The 71-game run the Knicks have been on this season—during which Amar'e Stoudemire has brought the Knicks back to relevance, soared into New York superstardom and played his way into the MVP discussion, all with little rest—has met its natural conclusion: He's spent.

Stoudemire, the 28-year-old power forward in his first year with the Knicks, has averaged 36.9 minutes per game, 19th in the NBA. His exhaustion reached a new low on Wednesday night against the Orlando Magic, when he had his worst game as a Knick, scoring just 13 points with seven rebounds. It was his lowest output of the season after averaging 25.8 points per game. Knicks coach Mike D'Antoni sees Stoudemire's burnout as an indicator of the entire team, which is just 5-9 in the month of March and has dipped to 35-36, their first losing record since November. D'Antoni said he's seen Stoudemire with "heavy legs" and a lack of balance—a rare sight for the ultra-athletic Stoudemire. D'Antoni chalked it up to the 14 games the Knicks have played in the past 20 days.

Stoudemire, who said he started feeling tired in the first quarter of Wednesday's loss to the Magic, said he tried to push through the exhaustion but "I don't think I played a month this hectic in my career."

"Amar'e is tired. We've worn him down a little bit," D'Antoni said. "[Wednesday] we struggled a little bit, but it's hard to explain…I'm not sure why other than we get tired and then we get stagnant because we get tired."

To combat the fatigue, the Knicks canceled Thursday's scheduled practice, giving the team nearly two days to rest up for Friday night's game against the Milwaukee Bucks at Madison Square Garden.

With five back-to-back sets, this month could be considered the worst on the Knicks' schedule and to make matters worse, the Knicks play an extra game this month, a make-up game against the Orlando Magic on Monday that was moved from November after an asbestos scare.

Until this week, Stoudemire had thrived despite scheduling: He has averaged 26.1 points per game in back-to-backs—the same as he does with a day of rest.

D'Antoni put the blame for his Stoudemire's tiredness on himself "He's been carrying throughout the whole year and that's it. I play him in a lot of minutes and we keep talking about playing too many minutes. To get where we are, I had to, and we're trying to get into the playoffs and now he's paying for it a bit."

D'Antoni was confident, however, that Stoudemire will "snap back."

The Knicks have lost four straight games and are 7-10 since trading for new star Carmelo Anthony, who himself puts up big minutes—averaging 35.7 minutes a game.

"I'm hoping," D'Antoni said. "that when the calendar gets better and we get a couple days off, we can bounce back."