WASHINGTON—Republican lawmakers are trying to revive plans for a nuclear-waste dump at Yucca Mountain, Nevada, setting up a showdown with the Obama administration over its efforts to abandon the site last year.

In a separate effort, also aimed at re-starting the Yucca Mountain project, state officials in South Carolina and Washington are preparing to go to court in March to challenge the administration's actions.

The moves highlight an energy-policy dilemma for the Obama administration. President Barack Obama in his State of the Union address listed nuclear power among the "clean energy" technologies the government should promote. But the proposal to develop a permanent nuclear-waste storage facility at Yucca Mountain, about 100 miles from Las Vegas, faces strong opposition from Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, a Nevada Democrat.

The nuclear-power industry, meanwhile, supports the Yucca project. Radioactive waste is currently stored at dozens of locations around the country for lack of a permanent repository.

Both South Carolina and Washington are home to large collections of Cold War-era nuclear waste, and members of Congress representing these radioactive sites, including Rep. Doc Hastings (R., Wash.) are leading the effort to revive the Yucca Mountain facility. They argue that a 1982 law prohibits the administration from abandoning the Yucca Mountain project, which Congress designated as the nation's first nuclear-waste repository.

Mr. Hastings, chairman of the House Natural Resources Committee, says the administration "has zero authority to withdraw the [Yucca Mountain] license application."

The Energy Department "is confident that we have the legal authority to withdraw the application for the Yucca Mountain repository," a spokeswoman said.

The Energy Department moved to terminate Yucca Mountain in March 2010 when it asked the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to withdraw a two-year-old application to build a repository. Calling Yucca Mountain "not a workable option," the Energy Department said the science on nuclear-waste storage had evolved since the project was first proposed.

A few months later, in June, a quasi-independent NRC panel dealt a blow to the administration and denied its request, saying the 1982 Nuclear Waste Policy Act "does not give the secretary the discretion to substitute his policy for the one established by Congress."

The NRC's five commissioners were then asked to consider an appeal of the panel's decision. They submitted preliminary votes on that issue in August and September but have not yet issued a decision. 

Republicans are pressing the NRC to conclude its review, and are keeping pressure on NRC Chairman Gregory Jaczko, a former aide to Mr. Reid. In a Nov. 19 letter to Mr. Jaczko, Mr. Hastings and two other House Republicans said it was "clear you delayed the resolution of this matter" and pressed the chairman to issue a final ruling. 

Mr. Hastings and other lawmakers say Mr. Jaczko and the NRC lack the authority to suspend a safety review of Yucca Mountain. Mr. Jaczko halted this review last year.

An NRC spokesman defended the chairman's decision. "It is the chairman's responsibility and authority to ensure that agency resources are used properly. He acted properly, and not unilaterally, after consulting with the chief financial officer, the executive director for operations, and the general counsel."

None of NRC commissioners has disclosed their votes on Yucca Mountain, so it's unclear how many would support or oppose the project. 

 Write to  Tennille Tracy at tennille.tracy@dowjones.com 