The latest index of economic freedom from the Heritage Foundation and The Wall Street Journal knocks the U.K. down and then, rather unsportingly, kicks it hard as well.

For the country has fallen precipitously since last year. It's now in a lowly 16th place rather than the number 11 spot it managed in 2010. 

But not only that; it must also suffer the indignity of seeing places it used to rule running rampant in the rarified heights far above.

Hong Kong, Singapore, Australia and New Zealand hog the top spots. Canada, Ireland, the U.S. and even Bahrain all beat the Old Country. 

The reason for the U.K.'s underperformance is plain enough. Economically, the place has a split personality.

It doesn't score badly at all against benchmarks of investment freedom, lack of corruption, labor-market flexibility and all that good stuff. Indeed, it's still one of the better places in Europe to do business, judged by these criteria.

But when it comes to state involvement in the economy, fiscal freedom and government spending, well… That's when the U.K. starts to look positively Third World.

As the Heritage Foundation says, "a dramatic expansion of government intervention has taken place in the U.K. in response to the global financial and economic crisis. The government has nationalized or seized ownership positions in some of the major banks. Public finance has deteriorated markedly. Welfare benefits have become a daunting burden. The government deficit has widened sharply, and gross public debt has climbed to over 70 percent of GDP."

Well, there you go. 

But the real question is, would the British have it any other way?

If economic freedom is to be equated with a lack of state involvement, the people seem not to want it. Indeed, they usually vote against it. 

Look at the last election. Despite the patchy performance of both the vast National Health Service and Britain's state-provided education system, neither of which bears comparison with the world's best, all the major political parties felt they had to promise to support both, come what may. To do otherwise was judged electoral suicide. Probably rightly.

Think about that for a moment.

Even in the face of an austerity program unprecedented in peacetime, these two massive, costly edifices had to be guaranteed, undamaged, to the people even by parties such as the Conservatives, which are supposed to have free-market leanings and an affinity for the private sector.

No, there comes a point when all British free-marketers are eventually forced to realize they are doomed to be in a minority, albeit sometimes a large one. Probably for ever.

A long post-war history of state involvement, if not dominance, in just about everything that matters to individual voters has left its mark. And it's a mark so deep on the British public that other ways forward in health or education, especially, are seldom seriously discussed.

Public money is not only the default position in answer to almost any problem in national discourse, it's usually the only position. 

And look at the dominance of the concept of "fairness" in any national debate. Argue as you will that fate doesn't create humans equal. It won't do you any good. The British want a state that redresses the balance, come what may.

Of course there is that sizeable minority that looks back to the swashbuckling Thatcher years as a lost golden age. But theirs remains perhaps the last love that cannot speak its name. Mrs Thatcher's way seemed just too brutal for the majority, and the Grand Old Lady of the free market remains popularly reviled. 

It's not all bad news, of course. Compared with its big European rivals and partners, the U.K. comes out of the index rankings rather well. Only the Netherlands is above it, and it still leaves Germany and, especially, France in the dust. The Old Enemy only manages to scrape in at 64, sandwiched between Cape Verde and Romania. Try telling Paris it's on a par with either of those two in anything.

But here again we see the U.K.'s split personality. Its apologists may look once more to that oft-touted talent for compromise to explain away this halfway-house between market and state.

Others may see it more as endless, incoherent dithering, saddling the country with the worst of both worlds, unable to reap the full benefits of either.

The U.K. isn't alone on the slippery slope, of course. For similar, post-crisis reasons, the U.S. comes in at a lowly ninth place; the lowest score it has notched up in a decade.

But that will be scant comfort in London. If the U.K. is ever to rival its old colonies in terms of economic freedom, the free marketers may just need better, gentler salespeople than they've had so far. In all likelihood, though, economic freedom for the British will forever stop at the hospital door or the school gate; much as it always has. 

 Write to  David Cottle at david.cottle@dowjones.com 