It's been an inauspicious start to 2011 for two of Asia's most popular stock markets. Benchmarks in India and Indonesia are both down more than 6% since the start of the year. 

Sellers in both markets share a common fear -- they're worried about how harshly central banks will have to respond to inflation. 

This is a fair concern, even if it's long overdue: Prices have been rising fast in both countries thanks largely to food. In the week ended Dec. 25, India's wholesale food articles index rose 18.3% from a year earlier. The annual increase in Indonesia's consumer price index, meanwhile, hit a 20-month high of 7% in December. 

Numbers like these have economists quickly changing their outlook for interest-rate increases. Credit Suisse, for example, said this week it expects India's central bank to increase its key policy rate by half a percentage point later this month. That's twice the increase the investment bank was previously expecting. 

Getting a handle on what Bank Indonesia will do next is more difficult. The central bank has been unmoved so far by the pace of inflation, explaining that it views food inflation as something that cannot be controlled with monetary policy. But food accounts for a large chunk of consumer spending in Indonesia and getting this wrong means the bank could either have to squeeze increases into a shorter span later or watch as high prices affect business profits. 

There's room for more selling, and not just in stock markets. Foreigners poured some $58 billion into India and Indonesia's stock and bond markets last year, and Indonesia is still more popular with fund managers relative to the MSCI benchmark than any other market in Asia, according to Citi Investment Research data. It'll take several months before investors get a sense of where the rate of inflation stands, and how aggressively the central banks will have to respond, says Barclays Capital economist Rahul Bajoria. 

This bumpy ride could just be starting. 

 Write to  Harsh Joshi at harsh.joshi@dowjones.com 