WASHINGTON—Senate leaders agreed Thursday to sharply cut the number of positions requiring Senate confirmation, eliminate secret "holds" on legislation and take other steps to streamline the chamber's rules, in response to criticism that they too often lead to stalemate.

But the move also marked the end, at least for now, of efforts to significantly weaken the most famous feature of Senate rules—the filibuster, under which senators can block or delay legislation by talking indefinitely unless 60 colleagues vote to shut off debate.

The agreement continued a recent, modest trend toward bipartisan cooperation. It capped two years of complaints from Democrats about GOP delaying tactics and from Republicans about being refused the right to offer amendments.

"Yes, we want the Senate to move deliberately, but we want to it to move," said Majority Leader Harry Reid (D., Nev.) in announcing the changes.

The changes were prompted in part by a push, mostly from newer Democratic senators, to change the filibuster rules. That effort collapsed, but it led to more modest alterations.

Sen. Tom Harkin (D., Iowa) said the changes were fine but insufficient. "They are far from the meaningful reforms that I think are essential for making the Senate a fully functioning legislative body," he said.

Perhaps the biggest change is a reduction in the number of positions needing confirmation by the Senate, from 1,400 to about 1,000. Senators still intend to approve high-level officials but would forgo confirmation of, for example, public-affairs officers or those who serve on part-time commissions. The change is expected to receive House and presidential approval.

The confirmation process has become ugly, senators said.

"We've created a situation in this town that I refer to as 'innocent until nominated,' " said Sen. Lamar Alexander (R., Tenn.), who led Republicans in talks on the rule changes. "It's almost impossible to get to the end of the gantlet without being branded a criminal."

Senators also agreed to eliminate the secret holds any senator can place on a nomination or bill. Individual senators will still be able to block legislation, but they must do so publicly.

Senators also agreed to stop delaying bills by forcing the reading of lengthy amendments.

The changes prompted an unusual discussion on the Senate floor about the chamber's problems and its place in the government. Some senators emphasized the Senate's role as a counterweight to the House, where a majority can push bills through with little opposition.

Mr. Reid and Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R., Ky.) also agreed informally that Democrats would show restraint in blocking Republicans from offering amendments, while Republicans would cut back on filibustering the "motions to proceed" that let a bill come to the floor. Filibusters could still proceed on amendments and on bills themselves.

 Write to  Corey Boles at corey.boles@dowjones.com 