 Austin, Texas 

Overheard this weekend at South By Southwest, the festival here at which Internet entrepreneurs, engineers, journalists, promoters, moneymen and web-savvy Hollywood types meet to discuss technology, brand and buzz:

"We're monetizing."

"I'm building a CRM."

"We're building an API."

"We closed a B-round."

"Social media is dead. The new Net is the Evernet." (We have no idea what that means, but you read it here first.)

When South By Southwest was launched in 1987, it was centered on the discovery of musical talent. In 1994, a few days devoted to new media and film were added to the agenda. Now the "interactive" portion is a huge draw. This year, more than 17,000 people are expected to have attended the five-day interactive conference, which offers panels with titles like "Slaying the Four Horsemen of the Social-Media Apocalypse" and "I'm So Productive, I Never Get Anything Done." 

But for many, the panels are the justification for attending a days-long party where you might see Conan O'Brien, Twitter fiends Ashton Kutcher and Demi Moore, or Rainn Wilson from "The Office," who was promoting a few indie features here. South By Southwest is the Sundance of the Internet industry. But don't call it "South By Southwest."

"Unless you know to call it 'South By,' you shouldn't be at South By," explained Mark Sullivan, a Houston-based publicist.

Some of the most coveted party invitations celebrate companies that might be obscure in middle America but in Austin are like Coca-Cola: Foursquare, Mashable, Hashable, Zynga, GroupMe and Fast Society. Late-night, the hotel bars become jam-packed. 

At the W Hotel in downtown Austin, guys—there's a high ratio of men to women—in jeans (dress code: I-didn't-give-this-outfit-much-thought casual) sit on low couches drinking and talking start-ups. Matt Bijur came to South By from Los Angeles to try to build buzz for Squabbler, a social-debate site in which users post 30-second videos to argue a particular position. Mr. Bijur was hanging out with Kevin Zellmer, head of strategic partnerships at KickApps, a company that helps brands with their social media outreach. Mr. Zellmer's agenda was fluid. He hoped to network and get a sense of "the space" (big buzzword). For him and his cohort, attendance was mandatory.

"You have to be here," he said.

A unique social etiquette pervades the event. At the door of the bar or hotel, a PR neophyte searches an iPad for your name. Once you pass muster, you "check in" to the venue on your geo-location social network of choice. Next, via your preferred group text-messaging app, you text a core of friends alerting them to your whereabouts. You sidle up to the bar and order a Shiner Bock. (It's a Texas beer and you're here to enjoy the local culture, right?) You snap an arty photo of the scene with your iPhone camera and post it on Instagram and Twitter, affixing "#sxsw" to the end of your micro-message so all your followers know you are in-the-know and on the list. 

Then, casually, you sip your drink, checking your device to see who has retweeted you, the warm glow of the screen casting you in the right light. The tech-obsessed indulge, free of judgment. Overheard (or, in Twitter parlance, "OH"): "Looking down is the new looking up." 

Charging batteries is a priority, and there is major competition for electrical outlets at the Austin Convention Center. You can catch a buzz on the street: representatives from Sonos, a wireless stereo company, carry mini-generators in backpacks and let passers-by plug-in.

The most exclusive place to recharge was the CNN Grill SXSW, where nearly every table had its own power strip. In an effort to be known for more than hard news coverage, the cable network took over Max's Wine Dive, a popular restaurant known for authentic Southern comfort food. A huge neon CNN sign outside the restaurant replaces Max's regular branding. 

Like sponsors do at Sundance, CNN also dispensed with the normal menu, instead giving control of the kitchen to Union Square Hospitality Group, the New York restaurant company run by Danny Meyer. You need special credentials to enter. 

Inside, bloggers blog, journalists tweet and entrepreneurs plot. On Saturday, three gentlemen from the search engine StumbleUpon.com discussed how to maximize their SXSW exposure by hiding "golden tickets" around town. Clues to the location of these tickets are being disseminated on Twitter. The first person to find the ticket, photograph it and tweet the photo wins a prize like a Macbook computer. It was finally decided that the golden ticket would be given to Danny Sullivan to hide and tweet about. Mr. Sullivan is the editor of SearchEngineLand.com and has more than 100,000 followers on Twitter.

"Not just a hat-rack," said Anthony Napolitano, StumbleUpon's director of sales, as he tapped his forehead.

On Sunday, those actually looking for a little Texas with their tech gathered at a party for the Houston Web site CultureMap. This was at Scholz Garten, a banquet hall first opened in 1866. The lighting wasn't fancy. The square dancing was raucous. The barbecue was spicy.

 Write to  Katherine Rosman at katherine.rosman@wsj.com 