KUALA LUMPUR—YTL Corp. Bhd. expects Asian currencies to continue appreciating in the long term, and this is helping drive the Malaysian infrastructure conglomerate's renewed focus on investing in its domestic market.

"Asian currencies will have to readjust upwards, and if you have Asian assets that's good,"  Francis Yeo, YTL's managing director, said in an interview late Wednesday. "You can see it from the rupiah in Indonesia to the Philippine peso to the Malaysian ringgit, and over the next 20 years we'll see the same thing: Asian currencies will continue to strengthen against European currencies and America and the big fund flows will continue to come to Asia."

Mr. Yeoh's response has been to roll out fresh investments in his home market of Malaysia to make the most of the growing momentum in emerging markets. 

At the moment, around 70% of YTL's revenue come from overseas, including running a water utility in Britain and part of a power supply grid in Australia. 

But in November YTL's communications unit began rolling out a new WiMAX telecommunications network in Malaysia that enables mobile access to the Internet at faster speeds than previously possible.

YTL Communications Sdn. Bhd., 60%-owned by parent company YTL, has invested 2.5 billion ringgit in the project and is announcing the launch of its phone-based products under the "Yes" brand Friday. The YTL network covers the bulk of Malaysia's main urban population centers as well as the country's main highway routes. The company is expanding its network to reach the rest of this country of 28 million people.

So far, the company has picked up around 150,000 subscribers, but Mr. Yeoh said he expects that number to grow once people realize what the company's telecommunications network can do. 

YTL also focuses on maintaining a substantial war chest of cash reserves to help it through fluctuations in the global currency markets without resorting to hedging. "I don't need to do any of that stuff," Mr. Yeoh said. He didn't specify the amount of cash reserves.

In addition, the company's business in Britain, Wessex Water Ltd., earns British pounds and borrows in the same currency, while its Singapore businesses earn Singapore dollars. This provides YTL with an effective geographical hedge, he said.

"But whatever the business, our philosophy is that if revenue and profits grow, then currencies can go up or down and sometimes we'll win and sometimes we'll lose," Mr. Yeoh said.

 Write to  James Hookway at james.hookway@wsj.com 