Joseph Brodsky called himself "a Russian poet, an English essayist, and an American citizen." He chose, embraced and mastered each of these identities with passion and defended them in the face of very formidable obstacles. The late Lev Loseff tells Brodsky's inspiring and complicated story well in his densely packed and thoroughly researched "literary life." Translated from the Russian, it is the long-overdue first English-language biography of the Nobel Prize-winning writer.

Brodsky (1940-96) was tested hardest as a Russian poet. In the Soviet Union of the early 1960s, the state claimed, along with everyone's livelihood, the ownership of morality and culture. Brodsky insisted on his right to create like a free man. In defense of what he called "spiritual autonomy" he was quietly but utterly unyielding. 

Though Brodsky's poems were circulated in samizdat he was not a "dissident" and did not write "anti-Soviet" verses. Yet, with unerring instinct, the Soviet state sensed that this high-school dropout supporting himself by menial jobs was an enemy of a higher, more dangerous order: someone who denied it moral authority over its subjects—its right to mold their souls, not just own their economic and political selves. In February 1964, Brodsky was arrested on charges of "parasitism," that is, not working in any of the branches of "socialist economy." 

A handful of Brodsky's supporters managed to infiltrate the tightly guarded courtroom, packed with snitches and "worker activists" from Leningrad plants and factories, during his trial. They were struck by how calm, indeed serene, the defendant was. 

A key part of the charges was that he called himself a "poet" without having been accepted into the Writers' Union:

"And what is your profession?" the judge barked at him in a celebrated exchange. 

"Poet," Brodsky answered. 

"And who told you you were a poet? Who assigned you that rank?" 

"No one. Who assigned me to the human race?" 

Brodsky had resolved to see the trial as no more than an annoying distraction from his life's work. In jail, he wrote love poems in which there is no hint of the ordeal. Brodsky titled the cycle "Songs of a Happy Winter." In his final statement, he said: "I am no parasite. I am a poet who will bring honor and glory to this country." Laughter reportedly broke out in the courtroom.

He was sentenced to five years of exile "with physical labor a condition of the sentence" and sent to a collective farm near the Arctic Circle. During the days, he sowed winter wheat, split wood, herded cows and patched roofs. At night, he lit a candle in a corner of a hut with no heat, electricity or plumbing and read, using a dictionary, an anthology of English and American poetry. He discovered the wonders of Auden, Frost and Donne, and he would remember those days and nights as among the "best times" of his life.

Brodsky's sentence was commuted after a year and a half thanks to international and domestic outrage (Akhmatova led the campaign and Shostakovich became involved). He returned to Leningrad, but, in May 1972 the KGB "advised" him to accept an "invitation" from a nonexistent relative in Israel ("Jacob the Jew," the KGB chose to call him) or face another arrest. He left three weeks later and came to the United States in July.

By then, his poetic style was well established. As with much great art, its pleasures stem from the clash of elements. In Brods

ky, it is a contrast between his tone—skeptical, ironic, detached, occasionally even melancholic—and the throbbing passions and ideas of each stanza, what Shakespeare called the "beating mind" behind every line: 



 It is windy today and the waves are  yay high. 

 Autumn is come, and everything  around will change. 

 And you know, my friend, this change  of colors 

 Is more touching than a girlfriend's  change of attires. 

 A maiden, you see, pleases only up to  a certain point—  

 You cannot go beyond the knee or the  elbow. 

 How much more joyful is the beauty  outside the body: 

 Neither an embrace is possible nor  unfaithfulness.  

 (from "Letters to a Roman Friend") 

Here is a world vividly and fiercely observed, with a breadth of cultural and historical references, cascading metaphors and "high" literary Russian interspersed with colloquialisms and slang. A few lines from "1972" catch the flavor of aging:



 A bird no longer flies into my open  window. 

 A maiden, with a beast's ferocity,  defends the buttons on her shirt. 

 Having slipped on a cherry pit, 

 I do not fall: the force of friction  grows as speed diminishes. 



Now imagine all this rendered in a strict meter and perfectly rhymed. The euphony of Brodsky's verse is irresistible in its ease and naturalness, and one finds oneself remembering lines and stanzas after no more than a couple of readings. "From the very beginning, as soon as it starts," Isaiah Berlin wrote of Brodsky's poetry, "you are in the presence of genius. And that is a unique sort of feeling—being in the presence of genius."

Alas, a reader without Russian has to take Berlin's word for it: Not even Brodsky himself managed to endow the English translations of his verses with the beauty and power of the originals (although he tried again and again, and the reader's indulgence of my translations above is begged). Without a fixed word order, auxiliary verbs such as "is" or "are" or articles, Russian offers little to impede the lyrical poet, and Brodsky rejoiced in this paradigmatically inflected language. Rich shades of emotions and meanings are conveyed by prefixes and suffixes. Myriad rhymes are generated almost spontaneously as the mostly polysyllabic nouns, verbs, adjectives and participles conjugate (that is, change their endings) in accordance with six cases and three genders. English, with its rigid order, shorter words and precious little change in word endings, is hardly a happy counterpart. "There is nothing odder," Brodsky admitted, "than to apply an analytical device to a synthetic phenomenon; for instance, to write in English about a Russian poet." The largely correct but hardly sparkling translation of Loseff's book and the Brodsky poems in translation that Loseff cites in his text prove this assertion right—yet again. 

So non-Russian readers must settle for the next best thing: Brodsky's prose. The "English essayist" wrote widely about literature (Dante, Dostoevsky, Hardy, Horace, Mandelstam, Akhmatova). He meditated on exile and boredom; Rio and Venice; the muse and the beloved; memory as the closest substitute for love—among dozens of other matters. He managed to speak about all of this without a scintilla of pontification or superiority. Reading Brodsky's essays is like a conversation with an immensely erudite, hugely entertaining and witty (and often very funny) interlocutor. ("In the country where I spent thirty-two years, adultery and moviegoing are the only forms of free enterprise.") Paradoxes are tossed out with a Wilde-like elegance along with allusions, similes and metaphors galore—many stunningly unexpected and all completely and satisfyingly accurate. One constantly reaches for a pencil to mark particularly fetching sentences: 



 It's better to be a total failure in a democracy than a martyr, or la crème de la crème, in a tyranny. 

 In a centralized state all rooms look alike: the office of my school principal was an exact replica of the interrogation chambers.  

 There is a great deal of mental comfort in the incoherence of aspiration. 

 Art is not an attempt to escape reality but the opposite, an attempt to animate it. It is a spirit seeking flesh but finding words. 

 A great writer is one who elongates the perspective of human sensibility, who shows a man at the end of his wits an opening, a pattern to follow.  



 By Lev Loseff  Yale, 333 pages, $35

Brodsky detested what is known as "cultural relativism." Culture, he wrote, is "elitist" by definition, and the application of "democratic principles to the sphere of art and knowledge" leads to "equating wisdom with idiocy," and "masterpiece with garbage." He ignored (or occasionally almost goaded) political correctness when discoursing on tyranny and liberty, contrasting Europe and Asia, or Islam and Christianity. Rationalism's "greatest casualty" was individualism, he thought, and the socialism of Lenin and the National Socialism of Hitler had the same "philosophical root [Marxism] which used the shelves of the British Museum for fuel and Darwinian thought for a model." When Vaclav Havel compared the "nightmare of communism" to "the nightmare of post-communism" —the hardly pretty but immeasurably more benign post-Soviet reality—Brodsky wrote in a long and angry response that communism was "a breakdown of humanity and not a political problem." He added: "Neither as a writer, nor, moreover, as a leader of a nation should you use terminology that obscures the reality of human evil." 

Brodsky took up his American citizenship with the same intensity that he deployed in his poems and essays. He stayed as far as he could from organized politics of mass democracy, which seemed to scare and mildly disgust him. Yet everything was "personal" to Brodsky—and therefore moral. "Bad politics make for bad morals," he believed. He saw his "role as a citizen" as, first and foremost, "speaking my conscience." (After the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979, he also seriously contemplated forming an "international brigade" to fight there.) 

He seemed effective in educating the American intelligentsia about freedom and the "vast, corpse-strewn, treachery-ridden historical vistas, whose very air turned solid with howls of ubiquitous grief." When Susan Sontag declared in 1982 that communism was "a fascism with a human face" and suggested to a horrified and enraged crowd of left literati that those who had read nothing but Reader's Digest understood a great deal more about communism than the readers of the Nation, it was Brodsky and his fellow Nobelist Czeslaw Milosz who had been responsible for her epiphany.

He was proud of having been named poet laureate of the United States in 1991, the first foreign-born writer to be so honored. "I am the property of the public," he said to an interviewer in his office at the Library of Congress. He thought of himself as a "poetry activist." To him advocacy of poetry was synonymous with advocacy of human uniqueness—and thus liberty. Art, Brodsky said in his Nobel Lecture in 1987, is about "the privateness of human condition": "Being the most ancient as well as the most literal form of private enterprise, it fosters in a man, knowingly or unwittingly, a sense of his uniqueness, of individuality, or separateness—thus turning him from a social animal into an autonomous 'I.' "

Brodsky died of a heart attack at the desk of his Brooklyn Heights apartment in January 1996. "One is what one reads," he wrote; and "One is changed by what one loves." His love of language, and of poetry as its highest achievement, will continue to change us all for better. 

—Mr. Aron is director of Russian studies at the American Enterprise Institute. His book about the ideas and ideals that inspired and shaped the Russian revolution of 1987-91 will be published in the fall.