The exclusion of unions representing police officers and firefighters from a "budget repair" bill passed by Wisconsin's state Assembly Thursday underscores the issue of whether such workers should be treated differently from other government employees, as states propose cuts to unions' benefits and powers.

Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, a Republican, has said he excluded the two groups from the bill—which curbs benefits and strips public-employee unions of nearly all collective-bargaining rights—to ensure that their critical public-safety work would continue free of disruptions or delays that such changes could cause. 

But with salaries and retirement benefits of public-safety workers a significant part of local budgets across the U.S., union retrenchment that exempts police officers and firefighters is "not necessarily a cost-cutting help to the local government," said Natalie Cohen, managing director of municipal-securities research at Wells Fargo. 

Mr. Walker's office pointed to the governor's previous statements about the exemptions and declined to comment further.

The issue is coming up in other states. In Indiana, Republican Gov. Mitch Daniels has proposed limiting collective-bargaining rights for teachers to wages and health-insurance benefits, after reducing collective-bargaining rights for state employees in 2005. Mr. Daniels hasn't challenged the rights of police and firefighters. In Idaho, a bill curbing collective-bargaining rights for teachers—but not police and firefighters—is pending approval by the Republican governor, who is expected to sign it into law. 

In still other states, pending legislation would affect public-safety officers. In Ohio, state senators last week approved a bill limiting collective bargaining for all public employees and banning them from going on strike. 

Wisconsin state police and firefighters' unions say that initially they appreciated their exclusion from the cutbacks. But many public-safety unions quickly changed course to rally against Mr. Walker's bill as an attack on the middle class, joining teachers and other state employees in protest marches and overnight "sleep-ins" in the capitol building. 

"We're married to teachers. We're married to city workers. It's not about firefighters and police. It's about the union movement," said Mahlon Mitchell, president of the 3,000-member Professional Fire Fighters of Wisconsin. 

Jim Palmer, executive director of the 11,000-member Wisconsin Professional Police Association, said he considered the exclusion of police officers and firefighters an attempt by Mr. Walker to divide the state's labor movement by pitting one union against another. "I really think the motivation for the exemption of police and fire was more political," he said. 

Some union leaders say Mr. Walker's exclusion of police and fire unions from the benefit cuts undermines his image as a cost-cutting Republican, because firefighters and police officers' salaries and retirement benefits, such as pensions and health care, are often significant expenditures for local governments. 

Those salaries and retirement benefits make up around one-third of the annual budget of most Wisconsin localities, said Dan Thompson, executive director of the nonpartisan League of Wisconsin Municipalities.

One of the provisions of Mr. Walker's bill would require all public-employee union members except public-safety officers to contribute 5.8% of their pay to pensions. That would save most cities about 1% to 1.5% of their annual budgets, Mr. Thompson said. If police and firefighters had been included, it would have saved around 2% to 3%. 

There are a number of reasons public-safety officers are more likely than other unions to be excluded from the changes to government-worker benefits and bargaining rights being proposed by states, observers say. Support from public-safety unions can allow politicians to tout themselves as tough on crime. And police and firefighters as a whole tend to be held in high esteem in many communities. Their image received a boost following their heroic efforts during the Sept. 11 attacks. 

"Many states, as hostile as they may be to collective bargaining, may be reluctant to take on police and fire [officers] because of the image they have among voters," said Harley Shaiken, a professor at the University of California at Berkeley specializing in labor issues. 

In addition, while teachers' unions typically support Democratic candidates, public-safety officers' unions are likelier than teachers to support Republican candidates, Mr. Shaiken said. 

 Write to  Jeannette Neumann at  jeannette.neumann@wsj.com 