JERUSALEM—Israel hopes to establish its first sovereign-wealth fund with revenues from recent offshore natural-gas finds within one year, the head of Israel's National Economic Office, Eugene Kandel, said on Wednesday. 

"It's not a fantasy," Mr. Kandel said. "We are working to implement this within the year." 

In 2009, a partnership that included Texas Based Noble Energy Inc. and Israeli oil companies discovered Tamar, an offshore gas field containing eight trillion cubic feet of natural gas. It was the largest gas find in the world in 2009 and the largest ever for Israel at the time. 

Last December, the company announced the discovery of the Leviathan field, which contains a whopping 16 trillion cubic feet of natural gas—enough to supply all of Israel's gas needs for 100 years—and promises to turn the once resource-starved country into a net energy exporter. 

Mr. Kandel said the government hoped a sovereign-wealth fund would help the country avoid many of the economic pitfalls that suddenly resource-rich countries often encounter—a phenomenon known as the Dutch Disease—from the decline in the Netherlands' manufacturing sector after the discovery of natural gas there in 1959. 

Mr. Kandel said Israel was studying sovereign funds in Norway, Singapore and Chile. The Israeli fund would invest money abroad with an eye to long-term investments that could serve as a cushion during catastrophic events at home, such as an earthquake, he said. 

He said a sovereign-wealth fund could also help channel any large inflows of foreign capital away from the Israeli economy to avoid further appreciation pressure on the Israeli shekel. Israel is struggling against an appreciation of the shekel, which hurts the country's heavily export-dependent economy.

"We don't want to get sick from Dutch disease, especially because we are already a rich country," he said. "We don't need an increase in wages, land prices and strengthening of our currency."

Mr. Kandel said the government expected gas revenues to account for around 0.5% of GDP over the next two to three decades, a relatively trifling sum that could easily be offset if an influx of foreign cash from ramped up gas exports caused the shekel to spike in value. 

"The government revenues from gas are not going to be huge over the next 20 to 30 years and we definitely don't want this half percent to wipe out our growth," Mr. Kandel said. "There is a chance this money would contribute to further strengthening of the shekel and wipe out any advantage provided by the gas." 

Mr. Kandel, a U.S.-educated economist who spearheads Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's influential economic-policy board, said the proposal to establish a sovereign-wealth fund had broad support within the government, including from Mr. Netanyahu and Finance Minister  Yuval Steinitz. 

 Write to  Charles Levinson at charles.levinson@wsj.com 