Managers of Japan-centered mutual funds are experiencing the agony of buy-and-hold investing.

Their mandate is to provide investors with exposure to Japanese stocks. But as the grim events unfold there, many managers are grappling with decisions on whether to unload shares, scoop up buying opportunities or sit on their hands. All the while, they worry about colleagues and loved ones in a danger zone half a world away. 

Taizo Ishida, portfolio manager of the $87.5 million Matthews Japan Fund, based in San Francisco, awoke at 5 a.m. last Friday, as usual, to check the Asian markets. "It was clear this was an extraordinary disaster," Mr. Ishida says. His co-manager, Kenichi Amaki, was due to arrive in Tokyo for a routine business trip roughly around the same time. Mr. Ishida rushed to check his email and found a note from Mr. Amaki that he had arrived in Tokyo safely. 

Mr. Ishida was relieved to hear Mr. Amaki and other contacts in Japan were safe. Then he began to worry about how Mr. Amaki would get back to the U.S. "It was not an easy weekend," he says. 

Mr. Ishida decided to stay the course with his current asset allocation, heavy in Japanese industrials and consumer-discretionary stocks. 

Most managers are taking a long-term view, seeing the natural disaster's potential effect on the markets as a temporary phenomenon similar to last May's "flash-crash" or recent turmoil in the Middle East. 

Neil Hennessy is portfolio manager and chief investment officer of Novato, Calif.-based Hennessy Funds, which manages the $55 million  Hennessy Select SPARX Japan Fund and the $20 million  Hennessy Select SPARX Japan Smaller Companies Fund. Both funds are subadvised by SPARX Asset Management in Tokyo. In the last several days they have lost more than 20% of their value, Mr. Hennessy says. 

On Thursday evening, an employee heard of the quake, text-messaged colleagues in Tokyo and forwarded a note to Mr. Hennessy. That came as a relief. "We try not to act on emotion here," he says.

Nevertheless, Mr. Hennessy says he came into the office around 4:00 a.m. on Saturday to gather information for shareholders. "At least we had the weekend to think about what to do next," he says. He adds that he doesn't plan to make any major adjustments to the funds' Japan holdings. 

Some fund managers are spotting buying opportunities. Chuck de Lardemelle says the roughly $9 billion in the International Value Advisors Worldwide Fund he co-manages currently has a 14% exposure to Japanese equities. "Parts of an already cheap market may have gotten cheaper," he says. He spent the weekend glued to his iPad perusing the latest headlines and looking up archival information on how the markets reacted to the Kobe, Japan, earthquake of 1995.

Mr. De Lardemelle declined to name any specific positions he has taken in recent days. Tjhe Japanese equities in the fund's portfolio were down around 4% to 4.5% from when the quake hit through Monday, he says, about half of what the Nikkei 225 index had lost. "This is obviously a horrible tragedy," he says. "But overall, our portfolio has been resilient." 

Even fund managers with relatively small exposure to Japan went into crisis mode on news of the disaster there. James Dailey, the portfolio manager of the $50.3 million Team Asset Strategy fund, says he has a 3.5% exposure to Japanese stocks, including shares of Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group, Inc. A part-business, part-leisure trip from Harrisburg, Penn., to New York turned into an epic work session out of his Park Avenue hotel last Friday that continued through Saturday as he headed back home on the train. He says his colleagues discussed liquidity concerns and when would be the right time to buy.

There were no redemptions from mutual fund investors over Japan, Mr. Dailey says. "This is really more of a human story than an economic story," he says.

Mr. Amaki of the Matthews Japan Fund arrived safely in the Bay Area on Tuesday. Since then, he and Mr. Ishida have been keeping a close eye on the unfolding nuclear issues in Japan. "Things are developing so fast that I have very little sleep last night," says Mr. Ishida. "But overall, we consider ourselves to be pretty lucky."