"Spider-Man: Turn Off the Dark" turned the lights on its revised production Thursday evening, adding some signature touches from the Spidey comic books and films, such as the use of one of the tale's legendary lines—"with great power comes great responsibility"—and one of its most striking moves, the upside-down kiss between the superhero and his lady love.

But the overhauled $70 million musical, which resumed preview performances after a three-week hiatus, also showcased some elements all its own. 

Snippets of classic U2 songs, including "Where the Streets Have No Name" and "Beautiful Day," are now woven into the creative fabric of the production, which also features original music by U2's Bono and the Edge. And in a striking departure from the traditional Spidey narrative, Spider-Man removes his mask to reveal his true identity,  Peter Parker, to girlfriend  Mary Jane Watson.

Thursday's performance was a largely seamless start out of the gate, with few technical hiccups and no production pauses of the sort of that have often plagued the complex, accident-prone show.

"Welcome, ladies and gentlemen and uninvited critics," lead producer  Michael Cohl said during a brief introductory speech on stage before the curtain rose. "It's almost a brand-new show," he said, prompting clapping in the audience. The production is now set to open June 14.

As part of the classic Spidey throwback elements, producer  Jeremiah Harris, on stage alongside Mr. Cohl, announced that a "friend of ours from California" had recorded the pre-show announcement required by the New York State Department of Labor concerning the aerial stunts. That "friend" turned out to be  Stan Lee, co-creator of Spider-Man and former president and chairman of Marvel Comics.

The revised musical, under the leadership of a new creative team since the ousting of its original director,  Julie Taymor, also pokes some fun at its hyperbolic attributes, particularly its cost. Green Goblin, the primary villain, refers to a "$65 million circus," then quickly mutters, "more like $75."

Thursday's performance attracted a fairly rowdy crowd, with many in the audience chiming in to cheer, gasp or comment. 

During a scene in which  Mary Jane's friend disparages Peter Parker, played by Reeve Carney, saying, "He's not that cute," an audience member stepped in to defend him, shouting: "Yes, he is!"

 Write to  Erica Orden at erica.orden@wsj.com 