LONDON—U.K. police arrested five people linked to an online collective known as "Anonymous," a group behind recent attacks on companies and individuals that tried to impede the work of WikiLeaks, the document-leaking organization.

London's Metropolitan Police Service said it had arrested the people, who are males age 15 to 26 years old, in dawn raids Thursday at their homes. 

The arrests relate "to recent and ongoing 'distributed denial of service' attacks by an online group calling themselves 'Anonymous,' " the police said. In such attacks, computers flood a server to prevent it from displaying a Web page.

The police said the arrests were part of a continuing probe into Anonymous that began last year following reports of attacks the group allegedly carried out "against several companies."

A police spokeswoman declined to identify the companies or specify whether the arrests were related to the pro-WikiLeaks attacks. The British police did say that their probe is being carried out together with law-enforcement agencies in Europe and the U.S.

Last month, a number of organizations and individuals sustained online attacks in what appeared to be an effort by hackers to exact revenge on behalf of WikiLeaks. Victims included  MasterCard Inc.
MA


0.07
%




 and Visa Europe, both of which had recently suspended payments to WikiLeaks. 

The firms took those steps against WikiLeaks against a backdrop of the site's showdown with the U.S. government over the website's release of thousands of classified documents.

The attacks' intensity rose following the arrest in London of WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange in connection with sexual-misconduct allegations in Sweden. Mr. Assange, who is fighting extradition to Sweden, has denied the allegations and hasn't been formally charged.

Attacks also were launched at organizations and individuals connected with Mr. Assange's personal legal troubles. That included the Swedish prosecutor's office and a lawyer representing the two women making allegations against Mr. Assange.

Following the attacks, Dutch police arrested two people in December that they linked to Anonymous. One of them was a 16-year-old male who Dutch police say was involved with the attacks on MasterCard and Visa. The second was a 19-year-old male who allegedly had attacked the Dutch prosecutor's website in sympathy with the WikiLeaks hackers, authorities say. 

Both have been charged with computer-related crimes and await trial, said Wim de Bruin, a spokesman for the Dutch prosecutor's office. He said Dutch police have been working with law enforcement in the U.S. and elsewhere in Europe.

"Anonymous" is well-known to U.S. law enforcement, which in the past two years has successfully prosecuted at least two individuals that participated in the group's attacks on the Church of Scientology. 

In the U.S., the Federal Bureau of Investigation said its agents conducted more than 40 search warrants across the country Thursday as part of the ongoing U.S. probe of cyber attacks in the wake of the WikiLeaks controversy. No U.S. arrests were made but the investigation continues.

Computer specialists describe "Anonymous" as a loose-knit collective, which doesn't have a centralized hierarchy or chief, but communicates via Internet chat rooms and recruits new members through social networking sites like Twitter. 

Its supporters have taken up wide-ranging campaigns in recent years including against the Church of Scientology and antipiracy groups, but security specialists believe it is likely that there are different individuals conducting the pro-WikiLeaks attacks than previous "Anonymous" campaigns.

—Evan Perez contributed to this article.

 Write to  Cassell Bryan-Low at cassell.bryan-low@wsj.com 