LONDON—For nearly two decades, the U.K.-based Fairtrade Foundation has been trying to improve the lives of farmers in developing countries through a certification process that guarantees producers of coffee or cocoa "sustainable" prices for their crops.

The Fairtrade Foundation, a nonprofit organization, audits the supply chain to make sure farmers, from Ghana to Costa Rica, get a fair price. The bulk of its costs are paid for by selling the right to use the Fairtrade logo. This swirly, circular badge has become a common sight for British shoppers, who know that while Fairtrade products may cost a little more, this is passed back to some of the world's poorest farmers. 

But  Harriet Lamb, the Fairtrade Foundation's 49-year-old chief executive, wants to stress that it isn't a charity that tugs at the heart strings. Rather, she tells corporate CEOs, it is promoting the sustainable farming of those commodities without which their companies would have no products. It's not charity, it's commercial common sense. 

Often, executives don't fully understand the relationship between fair prices, sustainability and product provision until they see it on the ground. For example, in 2009 Ms. Lamb travelled to Ghana with the chief executive of a major cocoa and chocolate manufacturer. At one point in their trip they met a farmer who was drying his cocoa beans on a table under the sun. The farmer told the CEO: "I'm really worried because my sons don't want to grow cocoa. They drifted to the capital and they don't see the point of all the drudgery and hard work of growing cocoa."

While the CEO was moved by the poverty of the cocoa farmers, he also realized that this poverty was endangering his business, Ms. Lamb says. He told her: "I don't think the board was aware of the risks the company is facing if we don't invest back in the producers. I wish I could bring my board out here," she recalls. 

"That's a supply-chain risk," says Ms. Lamb with a smile. Chocolate companies "can't make chocolate without cocoa. They face a problem: In Ghana the average age of a cocoa farmer is 51—that's old and that's worrying if the next generation doesn't see growing cocoa as the future. Farmers are very rational people. If they see the returns, they will grow cocoa."

"Many companies are waking up to the fact that, in the end, you have to make up for decades of neglect of farmers," she says. "You have to go back in and invest in the farmers so they think it's worth growing cocoa and coffee. That's your future. Your company depends on these farmers. Unfortunately, too often in boardrooms, they think of any number of risks and yet they overlook probably one of the major risks that their company faces."

Increasing numbers of companies and consumers are riding the wave of ethical shopping. The Fairtrade Foundation, founded 19 years ago, now has more than 4,500 licensed products. At the end of last month, it reported an increase of 40% in sales of Fairtrade-certified products in 2010 to £1.17 billion ($1.9 billion), despite many consumers switching to cheaper brands during the economic crisis.

"This is a real testimony to the basic decency of the public," Ms. Lamb says, adding that she hopes to see sales reach the £2 billion mark by the end of next year. "When the recession first hit, the cynics all thought that would be the end of ethical shopping, and it's amazing how people have remained utterly loyal. Once you hear that bananas are cheap only because a woman on the other side of the world can't send her kids to school, people are ready to say they want fair trade for a few extra pennies."

But it's not only Ms. Lamb's persuasive abilities that have managed to convince companies of the need to embrace more ethical trading; consumers have been demanding it, too. A survey of 1,000 people in the U.K. by research agency Datamonitor showed fair-trade products are "important" to 47% of consumers. Datamonitor also expects fair-trade food spending to double in the U.K., to £525 million, by 2014. Consumers are also more aware of the Fairtrade logo, a recognition that rose to 74% last year, according to survey by pollster TNS, commissioned by the Fairtrade Foundation.

In the U.K. three out of 10 bananas are Fairtrade-certified, as is 10% of chocolate and cocoa—compared with just 1% in 2009—40% of ground coffee, and 9% of the U.K.'s tea.

Fairtrade is not the only organization involved in ethical marketing. For example, in the U.K. the Rainforest Alliance has its own certification mark, but the Alliance's focus is more on conserving biodiversity and ensuring sustainable livelihoods by transforming land use. 

Consumers' desire to see ethically sourced products on supermarket shelves has also translated into a boost in profits for some companies. In the U.K., supermarket operator J. Sainsbury PLC, the world's largest retailer of Fairtrade products, reported a 27% rise in Fairtrade-certified sales to £276 million over the past 12 months and has said it aims for £500 million by 2015.

Others have also moved quickly to adopt the label, including retailer  Marks & Spencer
MAKSY


0.24
%




 and organic-chocolate maker Green & Black's, while global behemoths such as McDonald's and  Starbucks
SBUX


-0.23
%




 have also pledged to sell more fair-trade products.

But Ms. Lamb recognizes it is always easier to preach to the converted and she still faces the challenge of getting more companies on board.

"It should become much easier but it never feels like it has," Ms. Lamb says. Perhaps because a commitment to ethical supply costs businesses more, and this always remains an obstacle. "That's just the reality. But that's our mission: to make sure the farmers get a fairer price and therefore it does cost more and we can't shy away from that. We have high standards," she says.

So what do you say to a CEO who is reluctant to get involved in fair trade because of the costs? "You have to see it as an investment and not as a cost. All these companies are investing millions in marketing and in any number of initiatives to appeal to the public and in their supply chains. It makes sense to see fair trade as a mechanism that helps you reap the benefits of those investments."

Nevertheless, fair trade, which is a relatively new concept for consumers, sparks heated debates over its actual benefits to farmers. The Institute of Economic Affairs, a U.K.-based think tank, said in a report last November that the benefits of fair trade to the poorest farmers aren't always clear and said claims that fair-trade organizations make regarding the protection they give producers are exaggerated.

"Fair trade inevitably generates more heat than I think there's substance in the concerns," Ms. Lamb says. "People might say, 'Are you perfect?' and we are the first to say, 'We are not.' This is incredibly hard. We are trying to tackle poverty through trade. It's not easy to try to put principles in trade."

Proponents of free markets have been some of the most powerful critics of fair trade. They argue you shouldn't intervene in trade. "Even the most ideological free marketers accept you intervene in every market every day. And they are just part of the fabric in the way the economy runs," Ms. Lamb responds. "You could see fair trade as the free market operating at its best. The public say they want it, there's a demand, so it makes sense to have it."

 Write to  Javier Espinoza at javier.espinoza@wsj.com 