Long-term mutual funds had estimated net investor buying of $4.01 billion in the latest week as stock and hybrid fund inflows more than offset bond fund outflows for the second straight week, according to the Investment Company Institute. 

Bond funds have mostly struggled in recent weeks due to problems in the municipal-bond market, which was rocked as a federal bond-subsidy program expired at the end of last year. 

For the week ended Jan. 19, ICI reported bond funds had outflows of $2.17 billion, compared with an estimated outflow of $975 million the prior week. Taxable funds added $3.58 billion, while municipal ones had net outflows of $5.75 billion, the largest outflow since ICI began keeping track of the weekly data four years ago. It was also the 11th consecutive week investors pulled money from municipal funds. 

Meanwhile, stock funds had a net $4.62 billion of inflows, compared with prior-week inflows of $6.54 billion. U.S. stocks had $2.97 billion added to them, while foreign-stock fund inflows totaled $1.65 billion. 

At the same time, investors put a net $1.56 billion into hybrid funds, compared with prior-week inflows of $2.14 billion. Such funds can invest in both stocks and fixed-income assets.

Separately, assets in money-market funds grew $2.62 billion in the week ended Tuesday, a small rebound following a steep outflow the prior week, as prime-fund inflows more than offset government-fund withdrawals, according to iMoneyNet. 

The small inflows came after iMoneyNet last week reported a weekly outflow of $49.83 billion, the sharpest decline the money-market information provider has reported since April. 

Cash rushed out of money-market funds in the first half of 2010 due to low yields and, despite a small reprieve during the summer, fund flows have been mixed in recent months. 

For the week ended Tuesday, total assets in money-market funds grew to $2.727 trillion, according to iMoneyNet. 

Its reading on seven-day yields for money-market funds also held steady, at a record low of 0.03% for the 14th consecutive week. 

Taxable funds grew by $5.79 billion as institutional investors added $8.32 billion and individual investors pulled $2.53 billion. Prime funds, which invest in securities such as commercial paper, had $8.17 billion of inflows, while government funds withdrew $2.37 billion. 

Tax-free funds had net outflows of $3.18 billion, putting asset totals at $326.73 billion. Yields for seven-day and 30-day funds held steady at 0.03% and 0.04%, respectively. 

Meanwhile, yields on certificates of deposit were mostly unchanged in the latest week, according to Bankrate.com's weekly tally.

The average yield on six-month "jumbo" CDs, which typically require deposits of $95,000 or more, remained unchanged at 0.31% from the week earlier, according to Bankrate.com. The yield on five-year jumbos also remained unchanged, at 1.61% from the week earlier.

The average yields on small-denomination "savings" CDs were unchanged in the latest week. The average six-month CD yield remained unchanged at 0.29% from the week earlier, said Bankrate.com. The average two-year yield also remained unchanged at 0.72% from the week earlier. And the average five-year yield remained unchanged at 1.59% from the week earlier.

 to  John Kell at john.kell@dowjones.com 