  Sony Corp. Chief Executive  Howard Stringer apologized for a massive data breach of the company's online game networks—the first public remarks by the top executive as Sony works to reassure its customers following the theft of personal data from more than 100 million online accounts.

"I know this has been a frustrating time for all of you," Mr. Stringer said in a blog post addressed to Sony customers late Thursday evening. "Let me assure you that the resources of this company have been focused on investigating the entire nature and impact of the cyber-attack we've all experienced and on fixing it."

The intrusion, which occurred last month, resulted in the theft of names, email addresses and possibly credit-card information from its PlayStation Network and Sony Online Entertainment gaming services. Sony took down the PlayStation Network over two weeks ago to investigate the intrusion and secure the network from future attacks. 

On Thursday, Sony also revealed details of a plan to provide its customers with free identity-theft prevention services for 12 months. Sony said the prevention service, provided through a company called Debix Inc., will alert Sony customers to unauthorized use of their personal information and a $1 million insurance policy if they become the victims of identity theft.

Sony executives have come under increasing pressure, including inquiries from legislators and government privacy officials, to provide a fuller accounting of the data theft and the amount of time it took for Sony to notify its customers. Members of Congress, the New York State attorney general and German privacy officials have asked for information from the company on the topic. 

In his post, Mr. Stringer said he knows that some people believe the company should have notified its customers earlier about the intrusion, calling it a "fair question." Sony has said the attack on its network occurred between April 17 and 19, but the company didn't reveal the complete extent of the customer data that was stolen until April 26. 

Mr. Stringer, echoing previous comments made by other Sony executives, said it took time for the company to figure out the full extent of the damage. 

"I wish we could have gotten the answers we needed sooner, but forensic analysis is a complex, time-consuming process," Mr. Stringer said. "Hackers, after all, do their best to cover their tracks, and it took some time for our experts to find those tracks and begin to identify what personal information had—or had not—been taken."

Until the release of the letter, Mr. Stringer had remained surprisingly quiet on the problem, leaving the public handling to his trusted lieutenant and heir apparent,  Kazuo Hirai, head of the company's videogames division. In March, Sony promoted Mr. Hirai and identified him as the front-runner eventually to succeed Mr. Stringer, citing his deep understanding of integrating hardware, software and online services in a single product.

Since the network outage situation first emerged, Sony officials said Mr. Stringer was letting Mr. Hirai take the lead because Mr. Hirai is better versed in both the videogame and online-services businesses than Mr. Stringer.

And yet Mr. Stringer remains the most prominent global public face of the company. In his post, Mr. Stringer said Sony is still investigating the break-in and is working with the Federal Bureau of Investigation and "other law enforcement agencies around the world to apprehend those responsible." He said the company is upgrading its security systems so that "if attacks like this happen again, our defenses will be even stronger."

Sony hasn't yet disclosed the cost of the data breach on the company, including the investigation, which has involved hiring several outside forensic, security and law firms.

In early Tokyo stock trading Friday morning, Sony's stock was down more than 4%. 

A big priority for the company now is to get the PlayStation Network up and running to avoid further damage to its relationship with customers, who rely on the service to play multiplayer games against each other over the Internet. 

A Sony spokesman on Thursday said in a blog post that the company is in the final stages of testing its new security system, though he didn't say when its online gaming services would be available again to customers. Mr. Stringer suggested the company will meet its goal of bringing its game services back online by the end of the week. 

"In the coming days, we will restore service to the networks and welcome you back to the fun," he said.

—Daisuke Wakabayashi contributed to this article.

 Write to  Nick Wingfield at nick.wingfield@wsj.com 