NEW DELHI -- Onion supplies in key Indian markets have been disrupted following government tax raids to check suspected profiteering by traders, a senior government official said Wednesday, causing prices of the bellwether vegetable to once again soar.

Traders launched protests against the raids that took place over the weekend by government officials in some wholesale markets in western India's Nashik, an onion trading hub, as well as in New Delhi, India's capital.

"The raids have been conducted at a wrong time," said the official with a state-backed agriculture cooperative, declining to be named.

Supplies will take some time to get back to normal in retail markets, he said.

Onion retail prices have climbed by 20% over the past week to 6,000 rupees ($133.3)-7,500 rupees per 100 kilograms in New Delhi.

"Prices will rise at the retail level in the next few days, though they have come down at the wholesale level following the raids," the official added.

Supplies at Vashi market, western India's agriculture commodity hub, were at 900 tons Wednesday, while demand was for about 1,250 tons, said  Ashok Walunj, director at the Agricultural Produce Market Committee of Vashi.

Onion prices in India have more than doubled since Dec. 20 after late rains damaged a part of the crop and have been a big factor in pushing up year-on-year inflation rate for food articles to 18.32% for the week ended Dec. 25 from 14.44% a week earlier.

Despite the government's effort to curb prices since late December through measures such as scrapping import tax and the sale of onions at select outlets at subsidized rates, food prices marched on for the fifth straight week.

Fresh local supplies aren't expected before February and the supply situation worsened after Pakistan imposed a ban on export of the vegetable to India through the land route a week ago, although some supplies are landing via sea route.

 Write to  Arpan Mukherjee at arpan.mukherjee@dowjones.com and Debiprasad Nayak at debi.nayak@dowjones.com 