It's not every day that the passing of an art historian becomes a media event. But then Leo Steinberg, whose death in New York on March 13 at age 90 was widely reported in the print media and blogosphere, was no ordinary art historian. Nominally he was a University of Pennsylvania professor whose specialty was Renaissance and Baroque art, the work of Michelangelo in particular. (He retired in 1991.) But he spoke to a far wider public through his writings, and in doing so changed the way an entire generation looked at and thought about art.

During the 1950s and '60s the reigning orthodoxy, articulated by Clement Greenberg, the most influential art critic of the day, held that what mattered in a work of modern art were its formal qualities—color, form and their disposition across the flat canvas support. Subject matter and symbolism were considered of no account. 

By contrast, Steinberg's own experience of art, and his academic training, had persuaded him that works of art are far more complex than such a reading allowed, a point that informed his lectures and published works. 

An example was "The Philosophical Brothel," a two-part article on Picasso's "Les Demoiselles d'Avignon" (1907) that Steinberg published in ARTnews magazine in the fall of 1972. For decades "Les Demoiselles" had been referred to as the "first Cubist picture" because of the way its fragmented forms and crystalline spaces broke with 500 years of eye-fooling illusionism that began with the Renaissance. Its narrative content, a brothel scene, was mentioned only in passing.

Without discounting the stylistic revolution the painting heralded, Steinberg argued that the brothel subject was central to its form and meaning. The painting, he said, was about the sexual confrontation between the five prostitutes staring out from the painting and the viewer standing in front of it. 

But it was in "Other Criteria: Confrontations With Twentieth-Century Art," published a few months later, that Steinberg's aesthetic outlook found its fullest expression. An anthology of 18 articles and essays, the book constituted a thoroughgoing alternative to the accepted way of seeing. It's hard to overstate the impact it had when it appeared. It was as if someone had opened a window in a dark, airless room, and brought works of art back to life again. 

At its core were two pieces, the title essay and another, "The Eye Is a Part of the Mind," that offered the most sweeping argument against Greenbergian formalism. Drawing on examples from the Old Masters to modern art, he showed that the ways works of art are made and experienced are too sophisticated, too multilayered to be easily reduced to the two-dimensional schema Greenberg proposed. Today the length of these pieces—some 20,000 words between them—might seem like overkill. Yet it is a measure of how firmly the formalist aesthetic was entrenched that such an all-out assault was required. 

But Steinberg was more than a polemicist; he led by example. The remaining pieces in "Other Criteria" are on artists or artworks—among them Picasso, Rodin, Jasper Johns, Monet's water-lily paintings. Undergirding his examinations was the question, "What is the artist trying to tell us?" In his quest for answers Steinberg didn't limit himself to the history of art, but looked at popular and material culture as well. He would even adopt the posture of a depicted figure, the better to understand it. 

He seemed to transform every work of art he wrote about; you never looked at one the same way after reading what Steinberg wrote about it. The three essays on Picasso were ahead of their time in seeing the artist's career as a unity of motifs, themes and obsessions spread across eight decades, rather than, as had long been the practice, in narrowly stylistic terms—"Cubism-and-everything-else." His essay on Rodin remains the best introduction to the artist yet published.

Besides possessing a keen eye, wide-ranging intellect and stubborn resistance to received wisdom, Steinberg was a born writer—and English was his third language. (He spoke Russian and German first.) In place of the desiccated, impersonal drone of most academic writing, we get a voice—a flesh-and-blood personality—and a fluid, impassioned and nuanced prose stylist. He didn't just illuminate a work of art; he captured the experience. The 186 figures on Rodin's "Gates of Hell," he wrote, "drift and writhe like leashed flying kites."

Words mattered to him. He regarded Webster's dictionary as a purveyor of corrupting neologisms like "feedback," a word he disliked. Steinberg could be equally wary of editors. Once offered an assignment by one, he responded by insisting that the publisher first deposit $1,000 in an escrow account, to be forfeit to the publisher's favorite charity if the proposed piece appeared in print with changes not approved by the author. (He later relented, and the commission went forward.)

Despite occupying an endowed chair at an Ivy League university, Steinberg was always something of an intellectual exile within the academic establishment. His writings straddled the worlds of academic art history, with its emphasis on rigorous arguments supported by primary source documents, and criticism, which allows more personal interpretations and judgments about quality. In other words, he kicked over the traces too much, never more so than in his 1983 book, "The Sexuality of Christ in Renaissance Art and Modern Oblivion," a scholarly study of the depiction of Jesus' genitals as a manifestation of his human condition. Enough with the sex already, Leo, was the common reaction.

Still, Steinberg was the nearest thing to a celebrity the art-history profession has produced since Sir Kenneth Clark became a household name in 1969 with his "Civilisation" TV series. Steinberg was a popular lecturer, and even though anthologies are among the most perishable of literary forms, routinely going straight from printing press to remainder pile, "Other Criteria" has never been out of print.

Visiting the Museum of Modern Art recently, I came upon a docent explaining "Les Demoiselles d'Avignon" to a tour group and listened in, intrigued. All he talked about was the painting's narrative content—five whores in a house of ill-repute. The words "first Cubist painting" never crossed his lips. 

No doubt Steinberg would have been amused. He might have had difficulty getting his books reviewed in the scholarly press, but that hadn't stopped his ideas making their way down to street level. 

 Mr. Gibson is the Journal's Leisure & Arts features editor.  