If its long acclaimed reputation for being the world's largest fine-wine producer isn't enough to lure you to southwest France, then perhaps the coastal region of Poitou-Charentes, with its beautiful beaches, stunning scenery and turreted châteaux, will. Drawn by the unique microclimate making it the second sunniest part of France, after the Mediterranean, and its rich oyster culture, one can see why foreigners feel compelled to relocate to a place that pleases the palate and offers peace of mind. Of those who have made the leap, some have opened their homes to travelers eager to discover the region.

The last leg of the winding journey to Les Chapelles (www.leschapelles.com), a hamlet located in the Charente-Maritime department, takes you down poplar-lined avenues and through narrow-street villages, some rich in Romanesque architecture. A charming ensemble of rustic farmhouses flanks the green-shuttered château, which is home to my friends Mark and Michelle Pinsent, who in 2004 traded in London life for the countryside.

Officially known as a maison de maître, or master's house, the 200-year-old château oozes character, with many authentic period features intact, including the French walnut spiral staircase, parquet flooring and original stone fireplace. Its two self-catering gîtes, Le Cadran Solaire and La Cachette, are effortlessly chic, with a seamless blend of soft pastel furnishings and decor throughout. The crisp white bed linen and inspired mix of contemporary design and gadgets gives them a certain boutique feel. (From €580 per week.)

La Rochelle, the medieval city and capital of Charente-Maritime, and the island of Ile-de-Ré, are worth day trips. If time is of the essence, take the motorway route 100 kilometers north. Otherwise, opt for the more scenic one that takes you through the heart of the Saintonge, passing through Pont l'Abbé d'Arnoult (homeland of haricot beans), Tonnay Charente and Rochefort, an old military naval base. Once in La Rochelle, watch the boats glide through the port entrance and stroll around the ancient town center with its arcaded streets, lined in light-gray shuttered houses built in local stone, many of which now dedicate their ground floors to boutiques. The popular Aquarium La Rochelle (www.aquarium-larochelle.com) overlooks the harbor and for exceptional seafood, try Les Flots (www.les-flots.com), promising a sensational selection of freshly caught fish.

Cross the toll bridge to Ile-de-Ré and admire the island's atmospheric capital town of St-Martin, with its abundance of pretty whitewashed houses clustered around the harbor quays. The more adventurous can hire a bike or rent a canoe to explore the salt marshes around the village of Loix, situated on the peninsula along the northeastern coast.

Nestled between Cognac and Saintes, surrounded by lush vineyards, lies Le Logis, a manor house in the village of Dompierre Sur Charente. Steeped in history, Le Logis dates back to 1471. It was home to seigneurs until the Revolution and was visited by Henry IV in 1590. Owners since 2004, William and Clarissa Redfern spent three laborious years restoring it before they moved in with their two children.

In 2008, the Cognac distillery buildings on the grounds were renovated into three boutique gîtes, with excellent facilities including a children's play area, games room and bar, gym, heated saltwater pool and a pet corner. Each of the individually designed self-catering gîtes has been tastefully decorated with neutral tones and lovingly filled with rustic French furniture, as well as flat-screen televisions and Internet access. Each has a private terrace and barbecue, where one can relax with an apéritif at sunset, perhaps after a round of golf at the nearby Cognac Golf Club in La Maurie, (www.golfducognac.asso.fr), or an afternoon fishing for wild carp on the banks of the river that flows through the village. Accommodations at Gîtes du Logis (www.gitesdulogis.com) from €495 for one week.

From there, drive 35 kilometers west to the long sandy beaches at Royan, one of the most prestigious seaside resorts on the Atlantic coast. Its main beach, the Grande Conche, is a wide sandy cove that stretches over two kilometers and is a surfer's paradise. Nearby, the wonderful Zoo de la Palmyre (www.zoo-palmyre.com), sprawled over 12 hectares, is home to some 1,600 animals and birds. For wine connoisseurs searching for a more intoxicating experience, catch the 30-minute car ferry from Royan-Pointe de Grave to the Medoc peninsula. If it's your first visit, go directly to the Château La Tour de By in Bégadan for a tour of the wine cellars (www.la-tour-de-by.com). Round the trip off at La Maison du Douanier (www.maisondudouanier.com), an award-winning hotel-restaurant at the tip of the estuary, by the Gironde river, and savor its mouth-watering fish dishes.

Situated in the quiet hamlet of Herpès, less than an hour's drive east of Saintes, the spectacular Le Sousse (www.frenchholiday.biz) is the epitome of splendor. The Charentaise-style house was built in the 1700s by a family in the Cognac trade and extended in 1866. English owners Mark Kelly and Angie Moxhanthe sympathetically restored the eight-bedroom château and opened it for visitors in 2006. Whether it's the impeccable interior, the games room in the barn or the heated swimming pool with its robot cleaner, you will want to return before you have even arrived. (From €1,700 per week.)

From Le Sousse, head 10 kilometers into the heart of brandy country to the neighboring towns of Jarnac and Cognac. The enchanting Jarnac is full of cultural intrigue—it's the birthplace of François Mitterand and home to Courvoisier and Louis Royer. The Château de Courvoisier (www.courvoisier.com) presides over the market square and there are daily tours of its museum in the summer. One of the best ways to arm yourself with knowledge about the area is to go on the chabot, a boat that chugs along the waterways with a commentary about the town's history.

Further downstream on the Charente, Cognac boasts world-famous brands such as Hennessy and Rémy-Martin. Join a guided tour on a barge or train and discover the history of Cognac, its vineyards, distilleries and museums. Then, make sure you have a taste.

For bird song and wild habitat, La Charbontiere (www.villainfrance.co.uk) is a hidden gem. Close to the villages of Sers and Soyaux, this quintessential French château is set in 12 hectares of park land, with paradisiacal views of undulating countryside. Built in the early 1800s, Charbontiere was purchased in 2003 by Anthony Marshall and his partner, Patricia Gaines, who restored the château back to its original condition in 2004. Offering five double bedrooms, the château has been meticulously finished—elegant chandeliers, ceiling-high classic double-oak doors and shutters, original cobbled and polished wooden flooring, and an eclectic mix of old and new furniture, with splashings of toile-patterned upholstery adorning the interior. (From €1,169 per week. An adjacent refurbished coach-house that sleeps eight is available from €631 per week.)

La Charbontiere is well-located for a trip to nearby Angoulême, the historic hillside capital of the Charente department, which offers an array of shops and restaurants in the town's old quarter. Perching majestically over the Charante river and its tributary, the Anguienne, Angouleme is surrounded by ramparts and the 11th century Cathedral of St. Pierre, which was partially rebuilt in the late 18th century by the architect Paul Abadie, who also built the Hôtel de Ville on the site of the château of the Counts of Angouleme.

Venture 42 kilometers east to Brantôme on the River Dronne—the Venice of the Dordogne and one of only 151 villages in France given the accolade of being a Les Plus Beaux Villages. Appreciate the mix of medieval and Renaissance architecture, the Abbey that stands on a rocky outcrop at the bottom of a cliff, and walks along the edge of the water-lily covered river, sheltered by weeping willows. Visit on market day, Friday, to stock up on local produce and sample regional delicacies, such as goats' cheese, foie gras and cagouille. One must take home a bottle of the ambrosia-like walnut oil, which is milled locally and is a Brantôme specialty. Says Ms. Gaines: "Brantome comes to life on market day." 