Unlike other travelers who count the start of their vacation when they board the plane or reach their balmy destination, mine begins as soon as I drop off Mimi, our mutt, upstate with Frank and Caroline Mouris, dog boarders and breeders.

Mimi isn't the cuddliest pet. Indeed, I marvel at the dog that sits beside its master placidly watching TV with its head in the person's lap, or allows the owner to hug it without mistaking the affection for an assault that it's compelled to defend against with its incisors. 

And then there's Mimi's age and constitution. Not to put too fine a point on it, but as she edges toward 15 and is no longer fully in control of her functions, our days are demarcated not by hours and minutes, or our children's milestones, but by the last time Mimi was walked and whether she needs to go again.

I know from speaking with friends that their dog sitters occupy a special place in their lives, too. Those who possess the patience and love of animals to recommend them to the profession constitute a special, perhaps even more than mildly eccentric, class of individuals. But even among them, I would suggest that the Mourises are unique. 

I mean, how many dog sitters both have Harvard degrees, an Academy Award sitting in their living room and a house on a hill that looks designed from a child's drawing, with windows willy-nilly? But such achievements and accolades, while impressive, are not alone what selected the Mourises for the solemn responsibility of keeping Mimi comfortable while we're away.

The sensibility they brought to "Frank Film," the movie that won the Oscar for Best Short Subject, Animated Films in 1974—a visual bombardment of magazine images interwoven with two narrations, one autobiographical—is also at play when you drop off your pet and discuss any special health or dietary concerns of which the Mourises ought to be aware. 

Lately, the conversation has been about how to handle Mimi's remains should she expire on their watch.

I once had a discussion with Frank about the canine where he celebrated her personality in vocabulary usually reserved for the likes of Maria Callas, or maybe Liza Minnelli. I've forgotten his exact words, but that same je ne sais quoi was on display Sunday afternoon when I visited the couple and inquired how many dogs they currently have, not including boarders. They're all Wire Fox terriers, which the Mourises also breed and sell.

"There's Apollo, Justine, Athena, Odette—she's the French gamine—and Pontus," Frank said, counting them off.

How many dog breeders would refer to one of their animals as "the French gamine" let alone name a dog Pontus? The Mourises go through the alphabet for assistance in naming their litters, the letter "x" obviously posing special challenges. "We had Xanthippe, the wife of Socrates," Frank recalled of one recent puppy.

"They actually kept the name," Caroline said, referring to the buyers.

"They called her Tippy most of the time," Frank said.

Mimi (and I resist uttering so commonplace a name in such classical company) lived under the Mourises' roof with them on her several-times-a-year visits until circumstances dictated she move to the fully heated and air-conditioned kennel out back. Neither I nor they could recall how she'd warranted such special treatment because, as I may have already suggested, she doesn't have the most charismatic personality. 

But the Mourises obviously have a higher tolerance for all things dog than I do, though Caroline seems the disciplinarian in the family and primary dog whisperer, hectoring the animals to calm down or letting them out the door when they refuse. She apparently plays a similar role in her marriage. "She saves me from total obsession," said Frank, who confessed that he's been working on his current film, about the years they spent in Hollywood during the '70s and '80s, for the last decade. "If it weren't for Caroline I'd still be working on the first film. She's the producer and editor."

The couple seem immersed in popular culture, but from a safe remove. 

Their home is too remote to get cable, but they have a peculiar kind of square dish that only receives local stations, free of charge. They don't buy newspapers—reading them at friends' homes when they visit. But Frank raids the magazine exchange at the local library for periodicals, occasionally cutting out the images for use in his work, his Catholic guilt compelling him to stick photocopies of the pages before they were maimed back in the magazines, and then returning them to the library. 

The entire second floor of the house is given over to Frank's files, such as one devoted to Stephen Sondheim. "I send him collage letters," Frank explained. "He wrote us an unsolicited fan letter decades ago and we now communicate back and forth."

While the Mourises occasionally visit institutions of higher learning such as Harvard and Dartmouth to lecture about their work ("Frank Film" was picked for preservation by the Library of Congress's National Film Registry) exercise is Frank's current mistress.

"He could be gone half the day at the gym," Caroline sighed.

However, no matter how hard Frank works accumulating something called "fitness points" he always falls short of two ladies—one in her 50s, the other in her 80s. "My snide remark was, 'The 80-year-old obviously has dementia,'" Frank said, explaining her swollen totals. "I've seen the one in her 50s. She must be an ex-Marine."

One assumes that Frank's gym experiences will one day find their way into animation—if and when he ever finishes "Frankie Goes Hollywood."

— ralph.gardner@wsj.com 