George Kravis is thinking of putting a vintage electric lawnmower he recently purchased at auction in his living room—a move that could stun at least one observer. "My dog might give me a funny look," he said.

The 72-year-old design collector from Tulsa, Okla., sees the mower, complete with a light bulb for midnight grass cutting, as a piece of sculpture. Finding the art in good design and the value in everyday objects has been a passion of Mr. Kravis's since the 1960s, when he started collecting items such as midcentury modern furniture, streamlined toasters and space-age cocktail tools. 

Mr. Kravis, whose younger brother is the billionaire investor Henry Kravis, now owns thousands of objects. Since 2008, the collector has donated more than 250 pieces to Tulsa's Philbrook Museum of Art, which is set to expand to a satellite location next year to make room for much of that design collection.

One of Mr. Kravis's striking objects at Philbrook: a late 1930s baby monitor, marketed after the kidnapping of aviator Charles Lindbergh's son. The "Radio Nurse" features a receiver shaped like a head in a nurse's cap, a brown Bakelite creation designed by sculptor Isamu Noguchi for Zenith. Mr. Kravis recalls buying it online five years ago for less than $1,000. "It's kind of sinister," he said.

A onetime broadcasting executive who owned a few radio stations, including the self-referential KRAV, Mr. Kravis collects works by key players in industrial design. They range from an electric kettle by German architect Peter Behrens to the so-called $100 laptop by tech-culture guru Yves Behar. 

Mr. Kravis buys most of his objects at auction, but he also finds inspiration in museum gift shops. He purchased flatware designed by architect Zaha Hadid at the Philadelphia Museum of Art's shop and found it so striking that he later donated it to the Brooklyn Museum of Art.

Mr. Kravis's collection also raids his own past. He recalls that after his mother's death he joined his brother, Henry, in sifting through items from her home. The elder Mr. Kravis found and kept a Russel Wright glazed earthenware pitcher in chartreuse. 

Mr. Kravis said it doesn't matter if a streamlined teapot dribbles when it pours or if his early radios don't work. "I think it makes you happy" just to look at such objects, he said. He lives alone, so impractical design pieces that fill his home need only please him: His schnauzer, named Zephyr after the aerodynamic car, won't complain.

—Ellen Gamerman