Gov. Andrew Cuomo and lawmakers on Sunday said they reached agreement on a $132.5 billion budget plan that lowers spending slightly, avoids tax hikes and grants the administration much more authority to manage the flow of Medicaid dollars. 

The governor's handshake deal with legislative leaders isn't yet enshrined into law, and important details about the spending plan won't be known until the bills are passed and signed. But Mr. Cuomo's pact means Albany is likely to approve a budget before the April 1 deadline. Not since 1983, the first year of his father's administration, has the state adopted a budget before it was due.

Spending in the next fiscal year would drop by about 1% to 2%—possibly the deepest retrenchment since the beginning of the Pataki administration. 

The budget also closes a $10 billion gap without raising income taxes. Mr. Cuomo and Senate Republicans rejected a late push by Assembly Democrats for a special "millionaire's tax." 

The absence of the tax increase in a final deal was a frustrating concession for urban Assembly Democrats. But Mr. Cuomo and most Senate Republicans, who represent mostly suburban and upstate areas, held firmly against it. 





"This budget makes tough choices, which is what you sent me to Albany to do," Mr. Cuomo said in a statement. 

Still, the agreement sidestepped a few contentious issues, leaving them to be sorted out in the last three months of the legislative session. 

The budget doesn't contain any caps on local property taxes, a key campaign promise of the governor's. 

And while it assumes more than $2 billion in Medicaid savings, a fraction of that comes from across-the-board rate reductions to hospitals and other providers. About a $1 billion or more of Medicaid cuts haven't been fleshed out but exist merely as vaguely defined targets. 

The budget also counts on $1.4 billion in negotiated labor savings and across-the-board agency cuts—both of which may never materialize. 

And it avoided resolving divisive issues such as New York City's rent laws, which are set to expire in mid-June, and teacher layoff rules. 

The budget limits growth in Medicaid and public-school aid over the next two years. Mr. Cuomo will also be given more power to adjust Medicaid rates and services. Such powers over the public insurance program had always been shared with lawmakers. 

But the governor also agreed to exclude a key measure of his Medicaid overhaul package that had been embraced by the hospital industry. 

The final budget excludes a cap on malpractice recoveries. Originally, Mr. Cuomo wanted to restrict "pain and suffering" awards to $250,000, a measure that infuriated the state bar association and some patient advocates. 

The budget deal also eliminates 3,700 prison beds in medium- and minimum-security facilities. That was a high priority of Mr. Cuomo, who said the state was wasting dollars on excess prison space. It's not clear which prisons will be shut down. But the governor will have "sole discretion" over the decision after consulting with lawmakers. 

Lawmakers tacked on $270 million to Mr. Cuomo's education budget.The final budget agreement keeps state education spending flat at around $20 billion, but for districts that relied on the two-year surge of federal stimulus dollars, the state budget will feel like a deeper cut. 

The added school dollars weren't enough to appease the Bloomberg administration, which said the smaller cuts would still force the city to fire teachers. 

"We appreciate that some of the cuts in education aid were restored," Mayor Michael Bloomberg said in a statement. "But make no mistake: the final budget still cuts New York City more than ever before." 

Lawmakers also agreed to merge the state banking and insurance departments to form a new Department of Financial Services. While Mr. Cuomo wanted to grant his administration new regulatory powers to investigate and punish financial fraud, the scope of his authority isn't fully known. 

On Sunday evening, at a news conference at his executive chambers in Albany, Mr. Cuomo sounded buoyant and relaxed. "I'm hoping that this spirit of love and euphoria that I feel is infectious and grows and continues," said Mr. Cuomo, giving a knowing grin to Republican Senate Leader Dean Skelos and Democratic Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver. 

"I hope you keep feeling it," said Mr. Silver, eliciting a hearty laugh from Mr. Cuomo.

 Write to  Jacob Gershman at jacob.gershman@wsj.com 