The Algerian government over the weekend said it will reduce tax and import duties on some staples in a bid to end days of deadly clashes between police and rioters protesting food prices in the North African country.

The eruption came amid widespread antigovernment protests over high unemployment rates in nearby Tunisia in which at least 14 protesters died in clashes with police over the weekend, according to state media there.

Top Algerian officials held an emergency meeting Saturday after several days of widespread violence, triggered in part by a sharp rise in the price of cooking oil and sugar. 

Both countries suffer from high unemployment among an exploding youth demographic. But the authoritarian regimes in Algiers and Tunis have mostly kept a lid on political opposition and public protests, making the flare-up unusual.

Recently, rising global food prices have raised alarm among economists and development experts who worry they could ignite unrest, much like they did in some developing economies in 2008. But it is unclear to what extent global prices have directly affected Algeria, a big importer of grains and other foodstuffs. The immediate trigger to this month's protests appeared to be new regulations imposed by the government this year intended to rein in Algeria's big unregulated informal sector.

Wholesalers and distributors tried to pass on the higher cost resulting from the new regulations to consumers. That helped send prices for cooking oil and sugar, in particular, up 20% this month, according to economists and local businessmen.

But the protests also have appeared to resonate more widely among Algeria's large and unemployed youth. Young people under 25 make up almost 70% of the country's population and face an estimated 30% unemployment rate, according to the International Monetary Fund.

Starting in the middle of last week, protests and riots spread in waves across the country, including in the capital, Algiers. Demonstrators burned tires, vandalized stores and government buildings and clashed with armed antiriot police.

At least three protesters have been killed, while at least 300 police officers and some 100 demonstrators have been injured, Interior Minister Dahou Ould Kablia told state media over the weekend.

Algeria is one of the world's biggest energy producers. But President Abdelaziz Bouteflika—who has run the country with an iron fist since 1999—has had mixed success in reining in high unemployment among the country's youth, a problem across much of the Middle East. For years, young Algerians have protested against a lack of affordable housing, while civil-society groups have decried a lack of political freedom.

Despite the recent unrest, analysts say the government's healthy foreign-exchange reserves, estimated at about $150 billion, would allow it the flexibility that poorer countries lack, including the ability to boost already-hefty food-price subsidies. Indeed, Algeria's cabinet met Saturday and agreed to "temporary and exceptional exemptions" on import duties, value-added tax and corporate tax for sugar and food oils. A statement issued by Prime Minister Ahmed Ouyahia said the new measures are aimed at cutting prices more than 40%.

On Sunday, there were no reports of fresh protests, but residents said roadblocks and a heavy police presence around ministry buildings remained in place. Also on Sunday, Trade Minister Mustapha Benbada met with food importers and related businesses to discuss the new government measures.

The Algerian riots came amid weeks of instability in Tunisia, where on Sunday 14 people were killed during clashes in three Tunisian towns over the weekend, according to a statement published by the country's official news agency.

Unrest in Tunisia Dec. 17 when an unemployed university graduate set himself on fire after police confiscated his fruit and vegetable stand. Rare nationwide strikes and street marches followed his funeral.

 Write to  Margaret Coker at margaret.coker@wsj.com, Benoit Faucon at benoit.faucon@dowjones.com and Summer Said at summer.said@dowjones.com 