NEW YORK—Crude prices fell after Libyan forces called a cease-fire, but reports of renewed fighting on the ground and the mobilization of Western forces raised doubts that the conflict would end soon. 

Light, sweet crude for April delivery settled down 35 cents, or 0.4%, at $101.07 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange. Brent crude on the ICE futures exchange settled down 97 cents, or 0.8%, at $113.93 a barrel.

Prices fluctuated wildly throughout the day as traders' attention remained fixed on events in Libya, whose oil exports have been all but cut off since a rebellion against leader Moammar Gadhafi began a month ago. Prices surged more than 2% after the U.N. voted to authorize a no-fly zone over the North African country, but reversed course after Libya's foreign minister declared a cease-fire.

Despite the call for peace, reports of fresh assaults against rebel-held towns suggest fighting in Libya continued. President Barack Obama on Friday called on Col. Gadhafi's forces to halt attacks against rebels as Western countries mobilized war planes to prepare to enforce the no-fly zone over Libya. 

"It looks as if the problems there are going to play out a little longer," said  Gene McGillian, a broker and analyst at Tradition Energy in Stamford, Conn. "The…barrels of Libyan production are going to continue to remain off the market."

The rebellion, which began in mid-February, has sharply curtailed Libya's oil exports—which had previously averaged 1.3 million barrels a day—and sent crude prices soaring. Sustained violence in other countries in the region, including Bahrain and Yemen, has further stoked fears of supply disruptions and heightened worries that the violence could spill over to big oil producers like Saudi Arabia. 

Few market participants expect the conflict in Libya to end soon, despite calls for a cease-fire. Oil drillers are likely to adopt a wait-and-see stance before resuming production, even if fighting between pro-Gadhafi forces and rebels ends, Oppenheimer energy analyst  Fadel Gheit said. 

"Oil companies are not expected to rush back to Libya, as the situation is likely to get worse before it gets better," he said. 

Despite ending lower Friday, oil prices have rallied sharply from levels below $100 a barrel earlier this week as Japan claimed progress in containing the crisis at a nuclear-power plant damaged by last Friday's 9.0-magnitude earthquake. The nuclear emergency has placed markets on edge and turned investors skittish over risky assets like commodities. 

—Ben Lefebvre contributed to this article. 



 Write to  Dan Strumpf at dan.strumpf@dowjones.com 