BRUSSELS—The European Union increased its aid to handle the refugee crisis in Libya, and will mobilize extra funds to help member countries maintain border control, European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso said Wednesday. 

In a press briefing Wednesday, Mr. Barroso said the EU must reshape its relationship with North Africa and provide more resources to the region. 

Mr. Barroso said the EU was increasing its aid for the refugee crisis to €10 million ($13.8 million). He said there are about 140,000 refugees who have fled Libya, many of them Egyptians who had crossed into Tunisia, and called the situation a "humanitarian tragedy," with some of the people lacking any identity papers. 

The EU is providing medical and food aid to refugees at Libya's borders with Egypt and Tunisia. 

Mr. Barroso said the commission isn't involved in discussions of a no-fly zone, but that the EU must do everything possible to ensure that Col. Moammar Gadhafi steps down. 

Speaking on the EU's future role in the region, Mr. Barroso needs to reshape its role in the region to support democracy. He dismissed the idea that the Arab world wasn't fit for democracy. Similar arguments were made about southern Europe when it democratized in the 1970s, he said.

"They will of course follow their own road, make their own choices. It is not up to us to tell them what to do," Mr. Barroso said. But the EU is "totally determined" to help them along the "journey to democracy and a better future."

Many EU member states were caught by surprise by the recent events, which started with large-scale protests in Tunisia. Ties between French ministers and the Tunisian regime of former President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali embarrassed President Nicolas Sarkozy's administration while officials from Italy, which has close links with Libya, have warned the EU against taking action against Col. Gadhafi's regime. 

However, the EU has imposed an asset freeze and travel bans against Col. Gadhafi and 25 other Libyan officials. Mr. Barroso said the EU still has €4 billion to spend by 2013 on the region as part of its Neighborhood assistance program. 

He said there should be stronger conditionality on the funds to reward those who improve the rule of law and said money should be funneled to help constitutional and judicial reforms and to support non-state actors like unions, women's organizations and the media. 

Mr. Barroso also said the EU would use European Investment Bank funds to prepare a"stimulus package" for the region, focused around smaller firms. The commission also supports allowing the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development to invest in the region, he said. 

He also said the EU should work to encourage mobility between the two regions, with targeted visa facilitation for students, researchers and business people. 

