Gnocchi is obviously Italian, but like many food traditions that are transported to and adopted in another land—think bagels in New York or tacos in Los Angeles—it is even more symbolic and important in South America. 

Here's how important gnocchi, aka ñoquis, is in Argentina and Uruguay, where my husband is from: The food has its own day of each month, the 29th, when there is no question of what's for dinner. There is a whole segment of society known as "ñoquis." These are corrupt civil servants who go into the office just once at the end of the month, to pick up their paychecks. Then there's the region's dubious gnocchi economic plan: On the 29th, you put a few bills under your plate of ñoquis and the cash is said to eventually multiply. 

The origin of this lore is nebulous. The most solid theory I've heard is that potato-and-flour gnocchi is what poor Italian immigrants could afford by the end of the month in early 20th century Montevideo and Buenos Aires. Payday on the first gave credence to the pesos-under-the-plate trick.

Eating anything else on Gnocchi Day continues to be anathema in many restaurants and families. My husband's family are Polish and Russian Jews, with not a whiff of Italian blood. Yet he claims that his Yiddish-speaking grandmother, who raised him on borscht and brewed sweet Passover wine in the bathtub, made ambrosial gnocchi that to this day has never been bested. 

Even by me, the professional food writer who has perfected recipes for pancakes, risotto and braised short ribs that could be considered assets in a divorce settlement should we ever part. My husband, perhaps eager to avoid such a parting, is an avid fan of my cooking, responding to my worst flops with "riquísimo, Linda," (it's great, Gorgeous). But he has always been a shameless and unrelenting critic of my gnocchi.

 3 large or 6 small Idaho potatoes   1 teaspoon Kosher salt   1 egg, beaten   1½ cups all-purpose flour 

 What to Do: 

 1. Fill a large pan with salted water and bring to a boil.

 2. Set up a cookie sheet lined with parchment paper and dusted with flour.

 3. Scrub and dry the potatoes but do not peel them. Microwave on high until soft—the setting and time varies widely by microwave. Allow to cool only enough to be able to handle and peel with a sharp knife. 

 4. Pass potatoes through a ricer into a large mixing bowl. Sprinkle salt and flour over the potatoes. Add egg. 

 5. Using hands, knead quickly trying not to overwork the dough. The dough should be slightly on the wet side—though not sticky. 

 6. Generously flour a work surface and pinch off a small handful of dough. Using both hands, roll it into the shape of a snake. Using a sharp knife, cut into bite size pieces and lay them, separately, on the cookie sheet. Continue until finished.

 5.Once water boils, add the gnocchi, a few at a time, to boiling water. Using a skimmer, retrieve the gnocchi as they rise to the surface.

 The Sauce: BROWN BUTTER AND SAGE 

 1. Add a knob of unsalted butter to a large sauté pan (not non-stick) and set over high heat.   2.Once the butter browns, add several leaves of chopped sage and then immediately add well-drained gnocchi.  3. Do not touch the pan for a minute or two, until one side of the gnocchi is well browned.  4. Jerk the pan forward to toss the gnocchi, and allow them to brown on another side. Slide onto a plate and sprinkle with coarse salt and pepper.

 Other uses for the sauce: Boil in chicken soup; top with butter and grated cheese and brown under a broiler; toss with pesto or marinara.

It started when we were just married and I made my first attempt, which I planned to top with luscious, garlicky pesto. In a never-to-be-forgotten snafu, I didn't knead the flour into the potato well enough. As a result, they fell apart and turned to goop in the boiling water. 

"That's not how you make ñoquis," my husband said, ever so helpfully, as I poured the mess down the drain. I advised him I was freeing up the pot so I could clock it over his head.

I studied a variety of recipes and learned that the eternal gnocchi challenge is to add just enough flour so they don't disintegrate, but not so much that they become heavy. Likewise, the dough must be worked minimally, so it doesn't become tough, but enough so it adheres. The secret, according to several cookbooks, is to use old potatoes, which are drier, and bake or microwave them. Using less flour results in gnocchi that are light and fluffy. 

I proceeded with the microwaving tactic and made, in my opinion, optimal gnocchi. As my husband relished light, buoyant dumplings under a coating of marinara sauce, I shared my genius nuking trick.

"That's not how you make ñoquis," he said, putting down his fork. Grandma was a stalwart boiler, evidently.

The next month, I made great dough in a flash and revealed nothing about my method. But the last step—rolling the pieces of dough off the back of a fork to give them raked markings—was a real time suck, so I decided to skip it. 

He stared at his dish, befuddled. "That's not how you make ñoquis," he uttered, following with a tale about standing by Grandma's side as they filled a huge flour-coated table top with perfectly-raked gnocchi.

The next 29th, I worked the dough up to the point of snake shapes. Then we traded places. He stood in the kitchen cutting and rolling each pinch of dough off the back of a fork. After an eternity, I poked my head in to find he'd made it, hands cramping, through a mere fifth of the dough. We decided to boil the raked ones for him, and I would eat non-raked ones. Tossed in brown butter with crispy leaves of sage, they were scrumptious either way.

That was years ago. My husband is more Americanized now, we're busy with our kids and we don't eat homemade gnocchi as often as we used to. But when we do, we follow South American tradition: We eat them on the 29th and put money  under our plates, praying it will increase. 

We also follow our own new traditions. I nuke the potatoes and skip the markings. And my husband, that big fan of my cooking the rest of the month, falls into nostalgic reverie about Grandma and stints on the praise.

 Write to  Katy McLaughlin at Katy.McLaughlin@wsj.com 