TEL AVIV—Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas offered to visit the Gaza Strip in the coming days to discuss with Hamas leaders ending four years of divided rule that has stymied Palestinian politics and complicated a peace deal with Israel. 

After Mr. Abbas's offer Wednesday, the Islamist militant group repeated its invitation to Mr. Abbas, raising hopes for a revival of unity negotiations and for the first return of the Palestinian president to Gaza since Hamas overran the coastal territory in June 2007—a potential breakthrough in the parties' bitter rivalry. However, there was no immediate indication of a date for the summit, and Hamas officials said such a visit would take time to organize. And there weren't any signs of new flexibility on power sharing disputes between the sides.

Still, the mutual overtures are notable because they were prompted by pressure from demonstrators around the Palestinian territories and Gaza Tuesday—inspired by grassroots youth protest around the Middle East—that called on the rivals to reconcile. 

Hamas Prime Minister Ismail Haniyeh Tuesday said he would meet Abbas in Gaza or anywhere else. On Wednesday, Mr. Abbas told leaders of his secular Fatah party, which runs the Palestinian Authority in the West Bank, that he could visit as early as Thursday, said Munib Masri, a Palestinian businessman who was there. Mr. Abbas also pledged again not to seek re-election.

A Gaza visit "will create big momentum'' for Palestinian unity, Mr. el-Masri said. "We'll have a government with one address and one country. God has answered my prayers today.''

Israel's right-wing government would likely disapprove of a Hamas-Fatah détente if it didn't force the Islamists to foreswear violence, recognize Israel and honor peace agreements, requirements adopted by the "quartet'' of international peace-process sponsors that includes the U.S.. 

An Israeli official said that Palestinian reconciliation, while important for the peace process, was unlikely. "Will Hamas give the PA a foothold in Gaza? I'll believe it when I see it,'' the official said. 

Hamas and Fatah sat together in a unity government after the Islamists won parliamentary elections in 2006. Differences over power sharing escalated into violence in Gaza, with Hamas overwhelming Fatah's security forces. 

Since the split, the sides have held several rounds of talks on reconciliation with Egyptian mediators. In addition to a dispute over policy toward Israel, the sides disagree over who should control the Palestinian security forces and over arranging overdue legislative and presidential elections.

Palestinians have blamed both parties for the state of divide and many are pessimistic about the prospects of reconciliation, according to opinion polls. Protestors at Tuesday's demonstration said a reconciliation is a prerequisite for establishing a Palestinian state. 