PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla.—For Mets players, a day in spring training begins with a glance at a clubhouse bulletin board. There, a sheet of paper informs them of their fates.

If the box next to a player's name is empty, his workday will consist of perusing the breakfast spread, stretching under the Florida sun and working out for a couple hours in the morning. He's free to call ahead for an afternoon tee time.

But if the box next to a player's name is marked with an X, it means he's been chosen to board a coach bus and make the trek to the Mets' next road game. "You don't want to see that X by your name," outfielder Angel Pagan said. Not when you play for this team.

The Mets will travel more miles by bus this spring than any other team in baseball, according to a Wall Street Journal analysis of each team's schedule. Based on estimated driving distances between ballparks, including split-squad games, the Mets will log roughly 2,752 miles as they schlep around the Sunshine State.

The team's travel troubles are symptomatic of a larger issue in baseball: the number of teams that have fled the east coast of Florida in recent years. The Los Angeles Dodgers left nearby Vero Beach and moved to Arizona in 2009. The Baltimore Orioles abandoned Fort Lauderdale for Sarasota in 2010.

Now, the town nicknamed "Port St. Lonesome" is perhaps the state's loneliest baseball outpost. Only three teams are within 100 miles of the Mets, and none are within 40 miles. By contrast, in Arizona, all 15 teams in the Cactus League play within 50 miles of one other.

Want to hear a baseball player groan? Tell him to catch the 7 a.m. bus to Fort Myers for a 1 p.m. game against the Boston Red Sox.

For established major leaguers, who are among America's most pampered travelers, a three-hour drive across Florida is like a three-month toddle across the Sahara.

"On days you pitch, you don't really want to sit on a bus for two hours before," pitcher Mike Pelfrey said. "You get stiff. You tighten up. It would be ideal if you only had to go 30 minutes, like they do in Arizona."



Pagan shakes his head. "Four straight hours on a bus, it kills you," he said.

Pelfrey offers a solution. "They need to get sleeper buses," he said.

Mets pitching coach Dan Warthen scoffs at all this. It's the coaches, he said, who feel the impact of the travel. They are the ones who make almost every trip, who arrive at the Mets' spring training complex earlier and stay later than most everyone else.

"You get back at 7 p.m., you get your paperwork done, you leave here at 8:30 and you're back here at 5 a.m.," Warthen said. "By the time you grab a bite to eat or whatever else you have to do, you're back out there. Players come in, shower and shave and boom, they're gone."

When it comes to bus travel, though, all players are not created equal. Though Major League Baseball requires teams to bring at least four regulars on the road, star players are usually spared.

Closer Francisco Rodriguez said he couldn't remember the last time he took the bus during spring training, but he guessed it was sometime around 2005.



When Johan Santana took the bus to Jupiter for a start against the Cardinals in 2009, it made headlines. For a 40-minute ride down I-95 and three innings of work, he became the ultimate everyman.

Most trips are uneventful. Players turn on their iPods and doze off. On longer trips, movies are shown. On the way to and from Jupiter Wednesday, R.A. Dickey passed the time flipping through "Man's Search for Meaning," Viktor Frankl's 1946 book about his imprisonment in a concentration camp.

Occasionally, though, foul weather complicates matters. The Mets drove to Fort Myers for a game against the Twins last year but never made it off the bus.

"It was pouring the whole way there," first baseman Ike Davis said. "Five minutes before we were going to get to the ballpark, they told us the game was canceled. Then it was sunny the whole ride back."

The lack of nearby teams is more than an inconvenience. It also results in the Mets playing the same handful of teams the majority of the time. 

That's especially problematic because two of the three closest teams, the Marlins and Nationals, are division opponents.

Mets manager Terry Collins said he will keep starting pitchers out of games against division rivals late in spring training to prevent opposing hitters from getting good looks at them.

 Instead, they will pitch in minor-league games. "There's no reason to expose them at that time," Collins said.

As a short-term solution, Collins said he asked general manager Sandy Alderson to schedule a trip to the west coast of Florida for four or five days next spring, so the Mets can play a wider range of teams.

But the extensive travel schedule raises questions about the long-term viability of Port St. Lucie as the Mets' spring training home. 

Their lease at Digital Domain Park runs through 2018, though they have the option of buying out the remainder of the lease.

That's unlikely to happen anytime soon, given the Mets' financial problems. But with the Nationals considering leaving Viera, the Mets might have to give it more serious consideration in the years ahead.

"I can't say we've discussed it at this point," said Dave Howard, the Mets' executive vice president of business operations. "But it is something we're mindful of."

 Write to  Brian Costa at brian.costa@wsj.com 