After the Chinese military tested its new stealthy fighter during U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates' visit to Beijing, most attention focused on whether or not President Hu Jintao had advance knowledge of the test. The fact that Mr. Hu appeared surprised when Mr. Gates brought it up led to speculation on the relative independence of the PLA and its potential role in next year's change in China's leadership. These are obviously important issues but they should not make us lose sight of the test itself and the central fact that the balance of air power in the region is leaning increasingly in favor of the Chinese.

For the first time since the end of the Cold War, the U.S. and its allies face a competitor that can call into question what has been the American military's ace-in-the-hole—its supremacy in the skies. The test of a fifth generation fighter is not the only reason for this change in the regional balance of power. There are numerous contributing factors.

First, over the past 20 years, China has continually upgraded its air defense system. It has done in good measure by buying Russian-made S-300s. This family of surface-to-air radars and missiles is regarded as being among the world's most effective regional air defence systems, comparable and in certain respects superior in performance to the U.S.-made Patriot. With S-300s deployed across from Taiwan, the Chinese can put at risk any non-stealthy, U.S. aircraft flying in the vicinity of the Taiwan Strait. Since the vast bulk of American fighters and all U.S. tankers and transport aircraft are not stealthy, this is a serious problem. 

The second problem is China's expansive deployment of medium- and intermediate-range ballistic missiles. With advances in targeting, this vast arsenal of missiles puts every major American and allied air base in Northeast Asia in jeopardy. Short on hardened shelters for planes and control centers, these bases have become inviting "soft" targets. 

Add to this China's acquisition of a new generation of attack submarines, fighters, fighter bombers, cruise missiles of all sorts, a new suite of sensors to locate potential targets, and a newly operational ballistic missile designed to hit U.S. carriers at a distance, and it is increasingly clear that the cornerstone of America's ability to project military power in the region, the aircraft carrier and its aircraft, is no longer rock solid. 

In 1996, when President Bill Clinton sent two carriers in the waters near Taiwan in response to a military provocation by the Chinese when it launched a salvo of missiles off the northern and southern coasts of that island, he did so with confidence that the Chinese would not challenge the deployment or further escalate tensions. Today, an American president would have nowhere near the same confidence. 

So what's to be done? Perhaps the worst thing the U.S. can do is implicitly concede this advantage to the Chinese military by implementing strategies that would stage and deploy most American military assets from bases outside the region. Creating a Fortress Guam in response, for example, will undermine the credibility of American security ties with Japan, South Korea and the Philippines. It will be next to impossible to assure our partners that "we have their backs" when we are 1,500 miles away.

At a minimum, the U.S. needs to work with its partners and allies to begin hardening existing bases and establish new bases throughout the region to complicate China's military plans. Next, given the growing threat posed by Chinese submarine developments, the U.S. will need to expand its own submarine fleet, increase resources for the Navy's anti-submarine warfare program, and move ahead with developing a new generation of airborne electronic warfare platforms that can foul and confuse enemy radars and sensor systems.

Equally urgent is getting allies like Japan and South Korea to upgrade their air fleets with stealthy aircraft. No one knows just how stealthy the new Chinese plane is or exactly when full-scale production might occur. That said, the plane will almost surely be equal to or better than the vast majority of fighters now in U.S. allies' air forces. 

Accordingly, the Pentagon should be working with the Japanese and South Koreans for them to procure the F-35 stealth fighter-bomber. And precisely because of the threat to air bases posed by China's ballistic and cruise missiles, it is even more incumbent that the VSTOL version of the F-35 go forward, despite current problems in the program. Having a capacity to take off and land vertically and on short runways will become even more essential in the years ahead. 

Finally, Congress needs to reverse the administration's decision on ending production of the F-22 at 187. Not only is the stealthy "Raptor" far and away the finest fighter in the world—and will remain so for many years to come—it is the only plane available for more than a decade that can operate night and day in an independent fashion in a hostile Chinese air defense environment. 

The F-22 flies faster, higher and its suite of sensors makes it an even more effective platform than the F-35. In the best of all worlds, the U.S. would already have a longer-range, day-night, stealth bomber capability on hand to supplement the use of the F-22s. But it doesn't. And in the meantime, the reduced numbers of F-22s leave the U.S. tactically at a disadvantage.

All of this will cost money, of course. American political leaders on both sides of the aisle seem bound and determined to cut the Pentagon's budget rather than increase it. The cuts are the work of the green eyeshade folks in the administration and in Congress, whose agenda is driven largely by the politics of the budget and little or no strategic analysis. 

While keeping the peace always seems expensive when totaling up today's budget, the failure to do so is even more costly. Regaining American air superiority in East Asia is absolutely essential to ensure stability and prosperity in the region in the years ahead.

 Mr. Schmitt is director of the American Enterprise Institute's Program on Advanced Strategic Studies and Mr. Donnelly is director of its Center for Defense Studies. 