LUSBY, Md.—The televisions in the two cafeterias of the Calvert Cliffs Nuclear Power Plant are tuned to Fox News and CNN. The fate of Japan's Fukushima nuclear plant is of intense interest to the 880 people who work five shifts here.

Behind the gates and security checkpoints, workers express sadness for their counterparts in Japan and a determination to use the disaster to better prepare for a worse-case scenario. Training and procedures are the common refrain. The White House is 54 miles away.

Unspoken is the reality of what will happen to the Japanese workers who stayed behind to contain the crisis. Two Fukushima workers were hospitalized Thursday after being exposed to harmful radiation. All the employees at the plant here understand the power and potential danger of nuclear energy without having to dwell on the risks.

"Nuclear energy is special and unique," says Kent Mills, 51, from his perch overlooking the control room where crews monitor the reactors. "You should not be afraid of the technology but you should respect it to the utmost degree."

He says the Fukushima workers are likely consumed with the daily fight and not the likely toll. What happened there is "sobering," he says. "The events in Japan surely tell us we can't be arrogant with the 'that can't possibly happen to us' scenario. We run drills and say yes it can but this says even more, that we need to be ready for beyond design emergency planning."

Mr. Mills has been here 24 years, following a career in the Navy where he was an officer on nuclear submarines. At home, he says, the situation in Japan increased his family's understanding about his preoccupation with safety and emergency procedures.

In the simulator, a replica of the nuclear-reactor control room that is hidden a maze of security checkpoints away, Michael Fick, 42, says his thoughts are with the workers.

"Do they know the situation of their families?" he asked.  "Some people are still missing from the earthquake." At best most have lost their homes and have little access to food, water and clothing, and the fate of their families is beyond their control, Mr. Fick said. "I have a tremendous amount of sympathy for them and admiration," he said.

There are 60,000 employees at 104 nuclear plants in the U.S., according to the Nuclear Energy Institute, an industry trade group. Many of them, like the workers here at this Constellation Energy Nuclear Group LLC facility on the shore of the Chesapeake Bay southeast of Washington, are likely watching events in Japan while asking and fielding questions of their own.

This plant, one of three CENG nuclear facilities, has two pressurized-water reactors producing enough electricity for about one million Maryland residents. Each reactor is housed in a 193-foot-tall containment building with reinforced concrete four feet thick.

"You don't just shut nuclear power off like other power sources," says Mr. Fick, a 19-year veteran and member of the emergency preparedness unit. "Oil and coal power plants, you can shut down. You shut down a nuclear plant you still have decay heat," which results from the breakdown of radioactive material. His wife understands that in emergency he'd be here, he says.

Worst-case scenario plans in Lusby don't encompass earthquakes and tsunami, but instead other out-of-the-blue incidents, including a 300 miles-per-hour tornado, with debris, and a jet plane strike. Last year, the reactors shut down in an automatic sequence after a cooling pump lost power.

Pam Tolliver, 41, works just outside the eight-story room that houses the plant's turbines. She is aware of the power of the materials being used here, but says there are dangers in other power generation as well. Her father worked at a coal-burning power plant. "I've been here 24 years and every day we talk about safety but this [Japan] does get your attention."

Workers throughout the plant say it has helped that they have had town-hall meetings led by plant vice president George Gellrich, who passed along information from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, NEI and the Institute of Nuclear Power Operations about Fukushima. In addition to gaining a better understanding of the differences between the plants, they wanted to know how they could help Japanese workers.

Mr. Gellrich received a text message from his 20-year-old daughter at college after news about the volunteers at the Japanese plant surfaced. "Would you be one of the 50?" After he responded yes she texted: "I am proud of you."

Tim Riti, 45, a licensed operator and now general system supervisor said his three children ages 10, 12 and 19 have asked if the plant could have a similar crisis. "They know I'm part of the emergency response team," he said. "Not only am I one of the 50 but I'd be one of the 50 fighting to be one of the 50. This is where I'd want to be."

 Write to  Gary Fields at gary.fields@wsj.com 