 (Please see Corrections & Amplifications item below.) 

Jane Bussmann's "Bussmann's Holiday: The Worst Date Ever," part of the Culture Project's ongoing Women Center Stage festival at the Living Theater, is a one-woman show about traveling to Uganda in pursuit of an attractive peacemaker and winding up investigating that country's violent Lord's Resistance Army.

It's an unusual career move for an English-born comedy writer and aspiring filmmaker who's earned credits on "South Park" as well as several notoriously raunchy British TV and Internet series—one of which, "Brass Eye Special," sparked calls for new government censorship regulations. In 2009, Ms. Bussmann published "The Worst Date Ever," a chronicle of her unlikely transition from celebrity interviewer in Los Angeles to erstwhile foreign correspondent and, more recently, policy advisor on Uganda to the United Kingdom's Foreign Office. 

She also fled Los Angeles for a home in Midtown Manhattan, where she's currently working on a cop show for Comedy Central. With "Bussmann's Holiday"—the title of which is taken from her travel pieces in Britain's Mail on Sunday newspaper—set to begin Friday at the Living Theatre's Clinton Street venue (she will also present it next Wednesday and next Friday), the Journal caught up with Ms. Bussmann, 41, to talk about her shift from interviewer to Africa activist

 You've been writing comedy professionally since you were 19. How did you get your start so young? 

I get very cross about things, and when you can't find a word straight away, it ferments in your brain, and then what bursts out is just so wrong. A lot of what you're very politely calling funny is just desperately inappropriate. Failing your exams also helps a great deal. 

 How do your current projects reconcile the frequent media conundrum of wanting to expose real news while also being entertaining? 

I'm working on a three-part comedy drama about NGOs, because I thought "You altruistic bastards, you need a reckoning, and you're also very funny, without realizing it." There's nothing funnier than these pompous, pious bastards. There's nothing in the world that's funnier than Bono. You could not make him up. I'm still fighting the effects of a seizure from his Louis Vuitton ads. I'm also writing a cop show called "Bitch Squad," a pilot for Comedy Central UK and Caryn Mandabach, who produced "Roseanne." 

 How do you arrange your day, given the contrast between writing comedy and keeping up with Africa?  

The plan is very strict: be at my desk writing comedy from 6 a.m. till lunchtime, then eat a simple seaweed salad, run 40 miles and do the Lord's Resistance Army stuff till 5 p.m. This never happens. It's 7 a.m. to 10 p.m. of writing comedy interjected by Skype conversations with colonels in the Congo, priests in the Ugandan bush and cinnamon rolls.

 What advice is the UK Foreign Office soliciting from a sitcom writer? 

I performed this show at the House of Parliament last December, and as a result of that, we're going to be working on a new initiative on sharing intelligence. I'm trying to get them to have an intelligence-sharing unit. 

Every expert of every nationality says they don't know where [Lord's Resistance Army leader Joseph] Kony is. But I asked a Western official, "If I was kidnapped tomorrow, how would you find me?" And he said, "Well, local intelligence. The local people know where he is." Well, hang on a minute: Is it possible this incredibly remote area isn't all that remote to the people living in it? If you want to get Joseph Kony, go to Uganda and ask the Ugandan army—who we're trying to help out with loads of logistics and fuel money—why are they pulling troops out of where he is? And maybe start to think twice about this $250 million in aid. 

My take on it is that refugees are a cash cow, and there will be an infinite supply of kidnapped children so long as they're worth money. We've created a situation in which it wouldn't make sense to catch Kony. When you're pumping cash into the hunt for something, instead of the end result, you're basically paying FedEx $20 a day to send your package. 

 You moved from Los Angeles, which you described as being full of "Useless People." In your book, you describe Washington, D.C. as being full of "Useful People." Where does New York fit in on that spectrum? 

The pace of this place is the best. There's not a moment where your brain gets a chance to relax. 

And the dogs are actually pets here. They don't actually have human rights, as far as I've noticed. They don't own their own restaurants and bakeries and beauty salons like they do in Los Angeles.

For the cop show I'm currently working on, I'm writing it so it could work in any country, but the U.S. version could only work in New York so they can't make me go back to Los Angeles. So the cops solve a lot of crimes in front of the Empire State building, the Brooklyn Bridge and so on.

 Corrections & Amplifications  The Culture Project is presenting the Women Center Stage festival at the Living Theater. This article incorrectly implied that the festival is being presented by the Living Theater.