WASHINGTON—Free credit scores could be easier to obtain under a rule U.S. federal regulators proposed Tuesday. 

Starting in July, lenders would be required to disclose credit scores to consumers when the scores are used to set certain credit terms. The Federal Reserve and Federal Trade Commission proposed the rules to comply with a provision included in the sweeping Dodd-Frank financial overhaul Congress passed last summer. 

Lenders frequently review credit reports to determine a loan applicant's creditworthiness. Low credit scores and negative information on credit reports can leave a consumer paying higher interest rates. 

Under the proposal, a lender would be required to provide free credit scores to borrowers when the lender uses a credit report to set high interest rates or other loan terms that aren't the best available. 

Lenders would also need to provide credit scores when they deny credit, change the terms of an existing credit arrangement or refuse to grant credit in the amount or on the terms requested. 

  John Ulzheimer, president of consumer education for SmartCredit.com, said the new regulations would be "hugely empowering" for consumers. 

This means that "any financial-services product you apply for where you're denied or adversely approved based on a score, you're going to get the score, which is historical," he said. 

He said various kinds of credit scores are marketed to consumers, but those scores aren't necessarily the ones banks and other lenders are using to make credit decisions. "There's this massive amount of consumer confusion right now because all of the scores that are marketed really aren't being used," he said. 

The proposal by the FTC and Fed, however, would make way for consumers to see the credit scores creditors are actually using to make decisions, he said.

The rules would apply to financial products such as mortgages, credit cards and auto loans. 

But Mr. Ulzheimer says insurance companies, landlords and utilities also use credit scores. Those entities should be required to provide credit scores as well, he said. "I don't understand why we're taking baby steps here," Mr. Ulzheimer said. 

The new Consumer Financial Protection Bureau will gain authority over enforcing the rule on July 21, when the new regulatory agency officially launches. But the Fed and FTC said they wanted to move forward on the rule now. 

"The agencies believe it is important to have implementing regulations and revised model forms in place by July 21, 2011," they said. "This will help ensure that consumers receive consistent disclosures of credit scores and information relating to credit scores and will help facilitate uniform compliance when section 1100F of the Dodd-Frank Act becomes effective." 

 Write to  Maya Jackson Randall at Maya.Jackson-Randall@dowjones.com 