Some European national registries of carbon-dioxide-emission allowances Friday said they were waiting for the European Commission to authorize a resumption of the troubled European Emissions Trading Scheme after the EC shut spot trading Jan. 19 due to cyberfraud.

But registries from several other countries, including the United Kingdom, Italy and France, confirmed that they haven't yet submitted reports required by EC to resume trading.

The EC originally said the ban on spot trading would last through Jan. 26, but has yet to announce any resumption. The Czech carbon dioxide emissions registry said Thursday that it would be shut for at least six weeks, suggesting the problems may be worse than thought. The EC has said emission credits worth about €28 million have been stolen from three national registries in recent weeks.

While the vast majority of the ETS trading is in the futures market and is unaffected by the ban, the EU's travails with the ETS have undermined a centerpoint of the EU's vaunted strategy on climate change.

Maria Kokkonen, spokeswoman for climate issues at EC, has indicated that national registries can be reopened on a case by case basis if sufficient security measures have been adopted. Member states must first submit a report to the EC attesting to adequate security measures.

"The first reports have been received and are under review," Ms.Kokkonen said.

National registries for various EU members Friday reported a range of different status updates.

"We submitted the report on our registry's security Wednesday and are now awaiting feedback," said Julie Steinen, spokeswoman for the Germany registry, adding that the German registry expects the commission will give the green light to reopen after examining the report.

Following a string of electronic robberies of €28 million worth of allowances from three national emissions registries in January, the commission on Jan 19 ordered the closure of all EU registries to determine how the theft occurred, what was stolen and where the goods have gone.

France, Italy, the United Kingdom, Poland, Austria and the Czech Republic have confirmed they are preparing the security reports but are not yet able to submit them.

"At this stage, time scales still need to be clarified, but the Environment Agency is working to ensure the U.K. registry is reopened as soon as possible," a spokeswoman from Britain's Environment Agency said Friday.

Poland and the Czech Republic, however, say two weeks and six weeks, respectively, are still needed to settle all outstanding issues before they expect to be able to resume operations.

The Czech registry, which fell victim to the latest cyber theft of 1.3 million allowances from its accounts on Jan. 18, said there are still legal and administrative hurdles to be overcome before regular trading can begin despite having already put in place enhanced security measures.

The Czechs say the EU lacks harmonized, cross-border legal codes that would clearly state which government has jurisdiction in cross-border electronic theft of emissions allowances.

Until there is clear recourse for victims of such theft, and a system is in place to return allowances to their rightful owners, the Czech registry will remain closed, said Jiri Stastny, chairman of OTE AS, the Czech registry operator.

Mr. Stastny said registry officials in Germany and Estonia have confirmed they together have located 610,000 of the 1.3 million allowances stolen from the Czech registry last week.

The German registry Friday didn't confirm nor deny the report and the German Federal Criminal Police Office and Germany's General Prosecution Office said they weren't aware of any stolen carbon allowances on German accounts and are therefore not investigating the recent events.

A further 500,000 allowances stolen from Prague are believed to be in accounts in the U.K., OTE said. British registry officials had no comment on the Czech statement.

Spain, Greece and Romania on Friday said they are waiting for an indication of when they can reopen from Brussels, but none of the countries have yet confirmed whether they have submitted security reports.

"There is no information at the moment as to when trading will restart in Greece because we need to be sure that the system will be entirely secure after a complete investigation," said Greece's Ministry for the Environment, Energy and Climate Change said in a statement.

A spokeswoman for the Greek agency declined further comment.

Austrian officials did say that the certificates stolen from the country's registry earlier this month are sitting on accounts in Sweden and Liechtenstein.

 Write to  Sean Carney at sean.carney@dowjones.com 