MUMBAI – Tata Motors Ltd. is developing cheaper versions of its Prima range of trucks and plans to start launching them by the end of 2011 to boost demand, a senior company executive said recently. 

The new trucks will be sold at price points up to 400,000 rupees ($8863.3) lower than those of the current range, the executive told Dow Jones Newswires. 

"We are currently working on cutting costs through re-engineering and looking at cheaper, trimmed down versions," the executive said. 

The introduction of cheaper versions of the so-called World Trucks will likely help bolster Prima sales in the price-sensitive Indian automobile market, Asia's third-biggest and one of the fastest-growing in the world. 

Tata Motors, India's biggest commercial vehicle maker by sales, launched the Prima range of trucks in November 2009, as a niche commercial vehicle, suited for both Indian and overseas markets. 

The company has already launched two tractor-trailers and two tippers from the range, which also consists of twin-axle and multi-axle trucks, mixers and special application vehicles. 

The executive said the company sold only a fraction of the 5,000 trucks it had targeted a year ago. He didn't elaborate. 

Separately, a person close to the development said Tata Motors plans to introduce more powerful engine versions for its Prima tippers and tractor-trailers. 

"The current range of Prima trucks use 280 horsepower engines...the company is in discussions to introduce 300 HP engines too," said the person, who didn't want to be named. 

He didn't provide a time frame. 

"The next stage will be [to introduce] engines between 300 HP and 400 HP," he added. 

Tata Motors currently produces engines for its trucks and buses at a plant in the east Indian city of Jamshedpur and its new facility at Phaltan, near Pune. It has an equal joint venture with U.S.-based  Cummins Inc.
CMI


0.69
%




's local unit, Cummins India Ltd., to make engines for its medium and heavy commercial vehicles. 

 Write to  Anirban Chowdhury at anirban.chowdhury@dowjones.com 