

 Who can enter? 

Any company, individual, organization or government is welcome to enter from anywhere in the world. This is a truly global competition.



 What kinds of innovations are eligible? 

A very broad range: biotech and medicine, software, semiconductors, wireless, technology design, transportation, to name just a few categories. If the innovation involves technology, we want to hear about it. It should go well beyond marginal or incremental improvements to existing products and services. The innovation really needs to be a game-changer or have a wide impact on its field or other fields.



 How recent does the innovation have to be? 

Some important aspect of the innovation must have occurred since Jan. 1, 2010. This means the innovation itself must have been launched (or substantially updated) or there's been some other significant milestone, such as granting of a patent, publication in a peer-reviewed journal, purchase by a major client, etc.



 My innovation is at a very early stage. Am I eligible to enter the contest? 

Yes, but you should carefully consider whether you should enter the contest this year—or wait until you're able to provide more evidence that your innovation works the way you say it will. Moreover, medical innovations requiring the approval of the FDA in the U.S. (or similar agencies in other countries) should have received regulatory approval before being submitted to this contest.



 Am I required to submit my entry on your application form? 

Yes. For an application, please  click here  or send an email to  innovation@wsj.com .



 I can't decide which category to enter. My innovation overlaps several categories. 

Just choose what seems like the best category. If we or the judges disagree, we'll move your application to a different category.



 What sort of supporting documents should I send? 

That's up to you. We don't require supporting documents, but please feel free to send them if they'll help explain your innovation or bolster your claims. For instance: a peer-reviewed article in a technical journal. You can send supporting documents as an email attachment to  innovation@wsj.com . Please DO NOT send zip files; the Journal firewall will block them.



 Can I send everything to you by regular mail or courier service? 

No, sorry. We have judges on three continents and must do everything electronically.



 How will the winners be chosen? 

The Journal will assess all the applications and then forward the most promising ones to an independent panel of judges. (There have been years where shortlisted entries totaled no more than 20% of all applications. This is an extremely competitive contest.) We check to see whether the application is complete and whether the ideas contained in the application are expressed clearly and comprehensively. The Journal, as well as the judges, will consider whether an innovation represents a breakthrough from conventional ideas or methods in its field, whether it goes beyond incremental improvements to technologies that already exist, and whether it will have a wide impact on its field or other fields. In short: Is the innovation evolutionary—or revolutionary? And does the innovation actually do what its developer says it will do?

The judges will choose winners and a maximum of three runners-up in each category for which they decide to make awards. (Please note that the judges will sometimes decide not to make any awards in a particular category. For instance, there were no e-commerce winners from 2005 to 2009.) The judges will also choose Gold, Silver and Bronze winners for the entire competition.



 I have several innovations. Can I make more than one application? 

Yes, but please use a separate form for each entry. 



 Can I nominate myself? 

Yes.



 I work for a PR company. Can I nominate clients? 

Yes.



 What's the deadline for entries? 

May 6, 2011 (6 p.m. New York time). We will not consider applications arriving after the deadline. Please do not ask us for extensions. 



 Is there a fee to enter? 

No.



 What is the publication date? 

October 10, 2011. But please check our Web site for any changes to that date.



 When do you inform the winners? 

On the day of publication. We do not inform winners beforehand because The Wall Street Journal forbids disclosing contents before publication. 



 What's the prize? 

Fame. There will be extensive coverage in The Wall Street Journal's three global editions—in the U.S., Europe and Asia—as well as on WSJ.com and Dow Jones Newswires. We ran this competition in Europe before introducing it globally, and winners tell us that the Awards helped them obtain venture-capital funding or an increase in sales.

In addition, we will honor the winners at an awards presentation in Silicon Valley in the autumn (details to be announced). 



 I'm with a very small company (or I'm a single entrepreneur). How am I supposed to compete against global companies with huge R&D budgets? 

We judge every application on its own merits, regardless of whether it's from a single entrepreneur or a global company. If you look at lists of past winners, you'll see that the little guys can outshine the big guys.



 Can you supply the application form of a previous winner so that I have an idea of what a winning entry looks like? 

No. Entries often contain proprietary information that is supplied in confidence to The Wall Street Journal and our panel of judges. 



 Can I demonstrate my innovation to you or to the judges? 

We appreciate your eagerness to share your innovation, but we have to decline because we want to maintain a level playing field for all applicants. If The Wall Street Journal or the judges have questions about your application, we'll follow up with you.



 What is your best advice to applicants?  

Do NOT make unsubstantiated claims in your application. We disqualify hundreds of applications each year because people offer little or no evidence that their innovation does what they say it will do. You need to convince The Wall Street Journal and our panel of judges that your innovation works like you say it does. The best way to do that is to stick to a factual presentation and cite independent, third-party validation of your claims. For instance, you can send us articles from technical journals or testimonials from users or other third-party sources (including their contact details). 

We strongly suggest you avoid technical jargon and write in terms that laypersons can understand. Or if you have to resort to tech jargon, please explain what you mean. Each year, we find that winning innovations are explained clearly and comprehensively in plain English.



 What if I have further questions? 

Send an email to:  innovation@wsj.com . Or call Journal news editor John Leger in the U.S. at +1 (609) 520-5546. 