 Michel Balthazard, one of the three Renault managers suspected of leaking electric vehicle secrets, is planning to fight the company's decision to dismiss him, his lawyer said. Balthazard, a member of Renault's management committee and a leader of its electric vehicle program, received a letter of dismissal, which accused him of receiving money from outside the company, said his lawyer, Xavier Thouvenin. 

 Italy's Fiat narrowly won a crucial victory after workers voted to accept new working conditions at a plant seen as the cornerstone of a €20 billion ($26.8 billion) plan to double output in its home country.  

Registrations of new cars in Europe declined by 2.7% in December from a year before to 1.05 million vehicles, the ninth consecutive month of shrinking demand after various state-backed scrapping schemes in the region expired, but the pace of the downturn slowed further.

The European passenger-car market was down 4.9% year-on-year at 13.8 million vehicles in 2010, the European Automobile Manufacturers Association said.

Toyota has signaled it may relocate unprofitable manufacturing capacity overseas, a possible turning point for its longtime commitment to maintaining its production base in Japan. 

 The Japanese auto maker also believes it is near a breakthrough in developing electric motors for hybrid cars that eliminates the use of rare earth metals, whose prices have risen sharply in the past year as China restricted supply. 

Azure Dynamics, an electric- and hybrid-vehicle maker, said it has received an order for 600 hybrid-electric delivery vans from Purolator Courier, the Canadian logistics and delivery company. The order should help to triple the company's revenue this year over 2010, said the company's chief executive officer.

 Industrial & Commercial Bank of China plans to open five branches in Europe over the next two weeks, more than doubling the European presence of China's biggest lender in its latest move to establish a global footprint. 

Citigroup said it is working out "fair compensation" for the customers affected by a scandal at its banking branch in the northern Indian town of Gurgaon. It added that it will continue to support the investigating authorities fully until the matter is resolved. 

J.P. Morgan Chase's fourth-quarter profit jumped 47% to $4.83 billion, as the banking giant's asset quality improved further and it said consumers and businesses were looking for more loans and funding. 

Spanish banks' use of European Central Bank funding rose for the first time in five months in December, data from the Bank of Spain showed. Spanish banks raised €66.99 billion ($89.6 billion) in average net funding from the ECB over the month of December, up from €61.138 billion in November and similar to the level in October, the Spanish central bank said. 

Indonesia's Lippo Group is seeking to capitalize on surging valuations for companies in the country by selling its listed cable television and Internet business, said people familiar with the matter. 

 BP hailed its $16 billion share swap with Russian oil giant Rosneft as a ground-breaking maneuver in the oil industry, but the deal is drawing criticism in Washington over its potential implications for U.S. national security. The deal, which makes Rosneft the single largest BP shareholder, allows the two companies to jointly explore for oil and gas in the Russian Arctic. 

 AIG repaid all its obligations to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, ending the central bank's involvement in the affairs of the giant insurer and positioning it to begin exiting U.S. ownership in the coming months. 

Smiths Group, the U.K.-based global technology company, said it rejected a cash offer of £2.45 billion ($3.89 billion) from buyout firm Apax Partners for its Smiths Medical unit. Its products include syringe infusion systems and implantable ports for CT scanning. 

Spanish infrastructure operator Abertis Infraestructuras said it raised €626 million ($837.3 million) from the sale of its minority stake in Italian peer Atlantia, resulting in a capital gain of €151 million. 

News Corp. is in discussions about acquiring the U.K. production company run by the daughter of News Corp. Chairman Rupert Murdoch, according to a person familiar with the matter. The transaction, which has long been the subject of speculation, could see the addition of Murdoch's daughter, Elisabeth, to the leadership ranks of News Corp., according to people familiar with the matter. 

Time Warner Cable and Sinclair Broadcasting Group said they reached an agreement on programming fees that will prevent the sort of channel blackouts for about 4 million U.S. cable subscribers that have been causing controversy in the TV business. 

India's Tata Steel set a price range for the sale of new shares that could raise as much as 34.77 billion rupees ($766 million) in the country's first big-ticket capital-raising of the year. 

Alpha Natural Resources and Arch Coal have emerged as the most serious competitors to acquire Massey Energy, people familiar with the matter said. Massey's board will likely make a decision at the end of this month whether to sell the company or maintain the status quo, these people said. 

Chinese Estates (Holdings) said it has bought River Court, the larger and newer of the two buildings that make up the European headquarters of Goldman Sachs Group in the City of London. 

Sweden's IKEA said its net profit rose 6.1% to €2.7 billion ($3.61 billion) in its fiscal year to Aug. 31, as it benefited from consumers looking for bargains amid the challenging economic climate. The world's biggest furniture retailer by sales said revenue rose 7.7% to €23.1 billion. 

Borders Group, the U.S.'s second largest bookstore chain, is continuing talks to a secure a $500 million credit line and has hired bankruptcy and restructuring lawyers, said people familiar with the matter. 

 New Hewlett-Packard Chief Executive Leo Apotheker is finalizing a strategic plan for the technology giant, including shuffling senior management and placing a greater emphasis on the more profitable pieces of the business, said people briefed on the matter.  

Investment bankers have been making proposals to online deals site Groupon about a proposed initial public offering for the past week through an informal "bake-off," people familiar with the matter said. 

The board of Russian mobile company VimpelCom will meet to discuss a new merger framework for the telecom assets of Egyptian billionaire Naguib Sawiris, two people familiar with the matter said. 

Telecommunications software company Telcordia Technologies has been put on the sales block by its private-equity owners and could fetch between $1 billion and $1.5 billion in an auction, according to people familiar with the matter. It is one of the largest providers of software and services to U.S. telecom carriers, helping them run their wired and wireless networks.

High-speed rail operator Eurostar says that revenue rose by 12% in 2010 as the business travel market rebounded. Eurostar said revenue rose to £760 million ($1.2 billion) compared to £675.5 million in 2009. The total number of passengers rose by 3% to 9.5 million. 