BEIJING—China rebuffed a U.S. proposal for a clear timetable of strategic defense talks on the first day of a long-delayed visit to Beijing by Robert Gates, the U.S. defense secretary, and indicated that Taiwan remains the single biggest obstacle to improving the world's most important bilateral relationship.

While agreeing to narrower defense exchanges sometime in the first half of the year, Mr. Gates's Chinese counterpart, Gen. Liang Guanglie, also made clear that China would suspend military ties again if the U.S. continued to sell weapons to Taiwan, the island that Beijing regards as a rebel province.

Mr. Gates arrived in Beijing Sunday on a three-day mission to deepen and stabilize military-to-military relations, which China has repeatedly suspended for political reasons over the past decade—most recently in January 2010 in response to U.S. arms sales to Taiwan.

As his trip falls just ahead of a state visit to Washington by Chinese President Hu Jintao next week, Mr. Gates had hoped that Chinese officials would agree to set dates for a series of high-level defense talks and a visit to Washington by Gen. Chen Bingde, chief of staff of the People's Liberation Army.

But while Pentagon officials had been hoping for a more enthusiastic response from Gen. Liang on Monday, the reaction wasn't unexpected.

Some U.S. officials and China analysts believe China's civilian leadership is more keen on building the military-to-military relationship with Washington than is the PLA. As a result, some expect Mr. Gates's meeting with President Hu on Tuesday to be visibly warmer than the news conference with Gen. Liang.

But Chinese experts on U.S.-China relations say Beijing is highly unlikely to show any flexibility on the issue of U.S. weapons sales to Taiwan—especially in the run-up to a Communist Party leadership change in 2012.

Mr. Gates asked the Chinese military to look at American arms sales to Taiwan as a political matter, and not let Beijing's objections to the transactions lead to a suspension of military ties.

"We are in strong agreement that in order to reduce the chances of miscommunication, misunderstanding, miscalculation, it is important our military-to-military ties are solid, consistent and not subject to shifting political winds," Mr. Gates said.

He also proposed establishing a broader strategic defense dialogue that would include in-depth discussions on Chinese and U.S. policies on nuclear weapons, missile defenses, cyberattacks and space.

Both countries have long tried to prevent friction between their armed forces from affecting their overall relationship, which has improved steadily over the past three decades despite U.S. legislation that obliges Washington to help Taiwan defend itself.

But tensions on the military front are having an increasing impact on policy making in Washington and Beijing as China's growing military power starts to challenge the supremacy that the U.S. has enjoyed in the Asia-Pacific region since the end of World War II.

Those tensions were evident in a series of public disputes last year over issues including China's more forceful territorial claims in the East and South China seas, Beijing's close links to North Korea, and U.S. joint military exercises near China's coast.

Chinese state media have been fiercely critical of U.S. defense policy in Asia, seen as designed to contain a rising China, but have been relatively restrained in recent days in an apparent effort to ease the atmosphere ahead of Mr. Hu's visit to the U.S.

In recent months, U.S. officials have been offering their Chinese counterparts in-depth private briefings on U.S. nuclear policy and other military issues, in hopes of prompting Beijing to reciprocate.

But at a news conference Monday, Gen. Liang said only that China was "studying" Mr. Gates's request for a deeper strategic dialogue, and declined to agree on specific dates for future defense talks, saying only that they would occur in the first half of 2011.

Gen. Liang said he recognized the U.S. desire for military-to-military ties that are uninterrupted by political disagreements. But his emphatic denunciation of U.S. arms sales to Taiwan made plain that future weapons transfers likely would again threaten military relations.

"China's position has been clear and consistent: We are against it," Gen. Liang said. "U.S. arms sales to Taiwan seriously damage China's core interests. And we do not want to see that happen again."

Key U.S.-China military events

 May 1999: The U.S. bombs the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade by accident. 

 April 2001: A U.S. spy plane and Chinese fighter collide over the South China Sea.

 November 2007: China denies the USS Kitty Hawk aircraft carrier a Thanksgiving port stop in Hong Kong

 October 2009: U.S. and Chinese military officials agree to conduct some joint exercises, but they never take place.

 January 2001: U.S. announces $6.4 billion in arms sales to Taiwan. China suspends military ties. 

 -- WSJ Research 

Pentagon officials argue that they are trying to use incremental steps, such as the working-group meetings the Chinese officials agreed to Monday, to build trust and move to the kind of broader dialogue that Mr. Gates has been pushing for.

Some officials hope that if they can demonstrate openness with the Chinese, and successfully complete a series of dialogues on basic defense issues, over time Chinese leaders will grow more comfortable with a discussion that goes beyond talking points and tackles the deeper strategic issues Mr. Gates believes are critical to discuss.