SYDNEY—Amid the global rush to claim infrastructure assets, Australia's New South Wales state is offering private companies the right to operate the iconic Sydney Harbor ferries. 

The government wants companies to register their interest in running the service that transports more than 14 million tourists and residents annually across the harbor and along the main river. 

"Sydney Harbor is an international icon, the most beautiful city in the world, and it deserves a ferry service that matches its world-class status," said state Premier Barry O'Farrell. 

Governments have turned to leasing high-profile infrastructure assets such tollroads as a way of raising funds. The assets appeal to some investors for their stable, long-term returns. 

New South Wales, also known as NSW, is keen to reduce its infrastructure commitments, as it grapples with more than 12.2 billion Australian dollars (US$13.2 billion) of net debt. The state recently appointed Nick Greiner, a former premier, as its infrastructure czar with a view to attracting more private money and investment from sovereign wealth funds. 

Under the plan unveiled Wednesday, the NSW government will continue to own Sydney Ferries and control fare structures, but private operators will be handed the right to lease, maintain and run the fleet. 

Advertisements seeking registrations of interest to operate the ferries will run in newspapers next week, and companies must submit tenders with the state's Department of Transport by the end of the month.

Sydney Ferries traces its roots back to the late 18th century when Great Britain established a penal colony in Australia. In 1789, a ferry service was established between Sydney Cove and the farming settlement of Parramatta, with the first vessel built by convicts and powered by sails and oars, according to a history published on Sydney Ferries' website. The service evolved into a commercial operation in the mid-19th century as Sydney's expanding population led to homes being built on the harbor's northern shore. 

But the service has frequently encountered choppy waters as a business. The opening of the Sydney Harbor Bridge in 1932 cut annual ferry travel by more than half, and the state government was forced to take over the company in 1951 to keep the service running.

Ministers hope privatization will lead to the reinstatement of hundreds of ferry services, and encourage more people to swap their car for travel within Sydney's panoramic harbor. 

"We believe ferry reform is essential," said Gladys Berejiklian, NSW's transport minister. "Existing services need to improve but there also needs to be an increase in capacity to provide a real public transport option for commuters and a better tourist experience for visitors and for locals exploring Sydney Harbor," she said. 

Sydney Ferries operates 28 vessels traveling between Sydney's business district and nearly 40 destinations, including Taronga Zoo and the beach suburb of Manly. The ferries make a combined 175,000 trips every year. Private operators are allowed to run competing services with Sydney Ferries, with closely held Sydney Fast Ferries operating two high-speed vessels between central Sydney and Manly since April 2010. 

Ms. Berejiklian said the success of Sydney Fast Ferries, which saw passenger numbers more than quadruple between April 2010 and March 2011, shows there is "an enormous appetite for an efficient service" within Sydney Harbor.

 Write to  David Winning at david.winning@dowjones.com 