It's a good thing the Knicks traded for that big star—you know, Chauncey Billups.

New York beat the Heat 91-86 on Sunday night behind Billups's 16 well-timed points. With 1:01 remaining in the game, the point guard hit a 3-pointer that was so deep that Dwyane Wade had backed off him to give the Knicks an 85-84 lead they'd never give up. Billups had a steal on the next possession that turned into two Shawne Williams free throws and it was official: Billups is no longer "the other guy."

And although Billups isn't really a superstar, if the Knicks' season does come down to the also-rans who surround their two big names, Sunday's game was good news, as Billups was a key component in beating one of the best teams in basketball.

Carmelo Anthony scored 29 points with nine rebounds, and Amar'e Stoudemire scored 16 points with 10 rebounds. For the Heat, LeBron James scored 27 and Chris Bosh scored 20 with 12 rebounds.

It wasn't an easy end to the game: Nursing a one-point lead, Bill Walker bobbled Billups's in-bounds pass. Stoudemire blocked James's attempt with 7.9 seconds to go, and James missed a potential game-tying 3-pointer with one second remaining.

For the first time in the short Anthony era, Knicks coach Mike D'Antoni elected to go with a small, fast lineup, with Ronny Turiaf on the bench and Shawne Williams starting at power forward. The move puts Stoudemire at center and optimizes the speed that the Knicks love.

Most of New York's problems were on the defensive end. The team lacked height for much of the game and newly acquired point guard Anthony Carter struggled to stay with Wade in his 19 minutes. During one stretch of the game, 6-foot-6 guard Walker was the second-tallest Knick on the floor behind Stoudemire.

D'Antoni played 11 players in all, a rarity for a coach with a famously small rotation. He has said this week that the numbers game will sort itself out after a few games. Corey Brewer, the lengthy guard acquired from Minnesota, was once again inactive.

The Knicks looked disjointed and on the way to being blown out until a 16-0 run to end the first half. After being down 15 with 4:25 to go in the quarter, they used a pair of Billups threes and a pair of Anthony jumpers to crawl back in it. On the final play of the half, the comeback was complete when Anthony passed to Walker, who banked a 3-pointer off the backboard to take a 52-51 lead. 

Perhaps because the Knicks are a team in transition, and the Heat, who have three stars and 12 hangers-on, are always a team in transition, the game never looked very pretty. In the third quarter, the Heat outscored the Knicks 15-13 and the teams combined for 11 turnovers. Despite its superstar billing, the game was mostly a series of loose-ball scrambles and missed layups. The Knicks shot 38% from the field and 26% (8 of 30) from the 3-point line. 

There were still signs the Knicks needed to jell more—like the errant pass from Anthony to Stoudemire in the first that led to a Heat fast break and James alley-oop, but on Sunday night, the Knicks passed their first real test—with some clutch help from Chauncey Billups.

 Write to  Kevin Clark at kevin.clark@wsj.com 