A couple of questions used to suffice at the seafood counter: How fresh is it? Should I bake or fry?

Now it's more complicated than ever, with new government recommendations encouraging more fish consumption, and a wide and expanding array of guidelines for what is healthiest and most environmentally friendly. For the growing number of consumers who want to enjoy the taste and health benefits of fish without feeling like they are speeding the decline of ocean life, straightforward advice may seem to be in short supply.

The U.S. government earlier this year recommended for the first time that the average American should eat eight ounces of fish a week to reap the benefits of omega-3 fatty acids and other nutrients. At the same time, seafood consumption is rising world-wide as growing populations and an expanding middle class in developing countries boost demand for protein. This comes as scientists warn that a growing number of fish populations—including some popular tuna and salmon species—have dropped to worrisome levels. Concerns about mercury and other fish contaminants blur the picture further. 

"If you look backwards 10 years, a shrimp was a shrimp," says Carl Safina, co-founder of the Blue Ocean Institute, a marine-environment advocacy group. "It was like a bagel. You didn't ask if it was a sustainable bagel. There wasn't a discussion to be had over it."

Several marine-environment advocacy groups, as well as the U.S. government, have issued guidelines for consumers, businesses and fishermen.But they can be confusing and sometimes appear contradictory, even when much of the advice aligns from group to group. And the details can be overwhelming for a consumer simply trying to pick out dinner at a grocery-store fish counter. 

It isn't always useful when, for instance, guides from Blue Ocean and other groups say net-caught tuna isn't sustainable, but pole-caught tuna is, says Safina. "The consumer will have a very, very hard time figuring out if it's pole caught," at a grocery store or restaurant. "That's definitely a difficulty and a weakness."

No effort to create a single, national guide to sustainable seafood has yet emerged. Companies including Safeway Inc. and Costco Wholesale Corp. are putting in place new guidelines to simplify fish-buying for consumers, and to promote their "green" credentials.  Wal-Mart Inc. 
WM


-0.21
%




and  Kroger Co.
KR


0.71
%




 have both said they are working to stock more environmentally friendly seafood, and  SuperValu
SVU


-0.62
%




 says it is developing a sustainable-seafood strategy. 

Safeway is implementing standards developed with the nonprofit group FishWise. The second-biggest traditional U.S. supermarket chain by sales after Kroger is aiming to have nothing but sustainable seafood on its shelves by 2015. 

Two weeks ago, Safeway began training seafood-counter employees to answer customers' sustainability questions, and the company is designing signs based on the Monterey Bay Aquarium's Seafood Watch guide explaining which fish are best and why, says  Phil Gibson, the chain's group director of seafood. 

Some of the most sustainable choices, according to Seafood Watch, include wild Alaskan salmon, farmed Arctic char, and U.S.-farmed shrimp and catfish. 

If fishing continues in the same manner as it does now, "the available supply will be such that the average consumer will not be able to afford to buy this product," says Mr. Gibson. "It will destroy a portion of our business."

Costco last week said it halted sales of five wild-caught fish species that are on Greenpeace's "red list" of overfished species, including Greenland halibut, certain types of grouper, and skates and rays. Last year, the company stopped selling seven other species on the Greenpeace red list including Atlantic cod, Chilean sea bass and orange roughy, says  Jeff Lyons, Costco's senior vice president of fresh foods.

Late last year Whole Foods Market color coded all of its wild-caught fish to show consumers which are most sustainable, based on guidelines set by Monterey Bay Aquarium in California and New York's Blue Ocean Institute. 

Despite all these efforts, the fish counter can still be confusing. . Although much of the data from environmental groups is substantially the same—researched by some groups and repackaged by others—each group can add its own recommendations. Not all opinions line up neatly. 

Consider the monkfish.

While guides from Seafood Watch and the Blue Ocean Institute both say monkfish populations are sufficient to continue harvesting at current rates, each group takes issue with the method used to catch the warty, brown bottom-feeder. The meaty fish is caught in giant nets that are dragged along the ocean floor, a method environmental groups warn destroys habitats and other sea creatures. For this Seafood Watch gives monkfish its lowest, "red" rating. However, because of different methodology, the fish gets a middle-of-the-road "yellow" from the Blue Ocean Institute. 

The U.S. government doesn't agree with either nonprofit group. The habitat impact of catching monkfish is "acceptable," says  Laurel Bryant, director of external affairs at National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Fisheries Service, which counts and regulates how much fish is caught in the U.S. and maintains its own extensive seafood-buying guide called FishWatch.

One of the most contentious debates in the seafood community involves the sustainability of fish farming. In 2009 about 84% of seafood consumed in the U.S. was imported, according to NOAA. Of that, about half was farm-raised fish. Domestic farm-raised fish, such as tilapia, catfish and shellfish, accounts for about another 10% of U.S. consumption. 

Some scientists say densely packing fish into cages or nets in natural bodies of water, frequently just offshore, can destroy delicate habitats while the waste generated can elevate nitrogen levels to harmful levels. In addition, groups most concerned with overfishing note that carnivores such as salmon need to eat wild-caught fish, depleting populations of feed fish such as anchovies. 

Demand for seafood world-wide stood at about 17.1 pounds per capita in 2008, up 36% from around 12.6 pounds in the 1980s, according to the latest figures from the United Nations' Food and Agriculture Organization. Farming is probably necessary to keep up with demand for seafood, especially for the species consumers have grown to love, some scientists say.

"You can't be a seafood business and not sell salmon and shrimp," says  Tim Fitzgerald, a scientist in the oceans program at the Environmental Defense Fund. Still, he suggests consumers eat more farmed fish such as tilapia and catfish, which don't need as much fish meal in their feed. 

Even if a fish is abundant and harvested responsibly, contamination concerns complicate the picture further. 

Generally, the health benefits of seafood outweigh the risks associated with methyl mercury, a heavy metal found in varying amounts in much seafood, according to U.S. Department of Agriculture guidelines. 

The agency warns, however, that pregnant and breast-feeding women shouldn't eat swordfish, tilefish, shark, or king mackerel and should limit consumption of white, albacore tuna, a commonly canned variety.

Mr. Fitzgerald, of the Environmental Defense Fund, suggests a few ways to navigate all these issues: Eat more small fish, and a wider variety of them, including mackerel, oysters, or sardines. 

Mixing it up reduces the chances that you are getting too much of a single contaminant, he says, adding that the lower one eats on the food chain, the less of an impact one has. 

"The sky is falling a little bit, but we don't need to run around screaming," says Mr. Fitzgerald. "There are a lot of things consumers can do."

 Corrections & Amplifications 

An earlier version of this article had a missing phrase. The sentence should have read: It isn't always useful when, for instance, guides from Blue Ocean and other groups say net-caught tuna isn't sustainable but pole-caught tuna is, says Mr. Safina.

 Write to  Sarah Nassauer at sarah.nassauer@wsj.com 