It is puzzling that some Asian cuisines, such as Chinese, Japanese and Thai, have become universally popular while others, like Indonesian, Korean and Vietnamese, are found in considerably smaller numbers. It's not that there is anything intrinsically unappealing about them, but, for whatever reason, outside of Asia, they are found in only a handful of Western countries. 

When it comes to Vietnamese cuisine, there is plenty to be found in Sydney, New York and the Bay Area of San Francisco, with the most acclaimed being the Slanted Door (slanteddoor.com). Given the French colonial connection to Vietnam, it is hardly surprising that Paris, too, has a wide variety of offerings, especially in the 13th arrondissement Chinatown district, plus the renowned Tan Dinh in the seventh arrondissement, which, as a bonus, has one of the greatest wine lists in the country. However, elsewhere in Europe, Vietnamese restaurants are relatively scarce, except for a cluster in London's Shoreditch neighborhood. And of those that do exist, not many would claim to be gourmet establishments, attempting little more than glorified street food, including the ubiquitous spring rolls. 

British entrepreneur Anna Craven, who owns three restaurants in Vietnam, including the upmarket Deck Saigon (thedecksaigon.com), believes Vietnamese restaurants in Europe are often too heavily influenced by Chinese dishes. "They also tend to overcook the food and cover everything in MSG, which is a pity because the essence of Vietnamese cuisine is lightly cooked very fresh ingredients." The cuisine in Vietnam itself has long been influenced by a strong Western presence, starting with the baguette, which was imported more than a century ago by the French. The bánh mì, or bread roll, with its mixture of pâtés, pork belly, fresh herbs, pickles, chilies and mayonnaise, is the culmination of the cross fertilization between the French and Vietnamese, and is now the most popular form of Vietnamese fast food, easing out the traditional noodle soup pho, pronounced fur. Bánh mì is now big business all over the globe.

Different versions of bánh mì have been available in Britain for the past few years but since the opening of Kêu! Banh Mi Deli in Shoreditch last March, the level of quality has taken a big jump. This airy, contemporary deli on a nondescript street is the first in London to strive for an authentic rendition of the classic sandwich, plus versions with barbeque pork, roast duck and mackerel. It is the creation of Hieu Trung Bui, a 35-year-old Vietnamese who was born in Hanoi months after the Communist victory in 1975. He is indicative of a new generation of Vietnamese entrepreneurs who weren't fleeing from communism but rather came as undergraduates to study.

After graduating from Oxford Brookes University eight years ago, Mr. Bui decided to remain in Britain and opened Cây Tre restaurant, which is diagonally opposite Kêu!, and then later, the Viet Grill, also nearby. The restaurants quickly gained a reputation among London's foodies for the authenticity of their ingredients and their more adventurous menus. But Mr. Bui says it is unfair to criticize earlier Vietnamese places for any lack of innovation. "Let's just say that the people who originally opened Vietnamese restaurants did so because they were unskilled and unemployed," he says. "All they really knew about was pho or other forms of street food. They were not city people, so they didn't have any great knowledge of Vietnamese restaurants."

Mr. Bui's ventures have also generated buzz as he has involved leading British chefs and wine writers to help improve his product. One of the earliest customers at Cây Tre was British chef Mark Hix. "Mark said I didn't seem to know much about running a restaurant and that I needed a business plan. It was true because my idea was just to serve the dishes that I liked when I lived in Vietnam," Mr. Bui says. "Mark also recommended that I ask [wine writer] Malcolm Gluck to help improve my wine list." Even the baguette used for his bánh mì was the result of exhaustive comparisons with existing baguettes, which his brother made during a two-month tour of Vietnam earlier this year. Mr. Bui commissioned London restaurateur Sally Clarke's bakery to produce baguettes with a specific degree of crispness in the crust without using dough enhancers. 

Mr. Bui's next project is a new restaurant in London's Soho, opening later this month. He and his uncle served some of their new dishes at a recent meal in Viet Grill I attended. They were certainly far more sophisticated and subtle than anything I had eaten in Vietnam during the war and are likely to make a considerable impact on the Asian food scene in London. 

The cha gio re, or net spring rolls, were exquisitely delicate, but the stand-out dishes were a Lang Son roast pork, which looked like a rectangular football, and a fiery hot, Indian-inspired dish of soft-shell crab with sweet curry leaf. The roast pork dish is from the far north of Vietnam and involves stuffing the pork belly with a local curry leaf and then dousing it in a special mixture of honey, lemon and vinegar, which allows the skin to remain crispy. The soft-shell crab dish, with cinnamon and tomato, was inspired by one served at a popular canteen attached to the main mosque in Saigon.

However, the main difference with Mr. Bui's new venture, which will also be called Cây Tre (Vietnamese for bamboo), is that the menu will be relatively minimalist. "We do not want one of those huge menus with pages and pages of different dishes. We will only have two options for each ingredient, whether it is pork, beef, eel, squid or fish. That way there is less wastage and also we can focus more on having really fresh ingredients," he says. "I also think that the very big menus show that a restaurant is scared that you will not like their dishes; we are confident enough to make the choice for our customers."

 Write to  Bruce Palling at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 