LONDON—The price of gold is expected to break $1,600 a troy ounce before the end of 2011, supported by loose monetary policy and concerns over the stability of the economic recovery in developed economies, independent metals consultancy GFMS Ltd. said Wednesday. 

In its Gold Survey 2011, GFMS said fears the market may be approaching a turning point are "still premature," with growing evidence that buyers are adjusting to higher prices. 

"There is a higher starting point for each successive investor-led rally in the price. Thus, assuming investment demand will at some point take off again this year, there remains good scope for new highs in the price to be recorded," the consultancy said. 

The price of gold has already rallied strongly this year, hitting a new record of $1,476.37 a troy ounce Monday on demand for the commodity as an alternative store of value. 

"Indeed, we would expect the next waves of investor buying to take gold to above $1,500/oz, and then to the $1,600/oz mark before the end of 2011," GFMS said. 

The consultancy said this is largely down to continued loose monetary policies in the developed world, with the state of the economy still seen as fragile. 

"Furthermore we expect investment in gold this year to be supported by the probable spreading of the government debt crisis from Europe to the U.S. and Japan, especially in light of the huge budget deficits the latter two countries will record in 2011 and the lack of concrete measures they are taking to rein these in," GFMS said. 

Inflation concerns are also likely to grow as many central banks hold back from raising rates amid concerns it will come at the detriment of a recovery in economic growth and employment, it said. Gold is often bought as a hedge against inflation, as the yellow metal is perceived as a reliable store of value. 

Meanwhile, a growing shift toward physical gold "ought to mean that investment will be more solid and less prone to short-term selloff of the kind seen in the futures market in late 2010 and early 2011," the consultancy said. 

Data Wednesday showed global physical bar investment was up 66% last year, a figure expected to be repeated this year, it added. 

 Write to  Rhiannon Hoyle at rhiannon.hoyle@dowjones.com 