Why does their hatred of her burn so hot?

Ask them, and they'll most likely tell you: Because she's a moron. But that is obviously false. To be sure, her skills at extemporaneous speaking leave much to be desired. But that can be said of a good many politicians on both sides of the aisle, including George W. Bush, John Kerry and, yes, Barack Obama. And don't get us started on the man who defeated her for the vice presidency.

Whether or not she is presidential timber--and we are inclined to think that she is not--there is no denying that she is a highly accomplished person. She is also a highly accomplished woman, what in an earlier age would have been called a feminist pioneer: the first female governor of the malest state in the country, the first woman on the presidential ticket of the party on the male side of the "gender gap." Having left politics, whether temporarily or permanently, she has established herself as one of the most consequential voices in the political media.

They say she is uneducated. What they mean is that her education is not elite--not Harvard or Yale, or even Michigan or UCLA. They resent her because, in their view, she has risen above her station.

In this respect we identify fully with Palin, for we have been on the receiving end of similar disdain. Our education, like Sarah Palin's, consisted of too many years at inferior state universities, although unlike her, we never even got around to graduating. The other day Paul Reidlinger took a shot at us for featuring one of his restaurant reviews under our "Wannabe Pundits" heading last month: "I was even denounced by noted high school graduate James Taranto." (For the record, our high school diploma is a GED.)

"Denounced" is far too strong a word; "mocked" is more like it. Reidlinger writes for San Francisco Bay Guardian, whatever that is. He doesn't say, but we surmise that he possesses advanced degrees from Stanford or the University of California, both very fine institutions. He observes that "it is a writer's job to afflict the comfortable and complacent." That would be an insufferably pretentious way to describe our job as a political columnist for an elite newspaper. What is a restaurant critic going to "afflict the comfortable" with? Food poisoning?

Professional jealousy and intellectual snobbery, however, only scratch the surface of the left's bizarre attitude toward Palin. They explain the intensity of the disdain, but not the outright hatred--not why some people whose grasp of reality is sufficient to function in society made the insane inference that she was to blame for a madman's attempt to murder Rep. Gabrielle Giffords.

This unhinged hatred of Palin comes mostly from women. That is an awkward observation for us to offer, because a man risks sounding sexist or unchivalrous when he makes unflattering generalizations about women. Therefore, we are going to hide behind the skirts of our friend Jessica Faller, a New Yorker in her 30s of generally liberal politics. Over the weekend, she wrote us this analysis of Palin-hatred, which she has generously given us permission to quote:

We'd say this goes beyond mere jealousy. For many liberal women, Palin threatens their sexual identity, which is bound up with their politics in a way that it is not for any other group (possibly excepting gays, though that is unrelated to today's topic).

An important strand of contemporary liberalism is feminism. As a label, "feminist" is passé; outside the academic fever swamps, you will find few women below Social Security age who embrace it.

That is because what used to be called feminism--the proposition that women deserve equality before the law and protection from discrimination--is almost universally accepted today. Politically speaking, a woman is the equal of a man. No woman in public life better symbolizes this than Sarah Palin--especially not Hillary Clinton, the left's favorite icon. No one can deny Mrs. Clinton's accomplishments, but neither can one escape crediting them in substantial part to her role as the wife of a powerful man.

But there is more to feminism than political and legal equality. Men and women are intrinsically unequal in ways that are ultimately beyond the power of government to remediate. That is because nature is unfair. Sexual reproduction is far more demanding, both physically and temporally, for women than for men. Men simply do not face the sort of children-or-career conundrums that vex women in an era of workplace equality.

Except for the small minority of women with no interest in having children, this is an inescapable problem, one that cannot be obviated by political means. Aspects of it can, however, be ameliorated by technology--most notably contraception, which at least gives women considerable control over the timing of reproduction.

As a political matter, contraception is essentially uncontroversial today, which is to say that any suggestion that adult women be legally prevented from using birth control is outside the realm of serious debate. The same cannot be said of abortion, and that is at the root of Palinoia.

To the extent that "feminism" remains controversial, it is because of the position it takes on abortion: not just that a woman should have the "right to choose," but that this is a matter over which reasonable people cannot disagree--that to favor any limitations on the right to abortion, or even to acknowledge that abortion is morally problematic, is to deny the basic dignity of women.

To a woman who has internalized this point of view, Sarah Palin's opposition to abortion rights is a personal affront, and a deep one. It doesn't help that Palin lives by her beliefs. To the contrary, it intensifies the offense.

It used to be a trope for liberal interviewers to try to unmask hypocrisy by asking antiabortion politicians--male ones, of course--what they would do if their single teen daughters got pregnant. It's a rude question, but Palin, whose 17-year-old daughter's pregnancy coincided with Mom's introduction to the nation, answered it in real life.

Recently we were at a party where a woman in her 60s, a self-described feminist, called Palin a "moron" for having encouraged her daughter to carry her child to term and "to marry the sperm donor." Even apart from the gross language, this was a completely irrational thing to say. First, that Palin's values are different in no way reflects on her intelligence. 

More important, why is Bristol Palin's decision to carry her child to term any of this lady's business? Those who claim to be champions of privacy and choice need to do some serious soul-searching if they have so much trouble tolerating the private choices of others.

What about male Palin-hatred? It seems to us that it is of decidedly secondary importance. Liberal men put down Palin as a cheap way to score points with the women in their lives, or they use her as an outlet for more-general misogynistic impulses that would otherwise be socially unacceptable to express.

Liberal women are the active, driving force behind hatred of Sarah Palin, while liberal men's behavior is passive and manipulative. In this respect, feminism has succeeded in reversing the traditional sexual stereotypes. If this is the result, you have to wonder why anyone would have bothered.

  Guess Hu's Coming to Dinner   "Guests Prepare for White House State Dinner With Chinese President"--headline, Los Angeles Times, Jan. 19

  Meet the New Tone, Same as the Old Tone   "House Dem Exemplifies New Tone by Comparing GOP to Nazis on House Floor"--headline, HotAir.com, Jan. 19

  The Lonely Lives of Scientists   "Scientists Fight Bugs With Poo"--headline, Reuters, Jan. 19

  Gone to Graveyards Every One   "Where Are All the Sick People Who Can't Get Insurance?"--headline, TheAtlantic.com, Jan. 18

  Himmler Had Something Similar   "Holy Cow! It's Time for a Ball"--headline, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, Jan. 18

  Hey, Kids! What Time Is It?   "It's Not Sexy, but It's Time to Talk Infrastructure"--headline, London (Ontario) Free Press, Jan. 18

 Questions Nobody Is Asking 

 Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  It's Always in the Last Place You Look   "Hawaii Governor Can't Find Obama Birth Certificate"--headline, WorldNutDaily.com, Jan. 18

  Everything Seemingly Is Spinning Out of Control   "Congress: Getting Back to Normal"--headline, FoxNews.com, Jan. 17

  News of the Tautological   "Tailgating Leads Sports Fans to Drunkenness"--headline, NPR.org, Jan. 18

  Breaking News From 2010   "Obama, Biden to Headline Democratic Retreat"--headline, RollCall.com, Jan. 18

  News You Can Use   "Amazon Selling Gastric Bypass Surgery Kit"--headline, KIRO-FM website (Seattle), Jan. 18

 Bottom Stories of the Day  

  Blast From the Past   It took less than two weeks for the formerly mainstream media's phony war on "violent rhetoric" to reach the point of self-parody, Byron York reports in the Washington Examiner:

This reminds us of the story--perhaps apocryphal--about the college resident assistant who set up dorm recycling bins for "white" and "colored" paper. A wag crossed out the latter and wrote in "paper of color." The RA wrote her own note back: "If this is a serious complaint, please come see me. If it's a joke, it's not funny."

It's especially hilarious that this would happen on CNN, which used to have a program called "Crossfire" until the executives killed it.

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Deane Hartley, John Bobek, Joe Perez, Dan O'Shea, Taylor Dinerman, John Buchanan, Terry Holmes, Bart Borkosky, Bruce Goldman, John Sanders, Arlene Ross, Ethel Fenig, Sid Steward, Aaron Spetner, Mark King, Tom Elia, Max Goss, John Williamson, Elana Katyal, Mark Finkelstein and Michele Schiesser. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)