TOKYO—Prime Minister Naoto Kan attempted Friday to get his plans to restore Japan's fiscal health back on track after embarrassing comments suggested that he didn't fully understand the importance of a downgrade of Japan's debt.

When Standard & Poor's Ratings Services cut its views on Japan's financial health to AA- from AA Thursday, it took markets by surprise—and also, apparently, Japan's leader. When informed by reporters of the downgrade Thursday, he said he was "unfamiliar" with the matter. Some news agencies translated his comments as saying he was "ignorant" of the matter.

Opposition leaders, many analysts and local media outlets jumped on the comments, portraying him as a leader ignorant of basic economic concepts. It didn't help that S&P, in its statement, blasted the government for lacking "a coherent strategy" to address the debt problem.

Mr. Kan tried to cover his tracks on Friday in remarks at the parliament, which this week began a winter session meant to hammer out a budget for the next fiscal year beginning in April. The proposed budget projects that borrowing will exceed tax revenue for a second year.

"I used the word 'unfamiliar,' but I meant to say that information wasn't at hand at that moment," Mr. Kan said. He also said that his time as finance minister, which totaled five months, had given him the chance to gain knowledge about credit ratings.

Mr. Kan's aides also rallied to his defense. "The prime minister is actually familiar with the issue of credit rating agencies" said Kaoru Yosano, newly appointed minister of state for economic and fiscal policy. Mr. Yosano explained: "he was likely informed about the S&P downgrade by his secretaries after the parliamentary session but it wasn't as though he had a lot of time … So I assume he was not familiar with the matter at that very instant."

Political analysts said that Mr. Kan's problem-laden administration had missed its chance to turn the bad news to its own benefit.

The downgrade could have served as a "driving force to propel fiscal restructuring," and "evidence to show the public that Kan's recent calls for restructuring must be top priority," said Noritada Matsuda, associate professor of political science at the University of Kitakyushu.

"Instead, he spoke without much thought, virtually self-destructing by giving off the impression that he's not knowledgeable about the economy," he added.

Japan's total government debt is now near 200% of its annual economic output, the worst among major industrialized countries. Japan's finance ministry said Friday that without additional economic reforms, annual new government debt issuance could continue growing from the fiscal year starting April 2012 to as much as 54.2 trillion yen ($658 billion) in fiscal 2014—more than 20% more than in the current year. 

Mr. Kan has brought the issue of Japan's broken finances into the mainstream of debate after years of having the issue lurk on the sidelines as spending rose to fund massive public works projects and social insurance costs, tax revenue remained stagnant and debt levels kept rising. 

He has pitched himself as a fiscal conservative and offered an ambitious program to restore growth through a corporate tax cut, open up the country to free trade, and push the 5% consumption tax to an unspecified higher rate to help balance the budget.

But to do so, he needs the support of opposition parties, which have made clear that their legislative agenda is to push Mr. Kan out of office. The ruling Democratic Party of Japan's majority in the more-powerful Lower House assures the passage of the budget. But other bills, including special issuance of deficit-covering bonds that make up about 40% of the budget, need the blessing of the opposition-controlled Upper House.

With Mr. Kan's approval rating hovering around 30% and regional elections in April that many political watchers predict will result in losses for the DPJ, the opposition is stiffening its resolve to take down Mr. Kan.

"We will take part in consultations if the prime minister prepares himself to go to the people," Sadakazu Tanigaki, the leader of the main opposition Liberal Democratic Party, said Wednesday in Parliament, implying that the opposition is open to talks only if Mr. Kan agrees to hold a snap election. 

To be sure, "the downgrade may prompt a more serious discussion of fiscal reforms as the political debate heats up in May and June," said Takahide Kiuchi, chief economist for Japan at Nomura Securities Co. He added that it may provide an impetus for raising Japan's consumption tax and economic deregulation by talking with major trading partners on joining the Trans-Pacific Partnership free trade zone now forming in Asia. 

But with Mr. Kan's gaffe, analysts say the government's opportunity to go on the offensive has now been replaced by continued defense. 

"Kan's statement will only become ammunition for the opposition to attack him in parliament," said Hirotada Asakawa, an independent political analyst. "The downgrade took the wind out of Kan's sails. It gave the impression that the DPJ has yet to act like the ruling party," he said. 

—Chester Dawson and Takashi Nakamichi contributed to this article. 