 Boston 

Anyone who has toured a lab with a scientist or strolled over a bridge with an engineer knows that they notice things and ponder questions the rest of us don't. The same is true of artists contemplating art, as curator of Chinese art Hao Sheng discovered while guiding artists through the storage areas of the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. Intrigued, he decided to build a show around the relationship between contemporary artists and ancient works.

Others have also explored such relationships—currently, at the Rubin Museum of Art in New York, "Grain of Emptiness" showcases recent works that, in the curator's view, embody Buddhist tenets at the heart of ancient Himalayan works. But Mr. Sheng took a riskier approach. He commissioned 10 Chinese artists who, he says, "had looked deeply" at ancient art to select a masterpiece from the MFA's Chinese collection and respond to it with a work of their own. The result is "Fresh Ink," a show that successfully engages old and contemporary art in conversations that enrich our experience of both.

The show has no obvious progression, so it feels not unlike walking late into a cocktail party, wondering which conversation to join. Some, like Yu Hong's "Spring Romance," center on social themes. She selected a 12th-century hand scroll depicting court ladies making silk—from beating the pulp to ironing the cloth. The women's unity, both in purpose and station, stands out all the more when compared to the poses of the women on Ms. Yu's seven-foot-tall gold silk banners. While her composition echoes that of "Court Ladies Preparing Newly Woven Silk," Ms. Yu's women, almost all taken from snapshots, barely interact. The message is clear: The price of individuality can be isolation.

Equally monumental in scope is Liu Dan's response to "The Honorable Old Man," a tall, slender rock collected by a 17th-century Ming scholar. Nine detailed views of this jagged rock appear on larger-than-life ink paintings while, on a 30-foot-long horizontal sheet of paper, Mr. Liu uses features from the stone as the departure point for an imaginary rocky landscape. As the composition grows increasingly abstract, the effect moves from entrancing to liberating—a reminder that a goal of Chinese landscapes is to engender mental states. 

Many of the conversations dig even deeper and focus on the key element of all classical Chinese painting: the brushstroke. To grapple with it, two of the artists broke the rules. American-born and -bred Arnold Chang selected an American work, Jackson Pollock's "Number 10," insisting that it be displayed flat like a handscroll. This allows the eye to shuttle between the old and new works, perceiving gestural qualities in Mr. Chang's brushstrokes and the rhythm of a landscape in Pollock's abstract. 

For his part, Xu Bing eschewed the MFA's collection altogether and chose a reprint of the 1679 "Mustard Seed Garden Manual of Painting," the go-to book for formal compositional elements and classical brushstrokes. But while its text extols the power of the brush, its illustrations are woodblock prints. Exploiting this irony, Mr. Xu's 15-foot-long "Mustard Seed Garden Landscape Scroll" is composed of photocopied elements—a rocky outcrop here, scholars in a grove there —which he then had carved into woodblocks. The result is a panoramic landscape that has all the ingredients to make it "right," yet could not be more "wrong." Missing is the vibrancy of ink flowing through a brush wielded by the hand—a vibrancy made all the more visible in other works for its absence in Mr. Xu's.

 Museum of Fine Arts, Boston  Through Feb. 13

This is particularly the case in Qin Feng's "Civilization Landscape Series," which is as close to theater as ink on paper can get. Center stage is a 3,000-year-old bronze vessel flanked by a dozen hanging scrolls; before it, in tiered rows, an "audience" of accordion-style books the size of screens. The bronze carries an inscription whose 33 ancient characters Mr. Qin has copied onto the books in an ink as pale as watermarks. Mr. Qin's response is as personal as these characters are codified: bold, black strokes that dance and splash with an exuberance that would have delighted the seventh-century monks who made an art of wild (illegible) cursive script.

When it comes to bridging old and new brushwork, however, Li Huayi takes the prize. In studying a 13th-century scroll where nine scaly dragons writhe through a sepia mist, Mr. Li focused on a spot near the center where the brume twists into a spiral. He saw this vortex as the source of energy and kept this in mind as he created a landscape of clouds and mountains that fills six panels and a vertical scroll hanging over the central area. The background panels are in soft focus while, on the central scroll, the lines are vibrant, contrasts intense and details crisp. Here, light shines through a diagonal breach in the mountains, putting the dark rocks in the foreground in relief.

"Li Huayi is the closest to the old masters," says An Ho, who studied under one of China's last great scholar-artists and now lives in Chattanooga, Tenn. Looking at images from the show, she singled him out for his brushstroke. "He has studied line work," she said, explaining that the energy should carry through the last contact between brush and paper "like hope for rebirth." And she smiled at his innovation. "You have to feel your blood pressure drop when you see a landscape," says Ms. An. "But Li Huayi adds lots of diagonal lines." He thus used classical calligraphic lines to break with tradition and infuse his landscape with the energy of "Nine Dragons." Hard to imagine a more satisfying call-and- response.

 Ms. Lawrence is a writer based in Brooklyn, N.Y.  