JERUSALEM—Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, facing opposition within his government to any new offer of territory to the Palestinians, made a rare visit to the Israeli-occupied Jordan Valley and vowed to keep a military presence in that strategic strip of the West Bank.

His tour of army facilities Tuesday was meant to underscore Israel's fears about popular revolts sweeping the Arab world—the possibility that militants might infiltrate a destabilized Jordan, slip across the Jordan River into a Palestinian-governed West Bank and fire rockets at the Jewish state's major cities.

But the visit was also part of an effort by the Israeli leader to find consensus at home and support in Washington for a still-undefined peace initiative officials say he will soon offer the Palestinian Authority in an effort to break a long impasse in negotiations.

"Our security border is here, on the Jordan River," Mr. Netanyahu said. "In any future situation, in any future arrangement, the Israeli Defense Force must stay here. If this was true before the major unrest shaking the Middle East, it is doubly true today."

Mr. Netanyahu's position isn't new, but the venue and timing of his remarks sent a message that his peace initiative wouldn't include territorial concessions to the Palestinians along the 60-mile border.

Palestinian officials insisted again Tuesday that Israel must withdraw from all of the West Bank and East Jerusalem as part of any accord. Israel captured those lands and the Gaza Strip in the 1967 Six-Day War and withdrew from Gaza in 2005, only to come under increased rocket attacks from Gaza-based militants.

Mr. Netanyahu's office leaked word of a peace initiative to the Israeli media last week, disclosing few details. 

Some officials said he is weighing an offer of a provisional Palestinian state in as much as 60% of the West Bank—a long-term arrangement that would serve until the two sides negotiate a full accord on final borders, the fate of Palestinian refugees and rival claims to Jerusalem.

Defense Minister Ehud Barak said in an interview that Israel should make a "daring" initiative, coupling an offer of provisional Palestinian statehood with "assurances about the final results." Otherwise, he said, Israel faces a "tsunami" of international condemnation.

Two other ministers in the conservative-led government, Silvan Shalom and Moshe Yaalon, said Israel should ignore international pressure and refuse to cede territory. They said the Palestinian Authority is too weak to protect its borders and Jordan's peace treaty with Israel may not survive the regional turmoil.

Mr. Netanyahu tried to address that concern Tuesday, saying Israel's "solid security foundations" would remain. He didn't mention a peace initiative.

U.S.-mediated peace talks broke down in September after Mr. Netanyahu refused to extend a partial moratorium on Jewish settlement construction in the West Bank. Palestinian leaders said they won't return to the talks without a full settlement freeze and would reject an offer of provisional statehood.

A senior Israeli official said Mr. Netanyahu wants "to make it clear Israel is serious about a real peace offer and to put the onus on the Palestinians" for the deadlock. He said Israel, which wants peace talks with no preconditions, is consulting with the Obama administration to find common ground.

State Department spokesman P.J. Crowley told reporters Monday: "If and when Israel offers its own thoughts on how to move the process forward, we will be listening attentively."

The administration last year indicated it would support an Israeli security presence in the Jordan Valley during a transition to full Palestinian statehood. The Palestinian Authority has proposed instead that an international force protect the Jordanian border. Mr. Netanyahu has said Israel's troop presence there could be reassessed over time if the Palestinian Authority's own security forces prove effective.

 Write to  Richard Boudreaux at richard.boudreaux@wsj.com 