LONDON—Britain's police and security experts managed Friday's giant crowds of wedding spectators with barely a problem, a contrast to unruly scenes over recent months here where protests turned violent. But the U.K. struggled slightly with other logistics as some mobile data networks temporarily slowed under the heavy demand.



Around Buckingham Palace and the Mall, where the biggest crowds gathered Friday, data and email transfers became problematic at times with some major carriers, but voice reception didn't appear to be affected. That included Vodafone PLC and  Telefonica 
TEF


0.61
%




SA's O2. 

Earlier in the week, Vodafone said it had doubled its network capacity in the area by deploying extra mobile base stations in the city center, and O2 loaded up to 283 temporary and fixed cell sites in the area. Vodafone did not immediately respond to a request for comment on Friday.

Mobile providers said they performed well under added strain. O2 said call volumes were up 15% and text messaging was up 23%, compared to a normal Friday. The extra mobile sites that O2 deployed in central London were running at 80%, meaning the network wasn't overloaded, the company said.

Still, some users on O2 and Vodafone experienced trouble uploading photos and sending e-mails near Buckingham Palace and the Mall. "There has been small levels of congestion, which you would expect with 1 million people on the streets of London, but generally performance has been very good indeed," a spokeswoman for O2 said.

 The Internet generally heaved as the royal wedding got under way. At one point, the website of the British Broadcasting Corp. buckled under the pressure of heavy traffic from across the U.K. and the world, returning error messages to some visitors. The BBC said the technical issues were due to "the sheer weight of traffic" and were causing the site to run slower than normal.

  Sandvine Corp.
SNVNF


-0.63
%




, a network optimization company that can see Internet traffic, said video traffic on North America's fixed-access networks jumped 20% during the wedding, compared with the previous Friday. At its peak Friday, there were more than 5.4 million page views a minute for the more than major 100 news websites in North America for which Internet distribution firm  Akamai Technologies Inc.
AKAM


-0.46
%




 serves content.

Meanwhile, with the wedding watched around the world—and coming a year ahead of London's next big media moment, the 2012 Summer Olympics—police were under immense pressure for the event to go smoothly.

Though an estimated one million people descended on the route, there were only minor disturbances. By late afternoon, authorities had arrested more than 50 people for offenses including breach of the peace, theft and being drunk and disorderly, said London's Metropolitan Police, known as Scotland Yard. 

Friday's policing effort involved nearly 5,000 officers, including mounted policemen, motorcycle officers, and specialist firearm units. Police vans lined the streets and helicopters whirred overhead. From the early hours of the morning on, police vans lined the streets and helicopters whirred overhead. Police closed roads in a large chunk of central London around Westminster Abbey, the wedding venue, and swept the area using sniffer dogs and helicopters. The presence was highly visible but officers appear relaxed, chatting with wedding watchers and providing directions. 

Police were alert to a range of threats, from anarchist protesters to Irish Republican terrorists to al Qaeda-inspired extremists.The terrorist threat level in the U.K. is currently set at "severe," meaning that generally "an attack is highly likely."

In recent months, a string of U.K. demonstrations against austerity measures turned violent, including one in March when more than 200 people were arrested for criminal damage, violent disorder and other offenses after protests against government cuts flared into violence.

In December, student protesters attacked the car of Prince Charles and his wife Camilla, Duchess of Cornwall. Protesters, some chanting "off with their heads!" smashed a window and splashed paint on Prince Charles's Rolls-Royce as it drove through central London. The couple were unharmed but the incident was an embarrassment for security services. 

 Write to  Cassell Bryan-Low at cassell.bryan-low@wsj.com and Paul Sonne at paul.sonne@wsj.com 