Late-night television owes Booker T. Jones a debt of gratitude. Better known as Booker T. of Booker T. & the M.G.'s, Mr. Jones is the father of the rock-soul organ. His swaggering riffs in the 1960s inspired the keyboard sound now ubiquitous on shows like "Saturday Night Live" and "The Late Show with David Letterman."

Surprisingly soft-spoken, Mr. Jones has just released "The Road From Memphis," a rousing, funky CD that looks back at his life's emotional high points. On the album, he's backed by The Roots—the "Late Night with Jimmy Fallon" house band. 

Between 1961 and 1971, Mr. Jones and the M.G.'s recorded under their name and on hundreds of singles by Stax artists such as Otis Redding and Wilson Pickett. Last week, in an interview from his Los Angeles home, Mr. Jones. 66 years old, talked about the album, the organist who influenced him most and Lou Reed.

 The Wall Street Journal: Could you shave when you began recording? 

  Mr. Jones:  [Laughs] No. I was in the 10th grade in 1959 when I played baritone sax on "Cause I Love You," by Carla Thomas and her father Rufus. I had a scary ability to play almost any instrument I picked up. I used to hang around Satellite Records in Memphis after my paper route. Satellite became Stax in 1961.

 How did you become an organist? 

My mother played piano and gave me a tonal feeling for music. When I was 9 years old, I took piano lessons with Elmertha Cole, who had a Hammond B-3 in the corner of her dining room. One day I looked under the cover and saw two keyboards. I couldn't believe it. 

 How many instruments can you play? 

Pretty much all of them, including flute, oboe, clarinet, saxophone and trombone. I started on the drums in fourth grade, moved to the ukulele at age 10 and then on to the guitar. 

 Did you have a childhood? 

Not like most kids. I loved music so much I practiced all those instruments every day after school. As I got older, I concentrated on the guitar and Hammond B-3. Every chance I'd get, I'd go hear jazz and R&B organists like Jack McDuff and Blind Oscar on Beale Street. 

Listen to clips of songs by Booker T. & the M.G.'s



 When did you start the M.G.'s? 

In 1961 I put together a quartet. Two of us were black and two were white. We were tight and loved the same music. People who heard the records didn't know what we were and didn't care. Stax soon started using us behind almost all of its artists.

 What does the "M.G's" part of the band's name mean? 

In 1961, the band was at Stax trying to come up with a name. Out through the window we could see producer-engineer Chips Moman doing tricks with his new red MG sports car. One of the guys suggested we call ourselves the M.G.'s. 

 What's the meaning of the M.G.'s biggest hit, "Green Onions?" 

I came up with the riff in early 1962 while playing the piano over at my mom's house. When our bassist Lewie Steinberg heard it on organ, he said it was so funky it smelled like onions. Jiving around, one of the other guys said "green onions" for emphasis. 

 And "Born Under a Bad Sign?" 

I wrote that song sitting in my den late at night with lyricist William Bell in 1966. I was trying to come up with something for guitarist Albert King. I didn't want to wake my wife, so I played a melody line softly and William said, "Born under a bad sign." Cream recorded it in 1968.

 What made your organ sound different? 

It's in the settings. The Hammond B-3 has drawbars that you slide in and out to alter the personality of the instrument's sound. I turned off the tremolo, giving it a harder, take-charge sound. Ray Charles on "Genius + Soul = Jazz" in 1961 gave me the idea. Ray used a thinner, higher-pitched tone, which sounded cool, like special effects.

 Could you call the new CD a valentine to Memphis?  

Memphis gave me so much, and my life is so rich as a result. The city needs to be recognized for its enormous contribution to music. My daughter Liv wrote the lyrics for the song, "Representing Memphis." There's a message in there: "Memphis, don't put yourself down." The song is about the South Side, the food and the city's great smells. 

 Who is the song "The Vamp" about? 

The Vamp was an English lesbian we befriended in London during the M.G.'s 1967 U.K. tour. One night I tried to dance with her girlfriend, and she decked me. What a tour that was. The Beatles sent limos to the airport for us.

 Whose idea was it to use Lou Reed on "The Bronx?" 

Mine. We first met 20 years ago in New York. I knew he was a fan, so I called him and asked if he'd sing on the song. But first Lou wanted to hear the lyrics on the phone, which I didn't mind. Hey, he's the originator of the rock-star paradigm. He was duly cantankerous and cooperative. 

 Do you consider yourself a guitarist or organist?  

The truth is I started as a guitarist. The reason I wound up on the Hammond is that Satellite needed someone to play it, and I was there hanging around after school. But when I compose a melody, I imagine I'm playing the guitar. Then I fill in the gaps with the organ. The guitar is my heart but the organ is my speaking voice.