NAJAF, Iraq—Anti-American Shiite cleric Shiite cleric Moqtada al-Sadr's homecoming speech, which struck a conciliatory note, drew mixed reactions: elation among supporters, indifference among others as well as some fear that Mr. Sadr's return could worsen security.

In his speech over the weekend in this holy-shrine city south of Baghdad, Mr. Sadr backed the new Iraqi government that he recently joined and suggested he won't violently resist American forces if they withdraw as planned by year-end.

While Mr. Sadr couched his comments in his hallmark, anti-American rhetoric, the substance of the speech Saturday, his first since returning from more than three years of self-imposed exile in Iran, appeared to mark the emergence of a savvy political operator in tune with the mood of his constituency, which now wants jobs and services, not more violence.

U.S. officials declined to comment on Mr. Sadr's return and speech, deferring to the Iraqi government. On the streets of Baghdad and Najaf, the speech drew varied reactions. 

"Only the Sadr family has embraced the poor folk," said Hadi Kadhim, 48 years old, who came from Baghdad's mainly Shiite working-class neighborhood of Shuala to Najaf to greet Mr. Sadr.

But Ridha Abbas, a 19-year-old law student from the same neighborhood, fretted that Mr. Sadr's presence could worsen security. 

"His return will be exploited by multiple agendas," said Mr. Abbas in Shuala, which was once like many sections of Baghdad in the grips of Mr. Sadr's Mahdi Army militia.

In his speech, Mr. Sadr was unequivocal about maintaining his movement's military wing, now known as the Promised Day Brigades and dedicated to fighting Americans. But several of his most senior aides suggested the movement's oft-repeated call for "armed resistance" served as leverage in securing political gains and demands, such as prisoner releases. It also fosters a populist and nationalist image, these aides said. 

U.S. officials, however, accuse Tehran of funding and supporting several anti-American Shiite groups in Iraq, including Mr. Sadr's. These groups continue to use violence, both against U.S. and Iraqi government interests, to further their goals, American officials say. Iranian officials have repeatedly denied this.

"It's hard to distinguish if touting the armed resistance stems from the agenda of the Sadrist movement or the Iranian one," said Ghassan al-Attiyah, a London-based Iraqi analyst on Sunday.

Faleh Jabar, a Beirut-based Iraqi expert on Shiite affairs, said Sunday that Mr. Sadr's anti-American rhetoric was aimed at bolstering his "nationalist credentials" and pleasing Iran.

The extent of Tehran's sway over Mr. Sadr could ultimately depend on whether he stays in Najaf or returns to Qom, Iran's own Shiite clerical capital. A close associate, Aoun al-Nabi, said the 37-year-old cleric would have to return to Qom to continue his advanced religious studies, but couldn't say when. 

"If he stays in Najaf or Iraq, he won't have the adequate space he has outside" to study, said Mr. Nabi, also a turbaned cleric, Saturday.

In the speech, Mr. Sadr brandished his credentials not only as the torchbearer of a prominent, and traditionally activist, Shiite religious family, but also as a kingmaker in the rough-and-tumble world of Iraqi politics.

"We're all with the government if it served the Iraqi people," he said. "And if it did not serve the Iraqi people, there are other means—strictly political—that must be pursued to reform the government," Mr. Sadr said before a few thousand of his most ardent, mostly male, followers, who had trekked to Najaf to hear him.

Several cordons of armed men, some in gray suits, encircled the cleric while he spoke, perched on a makeshift stage outside his family's home in Najaf's neighborhood of Hannana. Supporters struggled to catch a glimpse of the black-clad cleric.

"Give the new government a chance to prove that it's in the service of the people," he told the crowd. 

Mr. Sadr's movement scored big gains in March elections last year and played an instrumental role in helping Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki secure a second term at the helm of an unwieldy coalition encompassing Iraq's main competing political factions.

After the provision of services, the government's next priority is to ensure that some 50,000 U.S. soldiers that remain in Iraq leave as scheduled by the end of December, said Mr. Sadr.

 Mr. Maliki told The Wall Street Journal last month that all U.S. troops would leave in accordance with a 2008 security agreement between Baghdad and Washington. Any U.S. military presence beyond the end of 2011 would require a new agreement, he said, an unlikely prospect given the influence of both Mr. Sadr and neighboring Iran, which backs Mr. Sadr and other anti-American forces inside Iraq.

—Ali A. Nabhan in Baghdad contributed to this article.

 Write to  Sam Dagher at sam.dagher@wsj.com 