The Arizona shooting has emboldened pro-gun groups that plan to lobby politicians for proposed laws that could expand the right to carry concealed weapons on the state's college campuses. 

At least two bills are on the table in Arizona, which resumed its legislative session this week. One would allow faculty members to carry concealed weapons on campus. The other would prevent colleges from stopping people with a valid permit, including students, from carrying them on campus. 

Last weekend's shooting, which left six dead and injured 14 others, including Congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords, has bolstered a belief among many gun advocates that one of the solutions to protecting people is to enable them to have guns more available, not less. 

The debate will likely be prominent at the "Crossroads of the West" gun show Saturday about 30 miles from the shooting site. On Friday, gun vendors were setting up display of their weapons—from pistols to semi-automatic rifles—at the Pima County Fairgrounds. Show organizers contemplated canceling or postponing the show but said too many attendees and vendors were already on their way. 

About six to eight thousand people were expected to attend, larger than the usual crowd of around 5,000, said Bob Templeton, president of the Crossroads of the West Gun Shows, which puts on the Pima County event five times a year.

"Anytime gun owners feel their rights are being challenged or are going to be challenged, they turn out in numbers," Mr. Templeton said. Extra security had been hired for the event and protesters are expected.

Pro-gun activists originally decided last year that lobbying for expanded gun rights on Arizona campuses should be a priority. There, as in other states, a push to allow students and faculty to carry concealed weapons came after the Virginia Tech massacre in 2007. 

Dave Kopp, president of the Arizona Citizens Defense League, one of the pro-gun groups in the state, said colleges and universities are given blanket statutory authority to set whatever policies they wish, including policies regarding weapons. 

One Arizona state legislator is already on board with the proposed bills. "Any attempt in the left to make an assault on the Second Amendment will not work," said Republican State Senator Al Melvin, adding that people are less likely to cause trouble if they know that teachers and other staff are armed. 

Some observers said there could be a backlash against Arizona's pro-gun movement following the shooting. "There might be some request for greater gun control," said David R. Berman, professor emeritus at the Morrison Institute for Public Policy at Arizona State University, by the electorate. He added that state legislators would likely hear that message.

Some pro-gun activists in Arizona see momentum for further expansion of gun laws however. The Arizona Citizens Defense League has put together a proposal called the "Giffords-Zimmerman Act," named for Congresswoman Giffords and Gabriel Zimmerman, one of her staffers who died in the shooting. 

The proposed law would require the Arizona Department of Public Safety to provide firearms training to members of Congress and people who work for them, said Charles Heller, one of the co-founders of the group.

With 4,000 members, it is one of a handful of pro-gun lobbying groups in the state. Others include the National Rifle Association, which has about 100,000 members in Arizona, and the Arizona State Rifle and Pistol Association, which has a few thousand participants. It's not clear whether gun groups in other states have made similar proposals directly related to the shooting. 

Each group has its own lobbyist or lobbying team, and together the pro-gun contingency has had a string of successes in Arizona in recent years. In 2009, for instance, Arizona's legislature passed a law that lets Arizona residents carry concealed weapons into bars and restaurants that serve alcohol as long as they have a "concealed-carry" permit and aren't drinking. 

Last spring, the governor signed the "Firearm Freedom Act" that allows certain weapons manufactured in the state to be sold without any federal registration or regulations.

—Andrew Morse, Angel Gonzalez and Tamara Audi contributed to this article.

 Write to  Vanessa O'Connell at vanessa.o'connell@wsj.com 