What lost decade? The Dow Jones Industrial Average may be stuck at 1999 levels, but the Standard & Poor's MidCap 400 stock index quietly broke its all-time record high earlier this month. That same day, the S&P SmallCap 600 index was just 3% away from its peak in July 2007.

After years of outperformance, however, the hot run from smaller stocks may be nearing an end. Some strategists say investors should start tilting back toward bigger companies.

Large-cap stocks, generally defined as shares of companies valued at more than $5 billion, have been out of favor for much of the past decade. The S&P 500 has gained just 14.1%, including dividends, over the 10 years through Friday, and remains more than 20% off its 2007 high. The S&P 400, meanwhile, has surged 72% over the past decade, and traded at 939.56 on Monday, its highest ever. The S&P SmallCap 600 has jumped 77% during the period. 

If anything, the trend toward smaller issues may be intensifying. In 2010, small- and midcaps nearly doubled the S&P 500's 15% total return, jumping 26% and 27%, respectively. 

Yet there are signs that large caps' days in the doghouse may be coming to an end. "They're cheap, unloved and no one wants to own them, but the points are aligning for large caps," says  David Rolfe, chief investment officer of Wedgewood Partners in St. Louis. 

Historically, small- and midcap returns peak in the year following a market bottom and then slow. Since 1926, small caps have averaged gains of 41.4% in the first year of a bull market, followed by gains of 12.4% in year two and 8.7% in year three. Likewise, midcap gains slow from 37.3% to 9.5% to 6.3%, according to Bank of America Merrill Lynch research.

Small-company valuations, meanwhile, seem stretched. The price/earnings ratio of small-cap stocks is currently about 17, compared with about 14 for large caps. That puts the ratio of the valuations of small to large at about 1.2, equal to the highest ever recorded, according to  Credit Suisse Group. 

What's more, a valuation measure known "expected returns," which forecasts a company's share-price performance based on its expected cash flow, also points to small-caps being overvalued, says  Mark A. Keleher, chief executive of BNY Mellon Beta Management. His research suggests that gains from the Russell 2000-stock index of small caps will come in 0.2 percentage point below large caps during the next decade, the worst differential since BNY began using this method in 1976.

Both valuation metrics were near these levels in June 1983; over the next decade the S&P 500 handily outperformed the Russell 2000, returning 10.4% annually vs. 6.5%.

"We've never seen these valuations before," Mr. Keleher says. "Large caps will definitely have their day." 

Even mergers and acquisitions, which are usually considered more beneficial to smaller companies, could give a larger boost to large caps in coming quarters, according to  Lori Calvasina, small- and midcap U.S. equity strategist at Credit Suisse. 

To measure each sector's sensitivity to M&A, she looked at their tendency to move in the same direction as M&A activity. (A "correlation" of 100% means two indexes move in lockstep all the time; a correlation of -100% means they move in perfect opposition.) The S&P SmallCap 600 has a correlation of 60% to year-over-year changes in M&A activity, while the S&P MidCap 400 has a 72% correlation. The strongest correlations: the S&P 100 and the S&P 500, at 77%. 

Of course, pundits have been predicting a reversal of smaller-stock dominance for years now. Skeptics note that, for now at least, investors are still putting their cash into small and midcap mutual funds—Lipper says they gained $2.2 billion in December, versus outflows of $7.8 billion for large caps. Others point to past performance: After the three previous recessions, small-caps didn't peak until investors sensed that the Federal Reserve would start raising interest rates. This time, that hasn't yet happened. 

If large caps are to close the gap in 2011, they will have to get better performance from two key sectors—health care and technology. In 2010 small- and midcap health-care companies returned 22%, while large-cap health-care stocks rose just 0.7%. Likewise, small- and midcap tech rose more than 20%, while large-cap technology gained just 9%. 

Recently, Morgan Stanley Smith Barney upped the allocation to large-cap stocks in its model portfolio. For an investor roughly in the middle of the risk spectrum, it recommends putting about two-thirds of the U.S. equity portion of the portfolio in large caps, and splitting the remaining third between mid- and small-caps, with particular attention being paid to health-care, technology, energy and consumer-product companies.

"Small- and midcap have had a big run," says  David Darst, chief investment strategist at Morgan Stanley Smith Barney. "The time has come for the global gorillas."

 Write to  Ben Levisohn at ben.levisohn@wsj.com 