Until a couple of years ago, if somebody remarked how much they liked the Flemish Primitives, you probably would have assumed they were referring to Jan van Eyck and other Early Renaissance artists who flourished in the Low Countries more than 500 years ago. But since 2009, chances are they could also be talking about the food congress held annually in Belgium, ostensibly to champion new developments in the country's cuisine. 

Food congresses are now as ubiquitous as literary festivals and, in the same way that those book fairs are keen to attract famous writers, no food event is complete without a scattering of celebrity chefs or food writers. The Flemish Primitives (www.theflemishprimitives.com) is a relative newcomer, but still managed to attract around 1,300 delegates to the bleak coastal town of Ostend earlier this month. The work of a handful of dedicated young foodies from the Flanders Taste Foundation, who essentially organize the entire thing on a voluntary basis, it was a well-run event, with an impressive glossy program guide in English. The star attraction was René Redzepi, who now carries the mantle of the "world's top chef" after his Copenhagen restaurant Noma won last year's San Pellegrino World's 50 Best Restaurant Awards. 

This year, in an endeavor to add more interest to the cooking demonstrations, organizers shifted from new technology and food pairings to chef pairings. This meant that Mr. Redzepi cooked on stage with Michel Bras, the renowned three-star Michelin French chef. Sergio Herman, the three-star Dutch chef from Oud Sluis, was also on the stage during their demonstration, though his lack of interaction made his presence almost seemed like an afterthought.

Superficially, Messrs. Redzepi and Bras wouldn't appear to have a great deal in common. Mr. Redzepi put Nordic Cuisine on the map with his inventive use of local foraged ingredients; Mr. Bras has focused entirely on his own region, Aubrac in France's Massif Central. His signature dish is a kaleidoscope of vegetables and flowers called Gargouillou, which varies according to what is available in the garden or marketplace. However, both chefs conveyed an equal passion for local produce—even if for Mr. Bras it was varieties of bread and pork, while Mr. Redzepi sang the praises of pickles, lichens and reindeer. Curiously, this event was concluded with Mr. Herman baking a "cake of peace," a dessert of cream, citrus fruits and pomegranate with "Ban the Bomb" logos and a peace sign on the top.

The other highlight of the chef pairings was Swedish chef Magnus Nilsson and Pascal Barbot, the Parisian chef from L'Astrance, where Mr. Nilsson worked before moving to an 8,000-hectare estate in north Sweden called Fäviken. Mr. Nilsson cooked an aged cabbage he had brought from Sweden on flames from willow wood, while displaying more exotic ingredients such as salted elk, which looked like a piece of darkened driftwood. In turn, Mr. Barbot showed his skill preparing mackerel with Asian ingredients such as kabu on pickled beetroot and purple shiso.

It was at this point that I suddenly reflected on why I had come to the Flemish Primitives congress in the first place. I had wanted to see the current culinary developments in Belgium, but found instead renowned international chefs displaying their techniques via large video screens and instantaneous English translations. With more than 1,000 people in the auditorium, it would be expecting too much for us to be able to eat the finished products. However, not being able to utilize the most critical sense when it comes to food (i.e. taste) means it was akin to attending a rock concert with the sound turned off.

Although Belgian chef Kobe Desramaults from In De Wulf had earlier appeared on stage in tandem with French chef Alexandre Gauthier of La Grenouillère, this was again a demonstration of how to cook one dish—a delicious-looking pork shin encrusted in herbs. There was also an afternoon session of six Belgians on stage, with each describing one of their dishes and, the night before the congress got underway, a gala dinner was held with 15 dishes presented by Belgian and Dutch chefs. Given the numbers involved and the size of the kitchen, the chefs did an impressive job, but there was an underlying feeling among the chefs I spoke to that not enough was done to explore Belgian culinary traditions. "All the chefs in Belgium know each other, but does the world know them?" asked De Jonkman's Filip Claeys. 

Mr. Desramaults, who has been inspired and influenced by Nordic Cuisine, said that "Belgium has always been a focal point between a lot of different cultures, but I think they are a bit too modest to really dig into their own heritage, as there is a lot of knowledge there." James Lowe, the young British chef from St. John's Bread & Wine in London, thought the inclusion of culinary stars like Messrs. Redzepi, Bras and Barbot outshone the local cuisine. "It was kind of a shame, as I wanted to know more about what the Belgian food scene is like," he said. "I don't think it did the local food movement any damage, but didn't help it either, as I doubt if anyone really knows more about them after the conference."

There will always be a contradiction between what attracts local crowds and foreign visitors to these events. However, the danger is that rather than highlighting or promoting national or regional cuisine, such events tend to globalize the food movement even more by their reliance on the international stars at the expense of local talent.

 Write to  Bruce Palling at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 