Perceptions of pain can be changed by distorting the view of the affected body part, a study finds.

Researchers put a heat-producing device on the left hands of 18 volunteers. They set up a mirror so that when the subjects looked toward their left hand, they really saw a reflection of their right hand. (The right hand got its own non-functioning heat device.) Then the researchers started turning up the heat, slowly.

When the mirror offered a true image of the right hand, the subjects reported discomfort at about 113 degrees, ending the trial. But when a distorting mirror showed a larger than life-size hand, they could tolerate heat up to 115 degrees. When the hand was smaller than life, they could tolerate only 111 degrees.

When the right hand was placed in a box, meaning the subjects couldn't see either hand, they could tolerate the least pain of all, asking to stop at 107 degrees. Given a choice, it seems it's better to look.

 "Visual Distortion of Body Size Modulates Pain Perception," Flavia Mancini, Matthew R. Longo, Marjolein P.M. Kammers and Patrick Haggard, Psychological Science (forthcoming) 

When we're learning online from training material using avatars to increase user-friendliness, how much do we want them to look (and act) like us? It's complicated, a study finds.

Researchers asked 257 people to take part in a training program involving the spreadsheet Excel. An avatar, appearing to the side of the training material, was to offer advice and encouragement. Trainees were asked how they liked to teach: Did they give directions or suggestions? Would they rank their student against others? Each avatar was matched to a trainee's teaching style, ethnicity and sex—or not. 

Surprisingly, race and sex had virtually no effect on enjoyment of the training or instructional outcomes—except that people reported less mind-wandering when avatars mirrored their race and ethnicity. Matched teaching styles, on the other hand, led to stronger performance on quizzes but had no effect on engagement or enjoyment. (Those are important, because people will drop out of programs they dislike.)

The greatest influence on whether people liked the sessions? The "perceived" similarity of the avatars, which might be utterly unrelated to objective similarity.

 "Similarity Effects in Online Training: Effects With Computerized Trainer Agents," Tara S. Behrend and Lori Foster Thompson, Computers in Human Behavior (May)  

You might think members of Congress would be well positioned to reap windfalls from the stock market, but a recent study found that they underperformed the stock-market average, from 2004 to 2008, by two to three percentage points. 

The study looked at the holdings of the 422 members of the House and Senate who reported owning U.S. stocks over that period. The average member of Congress who invested $100 in 2004 would have had $70 in 2008, the study noted. That was a bad stretch for many investors, but an index fund mirroring the stock market's performance would have left an investor with $80.

To be sure, there were some distinctive patterns in the politicos' portfolios: They invested 16 times more money in a company if it was in their district (or, in the case of senators, their state). And those investments outperformed the market by 4.5 percentage points. 

The researchers found no evidence that this was the result of suspiciously well-timed trades. An earlier academic paper, looking at 1993-1998, did find eyebrow-raising returns for members of Congress, but the authors of the new study say that either the ability to take advantage in this way—or the inclination—has waned.

 "Political Capital: The (Mostly) Mediocre Performance of Congressional Stock Portfolios, 2004-2008," Andrew Eggers and Jens Hainmueller, Working Paper (January)  

Researchers in Canada have produced the first case study of "beat deafness," a malady analogous to tone-deafness but affecting perception of rhythm.

Researchers asked for volunteers who thought they couldn't clap along with or sway to music and found only one person who qualified: Mathieu, an otherwise healthy 23-year-old student (who can carry a tune, by the way). Confronted in the lab with an infectious Latin merengue song, played at 116 or 124 beats per minute, Mathieu bounced tentatively and erratically (as a multimedia addendum to the paper shows, representing Mathieu's movements with a dot).

He could more or less mirror the moves of a second dancer but had highly unusual difficulty identifying when a second person was moving out of sync with music.

The researchers plan more tests to see if Mathieu has trouble with speech rhythms, gait adjustment and vocal imitation, in an effort to determine if this is a music-specific malady. The study could help point the way to the neurological roots of beat-identification, they wrote.

 "Born to Dance but Beat Deaf: A New Form of Congenital Amusia," Jessica Phillips-Silver, Petri Toiviainen and five other authors, Neuropsychologia (forthcoming) 