In a week that saw David Cameron, Britain's prime minister, lose his chief press aide and former prime minister Tony Blair make a reprise at the Iraq war enquiry, the most consequential political event was the appointment of Ed Balls as shadow chancellor. Mr. Balls, who lost badly to his former junior partner in the Treasury in last year's leadership election, now emerges as the winner. The government lost little time in handcuffing Ed Balls to his former boss. "Who was whispering into Gordon Brown's ear, budget after budget, creating this huge fiscal deficit?" asked deputy prime minister Nick Clegg on Sunday.

With two former Brown advisers leading Labour, there is now no prospect of Labour using its electoral drubbing last year to reflect on its economic record with any degree of objectivity. Labour leader Ed Miliband and Mr. Balls have the same views on Gordon Brown's mismanagement of Britain public finances. Ten days ago, Mr. Miliband denied that excessive public borrowing was to blame for the deficit. Before the financial crisis, the deficit had been manageable at around 2% of national income, he claimed. 

That view can only make sense in world in which the economic cycle had been abolished. During his chancellorship, Gordon Brown claimed countless times that he was putting an end to Tory boom-and-bust. In the long years of the upswing, voters believed him. Now it is a statement that voters recall only to mock and deride it. So to put at the heart of Labour's new economic policy the assumption that Gordon Brown had indeed abolished the cycle is not without risk.

Yet it could pay off. After a while, voters might tire of a government blaming all its problems on its predecessor, as President Obama found out last November. While it makes political sense for Labour to blame the downturn on bankers, the coalition has colluded in it, as their handling of the political row over bank bonuses shows. Trying to shore up left-of-center Liberal Democrat support has a political as well as an economic cost. 

Mr. Balls's arrival forces the coalition to raise its game. He brings an appetite for sustained argument about economic policy that is rare in British politics. Even more unusual, he comes across as a conviction politician. If the Labour leader sometimes appears at prime minister's question time as a grass-grazing ruminant, Mr. Balls is a red-toothed carnivore. A die-hard Keynesian who studied economics under Larry Summers at Harvard, Mr. Balls said last summer that the previous Labour government's intention to halve the deficit in four years had been wrong. Fiscal consolidation would lead to economic disaster. According to his reading of economic history, the 1981 budget, when the Thatcher government squeezed the deficit, caused the deepest recession since 1945.

During the rest of the 1980s, households' disposable income grew at an average rate of 3.2% a year after inflation, which is why the Thatcher government twice won re-election that decade. Despite the recession at the beginning of the 1990s, household income rose at an average rate of 2.9% a year for the rest of the Conservatives' time in office. During Labour's first term, when it stuck to the tight spending plans it had inherited, household income growth accelerated to 3.4% a year. Massive spending increases that followed went hand-in-hand with declining economic performance. Well before the recession, with public spending growing faster than any other country in Europe, income growth halved to 1.7% a year after inflation, on a level with the growth in productivity. This wasn't a boom; it was a bubble.

As Labour shifts position toward accepting the need to reduce public borrowing—on Friday, Mr. Balls signaled he had changed his opposition to halving the deficit—the political argument is likely to focus on how best the deficit should be cut; whether mostly by the coalition's modest reductions in overall spending, characterized by Mr. Balls as "deep, fast and reckless," or through more tax increases.

Messrs. Miliband and Balls have already called for the one-off 50% payroll tax on bank bonuses to be re-imposed, implying a tax wedge—the difference between what an employer pays and the employee receives—of 82%, before consumption taxes. Last summer, Mr. Balls said the starting rate for the top band of income tax should be brought down. When combined with the phase-out of the tax-free personal allowance on higher incomes, this would send marginal rates to over 70%, tax rates not seen in Britain since the 1970s. 

Does Labour want the tax revenues from the City of London, the fall in which it says caused the deficit, to come back? Or does it want to push them offshore or into tax avoiding behavior? The answer is that Labour has made a political calculation, not an economic one. Voters, in this view, would prefer to punish banks and to tax achievers than taking risks with prosperity. It all looks like a remake of the 1970s. When British voters saw the original movie, they gave it the thumbs down.

Yet this poses a challenge for David Cameron and the chancellor of the exchequer, George Osborne. Since they took over the Conservative Party in 2005, they made it an article of faith not to talk about taxes. In coalition with the Liberal Democrats, that has become harder still. As the spending reductions begin to bite, Ed Balls's assault on the coalition's spending cuts while holding out the prospect of allegedly pain-free tax increases could sound increasingly persuasive to voters. It would be unwise to assume that Labour cannot reconnect with them. One thing is for sure: The Coalition now has a fight on its hands.

 Mr. Darwall's book, "Global Warming: A Short History," is forthcoming from Quartet Books. 