LONDON—European tour operators have spent the weekend flying back stranded tourists caught up in the civil unrest in Tunisia that forced ex-President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali to flee the country Friday. 

Several European governments and the U.S. State Department have issued travel warnings, and airlines are urging passengers who have booked trips to Tunisia to check flight schedules as they are canceling flights. 

Many northern Europeans have recently favored package tours to Tunisia as a low-budget alternative to beach holidays in other Mediterranean resorts. The tourist trade has been a boon for the Tunisian economy, which could suffer if political turmoil persists. 

U.K. tour operator  Thomas Cook Group
TCG


0.15
%




 PLC said it planned another flight to Tunisia on Sunday to bring back the last few vacationers who now want to return to the U.K. On Friday, about 1,500 of the 1,800 people who had traveled to Tunisia through Thomas Cook U.K. returned home on special flights. 

German travel operators Thomas Cook AG, an arm of the U.K. group, and TUI Deutschland GmbH began evacuating German and Austrian tourists from the country on Friday after Germany's Foreign Ministry advised against nonessential trips to the country. 

Thomas Cook AG said Saturday it had organized eight flights leaving Monastir and Djerba for Germany. That follows its evacuation Friday, when the company flew about 230 tourists back to Germany and Austria on four flights. The tourists are part of vacations offered through Neckermann, Thomas Cook, Bucher Last Minute and Air Marin, all part of the Thomas Cook Group. Thomas Cook also said it has canceled all trips to Tunisia until at least Jan. 21. 

TUI Deutschland, the tour-operator unit of TUI AG, Saturday said it was evacuating all its approximately 1,000 guests from Tunisia, and has canceled all trips to the country until Jan. 24. 

"We don't expect the situation to stabilize anytime soon," TUI Deutschland said. 

Airline Lufthansa AG canceled all its Tunisian flights Saturday, a spokesman said. 

France's Club Méditerrannée SA on Saturday began evacuating about 130 vacationers from the company's holiday village on the resort island of Djerba, the only resort in the country open during the winter season. 

The U.K.'s Foreign and Commonwealth Office has also issued a travel warning.

  British Airways PLC said it was reviewing its services to the country and advised passengers to check the status of their flights before leaving for the airport. 

Meanwhile, an Italian circus troupe stuck in Tunisia appealed for evacuation by ship, according to Reuters. The Circo Bellucci says the lives of its 100 members were at risk because of the clashes.

"When the president fled, so did all the policemen," Attilio Bellucci of the circus told Italian television from the southern Tunisian city of Sfax. "We feel completely abandoned."

The troupe had barricaded themselves inside their caravans amid explosions and firing of teargas outside, he said.

Italy's ambassador to Tunisia, Pietro Benassi, said a few stones had been thrown at the circus and he was in regular contact with the troupe. Rome was evaluating options for bringing the troupe back home, he told Ansa news agency.

—Sarah Sloat in Frankfurt, Ruth Bender in Paris and Kaveri Niththyananthan in London contributed to this article.

 Write to  Terence Roth at terence.roth@dowjones.com 