 Geneva 

It may seem obvious but when car makers unveil their future products, they are predicting the future. And this isn't next year's hemlines and hot game apps we're talking about. This is the Big Future, the future than may or may not include $200 barrels of oil, food riots, days of rage, a Jasmine revolution, rare-earth scarcity and exhausted Saudi oil fields. A future that may or may not be able to support a predicted two billion to four billion cars roaming the earth by 2050. A hotter future, certainly, but just how hot? 

And so, as last week's events unfolded in Libya and the Arab Gulf states during the press days of Geneva's 81st International Motor Show (which continues through Sunday), the vibe at PalExpo hall felt very much like the floor of the stock exchange when traders worriedly watch breaking news on the overhead monitors. You could almost hear car makers asking themselves, have we guessed right? Are we ready for whatever comes next? 

Well, if what comes next is a doubling of global oil prices, the answer is a flat, comprehensive no. Yes, cars are, on average, getting smaller, smarter and incrementally more fuel-efficient. To be sure, the majors have interesting technology in the pipeline. Volvo unveiled its three-mode plug-in turbodiesel hybrid V60 estate, a 2012-model car that nominally delivers 472 pound-feet of torque, 7-second-to-60-mph acceleration, around 30 miles of all-electric range and 123 miles per gallon. The German triumvirate have plug-in and electric-car programs, too, but some seem like the palest greenwashing imaginable. Consider (BMW-owned) Rolls-Royce's electric Phantom concept car. It puts the Rolls in rolling brownouts.

With the notable asterisks of GM and Nissan, whose crystal balls told them to jump first into electric mobility, the car world has nothing remotely scalable to respond to a global oil crisis, should it come.



If, on the other hand, we should happen to discover an overlooked ocean of light sweet crude, we're good to go. Consider the new Lamborghini Aventador, a 6.5-liter V12-powered, 691-horsepower, all-wheel-drive hypercar that visually comes at you like a crazed monkey with a knife. Still, at around $400,000, and perhaps 800 units per year, the Aventador may be too pedestrian for you. Perhaps you'd like something more exotic, like the Pagani C9 Huayra, a $1.3 million, carbon-fiber Kabuki warrior with more than 700 hp while weighing less than 3,000 pounds. Just looking at it makes me feel as if I'm bleeding to death. Still not edgy enough? Also debuting in Geneva was something called the Koenigsegg Agera R, with a twin-turbo 5.0-liter V8 mounted amidships vomiting 1,115 hp (and painted like a cross-trainer shoe). The good news is that the Koenigsegg burns E85. The bad news is that in order to drive across Kansas, you'd have to ethanol-ize all the corn in Kansas.

In any event, the future apparently will be well stocked with BRIC billionaires eager to outdo the sheik next door. If, at a party, you should find yourself seated next to one of these oligarchs and he won't shut up about his Brabus-tuned Mercedes-Benz SLS, stab him with your fork.

What did I like at Geneva? Let's start with the obvious, the inevitable: the Alfa Romeo 4C, a car which, I confess, I didn't get a very good look at because the crowd around it was 10 deep. Perhaps best described as half the calories and all the taste of the Alfa 8C Competizione, the hawk-billed little sports car—about the size of a Mazda Miata—utterly killed on the show stand. The plumbing consists of a midengine turbo-four and a carbon-composite passenger cell. But the exterior was where the poetry was. A low and malevolent wraparound canopy, a superhero's visor; a beautifully composed fuselage roped with dusky red muscle and strung with sinew, and absolutely no chrome anywhere. Alfistis, start your checkbooks.

Some several light years on the other end of the Chrysler-Fiat merger were the 300 and 200 sedans and Town and Country minivan, rebadged as the Lancia Thema, Flavia and Voyager, respectively. With the latter, the Fiat marketers couldn't even muster the enthusiasm to think up a ridiculous name.

More aptly named, at least I hope: The Saab PhoeniX concept car. I asked designer Jason Castriota if the PhoeniX name wasn't a little too on-the-nose, given that Saab is currently more ashes than flaming bird. He said it was important, among other things, to create a bold, even insolent car around which the employees in Trollhättan could rally. I'll buy that. Moreover, the PhoeniX's design hints at a resurrection of Saab's original design language, exemplified by the Saab 92 (1946), known as the Ur-Saab. The 92 was a small, adorable teardrop of a car with that tapered rearward to a low Kammback, with a steeply raked windshield and defined wraparound canopy, all limned in a sort of seamless aerodynamism (Saab was a warplane company first). 

The PhoeniX concept car weaponized all these formal design elements in a masculine, purposeful and wholly original fastback coupe. I love the sinuous, carbon-fiber aero blades peeling back from the A pillar, providing mounting points for the rear outside cameras and acting as vortex generators to land more downforce on the rear lip spoiler. Translation: the aerodynamics of the car work. Mr. Castriota says the Phoenix has a coefficient of aero drag of a mere 0.25 Cd. I understand Saab will not build a ballistic sports car anytime soon, but the translation of these cues to the next 9-3 could be very promising. If the company can make it that far.

Which brings us to a company that has something of the opposite problem: Where to go in success? BMW's Mini brand has managed to spin off iterations of the Mini Cooper that are bigger and offer more doors (see my recent caviling about the Countryman) but the company runs the risk of exhausting its small-car cred. So, in Geneva, it went the other direction: a smaller Mini, which it calls the Rocketman. A full foot shorter than a Mini Cooper, the Rocketman looks like a Greco-Roman hobbit, hugely strong and magically abbreviated. And, given its brilliant ringed headlamps and gaping, guppy-like mouth, it looks like it's auditioning for the cast of Pokémon. Among its marvelous details are double-hinged doors that articulate on carbon-fiber panels. Also interesting is a cross-braced bubble top on which the hatch hinges from a point directly above where the dome light would be. If you don't like this car, get thee to the nearest defibrillator. Word on the street is the Rocketman is heading to production.

Where will I be in June? If my luck holds, I'll be in France, at the 24 Hours of Le Mans, pulling for the Peugeot 908 HYbrid4, a diesel-electric hybrid prototype that was unveiled in Geneva and may run at the Great Race this summer. Powered by a 3.7-liter diesel V8 (550 hp) and an 80-hp electric motor/generator, the car will suck up electrons with regenerative braking and unleash them under acceleration. The technology is known generally as KERS, for Kinetic Energy Recovery Systems. Peugeot's d-hybrid seems destined to compete with Porsche's 918 RSR hybrid, with its amazing flywheel energy-storage system. I don't have a crystal ball, but I predict that will be awesome.

 Write to  Dan Neil at Dan.Neil@wsj.com 