Milan de Vries has baked six loaves of bread a week since buying a popular cookbook from San Francisco's Tartine Bakery and Café two months ago.

He gives away most of the loaves, but only after taking photos that he posts on the Internet for fellow fanatics to critique. 

The 33-year-old political organizer from Arlington, Mass., is part of a rising community of largely male home bakers who have become devoted to shaping and leavening, an obsession that has led some of them to share every crumb of their new hobby in online forums and Facebook pages. 

Driving their passion for bread's every nuance is "Tartine Bread," the cookbook written by  Chad Robertson, co-owner of Tartine Bakery. In the book, Mr. Robertson devotes 28 pages to a single recipe, his basic country bread. That is followed by more than 30 pages on "the basic loaf in depth" and slight variations on the recipe.

Soon after the book was published in September, Mr. Robertson began seeing the consequences of his meticulous approach. "I get a lot of photos from people of their bread," he said, and "emails that are like: 'I can't get my starter to work. What do I do?' "

Mr. Robertson's book has caught on with the type of compulsive amateur baker who thinks nothing of making loaf after loaf in search of yeast-risen perfection.

"It's a good focal point for bread obsession," said Mr. de Vries. 

On a typical day, Mr. de Vries, who works at home, makes his dough at 8 a.m., spending about 15 minutes on the process. Then he turns the dough every half hour or so throughout the day—the recipe doesn't require kneading while it rises. Finally, he shapes it into loaves, pops it into the oven and, by evening, he has the finished product.

Next, he photographs his handiwork and posts the pictures on Facebook, where a group of fellow devotees assess the color of the crust and the texture of the crumb, or inside, and grill him on the amount of water he added and the temperature at which he let the dough rise.

"If you want to bake at home well, if you can bake this one loaf, you're doing all right," said Mr. de Vries.

Tartine, at 18th and Guerrero Streets in San Francisco's Mission District, opened in 2002 and soon drew attention among foodies nationwide for its crunchy-on-the-outside, moist-on-the-inside bread. It is the stuff of local legend, in part because it is so hard to get: Loaves go on sale at 5 p.m. and are usually gone within the hour. Advance planners have an alternative—reservations for the bread are taken up to three days beforehand.

Mr. Robertson, who owns the bakery with his pastry-chef wife,  Elisabeth Prueitt, originally planned "Tartine Bread" as a standard cookbook, with a catalog of recipes. Instead, he found himself writing about his approach to bread making.

The result is a book that appeals to "people that are really into analyzing things." He tries to respond to the questions he receives almost every day from fans, but answering many would require hours on the phone or online. "If it's kind of technical they will need to work through it with a [Web] forum," he said.

One of the websites Tartine acolytes gravitate to is thefreshloaf.com. The forum was started in 2005 by Floyd Mann, a 36-year-old Web developer in Portland, Ore., who said he wanted a site "where guys could geek out and lose perspective."

The forum has spawned hundreds of posts about "Tartine Bread" chronicling members' bread-making progress. Todd Wolcott, 35, a stay-at-home dad in Chicago, said he turned the dough four times when he first began baking the basic Tartine loaf. But after posting pictures and receiving advice, he now folds it six times.

"I think it gives it more strength," he said. 

On the Facebook group Mr. de Vries belongs to, discussion ranges from how to make a loaf "spring" up during baking, to the proportion of whole wheat and white flour to use, to the psychological toll of a loaf that doesn't turn out well.

"Experienced such profound TBF [Total Bread Fail] yesterday that I found myself in the shower this morning cataloging my life's sins, looking for the cause," a member of the "Recipes from Tartine Bread" Facebook group recently wrote. 

Marc Phu, a 34-year-old Web developer, started the Facebook group about a month ago to get quick feedback on his bread. "Are all my hunches about room temperature and length of [rising] time real or just coincidental?" he asked. Group members, who now total 25, aren't shy about voicing their opinions.

Mr. Phu, who lives in San Francisco, has an advantage over many other members: "I know what Tartine tastes like," he said. 

Others, like Mr. de Vries, have never tasted the real thing. "It's almost more fun that way," he said. "It has mythical status in my mind."

 Write to  Ben Worthen at ben.worthen@wsj.com 