By repeatedly ruling for  Raj Rajaratnam on procedural issues and running a tight trial, U.S. District Judge  Richard Holwell has reduced potential avenues for a successful appeal by the convicted hedge-fund manager, lawyers said.

Mr. Rajaratnam's attorney said he planned to appeal his client's conviction on 14 counts of securities fraud and conspiracy. But there may be limited grounds for a successful one. During Mr. Rajaratnam's trial and jury deliberations, it was largely prosecutors, not the defense lawyers, who objected to the bulk of Judge Holwell's rulings.

"It's going to be very tough for the defense to make a winning appeal on those rulings, especially given that the defense didn't object to many of them," said  Samuel Buell, a former federal prosecutor and law professor at Duke University.

In court on Wednesday after the verdict was announced, defense attorney  John Dowd said the admission of the wiretaps was a substantial issue for an appeal, but didn't address the likelihood of taking an appeal on other issues. In a written statement, he said: "This is only round one. We are going to take an appeal of this conviction.…We will see you in the Second Circuit."

Last November, Judge Holwell ruled that prosecutors were free to use secretly recorded conversations of Mr. Rajaratnam. The defense objected, arguing among other issues that the wiretaps were improperly obtained.

Judge Holwell agreed with the defense's argument that a federal agent omitted important information in seeking permission to tap Mr. Rajaratnam's phone, but said there were enough facts stated at the time the government sought its initial approval for wiretaps to establish probable cause. 

Criminal complaints and developing disclosures in the Galleon insider trading case allege a far-reaching and complex scheme. Here, the known and alleged relationships.

A spokeswoman for the Manhattan U.S. Attorney's Office declined to comment. 

When presiding over criminal trials, especially those in which the government has strong evidence, judges sometimes tend to favor the defense in rulings on procedural issues, lawyers said.

"It's a way to remove potential grounds on appeal," said  Andrew Hruska, a white-collar defense lawyer and former federal prosecutor. "If it's a close call on issues of, say, privacy, a judge might give it to the defense."

Judge Holwell's rulings stand in contrast to the strategy taken by the judge who presided over the prosecution of former Credit Suisse banker  Frank Quattrone.

After Mr. Quattrone was convicted in 2004 on witness-tampering and obstruction-of-justice charges, he appealed, arguing that the lower-court judge had made rulings on some issues in favor of the prosecution.

The Second U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals agreed, and reversed his conviction. Mr. Quattrone ultimately reached a deferred-prosecution agreement that included the conditional dropping of all criminal charges. 

Judge Holwell, in a May 3 order, explained some of the rationale behind some of his decisions, including his ruling to hold discussions in his private office and seal these transcripts after one juror had to be replaced for medical reasons.

The judge wrote that he was "mindful of the presumption of public access," but found that making public sealed proceedings could "prejudice both the defendant's right to a fair trial before an impartial jury and the public's interest in the fair administration of justice…."

He even kept private the discussion about the contents of the jury instructions. "That's highly unusual," Mr. Buell said.

After one juror fell ill and had to leave the panel, Judge Holwell decided to question a potential replacement juror in his private office.  Jonathan Streeter, a government lawyer, objected to the move, arguing that the First Amendment weighs in favor of openness in criminal trials. But Judge Holwell dismissed Mr. Streeter's objection partly out of concern for the juror's privacy.

In what appeared to be two possible rebukes of the government, Judge Holwell twice declined to allow transcripts of wiretapped conversations into the jury deliberations, even after the jurors requested them.

"Some of the government's best evidence is not back there in the jury room," said federal prosecutor  Reed Brodsky at the time.

Now, said legal observers, the government can look back at Judge Holwell's rulings through a different lens.

  Daniel Richman, a former federal prosecutor and law professor at Columbia Law School, said: "The same rulings the government was troubled by at trial are now ones they can pat themselves on the back over."

—Michael Rothfeld  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Ashby Jones at ashby.jones@wsj.com and Michael Rothfeld at michael.rothfeld@wsj.com 