Next month, the European Parliament will get down to discussing a number of animal-welfare issues, especially concerning cruel methods such as battery production for hens and the use of small cages for pregnant pigs. The legislation to outlaw these practices is already on the statute books of some countries, but not all member states are vigilant.

Political parties aren't the only institutions pressing these issues —one of the most determined campaigners in Britain is a very vocal English aristocrat and activist called Tracy Worcester. 

The 52-year-old Marchioness of Worcester has gained both fame and notoriety for her championing of Green causes, especially her opposition to the farming of pigs in Eastern Europe by giant corporations. Her 2009 documentary "Pig Business," highlights the health and environmental issues caused by factory farms in Poland and elsewhere. The last time I saw her in activist mode was at the Slow Food Congress in Turin last October, where she had set up a stall and buttonholed officials while wearing a billboard on her back advertising her documentary.

The next event she is preparing for is next month's opening of the European Parliament in Brussels, where she will later screen her film and then agitate for changes in the Common Agricultural Policy, or CAP. Although the stated aim of the CAP is to help European farmers create food at reasonable prices, it has largely become a subsidy scheme, which at its height in the early '80s devoured more than 70% of all European Union expenditure but is expected to shrink to one-third by 2013.

Another issue for Lady Worcester and other campaigners is guaranteed loans through the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development that are used to help corporations purchase farms and infrastructure from Communist-era institutions. Poland had one of the largest traditional farming sectors in Eastern Europe, but in the eyes of activists like Lady Worcester, this is being sacrificed by the creation of factory farms by foreign investors. "In the short term, I want three things: better enforcement of legal directives that promote the welfare of pigs; I would also like the CAP to move away from any policies that assist factory farming; and, finally, more to assist the sustainability of traditional farms." 

Lady Worcester is keen to take a broad approach and not just highlight animal-rights issues but environmental ones as well, along with questions about the spread of diseases such as swine flu and some strains of superbug methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, or MRSA. "I object to factory farms on many other levels too—it is not only the threat to health posed by factory farming techniques but there is also the question of animal welfare, environmental pollution and degradation," she says. She also mentions the inferior taste of the cheaper range of mass-produced pig products but I sense that she may be cautious not to exploit this and risk being written off as a wealthy aristocrat who can easily afford to either grow her own food or purchase it from expensive organic farm shops. 

"I am from the class that many people hate," Lady Worcester says. "I don't support the class system either—I would say that the aristocracy are far more idiotic than most other classes. However, I have spent most of my life trying to get rid of the mold I was poured into by my private education and privilege. I was only reared to be an interior decorator or art dealer because we were surrounded by beauty and privilege. I believe in decentralizing power in every way."

The 52,000 acre Badminton Estate, which her husband will eventually inherit on the passing of his father, the Duke of Beaufort, has the most illustrious fox-hunting pack in the country. However, this was another difficulty for Lady Worcester, who used to hunt regularly, but no longer does. "It is hard for city dwellers to comprehend country sports— they just can't understand why a person would want to chase an animal, without realizing that they are doing things far worse to animals they eat." 

British legislation regarding living conditions for pigs—it is illegal to keep pregnant sows in tiny metal crates that they cannot turn around in—are somewhat more humane than they currently are in continental Europe, although that is changing, with the EU phasing out by 2013 the use of the crates after a month of pregnancy. "I would like it if people only bought pork that originated in the U.K. and was reared outdoors," says Lady Worcester. "The current EU legislation means food manufacturers do not have to identify which European country their meat comes from, so it is impossible to know if it is from Poland, Sweden or Spain."

And what about future farming at the Badminton Estate? She politely refuses to speak on behalf of her husband but adds: "I hope my son [the Earl of Glamorgan] goes organic—I am sure he will as he recognizes what is happening to the soil and that there is a market if you do go organic. I have shown him the shed with all of the noxious chemicals in it that are spread over the land, so he is very much aware of the issues."

 Write to  Bruce Palling at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 