Mine-safety officials are coming under increasing fire for failing to provide status reports on their investigation into the accident last April that killed 29 coal miners at a  Massey Energy Co. mine, and for letting months pass without any update to family members. 

Lawmakers are demanding an end date for the investigation from the federal Mine Safety and Health Administration. They also are calling on Labor Secretary Hilda Solis to pressure MSHA to meet with families, noting that the most recent update was back in September.

Unlike the probe into last spring's  BP PLC oil-rig explosion in the Gulf of Mexico, where developments were disclosed during public hearings, MSHA is interviewing witnesses in private. Meanwhile, a federal grand jury in West Virginia, the site of the accident, continues to hear testimony into possible criminal wrongdoing, according to people familiar with the matter. 

While slow with official updates about the probe, MSHA head Joe Main and other officials have repeatedly criticized Massey's safety record in public statements. They have maintained that the accident should have been prevented, but haven't provided evidence to support the claim. Massey has accused the agency of selectively leaking information about possible causes, which the agency has denied. 

Sen. Jay Rockefeller (D., W.Va.) complained in a letter to Ms. Solis last week that families hadn't been briefed on the accident since September. He also asked for a status report on the probe and a completion date.

"Three months is too long for these families to wait," Mr. Rockefeller wrote.

Amy Louviere, an MSHA spokeswoman, said, "We share Sen. Rockefeller's concerns about mine safety and the need to keep the families updated on the status of the investigation." A spokesman for Ms. Solis declined to comment further.

One deceased miner's relative said the MSHA would meet with families on Jan 14. Ms. Louviere would only confirm there would be a meeting soon.

Mr. Main has declined to provide a timetable for completing the investigation. He has said the probe was proceeding slowly because it was complex, and that it was being conducted in private so as not to compromise potential evidence in a separate criminal probe by the Justice Department.

A spokeswoman for the U.S. attorney for Southern West Virginia in Charleston, W.Va., declined to comment. 

Shane Harvey, Massey's general counsel, said the company's investigation of the conditions underground in the mine was winding down, but that it hadn't set a time frame to complete its inquiry. "We are interested in seeing what the state and federal investigators say, and this may impact the timing of our final report," Mr. Harvey said. 

Federal and state investigators are sifting through more than 50,000 pages of mine records and other documents, according to a person familiar with the probe. They have also conducted more than 250 closed-door interviews with witnesses, resulting in tens of thousands of pages of transcripts that have yet to be released to the public. 

 Write to  Kris Maher at kris.maher@wsj.com 