Brisk hiring in February pushed the U.S. unemployment rate below 9% for the first time in nearly two years—a development that reflects a broadening recovery but also underscores how much ground the economy has yet to regain.

Employers rebounded from a harsh winter to add 192,000 jobs to nonfarm payrolls in February as the unemployment rate fell one notch to 8.9%, the lowest level since April 2009, the Labor Department reported Friday. Broad-based private-sector gains in manufacturing and service industries more than offset accelerating layoffs by state and local governments, while stable wages suggested subdued inflation pressures.

 At the same time, though, one key gauge of the labor market's health—the labor force participation rate, which measures the percentage of adults who have jobs or are seeking them—remained stuck at its lowest point since the mid-1980s. 

A low participation rate both saps the economy's long-term growth potential and can obscure deeper problems in the labor market. If, for example, labor force participation today were at the same level as before the recession, the jobless rate would have been 11.5% in February. 

Meanwhile, employers must contend with the implications of the rising price of oil, which hit a 2.5-year high, closing at $104.42 a barrel Friday.

"It's a recovery but it's still a very muted recovery," said Nigel Gault, chief U.S. economist at IHS Global Insight, a forecasting firm. "To get to a strong recovery, you'd want to be adding 300,000 to payrolls a month. We're clearly a long, long way from that."

Including revisions to previous monthly reports, the economy has added an average of 136,000 jobs a month since November, just barely more than the 100,000 a month needed to keep up with typical growth in the labor force. 

As of February, the number of workers on U.S. payrolls was 7.5 million below the December 2007 level.

Among those discouraged by the job market's slow recovery is Glen Hineman, a 58-year-old Westland, Mich., resident who lost his job as a supervisor and a steel processor in August 2008.

The recession has driven many young people out of the job market and back to school. At the same time, many people over age 55, with their savings depleted, are back at work or looking for work. See the U.S. labor force participation rate, which measures the employed and unemployed in the labor force as a percent of the population. 

He has exhausted his unemployment benefits and stopped searching for work about a month ago. Mr. Hineman said he looked for work but had little success, aside from brief stints with the U.S. Census Bureau, and sorting and bagging frozen mice to be sold to pet stores as food. 

Mr. Hineman said concerns that he might need a hip replacement led him to abandon his search. He is considering applying for disability because he can't draw from his pension for a few more years.

U.S. unemployment since 1948

"Ideally I'd like to go back to work," Mr. Hineman said. "I'm not ready for retirement, but I just have a feeling that it's being forced on me."

Even as hiring picks up, more people are suffering long bouts of unemployment or giving up completely on finding a job. 

As of February, 4.4 million people had been out of work for more than a year. The labor force participation rate stood at 64.2%, down from 66% in December 2007 when the recession began.

Economists worry that many of the nation's idle—particularly men—won't return to the work force because they lack the college degree or higher education required for many job openings, or because their skills have atrophied. 

A growing number of workers with health problems are applying for Social Security Disability Insurance benefits. The disability rolls, where many beneficiaries remain for life, have surged more than 14% since the recession began, to nearly 10.2 million in December 2010. 

"We already know from the number of people who have entered the disability rolls that there's going to be a permanent hit to the labor force participation rate," said Lawrence Katz, a Harvard University economist. "That's both costly to them—they're going to be less happy—and costly to us to lose someone who could be a productive worker."

February's increase in private employment added to other indicators, such as falling jobless claims, that suggest the labor market is gaining momentum. The booming manufacturing sector added 33,000 jobs, while service providers such as truckers, bankers and accountants gained 152,000, up from 33,000 the previous month. 

The sharpest declines came in state and local governments, which shed a total of 30,000 jobs, compared with 8,000 in January.

"Things are looking better," said Rich Weinberg, chief executive of Lighting Science Group Corp., a manufacturer of LED lighting products that added 17 jobs last month, bringing its payroll to 600. 

He said the company has seen sales accelerate as its customers, which include major retailers, become more willing to spend on new projects. The Satellite Beach, Fla., company picked up engineers and researchers from a nearby NASA facility that is shedding jobs as its funding drops. 

The White House and lawmakers from both sides of the aisle called the latest figures welcome news. Austan Goolsbee, chairman of the White House Council of Economic Advisers, said the administration's initiatives—such as a payroll-tax cut—"are creating the conditions for sustained growth and job creation." 

House Speaker John Boehner, meanwhile, credited the improvement to "the hard work of the American people" and the extension of income-tax cuts into 2012. 

"Now we must build on it by eliminating the job-crushing uncertainty being caused by excessive spending, borrowing, and regulating in Washington," he said.

The jobs report won't be a game changer for the Federal Reserve, where officials are on track to complete a $600 billion bond-buying program in June and remain more concerned about the weak labor market than about the potential inflationary effects of rising commodity prices. 

In one sign of muted inflationary pressures, average hourly earnings rose only one cent in February, to $22.87.

February's job growth will provide U.S. consumers with a much-needed income boost, but possibly not enough to offset the pain of rising energy prices. Climbing commodity costs and uncertainty about the outlook for consumer spending have some employers wary of ramping up hiring. 

"The only thing that drives hiring is demand," said Dave Cote, CEO of  Honeywell International Inc.,
HON


0.10
%




 which has been cautiously increasing its U.S. employment since mid-2010. "Until you're sure the sales are there, you're not going to hire."

—Phil Izzo contributed to this article.

 Write to  Sudeep Reddy at sudeep.reddy@wsj.com and Sara Murray at sara.murray@wsj.com 