 (Please see Corrections and Amplifications below.) 

Few major businesses are led by 66-year-olds who won't even hint at who will succeed them or when they might step down.

But that has been the approach at Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. and a passel of other Wall Street private-equity firms, where a generation of buyout billionaires still rules the roost—and has no plans of stepping down.

The average chief executive officer of companies in the Standard & Poor's 500 is 56 years old, says executive-placement firm Spencer Stuart.

At KKR,  Henry Kravis is 66, and partner  George Roberts, 67.  Stephen Schwarzman of  Blackstone Group
BX


0.39
%




 LP is 63; his heir apparent,  Tony James, will turn 60 next month.  Leon Black of Apollo Global Management turns 60 in July. TPG co-founder  David Bonderman is 68.  Donald Gogel, chief executive of Clayton, Dubilier & Rice LLC, is 61; the firm's chairman,  Joseph Rice, is 79.

And the triumvirate running Carlyle Group,  David Rubenstein, William Conway and  Daniel D'Aniello, are 61, 61, and 64, respectively.

The issue of succession is of growing importance to clients. Many of them laud the veteran investors for years of good returns, and hope the executives continue in their roles. At the same time, they fret about how the firms are planning for the future. Of concern: Whether the next generation of deal makers might bolt if they don't get the chance to grab the reins.

Private-equity honchos often cite  Berkshire Hathaway, run by 80-year old  Warren Buffett, as proof they can continue to run their firms for many years. Mr. Buffett, at least, is preparing for change. In the latest issue of Vanity Fair magazine, Mr. Buffett said that succession "is all we talk about" at board meetings.

The issue is more pressing because the largest buyout firms have become harder to manage. KKR, for example, once was a private firm focused on U.S. buyouts. Today it is a publicly traded company with 750 employees that cuts deals in Africa, Asia and Europe, trades stocks and bonds, and even buys pipelines.

"Investors care a lot about who will succeed the kings of private equity, it's a big issue," says  Mario Giannini, chief executive officer of Hamilton Lane, which advises private-equity investors and makes investments in these firms. "So many firms are getting larger and have to deal with succession, and one or two people can't do it all."

Succession matters less at hedge funds, because investors generally can withdraw money on a quarterly basis if they are displeased with a firm's direction. 

But once investors commit to a private-equity firm they usually can't withdraw for a long time—sometimes for more than decade. That makes future leadership more important.

  Robert Long, chief executive officer of Conversus Asset Management, a company that invests in private-equity firms, says he is avoiding firms that haven't done a good job planning succession, and is spending more time focusing on "key man" clauses in partnership agreements. Those terms allow clients to withhold new investments if certain executives quit.

"Our three founders are working harder than ever and we're grooming the next generation of leaders," says a Carlyle spokesman.

A spokesman for Blackstone said: "We have a number of senior executives running our various businesses and a deep bench of highly experienced people backing them up." 

A representative of Clayton said the firm has twice smoothly transtioned leadership and is confident it will in the future.

Even those firms that now are public, such as Blackstone and KKR, don't have rules encouraging employees to step down at a certain age. 

Choosing a successor can spark departures by key deal makers. And vying for the future brass ring can sometimes cause a healthy tension within firms, some say. 

Worried investors cite the example of Forstmann Little, co-founded by  Ted Forstmann, which was a buyout power during most of the 1980s and 1990s. The firm suffered big telecom losses in the early 2000s and Mr. Forstmann didn't have a successor, and the firm chose not to raise a new fund.

More recently,  Justin Wender, who had been president of Castle Harlan, Inc., quit the firm in August after growing frustrated that  John Castle, the firm's founder, didn't give him enough control, according to clients of the firm. A firm spokesman says it moved quickly to announce new leadership once Mr. Wender left.

For all the hand-wringing among investors, some firms seem well-prepared for the future. 

TPG's co-founder,  James Coulter, is 51. Mr. Black's co-founders,  Joshua Harris and  Marc Rowan, are 45 and 48, respectively.

Mr. Kravis and Mr. Roberts have moved responsibilities to others at the firm and introduced a management committee, efforts aimed at grooming stars and giving them more power, say people close to the firm. Those changes should make the firms less dependent on their founders. For now, however, the founders show no signs of letting go.

Over the past year, Mr. Kravis, for example, has visited a string of cities, from Cincinnati to Shanghai, to meet political leaders and corporate executives. Carlyle's three founders have been to Asia nearly a dozen times in that period.

So why don't buyout bosses move off center stage? Some, like Mr. Kravis and Mr. Schwarzman, enjoy crafting deals and building their respective businesses. Running high-profile firms also helps keep the veterans relevant, some have told colleagues. 

"We investors want succession, and we also want George [Roberts] and Henry [Kravis]" to continue running their firm, says Mr. Giannini, "so we want it both ways."

 Corrections and Amplifications 

Leon Black of Apollo Global Management is 59 years old. A photo caption in an earlier version of this article incorrectly said he is 60.

 Write to  Gregory Zuckerman at gregory.zuckerman@wsj.com 