 Sundance Film Festival, Jan. 20-30 

A diverse group of coming-of-age films and movies that question the meaning of faith await this year's attendees at Robert Redford's annual Park City, Utah fest, which kicked off Thursday. In addition to debuting works by emerging filmmakers, the fest also welcomes back projects from alumni such as Morgan Spurlock (the film- marketing documentary "The Greatest Movie Ever Sold"), Eugene Jarecki (the Gipper documentary "Reagan"), and Kevin Smith (the horror film "Red State"). Film buyers will also be hoping to snap up this year's "Winter's Bone" or "The Kids Are All Right." 

 'The Peacock Male,' Philadelphia  Museum of Art, Saturday to June 

Outlandish menswear takes over the museum in this new exhibit, subtitled "Exuberance and Extremes in Masculine Dress." It looks at 300 years of flamboyant clothing for men. Starting with colorful silk stockings and a herald's tabard from the 18th century, the exhibit thematically addresses how men use clothing to make personal statements, status and markers of group association—from tartan to sports jerseys. Contemporary designers Yohji Yamamoto, Vivianne Westwood and Thom Browne represent the modern era. The 1973 shoe is by an unknown Italian designer.

 'The Company Men,' Friday 

Number of screenings scheduled at Sundance Film Festival

This feature-film directorial debut of TV producer John Wells ("E.R.," "The West Wing," "Southland") finally opens wide, in 106 theaters. Starring Ben Affleck, Tommy Lee Jones, Chris Cooper and Kevin Costner, the film is about corporate downsizing and risks seeming a bit weirdly timed after "Up in the Air" hit many of these themes in 2009. Mr. Wells argues that topics such as the shame of the unemployed and the anguish of management haven't yet been explored dramatically. "We're only in the middle of the film," he says. More of Mr. Wells's thoughts about his film at WSJ.com/Lifestyle.

 'Spartacus: Gods of the Arena'   Starz, Friday 

Starz had to shelve the second season of its heavily promoted "Spartacus: Blood and Sand" series when leading man Andy Whitfield was diagnosed with cancer. Hence this prequel, "Spartacus: Gods of the Arena," still swarming with hedonistic, bare-chested people of both genders. 

 Winter Antiques Show, Jan. 21-30  

This New York fixture includes works ranging from an Egyptian relief depicting the Pharaoh Akhenaten to a long-lost 19th-century painting by American master Martin Johnson Heade to a groovy 1953 wall hanging called "Constellation" in black walnut, steel, bronze and glass. The Park Avenue Armory show features new additions: a loan exhibition from the Historic Charleston Foundation of South Carolina and installation booths in which designers place antiques in contemporary settings. 

—Michelle Kung, Pia Catton, Anthony Kaufman, Amy Chozick, Ellen Gamerman

 Corrections & Amplifications  The film "The Company Men" opened in 106 theaters on Jan. 21. A previous version of this article reported that it would open in 200 theaters. 