The United Nations General Assembly on Tuesday suspended Libya from the U.N. Human Rights Council because of Col. Moammar Gadhafi's violent crackdown on anti-government protestors.

The decision was taken by consensus in the 192-seat assembly. The vote came after the Human Rights Council last week recommended the suspension.

"This is a harsh rebuke, but one that Libya's leaders have brought down on themselves," said Susan Rice, U.S. ambassador to the U.N. "The U.S. continues to be appalled by the situation in Libya. This action sends another clear warning to Mr. Gadhafi and those who stand by him: they must stop the killing."

Libya's controversial election to the council last May was strongly condemned by human rights groups at the time. In a joint statement, 37 rights organizations said: "Col. Gaddafi belongs in jail, not on the world's highest human rights body." Their statement called his government "one of the world's most brutal and longest-running tyrannies."

But that appeal was ignored by the General Assembly, where 155 nations voted for Libya's seat on the council. By contrast, on Tuesday all of those nations agreed with the consensus to suspend Libya.

"We regretted its election last year," Ms. Rice said. "We thought it was unfortunate." She said it was unavoidable if regional groups at the U.N. only put up one candidate for its seat. "This is why the U.S. has worked to ensure that there are competitive elections."

Jorge Valero, Venezuela's U.N. ambassador, said the General Assembly was wrong to suspend Libya because a planned Human Rights Council investigation in Libya had not yet taken place. "A decision like this could only take place after an objective and credible investigation that confirms the veracity of the facts," Mr. Valero said.

The Venezuelan envoy also accused the United States of planning an invasion of Libya. "Those who promote the use of military force against Libya do not seek to defend human rights, but to establish…a protectorate to violate them in one of the most important sources of oil and energy in the Middle East," Mr. Valero said.

Ms. Rice accused Mr. Valero of "living in a fantasy world," adding that the U.S. "utterly rejects this willful and ugly distortion of U.S. policy and posture." She called Venezuela's statement "shameful" and called into question its own human rights record.

The Human Rights Council is made up of 47 countries that are elected for three year terms. Regional blocs put forward candidates to represent it. 

 Write to  Joe Lauria at newseditor@wsj.com 