WASHINGTON—U.S. President Barack Obama called for a boost in infrastructure spending Tuesday to create jobs and lift the economy. But the plan will face a significant hurdle: Money for highway projects is scarce, and neither party has shown an appetite for raising the federal gasoline tax. 

Mr. Obama will use his State of the Union speech to call for a six-year plan to repair roads, bridges and transit systems, and the creation of a national infrastructure bank to leverage private dollars, White House aides said. He will also call for more spending to build intercity passenger rail lines, and a "national wireless initiative" to give most homes Internet access. 

"Our infrastructure used to be the best--but our lead has slipped," Mr. Obama will say, according to prepared remarks released by the White House ahead of the address. 

The debate over how to pay for the plan is expected to begin in earnest Wednesday morning in the Senate, where a hearing called by Sen. Barbara Boxer (D., Calif.) will focus on a multi-year highway bill that could provide the framework for Obama's plan. 

The plan would likely cost hundreds of billions of dollars, based on the price tag of previous highway bills. The main source of funding for highway projects--the 18.4-cent federal tax on a gallon of gasoline--hasn't drawn enough revenue in recent years to pay for needed highway projects, and Washington will need to find a way to plug the gap. 

The White House and congressional lawmakers from both parties have rejected the politically risky step of raising the gas tax. Congressional Republicans have also vowed to oppose using other sources that would require additional borrowing or raise other taxes. 

That leaves few apparent options for the White House to fund its plan for billions of dollars in new projects and for a national infrastructure bank to oversee them. 

"This has tremendous political and institutional hurdles it has to overcome," said Robert Puentes, a transportation expert at the Brookings Institution, a Washington think tank. 

The transportation plan outlined by Mr. Obama Tuesday night is expected to call for a six-year bill, with a significant portion of the money spent early on to help generate as many as hundreds of thousands of jobs. He will also call for a "significant down payment" on passenger-rail projects, with a goal of giving 80% of Americans access to rail service within 25 years. 

The wireless-network initiative calls for 98% of Americans to have access to high-speed internet service. Obama isn't expected to release details of how he plans to pay for the projects. 

A broad proposal by Obama in September called for an immediate $50 billion in infrastructure spending this year on top of existing programs. He suggested eliminating tax breaks for oil companies to pay for the plan. 

That idea drew immediate criticism from at least one key House Republican, Rep. John Mica of Florida, new chairman of the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee. Mica has said that raising taxes would hurt the economy and wouldn't be an option. 

Mr. Mica has suggested raising more money through the use of tolling and other types of so-called public-private partnerships. Other lawmakers and transportation lobbyists have floated ideas such as taxing a barrel of oil and taxing the percentage of gas drawn at the pump, which would bring more revenue as gas prices increased. 

The White House has said it will release details on its plan for funding transportation projects when it releases its budget proposal in February. 

James Corless, director Transportation for America, a group that lobbies for transportation spending, said the president's speech will help the cause of public-works projects, but he acknowledged the president will face battle in Congress. 

"It's not lost on those in the transportation community that we have to build more political support for investing in transportation," Mr. Corless said. 

 Write to  Josh Mitchell at joshua.mitchell@dowjones.com 