Many managers of international mutual funds bought Japanese stocks in the aftermath of the March 11 earthquake and tsunami, the strongest sign yet that a market that has long been out of favor is gaining a new image as a promising underdog. 

Read the complete Investing in Funds report. 

Japan's benchmark Nikkei Stock Average plunged 16% in the first two trading days following the disaster, then staged a rebound, rising almost 12% over the next five sessions to close at 9608 on March 22. More recently, the Nikkei has traded around 9850, even as officials continue efforts to contain a nuclear crisis at a power plant damaged by the quake.

Some fund managers see the earthquake as the turning point for international investors. They say manager sentiment, money flows, Japan's long-term economic outlook and its reasonable stock valuations all suggest that the market's rapid rebound could mark the beginning of Japan's re-emergence as a top destination for international funds.

"There's a huge change of mind-set," says  Taizo Ishida, who manages  Matthews Japan and  Matthews Asia Pacific. "In a very strange way, Japan is back to the headlines. It's a very unfortunate incident, a very tragic thing that happened. But people looked at Japan one more time. They're really rediscovering Japan as a country," he says.

There have been significant inflows into the roughly $100 million Matthews Japan fund in the wake of the earthquake, according to Mr. Ishida. T. Rowe Price Group Inc., meanwhile, says overseas investors were net buyers of Japanese stocks for 12 straight weeks through late March.

Mr. Ishida says he started loading up on Japanese stocks for the $330 million Matthews Asia Pacific fund even before the quake. In October 2010, he began increasing their weighting in the fund to 40% from 30% because he believed they were cheap and that a weak yen and surging international demand would help Japanese exporters. 

The earthquake and especially the power outages and contamination fears associated with the nuclear accident at Tokyo Electric Power's Fukushima plant have done appreciable damage to Japan's economy, but history suggests repairs will be swift. 

This is, after all, the nation that emerged from the ashes of World War II to become the world's second-largest economy and stunned the world again with its comeback from the 1995 Kobe earthquake. 

Nothing can replace the nearly 30,000 people lost and missing in the latest tragedy, but survivors already have shown their remarkable resolve: The earthquake reduced a highway in the Ibaraki prefecture north of Tokyo to shards of concrete. The road was repaired a mere six days later. 

After cutting its estimates for 2011 growth in gross domestic product to 0% from 0.4% because of the quake, Japanese brokerage Nomura Securities boosted its outlook for 2012 growth to 2.2% from 2%, citing the expected push to rebuild.

"We look for real GDP growth…as supply chain issues ease in line with the restart of factories and the shift of production to other areas, and we project a sharp acceleration in growth…as recovery demand feeds through in earnest," the Nomura analysts wrote.

Some international investors say they bought Japanese stocks because they believed that the market plunge in the first trading days following the earthquake was more severe than what was warranted.

According to many portfolio managers, Japan's stock market showed all the classic signs of "panic selling" as investors indiscriminately dumped stocks, even those of companies without major exposure to the earthquake and its aftermath. 

For long-term investors, this was an opportunity to "exploit the short-term impatience," says  David Herro, portfolio manager for  Oakmark International and  Oakmark International Small Cap. 

He and some other fund managers say a longer-term mispricing of Japanese stocks is likely to lure even more international investment.

Some investors "think that because a company is based in a slow-growing developed market, it must be bad," says Mr. Herro, whose funds had 23% of their assets by dollar value in Japan as of March 1. But when pricing a business, "you have to base it on where it would be generating its cash flows, not where it is coming from," says the fund manager, whose buying spree after the quake resulted in his firm owning 10% more Japanese stocks by number of shares.

He and other fund managers point to companies such as Canon Inc.,  Toyota Motor Corp. and  Sony Corp. as stocks that are associated with their Japanese base even though the bulk of their sales comes from overseas. This perceived guilt by association with a weak domestic economy means that earnings growth at these and other companies doesn't show up in their stock prices, they say.

"I think Japanese stocks started this crisis looking very attractive in terms of valuation," said  Campbell Gunn, portfolio manager of  T. Rowe Price Japan, in an interview on the firm's website. "That's just been made more so," he said, adding that "once the market has settled down, we could look forward to Japan outperforming the rest of the world for one to two years."

Stocks in Japan are cheaper, on a relative basis, than most other markets. The average stock on the Nikkei 225 was trading at 14 times earnings and had a price-to-book ratio, or market value compared to the value of the balance sheet, of about 1 to 1 before the quake, according to Mr. Ishida. 

By comparison, the average stock in the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index was trading at about 16 times earnings as of March 31, and its average price-to-book ratio was roughly 2.2 to 1 as of year-end 2010.

Japan outperformed the rest of the world in the 1980s, but investors fled the Japanese market in the 1990s when stocks grew too expensive relative to growth, fund managers say. At the peak, stocks in Japan traded at an average of 35 times earnings, and the average price-to-book ratio was 2 to 1. 

During the 2000s, Japan's exporters recovered their growth rate by selling to emerging countries in Asia in addition to the American market that had driven the 1980s boom. But the stock market stagnated, and Japan disappeared into the shadow of faster-growing neighbors China and India. 

The stagnation of Japan's market is clear from its weighting in the MSCI Europe, Australasia and Far East (EAFE) index, which peaked at 65% in 1988 but was at 22% at year-end 2010, close to where it started the 2000s. International-stock fund managers tended to hold even less Japanese stock than the international benchmarks—which generally helped their funds' performance relative to those gauges.

So one question lingers: After so long overlooking Japan, why would long-term international investors start buying now?

The disaster opened investors' eyes to the critical role the nation still plays in the global economy, says Mr. Ishida. The crisis has caused an international shortage of everything from auto parts to equipment for making microchips. 

"One thing is clear: Japan still makes a lot of stuff," he says. "A lot of people thought: 'Oh, gee, I didn't know things were still made in Japan, I thought they were all made in China.' "

For some international fund managers, the Japanese shock provided them with the entry point they were waiting for, says  Rob Wherry, a mutual-fund analyst at Morningstar.

"I think every fund manager has a wish list of stocks they want to buy" in Japan, says Mr. Wherry. "But for some reason the shares aren't attractive, so they wait for an entry point. Most never thought the entry point would come from such a horrific event."

 Mr. Curran, a writer in Denton, Texas, is a regular contributor to Dow Jones Newswires and The Wall Street Journal. Email him at rob.curran@dowjones.com. 