MEMPHIS, Tenn.—More Memphis residents were being told Sunday to flee their homes for higher ground as the mighty Mississippi's crest edged toward the city, threatening to bring more flooding to parts of an area already soaked.

Officials were going door-to-door, warning about 240 people to get out before the river reaches its expected peak Tuesday. In all, residents in more than 1,300 homes have been told to go, and some 370 people were staying in shelters.

The Mississippi spared Kentucky and northwest Tennessee any catastrophic flooding and no deaths have been reported there, but some low-lying towns and farmland along the banks of the big river have been inundated with water. And there is tension farther south in the Mississippi Delta and Louisiana, with the river's crest continuing a lazy pace, leaving behind what could be a slow-moving disaster.

Jittery Memphis residents have been abandoning low-lying homes for days as the dangerously surging river threatened to crest at 48 feet, just shy of a 48.7-foot record of a devastating 1937 flood.

Record river levels, some dating as far back as the 1920s, have already been broken in some areas upstream. Heavy rains and snowmelt have been blamed for swelling the big river, and there is so much water in the Mississippi, the tributaries that feed into it are also backed up, creating much of the flood problems so far.

At Beale Street, the famous drag known for blues, water pooled at the end of the road, and dozens gathered to catch a glimpse.

  Scott Umstead, his wife and their three children made the half-hour drive from the eastern Collierville. He has never seen the river so high and marveled at the other gawkers.

Tourists typically flock here in May for a music festival or barbecue championship, but the river area was buzzing this year.

"It's probably the biggest tourist attraction in Memphis," Umstead said.

The water on Beale Street was about a half-mile from the world-famous nightspots, which are on much higher ground.

  Kim Mueller and her husband Lloyd were taking pictures of the river from an elevated walking bridge that runs parallel to the river. The Brentwood, Tenn., couple came to Memphis to watch their son play in a rugby tournament and were stopping by the river on their way out of town.

"If it was my house, I would be devastated," said Kim Mueller, whose home was spared last year during the Nashville floods, which inundated parts of downtown and many low-lying neighborhoods.

She thought the wide river looked peaceful. "It's just awesome," she said.

Downriver in Louisiana, officials warned residents that even if a key spillway northwest of Baton Rouge were to be opened, residents could expect water 5- to 25-feet deep over parts of seven parishes. Some of Louisiana's most valuable farmland is expected to be inundated.

The vital Morganza spillway, northwest of Baton Rouge, could be opened as early as Thursday, although a decision hasn't yet been made.

A separate spillway northwest of New Orleans was to be opened Monday, helping ease the pressure on levees there, and inmates were set to be evacuated from the low-lying state prison in Angola.

Engineers say it is unlikely any major metropolitan areas will be inundated as the water pushes downstream over the next week or two. Nonetheless, officials are cautious.

Since the Great Mississippi Flood of 1927, a disaster that killed hundreds, Congress has made protecting the cities on the lower Mississippi a priority, spending billions to fortify cities with floodwalls and carve out overflow basins and ponds — a departure from the "levees-only" strategy that led to the 1927 disaster.