LONDON—The nine members of the Bank of England's Monetary Policy Committee face possibly the most difficult combination of circumstances since the central bank gained independence in the setting of monetary policy over a decade ago. 

Inflation has been above the central bank's 2.0% target in 41 out of the past 50 months, and is expected to stay high over the coming year. While that is largely due to temporary shocks, it has pushed up consumers' expectations of price growth, risking an upward spiral. 

But the U.K.'s economic recovery is still fragile, and dependent on a pickup in private sector activity that is strong enough to offset the government's austerity measures. Yet bank lending remains constrained, and demand from the U.K.'s major trading partners tepid. 

The dilemma facing MPC members as they gather Wednesday and Thursday for the first time in 2011 isn't new, but the persistence of high inflation is making it more acute. The government has looked to the MPC to keep policy easy in order to support growth as it tackles its huge budget deficit, but has started to show signs of nervousness about the inflation outlook. 

"I think if you look at the recent figures they are concerning because they are well outside what the Bank of England is meant to deliver," Prime Minister David Cameron said Sunday. 

In a fresh indication that consumer prices are set to rise further, E.ON U.K., the U.K. subsidiary of German utility  E.ON AG, Tuesday said it is increasing prices for the majority of its residential customers with effect from Feb. 4, becoming the fifth of the six big energy suppliers in the U.K. to increase prices this winter. 

Standard prices will rise 9% for electricity and 3% for gas and comes mostly as a result of increasing wholesale energy prices, which have risen 35% since last spring, the company said.

Investors also appear to be worried, and now expect the key interest rate to rise twice before the end of 2011, to 1.0% from a record low of 0.5%. Many economists have also changed their minds in recent weeks, and tip the key rate to rise sooner than previously. 

"We concur with the MPC's mainstream view, which is that inflation will be more subdued in the medium-term and that the targeted measure will be below 2% for most of next year," said  Philip Shaw, U.K. economist at Investec Securities. "However, if the committee judges that its credibility is at stake in the meantime, it may be forced into an early tightening." 

The MPC's language has turned noticeably more hawkish over recent weeks. 

While at October's meeting, several members saw an increased likelihood that more quantitative easing bond purchases would be needed, by November that language had been removed from the minutes. 

And in December, the minutes voiced concerns among the majority of policy makers that inflationary risks had risen. Members also noted signs that household inflation expectations were edging up, and the possible added cost of bringing price growth back down. 

Economists' expectations have shifted at a similar pace. While only a month ago, five out of 16 analysts polled tipped the BOE to apply further stimulus, now only one out of 16 does. 

In December, no analyst surveyed by Dow Jones Newswires saw the central bank lifting rates before the second half of 2011, and the largest number—eight—saw rates beginning to rise in the fourth quarter. Two saw an increase in the third quarter, while five didn't see any tightening until 2012 and one until 2013. 

Although the biggest number of economists—five—still tip rate increases to begin in the fourth quarter, two now see an increase in the second quarter, and four in the third quarter. Only four see tightening starting in 2012 and one in 2013. 

All 18 economists polled tipped the MPC to leave its key interest rate at its 0.5% all-time low and bond purchases at £200 billion when its two-day meeting ends Thursday at 1200GMT. 

The market is pricing in the Sterling Overnight Index Average at 0.735% by the time of the BOE's July meeting, according to ICAP, an interdealer broker. Sonia, the weighted average rate of all unsecured sterling overnight cash transactions brokered in London, is seen at 1.035% by the time of the December meeting, implying two rate rises by the end of the year. 

The dilemma for the MPC is that the U.K. recovery remains very far from being assured. 

The start of the new year heralded a hike in the sales tax to a record 20% from 17.5%—which besides lifting prices will also weigh on demand--and many more measures are set to follow as past of the government's pledge for £111 billion of fiscal tightening by 2015. 

The hope is that the private sector will be strong enough to compensate for that, but the signs are not promising. 

According to a survey of purchasing managers released Thursday, the U.K.'s dominant services sector posted a surprise contraction in December, as the wintry weather, weak confidence and job cuts weighed heavily on sentiment. 

Although the manufacturing sector continued to grow, a contraction in the construction industry meant that private sector activity as a whole stagnated. 

Broad money supply growth remains well below pre-crisis trends, and U.K. banks face what the BOE recently described as the "major challenge" of refinancing or replacing £400 billion to £500 billion of wholesale term debt by the end of 2012. That will curb their ability to support economic growth. 

Policy makers still hope that the 25% depreciation in sterling since the start of the financial crisis will boost U.K. exports, helping to engineer a rebalancing of the economy away from domestic demand. But latest gross domestic product data showed that trade remained a drag on U.K. output in the third quarter. 

—Neelabh Chaturvedi contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Natasha Brereton at natasha.brereton@dowjones.com 