The Upper West Side could lose its first charter school before it even opens. 

A judge has slapped the Department of Education with a temporary restraining order that halted the start of renovations necessary on the school building on 84th Street where Upper West Success Academy Charter School plans to open in August. 

The city downplayed the restraining order. 

"While we do not believe the stay was warranted, it is not unusual for judges to preserve the status quo for a short period of time while they consider the legal issues before them," said Chlarens Orsland, assistant corporation counsel for the New York City law department. 

The school, founded by former City Council member  Eva Moskowitz, has been the subject of heated opposition since the DOE announced it would be allowed to take root in the old Brandeis High School building, where there are now five small high schools. 

Some community members and parents of the high school students in the Brandeis building sued the city last month to prevent the charter school from moving in, saying there is no room and that the DOE didn't follow the administrative procedures under state law when schools must share space. 

"The judge has recognized that the parents and the community have a very strong case against the DOE," said  Noah E. Gotbaum, president of Community District Education Council 3, which calls the charter school "unwanted and wasteful." 

Mr. Gotbaum said there is much more demand for the high schools in the building, and that those schools should be allowed to grow larger to accommodate a greater number of students than planned. 

In court papers, the school said it would occupy rooms that are currently used as storage spaces. They are mostly filled with filing cabinets, some with files up to 11 years old. 

"There's room in this building," Ms. Moskowitz said. "The people who are putting forth the lawsuit, they've got their kids in a good school, and they want to deny parents who don't have another option to choose this option." She said there's a dearth of good schools in all neighborhoods in the city. 

"You would think we would be welcoming with open arms a great school," she said. 

More than 1,500 children applied for the 184 kindergarten and first-grade seats at the charter school, with 700 of those children coming from District 3, which encompasses the Upper West Side. Ms. Moskowitz runs several schools, and all currently operate in high-poverty neighborhoods, such as in Harlem. Her flagship school, the Harlem Success Academy, ranked ninth out of more than 800 New York City elementary schools based on student performance. 

Charter schools are public schools that are privately run. In New York City, the majority of charter schools share space with traditional public schools. In general, New York City charter schools are situated in low-income neighborhoods where traditional schools perform poorly for students. 

In vowing to open a charter school in the more affluent Upper West Side, which has some of the most highly coveted and high-performing schools in the city, Ms. Moskowitz is charting new territory that is as much political as educational.

The restraining order has upset some parents. "I'm just beside myself," said Nina Rosen, whose son won a spot in the lottery for the charter school. 

In December, Ms. Rosen said, the DOE rezoned her neighborhood, and now her son is zoned for P.S. 191, a school that got an "F" in the student-performance section of the last progress report, in part because only 34% of students were proficient in English and 38% were proficient in math. "We're just not sure what we're going to do," she said.