The conventional wisdom, propagated by senior businessmen, pundits and policy makers, holds that the 21st century is China's for the taking. The wise leaders in Beijing, we're led to believe, sailed through the financial crisis with deft management. They benefit from a long-term view that eludes their American and European counterparts. Growth is steaming along at nearly 10% and the global slowdown barely registered. The counterpoint, sometimes implicit and sometimes explicit, is that China's rise comes at the cost of America's decline.

So pervasive has this view become that any effort to examine whether it's actually true comes as a breath of fresh air. "Red Capitalism" is such a work. Authors Carl E. Walter and Fraser J.T. Howie, both investment bankers, argue that China isn't so different from other economies nor so immune from normal economic laws as cheerleaders argue. An examination of the financial system—or "how China's political elite manages money and the country's economy," as the authors put it—offers a useful lens through which to view much broader issues.

A striking observation is that foreigners (and perhaps Chinese policy makers too) have become so entranced by the large amounts of money flowing through the economy that they often forget to follow it. Noting only that China has produced six of the world's 15 largest initial public offerings since 2007 might create the impression that the country is developing a capitalistic financial market capable of intermediating its vast savings into a productive corporate sector. Last year, IPOs by Chinese companies reached $105 billion, 37% of global IPO volume. 

What gets forgotten is just how "public" these offerings are—for IPOs within China, the majority of the investment capital comes from other state-owned companies rather than the private sector. And in an environment where regulators carefully manage the supply of new shares coming to market, it helps to be a state-owned company if you want to secure permission to list. Hence the stock market that's presented as evidence of China's capitalist transformation is in reality a merry-go-round for circulating money from one state-owned enterprise to another.

 Carl E. Walter and Fraser J.T. Howie  Wiley, 250 pages, $29.95

The authors return again and again to the notion that while Beijing has embraced the form of market-based reform, the substance remains elusive. This has many implications. One relates to who's in charge of the Chinese economy. If reforms truly were leading to a more market-based system, one would expect a growing market for corporate control resulting from a wider dispersal of ownership. China would be witnessing more contested board elections, hostile takeover attempts and the like. This has not happened. Instead, the management of listed companies continues to be selected based on political criteria by China's Communist Party. Minority shareholders get no say, merely a ticket to ride.

Then there's that other crucial ingredient of a modern economy (recent financial crisis notwithstanding), the debt market. "Like highways, new airport terminals or CCTV's ultra-modern office building in Beijing, it exists because the Party believes bond markets are a necessary symbol of economic modernity," Messrs. Walter and Howie write.

Yet dig a little deeper and it becomes clear that this market is not allowed to perform its traditional role of pricing risk to facilitate the efficient flow of capital. It would be almost heretical for Chinese banks to ascribe riskiness to other state firms' debt, so the bond market simply doesn't attempt to price risk.

All well and good, but then again Beijing's current claim is that it is not trying to be like the Western capitalists—who it says failed so miserably to avert the financial crisis. Is it possible that Beijing's model, whatever its precise nature, will work? 

It has certainly been profitable, up to a point, for foreigners. Chinese IPOs have no trouble attracting foreign investors keen to bet on the country's growth story. And Western banks, such as those that employ Messrs. Walter and Howie, have made millions upon millions of dollars piecing together bits of Chinese ministries into "corporations" to list.

Yet longer-term viability is another matter. China is not "a market economy, but a carefully balanced social mechanism built around the particular interests of the revolutionary families who constitute the political elite," the authors conclude. They liken the economy to a "family-run business," both figuratively, given its insularity, and literally, given the role of well-connected scions. As with any family business, that can be a blessing—if the "patriarch" is an expert in the field—or a curse—if an uninterested or unintelligent heir takes over. And the switch from one mode to the other can happen very suddenly.

How well the current ruling "family" understands the business is an open question, but there are signs it may not. "It appears the Party mistakenly believes its own advertising about its banks being rich and strong," Messrs. Walter and Howie write. "The absence of a strong leader is a weakness that allows the special interest groups to take advantage." The signs are all around us, and especially in Beijing's recent propensity for arrogance on the world economic stage.

That could be a ruinous mistake. The authors fret over unacknowledged bad loans piling up within the system (which implies leaders have been rampantly misallocating capital), and they estimate total public debt of about 76% of GDP, a very high figure for a developing country. With a rapidly aging population (more than 200 million people will be over the age of 65 by 2020) and weak social safety net, China can ill afford a banking crisis any time in the next decade. If and when one comes, Beijing could rue the many days when it resisted creating a more resilient, genuinely capitalist market.

Messrs. Walter and Howie will do little to dissuade the vast majority of foreign businessmen who are bullish on China. Nor are they likely to awaken its financial stewards to take action on the brewing problems below the surface. Perhaps China's cheerleaders are correct that China really is different. But after reading "Red Capitalism," and given the long, failed history of other claims to economic exceptionalism, is that a prudent bet to make?

 Mr. Carew is a former Asia M&A reporter for The Wall Street Journal. 