MELBOURNE, Australia—It took three hours and 46 minutes, two tie breaks and, in the end, one perfectly placed match point volley for Britain's Andy Murray to defeat Spaniard David Ferrer in the Australian Open semifinals Friday night.

His four-set 4-6, 7-6 (2), 6-1, 7-6 (2) victory sets him up for a clash against good friend and practice partner No. 3 Novak Djokovic in the final. 

The Serbian defeated No. 2 Roger Federer in straight sets here on Thursday night to create the first Grand Slam final without Mr. Federer or No. 1 Rafael Nadal in three years. 

Mr. Murray and Mr. Djokovic are often considered the best players on the tour behind Mr. Federer and Mr. Nadal, but they have yet to meet in a Grand Slam because their close rankings mean they typically end up on opposite sides of the draw. 

"I hope it's the start of us playing each other in the big matches," Mr. Murray said. 

This will be Mr. Murray's third Grand Slam final and second consecutive Australian Open final. Winning the final would make Mr. Murray the first man from Great Britain to win a Grand Slam since 1936.

Against Mr. Djokovic, Mr. Murray has won the last three matches they played on hard courts. Mr. Djokovic won the four matches they played before that. Mr. Murray recalled the first time the pair played, when they were just 13. As far as he can remember, Mr. Murray won that match 6-0, 6-1. 

"It will be just a bit tougher than that on Sunday," he joked.

Unlike Mr. Djokovic and Mr. Federer's fast-paced semifinals match, Mr. Murray and Mr. Ferrer's meeting on Friday night began much more deliberately, the first set marked by spectacular 27-, 37- and 40-shot rallies, the type of tennis that tends to favor the tireless Spaniard. As early as the first set, which Mr. Ferrer won, his Scottish opponent looked a bit weary. 

Mr. Ferrer, the underdog heading into tonight's semifinals match, had beaten countryman No. 1 Rafael Nadal in the quarterfinals earlier this week to make it into the semis. But that victory came from a match in which Mr. Nadal injured his hamstring and was left to play out the match with limited mobility. 

Mr. Murray broke Mr. Ferrer at the start of the second set Friday night, taking the first game on one of the Spaniard's unforced errors. Mr. Ferrer immediately broke back in the second game, setting the tone for what was certain to be a long night. 

Down 2-3 in the second set, Mr. Murray ratcheted up his serve, doling out three serves that Mr. Ferrer could not put back in play and one ace, denying Mr. Ferrer the chance to convert three break points in the game. 

The second set wound up in a tiebreak, a point at which Mr. Murray found his pace and Mr. Ferrer seemed to lose his. Where Mr. Murray was able to hit winners from the baseline, Mr. Ferrer was making unforced errors on his groundstrokes. Mr. Murray comfortably won the tiebreak 7-2.

In the third set, Mr. Murray took an early lead, breaking Mr. Ferrer in the third and sixth games to win that set 6-1.

It was then Mr. Ferrer, who had changed from a black shirt into a neon yellow one after he won the first set, came back onto the court in the black shirt, perhaps with the hope that would bring back some of what his game had lost during the course of the match.

The fourth set was indeed a tougher fight for Mr. Murray. Mr. Ferrer, broken in his first service game, broke back in the fourth game to even the score, and the pair held serve until the final tiebreak. 

Gone were the long rallies. Mr. Murray opened the final tiebreak with a short rally that ended with him forcing Mr. Ferrer to hit a backhand into the net. Mr. Murray followed that up with an ace and then, despite giving up one point to Mr. Ferrer on an unforced error, Mr. Murray managed to maintain the momentum to reach match point. It was then Mr. Ferrer responded with a serve Mr. Murray couldn't return, and it seemed the match would go on.

It was during the next point, in a rally that brought both men to the net, that Mr. Murray hit the backhand volley needed to finish the match.

"He's an unbelievable athlete," Mr. Murray said of Mr. Ferrer after the match. "He's an unbelievable competitor. He works so hard. I was expecting an unbelievable match and I got it."

 Write to  Cynthia Koons at Cynthia.Koons@dowjones.com 