British police said they arrested five men near a nuclear plant in northwest England under antiterrorism laws. 

The arrests come as the U.K. and other countries are on high alert for potential reprisals following the killing of al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden early Monday morning. 

The arrests were made Monday afternoon local time after police officers from Britain's Civil Nuclear Constabulary conducted a routine stop check on a vehicle close to the Sellafield nuclear-power plant in West Cumbria, the police said in a statement. The plant is in a largely rural part of northwest England. 

The five men, who are all from London and in their 20s, are being questioned in Manchester by counterterrorism police. Police said they were also searching four addresses in East London following the arrests and had taken a small container from one property for forensic examination.

The men, of south Asian origin, were stopped as they tried to film the Sellafield plant site, according to a person familiar with the matter. 

The arrests came as governments around the world on Monday stepped up measures to be prepared for possible strikes aimed at retaliating against bin Laden's killing by U.S. Special Forces in Pakistan. 

A spokeswoman for Greater Manchester Police said that "at this stage" they aren't aware of any connection between the men and recent events in Pakistan. 

The U.K. has told its military installations and its embassies abroad to review their security in the wake of the killing. Late Monday, Prime Minister David Cameron held a meeting of the so-called COBRA committee, which convenes to discuss issues of national security ranging from floods to terror threats. 

Britain sees itself as being particularly high on any potential revenge list. It has been targeted by al Qaeda-inspired terrorism before, including an attack on the London transport system in 2005 in which 56 people were killed. 

In the nearly 10 years since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, the U.K. has often found itself in the middle of the terrorism debate, in part because radical Islam has developed a strong presence in the country, where some mosques have been accused of serving as al Qaeda recruiting hubs. 

Sellafield is the U.K.'s largest nuclear site, though it is used for decommissioning spent nuclear fuel, not for power generation. Last year, the government asked Sellafield and other nuclear plants to review their security against potential terror attacks. "We have a robust process in place to maintain safety and security of the site," a spokesman for Sellafield said.

 Write to  Alistair MacDonald at alistair.macdonald@wsj.com 