KABUL—U.S. Vice President Joe Biden promised Afghan President Hamid Karzai that the U.S. won't abandon Afghanistan after the bulk of U.S. troops withdraw in 2014. 

"We are not going if you do not want us to leave," Mr. Biden told Mr. Karzai at a joint news conference in Kabul. The U.S., Mr. Biden added, is committed to "a stable and sovereign Afghanistan [that] is not a haven for terrorists." 

The U.S. vice president arrived in Afghanistan late Monday on a trip intended to assess the readiness of Afghan forces to start taking over security responsibilities from the coalition this year. 

The visit also provided an opportunity to show that strains in relations between Mr. Biden and Mr. Karzai have been mended. 

At the news conference, Mr. Biden joked with Mr. Karzai about their first encounter in Afghanistan after the fall of the Taliban—a meeting held in a dark room without electricity and heat. 

There was no mention of another meeting with Mr. Karzai, in February 2008, when Mr. Biden, then a senator, walked out of a dinner after the Afghan leader minimized the extent of corruption in the country. 

Mr. Biden took a more gentle approach on Tuesday, asking Mr. Karzai to "strengthen accountability" in his government. 

The vice president has opposed the U.S.'s troop-intensive strategy in Afghanistan, and is a leading advocate of speeding up the transition of security duties to the fledgling Afghan army and police. 

President Barack Obama has said U.S. troops will start pulling out in July; last month, Mr. Biden promised that the size of this withdrawal will "not be token."

The U.S.-led coalition decided at a summit in Lisbon in November that Afghan forces will start taking over parts of the country this year, with Afghanistan's entire territory coming under Afghan security control at the end of 2014. 

Some military officials argue that progress in the campaign against the Taliban isn't yet at a stage to warrant a major drawdown. 

Mr. Karzai has sometimes talked of the need for foreign support past 2014, both in terms of civilian and military aid. Some Afghans worry that the U.S. intention to begin a drawdown in July will mean a full withdrawal when the security situation remains precarious. 

Mr. Biden told Mr. Karzai that U.S. aid to the Afghan government and training for the country's security forces will continue past 2014. Mr. Karzai thanked the U.S. for its assistance. 

The vice president, who was set to fly to Islamabad later Tuesday, also criticized Pakistani authorities for their failure to tackle the Taliban.

Sustaining the coalition's recent military gains "will require more pressure on the Taliban from the Pakistan side of the border than we have been able to observe so far," he said. 

Some U.S. officials have said they believe parts of the Pakistani military and intelligence establishment actively support and finance the Afghan Taliban. 

This week's vist was Mr. Biden's first to Afghanistan as vice president. He came to Kabul in January 2009 as vice president-elect. 

 Write to  Alistair MacDonald at alistair.macdonald@wsj.com 