MUMBAI – Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd. expects the crisis in Japan to hit supply of auto parts to its majority owned South Korean unit, Ssangyong Motor Co., in the short term.

However, Mahindra itself won't face any impact as it doesn't buy parts from Japan,  Pawan Goenka, president of automotive and farm equipment business at Mahindra, told Dow Jones Newswires Thursday. 

"Ssangyong sources a chunk of components from Japan and there will be an impact on that in March," said Goenka, who has been appointed as the South Korean auto maker's new chairman. He didn't specify what components Ssangyong buys from Japan. 

Mahindra, India's biggest sport-utility vehicle maker by sales, owns a 70.03% stake in Ssangyong. 

Japan has been grappling with a series of disasters after it was rattled by a 9.0-magnitude earthquake on March 11, its strongest ever, followed by a tsunami and radiation leaks from a nuclear power plant. 

The events, apart from claiming thousands of lives, have forced companies in several sectors to halt manufacturing activity to cope with damaged facilities and planned power outages. Auto makers such as  Toyota Motor Corp.,  Honda Motor Co.
HMC


0.78
%




, Nissan Motor Co. and  Suzuki Motor Corp.
7269


-0.02
%




 have stopped production at their factories since Monday. 

Mr. Goenka also said that Mahindra and Ssangyong have set up a joint panel to work out operational synergy. 

"We plan to synergize on three fronts--product development, technology and [parts] purchasing," Mr. Goenka told a news conference earlier Thursday. 

"The synergizing on the product development part has already started...teams from both companies have met and discussed sharing of platforms and other details." 

Mr. Goenka said Mahindra will this year hold its annual suppliers' meeting in South Korea and meet Ssangyong's suppliers then to discuss component sourcing strategies. 

Mahindra plans to assemble and sell two Ssangyong SUVs--the Korando C and Rexton in India. Goenka said the Korando C will be assembled on the same production line as Mahindra's yet-to-be-launched new SUV, while the Rexton will be assembled along with its recently-introduced pick-up truck Genio. 

Mr. Goenka also said that the company's Mahindra & Mahindra Financial Services Ltd. unit would look at setting up shop in South Korea to provide loans for Ssangyong customers. The unit may look for a joint venture partner in South Korea, he said. 

Mahindra, part of the diversified $7.1 billion Mahindra Group, in November signed a final contract to buy a controlling stake in Ssangyong Motor for 522.5 billion Korean won ($463.6 million). 

Ssangyong Tuesday said it will invest more than 240 billion Korean won ($213 million) this year on vehicle development and brand-building. Mr. Goenka said Thursday all the money will come from Ssangyong's internal resources and it won't raise any fresh funds this year. 

 Write to  Anirban Chowdhury at anirban.chowdhury@dowjones.com 