  Hei-Kyung Hong looks every bit the international opera star—the sort who jets around the world to sing on the most important stages.

But Ms. Hong, 51 years old, is based firmly in Bayside, N.Y. And her central stage is the Metropolitan Opera, where since 1984 she has sung 24 roles, from Violetta in "La Traviata" to Susanna in "Le Nozze di Figaro." And earlier this month, Ms. Hong landed a career highlight: a full run as the lead in Gounod's "Romeo et Juliette."

On March 2, the Met announced that the soprano who was scheduled,  Angela Gheorghiu, was ill and would withdraw from all the performances. Ms. Hong—who rehearsed the role as the cover (the opera term for an understudy)—got the call the night before opening night. It was sudden, but she was prepared. "When the person you are covering is not feeling well, you have to be ready," she said.

It's a discipline that Ms. Hong knows well. In January, she replaced  Genia Kuhmeier as Micaela in "Carmen" for three performances. "The cover is supposed to be there, ready to go on at any time," she said. "The main character could sing and fall [onstage] and hurt herself. As a cover, you have to get dressed and go in for the rest of the show."

It's less common, though, to sing the entire run. But Ms. Hong is a stalwart professional who has built her career carefully—and in balance with her family life. "What she has been able to craft is an almost entirely Met-based career," said  Brian Zeger, artistic director of the vocal department at the Juilliard School and executive director of the Metropolitan Opera's Lindemann Young Artist Development Program. "It almost doesn't happen for anyone."

Ms. Hong grew up in Seoul and moved to New York at age 15 to study at Juilliard. "I had no idea I could sing opera," she said. "It was just to learn the vocal art."

After embracing opera, she found an influential supporter in conductor James Levine, who cast her as Servilia in Mozart's "La Clemenza di Tito." Says Mr. Zeger, who saw her Met debut: "He recognized in her enormous ability and versatility."

But rather than shoot for an international career, Ms. Hong proceeded conservatively, mindful of the mistakes of others. She recalls going to City Center to see an up-and-coming singer in "Lucia di Lammermoor." 

"It was magnificent. I became a fan. Then three years or so later, I went to see her again and she was singing Susanna in 'The Marriage of Figaro.' Her voice was gone," said Ms. Hong. "The conductor was an acquaintance of mine, and I had the opportunity talk to him. He said she just sang too much. She was so good that everybody was asking her to come here and there. She's traveling back and forth, and her voice gave out."

The lesson stuck—and her career has been long, as a result. "Hei-Kyung made extremely smart choices of repertory. She never overstepped," said Mr. Zeger. "She was asked from a young age to sing 'Butterfly,' but it would have cost her a great deal."

The role requires volume and a hefty voice that can project over the orchestra, he explained, adding that Ms. Hong's voice has a "very silvery sheen that always sounds youthful and fresh. It's not about sheer power."

The role of Juliette—which she sings Saturday night and March 22 and 26—allows that quality to shine. And as a mother of three, she knows how to physically portray a coltish, over-excited 14-year-old. She first sang Juliette in 1996, when her two daughters were 15 and 16. Now, her son is 17. "I know these uncontrollable hormonal attractions," she says. "I went through it, but it's a different perspective when you watch your children being overwhelmed by these hormonal desires."

Her own romance had a dreamy quality. After nine years of living in the U.S., she went to sing at a Korean church in Woodside, Queens. Her future husband was in the congregation. "He totally did a Romeo on me," she said.

In regard to her onstage Romeo, Piotr Beczala, Ms. Hong says no prudishness gets in the way: Those kisses are for real. "Absolutely! Would Juliet and Romeo not kiss? That would be out of the question," she laughs.

And while she is happy to have the opportunity to sing the lead role onstage, she says the rehearsal room would have been enough: "For me it's not about fame or being a star or a successful opera person. I was given this talent. When I have an opportunity to express it, I feel at home, happy, alive and complete. I was having wonderful time rehearsing!"