KABUL—An American-led special forces team killed an older cousin of Afghanistan President Hamid Karzai on Thursday in a night raid that aggravates tensions between the Afghan leader and the U.S. over civilian deaths.

Mr. Karzai's office criticized the assault and renewed a call for U.S. forces to end night raids, a sensitive issue in Afghanistan. "This case reaffirms the fact that night raids can be very devastating to the cause that we all jointly pursue," said Waheed Omar, Mr. Karzai's chief spokesman.

The killing of Mr. Karzai's cousin came days after the U.S.-led military sparked an outcry with an errant airstrike in eastern Afghanistan that killed nine Afghan children cutting firewood. Defense Secretary Robert Gates made a personal apology for the incident after an angry condemnation by Mr. Karzai. 

American and Afghan officials said they were trying to figure out what happened early Thursday morning when U.S. and Afghan special forces conducted the deadly raid in Mr. Karzai's ancestral village of Karz, south of Kandahar city.

Relatives of the cousin, Yar Mohammad Karzai, said the 65-year-old farmer was shot and killed in his bedroom by U.S. forces during the operation.

Farid Ahmad Khan Karzai, the slain man's 22-year-old son, said he was awakened around 2 a.m. by the sound of helicopters descending on the family compound.

The younger Mr. Karzai said he was handcuffed and blindfolded after telling U.S. soldiers that his elderly father was inside the compound. While blindfolded, Mr. Karzai said he heard a gunshot and later saw his father's body in his bedroom.

U.S. officials challenged Afghan claims and suggested that President Karzai's cousin was shot after he was spotted carrying an AK-47 assault rifle and a flashlight through a nearby building during a search of the compound.

"The security force assessed the male as an immediate threat to the security force and engaged him," the U.S.-led coalition said in a statement.

The U.S. military said that during the compound raid it captured a local Taliban leader responsible for planning several car-bomb attacks. 

U.S. officials initially suggested that the slain man was the father of the Taliban leader. But they retracted that claim after Mr. Karzai's relatives came forward to dispute the U.S. version of events.

"We want the people responsible for murdering my people to be punished," said the younger Mr. Karzai. "He was an innocent old man. He was not even involved in politics."

Ahmed Wali Karzai, the Afghan president's half-brother who runs the Kandahar provincial council and is the province's most powerful politician, took a different view. "I don't blame the U.S. troops because they have not killed him intentionally," he said. "He was mistakenly killed."

Night raids have been a source of tension between the Afghan president and U.S. commanders, who have dramatically stepped up their use of such operations. U.S. military leaders say thousands of insurgents have been killed or captured in such raids, which are now being conducted an average of 18 times each night.

American officials said that special forces open fire in 20% of the raids and that the vast majority end without civilians being hurt or killed.

Still, many Afghans see it as an insult that foreigners invade the sanctity of their homes, and see the women inside.

Thursday's incident came one day after U.N. officials praised American-led forces in Afghanistan for taking steps to reduce civilian casualties in Afghanistan. The U.N. said Taliban-led insurgents were responsible for three-quarters of the civilian casualties in 2010.