NEW DELHI—India has an elected prime minister and Parliament and a large bureaucracy. But amid public outrage over corruption and the widespread perception that the nation is poorly governed, the Supreme Court's 29 justices increasingly are calling the shots. 

The Journal is examining the threats to, and limits of, India's economic ascent.

The court has turned hyperactivist in the past year, injecting itself into policy making and governance in unprecedented ways. Justices are micromanaging government-corruption and money-laundering investigations, issuing orders to agencies on issues from malnutrition to caste violence to education, and venting a frustration held by many Indians but rarely articulated from such a lofty perch.

"What the hell is going on in this country?" railed Supreme Court Justice B. Sudershan Reddy on March 3 as he heard arguments in a public-interest case brought against the government for not pursuing tax evaders who are allegedly stashing billions of dollars in overseas tax havens. 

At the court's behest, government authorities the following week arrested a rich businessman from the western city of Pune who authorities believe has billions of untaxed dollars—or "black money" in Indian parlance—in bank accounts outside the country.

India has the world's second-fastest-growing major economy after China and has been on a path of economic liberalization for the past 20 years. Yet there is growing frustration among millions of Indians that the government is failing to crack down on graft, ensure the middle class and poor get their fair share of the fruits of growth, and do away with outdated social strictures.

The Supreme Court has taken upon itself the task of trying to solve many of those problems. After hearing a case on malnutrition on Saturday, the court ordered the government to distribute five million tons of food grains to the poorest districts of the country, saying state-owned warehouses stocked with supplies weren't getting to the needy. The court also told the government to review the official poverty line—$10 a month in rural areas and $13 a month in cities—saying it grossly underestimates the number of poor. Food aid is typically distributed to households below the poverty line.

 Corruption : The Supreme Court is overseeing an investigation into alleged graft in a 2008 sale of mobile-phone spectrum. Former Telecom Minister Andimuthu Raja, among others, has been arrested and charged.

 Caste: The court ruled recently that people convicted of honor killings—murdering others to protest mixed-caste relationships—should receive the death penalty. It also outlawed informal local councils that sanction honor killings.

 Tax-Evasion: The court is overseeing a government probe into tax evasion and money laundering by the rich and well-connected.

 Malnutrition: In a longstanding public-interest case, the court has directed the government to increase the availability of food grains to the poor.

 Welfare: The court ordered the central government to investigate whether funds allocated to a national rural work guarantee program were being wasted or used for other purposes.

 Security: Addressing reports of police abuses in central India that have helped fuel a leftist insurgency in those regions, the court ordered the national government to overhaul local police recruitment.

 Education: The court ordered local officials to submit reports on whether their schools have certain basic facilities, including potable water, separate toilets for boys and girls, and electricity.

"We cannot have two Indias," a bench led by Justice Dalveer Bhandari said at an earlier hearing on the same case. "You want the world to believe we are the strongest emerging economy, but millions of poor and hungry people are a stark contrast." 

Civil-society activists are hopeful the court's outsize role in governance will force the other branches of government to address glaring social and economic problems. 

But some judiciary experts and government officials say the court is overstepping its authority and trampling on the separation of powers in the Indian constitution. They also say judges are going beyond their capabilities by directing the activities of criminal investigators and trying to shape policy in complex areas where they have few resources to follow up on orders they issue. 

"It is perfectly all right to indicate to the government, 'You're not doing your job—you better do it,' " said former Indian Chief Justice J.S. Verma. But he warned that if the court went too far in trying to run the country there could be "legitimate criticism that this judicial activism" is actually "judicial tyranny."

India is hardly the only country where the courts have intervened to address major social issues. But in India, sweeping interventions by the court are becoming the norm rather than the exception, and they often aren't intended to resolve longstanding constitutional quandaries but rather to correct governance failures and enforce laws on the books. 

India's peculiar system of public-interest litigation gives its Supreme Court a special platform to influence public policy. Petitioners in public-interest cases can be any reputable third party—not just a person who has been directly harmed—and cases can bypass lower courts and go directly to the Supreme Court. More than 250 such public-interest cases are currently pending. 

The Supreme Court took special interest in the "black money" tax evasion case in the past few months amid media reports that Indian government investigators were letting off the hook a Pune-based businessman,  Hasan Ali Khan, who is suspected by authorities of being a large tax evader. A lawyer for Mr. Khan vigorously denied the allegations against him, saying the government has a weak case without evidence, and said Mr. Khan was cooperating with investigators.

On a recent afternoon, the case came before the two-judge bench over which Justice Reddy presides in a small trapezoid-shaped courtroom packed with 80 spectators. In a deferential tone, Solicitor General Gopal Subramanium told the court the government was setting up a special committee of top officials from investigative, tax and banking authorities to oversee this case and others in which the defendants are alleged to have parked large amounts of untaxed income overseas. 

"This is to show, my lord, that further progress has been made," Mr. Subramanium said, using an honorific inherited from the British. Justice Reddy looked unimpressed, as did public interest lawyer Anil Diwan, who said, "This is merely a ruse to delay the appointment of independent people."

Mr. Subramanium wasn't available for comment on the case or India's view on the court's recent rulings. 

The Supreme Court first started flexing its muscles in the 1980s in an effort to rehabilitate its image as an accomplice to former Prime Minister Indira Gandhi's imposition of emergency rule from 1975 to 1977—one of India's darkest eras. In ensuing years, the court began to issue sweeping directives to protect the rights of prisoners, slum-dwellers and bonded laborers, and later waded into major environmental disputes. 

But court observers say its activities in recent months reflect a breadth and depth of intervention—and rhetorical hostility to the government—that is unprecedented. 

In another high-profile case the court is monitoring the government's investigation into corruption in the sale of mobile-phone spectrum to telecom companies in 2008. Since the court took up the matter last fall and began pressing the issue, the Central Bureau of Investigation, the equivalent of the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation, has arrested and charged India's former telecom minister, several of his aides and a few executives at telecom firms.

Nick Robinson, a professor at the Jindal Global Law School outside New Delhi, said the court was acting as "the custodian of the country" by intervening in corruption cases and addressing what it believes are major governance failures. But he said it would be a better long-term approach for the government to create a new anticorruption office, something that is now under discussion. "It would be better for the court not to have to take a hostile approach to the government and micromanage," Mr. Robinson said.

The court has also tried to settle what it sees as long-standing social injustices. In a recent order, Justice Markandey Katju ruled that a man's use of an epithet for a lower-caste person was illegal. "In the modern age nobody's feelings should be hurt—in particular in a country like India with so much diversity," he wrote in his order. He said the caste system was "dividing the nation at a time when we have to be united." 

The court ruled May 9 that people convicted of honor killings—when people are murdered for having mixed-caste or mixed-religion relationships—should receive the death penalty.

 Write to  Amol Sharma at amol.sharma@wsj.com 