DAVOS, Switzerland—Tunisia's new central-bank governor criticized ratings agencies for downgrading the country as newly appointed government leaders race to stabilize the nation after its uprising.

"They downgraded in a rush. This is not acceptable," Mustapha Kamel Nabli told an audience at the World Economic Forum on Saturday. "Were they sleeping when corruption was endemic?"

On Wednesday, Moody's Investor Service Inc. downgraded Tunisia's sovereign rating by one notch and changed the country's outlook to negative from stable, citing political instability caused by the toppling of the government.

The rating was cut to Baa2 from Baa3, Moody's said. 

At Davos, Mr. Nabli and two of Tunisia's other new ministers asked world leaders to give the nation some time. The contingent reflected the rapid-fire events of the past two weeks. Mr. Nabli, a World Bank official from Washington, has been in his new job less than ten days. The nation's new trade minister had been on the job for two days and hadn't had a chance to return to Tunisia from an overseas business trip.

"The fact that I'm here today should be an indication to you that this is under control on the economic side," Mr. Nabli said. He appealed to governments and institutions to do no harm: "Don't disrupt trade and investment flows. The country is back to work."

Mr. Nabli is one of several prominent Tunisians who have been enlisted to help form a temporary government and prepare for elections to choose a new leader. He worked for former president Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali in the 1990s, and says that when he found the situation intolerable, he left for the U.S. and joined the World Bank.

He has helped assemble a coalition largely of business leaders, including Yassine Bahaim, a software executive who is now Tunisia's Minister of Infrastructure and Transport and Sami Zauoi, a partner at Ernst & Young who is now Minister of Communications and Technologies.

"I had less than ten minutes to decide. In fact, they told me I had no choice," Mr. Zauoi said. 

A significant task is sorting out ownership of big companies that were controlled by members of the ruling family. 

The social media, which played a crucial part in Tunisia's regime change, will be embraced by the country's new government, said Mr. Bahaim.

He noted the role of Facebook and Twitter during the uprising and said the new government "is aiming to leverage" social media. "Democracy is becoming horizontal. We don't have a charismatic, populist leader." 

He said that during the government's first meeting, another new minister, who was in jail until three weeks ago because of his opposition to the old regime, "put it on Twitter."

Mr. Nabli and the other leaders wouldn't comment on the unfolding events in Egypt but emphasized they aren't afraid of further demonstrations. "There was a tipping point at which this fear was overcome and the rest is history," he said.

-- Leila Hatoum in Dubai contributed to this article.

