Stable patients with clogged heart arteries often don't try the best drug treatment before getting stents, even though a closely watched study showed this was a cheaper option that didn't pose major risks, according to new analysis. 

Four years ago, a $33.5 million study called "Courage" made a big, initial splash because it indicated patients with stable heart-artery disease wouldn't face a higher risk of death or heart attacks if they received "optimal medical therapy" with heart drugs instead of an artery-clearing angioplasty procedure. Those procedures typically involve implanting tiny, metal stents. 

A new analysis shows less than half of patients received optimal drug treatment ahead of angioplasty before Courage results came out, and that the rate barely budged afterward. 

Likewise, Courage prompted little change in the rate of patients getting such drug therapy after they had angioplasty. 

"Collectively, these findings suggest a significant opportunity for improvement and a limited effect of an expensive, highly publicized clinical trial on routine clinical practice," concluded authors of the new analysis, which is being published in the Journal of the American Medical Association. 

"I think that the breakdown is across the board," ranging from referring physicians to stent-implanting cardiologists, added William Borden, a cardiologist at Weill Cornell Medical College in New York and the new study's lead author. 

The fact Courage results "were not universally accepted" may have muted the study's impact, authors said. Some stent-implanting doctors cast doubts on Courage when it came out, and stent companies also criticized the study. Also, financial incentives that reward doctors more for implanting devices than watchful waiting may also play a role, Dr. Borden said. 

The global market for medicated heart stents, the most expensive and commonly used versions in the U.S., is worth about $4 billion in annual sales. Top manufacturers include  Abbott Laboratories
ABT


-1.77
%




 and  Boston Scientific Corp.
BSX


-0.98
%




 

The new analysis pulls information on 467,211 patients from the National Cardiovascular Data Registry, roughly a third of whom had angioplasty before Courage results came out, and the rest who were treated afterward. 

This analysis has some limitations because it's backward-looking rather than a trial that specifically recruited patients to measure how much they took medicine like anti-clotting drugs, beta-blockers and cholesterol-lowering statins. 

The findings may come as a surprise to doctors who felt Courage did have a big impact. And indeed, it was credited with contributing to a $1 billion slide in sales for medicated heart stents in 2007, when worries about links to dangerous clots also hurt the market. 

"The Courage echoes are still resonating through almost everything we do with stable patients," said Christopher White, current president of the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, which includes stent-implanting doctors. 

He suggested one drawback in the new study is that some patients might be actively managed on drug therapy that isn't considered "optimal," but still works for those patients. He also noted that some drugs have tough side effects that are a tough sell on patients whose artery problems don't cause major symptoms. 

 Write to  Jon Kamp at jon.kamp@dowjones.com 