DUBAI—Libya's central bank governor Farhat Bengdara said Wednesday he had been temporarily replaced by the country's finance minister and had his right to sign agreements withdrawn.

Mr. Bengdara's still uncertain status highlighted the awkward position foreign governments and international institutions face as they seek to support a still inchoate rebel movement in Libya, while international legal obligations force them to deal with representatives of the government in Tripoli.

"Obviously, I can't go back," to Tripoli, Mr. Bengdara said in an interview at Istanbul's Ataturk Airport, after disappearing from public view for more than a week. He said he was disputing the government's decision to replace him and would continue lobbying foreign governments to soften the impact on ordinary Libyans of any freeze on the central bank assets.

United Nations officials also face some tough choices as a result of Libya's divisions, after Col. Moammar Gadhafi named a new U.N. ambassador, former U.N. General Assembly president Ali Abdussalam Treki.

Libya's top two diplomats in New York had made a dramatic break with the government, comparing Col. Ghadafi to Hitler and Pol Pot and calling for him to step down. At the same time Libya's rebel Transitional National Council has written to the U.N. General Assembly saying it is the legitimate representative of Libya.

"Basically, we have to accept credentials from a member state once the government turns it in, and we'll need to do that in due course," a U.N. official said. "If there's a challenge at the Credentials Committee, that could change things; but so far, there has been no such challenge'

Mr. Treki has not yet arrived in the United States. As the U.N.'s host country, Washington has the power to deny him a visa, officials said, though there is no indication yet that will happen.

Mr. Bengdara is seen within Libya as close to Col. Ghadafi's son, Saif al-Islam, but his family comes from the city of Benghazi, now the main stronghold of rebel forces. A senior Libyan government official said Wednesday that the government had decided to cut Mr. Bangdara loose because they no longer trusted him.

Mr. Bengdara stressed that the decree replacing him gave his job to Abdel Hafid Zlitni, the secretary of planning and finance, only until Mr. Bengdara returns to Tripoli. At the same time, he said the government had sent messages to other central banks and financial institutions withdrawing his signature authority and saying he no longer represented the central bank.

He said he had been based in Istanbul since Feb. 22, and in that time had contacted U.S. Treasury and European Union officials. "I think they understand that we have to find a mechanism whereby freezing central bank deposits does not stop imports of food and medicine," he said. He was returning Wednesday from a brief trip to Dubai.

The European Union is expected to announce measures on Friday to widen the scope of its sanctions on Libya that are almost certain to include a freeze of assets held in Europe by the Libyan central bank and the country's sovereign-wealth fund. The freeze would be broadened beyond the top Libyan officials already subject to EU and UN sanctions.

The U.S. has already frozen the assets of the sovereign-wealth fund and the central bank, as well as those of Col. Gadhafi, his family members and senior officials.

Mr. Bengdara, generally considered a reformer who began to open Libya's financial system to the outside world, said travel disruptions and communication problems had made it difficult for him to conduct central bank business from Tripoli, prompting him to leave. He chose Istanbul not for any political reason, but because he didn't need a visa "and there were flights," he said. Turkey's government has taken a strong position against imposing sanctions on Libya.

Mr. Bengdara said in a phone interview earlier Wednesday that he had been informed of his replacement on Tuesday. While he intends to resign as central bank governor "when the current crisis is over," Mr. Bengdara said in his view he remains governor, and he sees the move by Mr. Zlitni as a contravention of Libyan laws that govern the central bank.

He said Libya's revenues have fallen dramatically because of the country's inability to export oil. If payments to the central bank for oil shipments are frozen, it will cause further difficulties, Mr. Bengdara added.

"We are trying our best to make the case that any sanctions should not affect the Libyan population, it should not make it difficult for people to import food," Mr. Bengdara said.

—Margaret Coker in Tripoli and Joe Lauria contributed to this article.