DUBLIN—The Irish government hasn't given up hope of securing a reduction in the interest rate it pays on loans from its fellow euro-zone members, although it continues to rule out any increase in its corporate tax rate in return. 

Both parties in Ireland's governing coalition pledged to renegotiate the interest rate during campaigning ahead of the Feb. 25 general election. But at a meeting with leaders from the 16 other nations that use the euro Friday, Prime Minister  Enda Kenny was told a reduction in the interest rate would only be available if he agreed to a common approach to levying corporate tax. 

To a greater extent than elsewhere in the euro zone, Ireland relies on attracting foreign, chiefly U.S., companies intending to export to the European Union. Most Irish policy makers, and most Irish voters, believe the 12.5% rate of corporate tax is key to the nation's success in attracting those companies, and any increase now would remove any hope that the economy could recover from its recent collapse. 

However, the French and German governments have long argued that Ireland gets the jobs associated with those foreign investments at the expense of lowering corporate tax revenue across the EU. Mr. Kenny will have another chance to strike a deal that would mark an auspicious start to his time in office when leaders from all 27 members of the European Union meet March 24 and 25. But if he won't budge on the corporate tax rate, it's unclear what he can offer to persuade German Chancellor Angela Merkel and French President Nicolas Sarkozy to grant his request. 

A government spokesman said Ireland's negotiators had taken some encouragement from the fact that Greece did secure a cut in the interest rate it pays on its bailout loans from the European Union. 

"Those discussions continue," the official said. "The government is continuing to engage in all those matters even though it does not like the discussions about the consolidated tax base. Our colleagues in Europe did not say to us take this and go away. They were listening to us." 

However, a senior euro-zone official said Mr. Kenny's negotiating style had irked other euro-zone leaders, since he had been "very demanding." Irish Finance Minister  Michael Noonan may therefore have to take a less strident approach when he meets his counterparts from the euro zone Monday and the EU Tuesday. 

Mr. Kenny spent Saturday night in his County Mayo electoral district on Ireland's west coast, celebrating his recent elevation with 2,000 supporters. Like many other parts of the country, it is home to a number of U.S. companies. 

"Our corporation tax is not up for review, it is not up for negotiation," said  Michael Ring, a lawmaker from Kenny's Fine Gael party and a junior minister in the new government. "We depend on it in this country. It creates thousands of jobs in this country." 

But without conceding ground on the tax rate, it's unclear what the government can offer the French and German governments that would persuade them to lower the interest rate on the loans made by the European Financial Stability Facility. 

That rate stands at close to 6%, well above the rate that the EFSF is able to raise funds at on the international bond markets. The premium charged by the EFSF over its own cost of borrowing is supposed to dissuade governments from running their finances so badly in the future that they need help. 

But Irish policy makers argue it just makes it more difficult for them to cut the budget deficit and gain some control over the government's rapidly rising debts, which are expected to peak around 125% of gross domestic product by 2014.

In truth, however, any reduction in the rate charged by the EFSF is unlikely to have a major impact on Ireland's finances. A reduction of one percentage point on the EFSF's portion of the EUR67.5 billion bailout from the EU and the International Monetary Fund would save the government just EUR675 million a year. 

"This equates to 0.4% of GDP, in the context of an estimated interest bill of 5.2% of GDP in 2014," said Dermot O'Leary, chief economist at Goodbody Stockbrokers. 

Mr. O'Leary said a reduction in the interest rate was "no silver bullet" and that more significant savings were to be found in some EUR21 billion in unsecured and unguaranteed bond debt that the Irish banks are due to repay bond holders through 2015. 

The growing cost of repairing the nation's crippled banking system is a far more pressing problem for the government. Stress tests will be completed March 31 that will give an indication of how much more it will cost to adequately capitalize the banks given their likely future losses on loans. 

The euro zone desperately wants the new government to keep the banks afloat and paying their debts, since any renegotiation of senior bonds issued by Irish banks could cause major problems for the rest of the currency area's financial system. That may be an area where the new government has some leverage. Mr. Kenny "has to get the point across to these folks that the burden they are placing on the Irish taxpayer in order to sustain the systemic interests of the European banking system is not just morally unfair but practically impossible for the state to sustain," said  Ben Tonra, European politics professor at University College Dublin. 

In an interview with state-owned broadcaster RTE, Mr. Kenny said his government will do its best to repay its debts. 

"We will not renege on our responsibilities," he said. "We will not run away from our responsibilities, but we need some flexibility from our European colleagues and I expect to get that. It is not just the interest rate. It is flexibility in other matters, in relation to the banking structure that we need assistance on as well." 

Mr. Tonra said Mr. Kenny may also have another card up his sleeve. In order to establish a permanent mechanism for dealing with debt crises, changes will have to be made to EU treaties. And under the Irish constitution, that may require a referendum. Both the Treaty of Nice and the Treaty of Lisbon were rejected by Irish voters at the first time of asking, although they passed on a second vote. 

 Write to  Paul Hannon at paul.hannon@dowjones.com 