The new cable drama "The Killing," opens with flashes of a young girl running terrified through dark woods, bloodied and screaming for her life. This is the Seattle area, and the sun rarely shines as the investigation into the girl's murder unfolds. A sinister-looking secret basement may hold clues. 



 Nordic noir, the chilling, realistic Scandinavian crime fiction that has taken movies and books by storm, is coming to American television. 

"The Killing," premiering April 3 on AMC, comes from the hit Danish drama "Forbrydelsen," and at first isn't unlike a dark episode of "Law & Order: Special Victims Unit." A teenage girl's body is found; detectives probe the murder; there may be connections to a prominent local politician. 

The pace, however, is different. Each episode represents a day in the investigation, a drawn-out version of the fast-paced "24," focusing on how the murder impacts everyone involved. "This is slow-burn storytelling," says executive producer Veena Sud, who came from CBS's "Cold Case," cancelled last May. 

"The Killing" comes as the late Swedish writer Stieg Larsson's tattooed Lisbeth Salander has become a worldwide literary sensation and as other authors such as Norway's Jo Nesbø and Iceland's Arnaldur Indridason grow in popularity. 

The show's producer, Fox Television Studios, has two other Danish series in development. "Lulu and Leon" tells the story of a housewife who gets sucked into her husband's criminal operation. "Man with the Golden Ears," in development with AMC, is about a music executive.

" 'The Killing' is an effort to get in on the ground floor of the TV version of this talent pool," says David Madden, president of Fox Television Studios, which like The Wall Street Journal is owned by News Corp. Mr. Madden recently attended a TV Festival in Copenhagen to suss out shows that could work in the U.S. 

The AMC series isn't entirely an import. Its formula is similar to such short-lived TV dramas as Steven Bochco's "Murder One," which traced a single high-profile criminal case over a season and David Lynch's "Twin Peaks" with its long exploration into the death of the Washington town's popular homecoming queen. 

While "Forbrydelsen" followed detectives as they try to find out what happened to a 19-year-old who goes missing, the U.S. version makes the victim 17, a seemingly perfect high-school student with the pink bedroom to prove it. The writers also changed the ending, so fans can't snoop around online and find out the culprit in the Danish version, which airs in several European countries. 

 Ms. Sud says all she had to hear from her agent was "Copenhagen" and "killing" before she signed on to write a pilot script. She assembled a team of writers who had worked on such dramas as "Criminal Minds" and "Damages." She decided to set the series in Seattle (though it's shot in Vancouver) for its dank feel and crime history. Ted Bundy used to live there; the Green River Killer stalked the area: "Here's this pristine, liberal city but also home of incredible darkness." 

Nothing can be too prettified in Nordic noir. Ms. Sud was insistent that lead character Det. Sarah Linden, played by Mireille Enos, looks as easy to relate to and beaten-down as possible; she sports cheap oversized sweaters and messy hair. 

"It's really hard to believe the woman on screen is actually a cop when she's running around in stilettos and looks like a heightened Barbie doll," Ms. Sud says.

 Write to  Amy Chozick at amy.chozick@wsj.com 