Waffle classicists, take heart. Yes, thick-and-poufy Belgian-style machines have become the norm. But a handful of trusty traditional irons are still out there, and we put a slew of them to the test. If you prefer your waffles slim, crisp and old-fashioned (and don't require a fancy model that will do flips or emboss the face of a cartoon character onto your breakfast), look no further. We've listed our top five models below.

$130 // williams-sonoma.com 

 PLUS: An impeccably constructed stainless-steel pod consistently cranks out waffles with substantial crusts and airy interiors. A polite beep lets you know when they're done. The heated overflow channel bakes up excess batter along the waffle's edges—meaning less mess, more waffle.

 MINUS: The sweeping silver handle is handsome but not entirely practical; it makes storage more challenging and gets much warmer than cheap but sensible rubber or plastic handles. And all these bells and whistles come at a price—the steepest by far.

$30 // cuisinart.com 

 PLUS: Clean design with an unbeatable price tag. Waffles come out with a crackly exterior and still-moist middle. It makes the waffles with the deepest ridges of any model we tested, and any sides where there's a shortage of batter become crisp, pillowy nubs (rather than limp edges). 

 MINUS: No audible alert and a hard-to-see ready light will keep you tethered to the machine. Excess batter careens over the sides.     

$50 // cucinapro.com 

 PLUS: Each sturdy, pancake-like waffle is announced with Cucina Pro's unmistakable "Waffle Tone." It's not the prettiest sound but it's actually helpful. Wide grooves and an effective nonstick coating deflect even the stickiest burnt-on berries and chocolate chips—important for a cooking surface that can't go anywhere near a sink.

 MINUS: The temperature knob gets awfully hot for adjusting midway through a batch.

$40 // eurocuisine.net 

 PLUS: The hottest settings are timid—and anything cooked at medium or below won't have any more texture than a steamed pudding—but the relatively low heat and shallow pockets yield a waffle with one of the more evenly baked, golden shells.

 MINUS: No beep, though the large indicator light helps. With a tighter temperature range, the only means of customizing your waffle is time—and a deep brown will take several minutes, even at maximum heat.   

$50 // chefschoice.com 

 PLUS: Ideal for vigilant cooks who like to micromanage their breakfast. Its wide range of heat settings and a choice of a quick vs. deeper bake allows you to fiddle and tweak until you've found your dream waffle. Persistent beeping indicators are a boon to the easily distracted.

 MINUS: A wide reservoir saves your countertop from drips but can form a floppy, undercooked rim if you're heavy-handed with the batter.