HOUSTON—Rodeo, any cowboy will tell you, centers on the solitary battle between man and beast. It's about grit and sweat and danger.

And…wine bars? Absolutely not.

But here at one of the nation's largest rodeos, which is expected to draw two million visitors over three weeks this month, a softly lighted wine garden serves up chardonnays, live jazz and educational seminars that go into picking the perfect vintage to pair with dessert.

There's also a massage booth, a flower-arranging competition—and a children's show. It features "an owl, a kangaroo, a porcupine, a sloth," said 9-year-old Cade Walker after spending four hours there. What about bulls and horses? "Haven't seen any yet," he said.

Organizers of the Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo say they're trying to appeal to the broadest possible audience while staying true to the essence of rodeo. Traditionalists, however, aren't appeased.

"The rodeo is taking a back seat to Lady Gaga," laments Don Gay, a retired bull-riding champion turned rodeo announcer. (Ms. Gaga is not playing this year, but Janet Jackson and Kiss are on the lineup.)

The most contentious update: For its grand finale on Sunday , the Houston rodeo is scrapping several events that make some city slickers queasy, such as calf roping and steer wrestling. 

That was the last straw for the Professional Rodeo Cowboys Association, which for the first time in more than 50 years refused to put its name behind the Houston show. That means points earned by participating cowboys won't count toward qualification for the national final.

"It's a slippery slope to let any one rodeo dictate or choose the events they are to produce," says Karl Stressman, the association's commissioner. 

Jerry Nelson, a longtime rodeo producer and livestock breeder, agrees. 

"It's as if the Dallas Cowboys decided they could get more money by instead of playing four quarters, playing two," he says. "That may be better for them, but it's not what's better for the National Football League."

Rodeo evolved from informal contests in the 1800s between ranch hands trying to one-up each other on everyday tasks. These days, it is a professional sport backed by millions of dollars in sponsorships, more than 600 showings around the country and a strict set of rules.

To be sanctioned by the professional association, a rodeo must include six contests: Tie-down roping, which consists of lassoing and tying a calf; team roping; steer wrestling; bull riding; saddle-bronc riding, in which a cowboy tries to stay on a bucking horse; and bareback riding. 

Houston isn't the only rodeo tweaking tradition. The Texas Stampede, a rodeo in the Dallas area, pulled out of the professional circuit in 2009 and cut the rodeo program down to just the popular riding contests. 

One reason: demographics. Urban centers in Texas are swelling rapidly, while the rural areas in the state are barely growing or shrinking, the latest numbers from the U.S. Census show.

The Houston rodeo features a "Go Tejano Day," which caters to the city's growing Hispanic population, and a massive market, with vendors selling everything from gourmet ginger-root graters imported from Spain to wine-bottle holders in the shape of cowboy boots. 

Leroy Shafer, Rodeo Houston's chief operating officer, says his organization is also aware that the public has become more concerned about the welfare of rodeo animals, in part because of YouTube videos shot by undercover animal-rights activists that show practices some consider abusive. 

So this year the Houston event instituted new rules that protect cattle during the competition, including one requiring cowboys to immediately stop roping when an animal appears to be injured. 

"Our audience is changing more and more every year," says Mr. Shafer. "We want to present a rodeo that those families can look at and say, 'I don't mind watching this. This is neat!'"

The strategy won over Tracy Phenes, a 41-year-old from the Woodlands, an affluent suburb north of Houston, who was so taken with the city's rodeo she bought a season pass. 

"There's wine, shopping, and hot guys riding bulls," she said on a recent evening. 

But Baljit Singh, a petroleum engineer, says the rodeo competition itself could stand some more updating. Three straight hours of wrangling cattle seemed to him a bit dull.

"Bring a damn elephant in there," he suggested.

Mr. Singh also had some advice for the livestock show: Close the animal exhibits earlier so the cows can go to bed at a decent hour. "I felt very bad for the cows," he said, after a 10:30 p.m. visit to the stockyard.

Defenders of Rodeo Houston say that all the extras aside, the 20-day extravaganza teaches city folks about country living, an important part of its mission. At the birthing center, visitors can learn about pig placentas, and the difference between a stallion and a gelding: A gelding has been castrated. 

As for the wine bar? 

"The rodeo is all about agriculture and livestock," says George DeMontrond, a car dealer who every year dusts off his cowboy hat for the Houston rodeo. "This wine here is made from an agricultural product called grapes." He's a volunteer at the rodeo who helps with the wine auction.

Some professional cowboys, meanwhile, are hopeful that the new rodeos will attract more sponsors. 

"More money for the sport is more money for the cowboys," Cody DeMoss, a saddle-bronc rider from Heflin, La., says as he twirls a toothpick in his mouth.

But some say rodeo revisionists are going at it in the wrong way, trying to gussy up a concept that would do just fine on its own.

"It doesn't feel authentic," says Todd Andersen, a 38-year mortgage banker and steer wrestler from Fulshear, Texas.

Mr. Nelson says a more traditional, bare-bones rodeo he helped put on last weekend in Arcadia, Fla., sold out every day, with 12,000 spectators cramming the stands to watch men ride bulls and wrestle steers.

"They're not there to taste wine or eat cheese or see llamas," he says. "They're there to see rodeo."