A stalled condo project in the brownstone neighborhood of Clinton Hill is getting remade into a luxury rental-apartment tower. 

The 16-story glass tower at 163 Washington Ave. will be the latest high-end rental building to make its debut in Brooklyn where rents have been rising and landlords have been cutting back on the concessions given during the height of the economic downturn. 

A group of real-estate investors from New York City and Northern California closed a deal on Wednesday with New Jersey developer GLC Group LLC to purchase the completed building for approximately $21 million, according to people familiar with the matter. GLC Group built the tower and originally intended to sell off the 49 units in the buildings as condos.

"We felt this was a really unique product," says Jason Boxer, a member of the group that bought the building. "We think there is demand for both condo and rentals. We thought about both options, but our experience is in rental units."

The glassy building has 360-degree views of Brooklyn and the Manhattan skylines. Asking rents start at $1,850 and go up to $4,800. 

GLC Group acquired the site in 2005, according to public records. The developer's plan to construct the building sparked a controversy in the neighborhood and drew opposition from locals who said the building would be too tall for the area. 

Last November, 163 Washington Ave. hit the market as a condo building. At least 10 contracts were signed for the homes with prices ranging from $250,000 to $767,000. 

Sales "were doing well," says David Maundrell, president of aptsandlofts.com, the leasing agent on the building. 

But GLC Group later canceled the contracts and pulled the remaining units off the market. Officials with GLC Group didn't return calls for comment. 

The development is re-launching as New York City's rental market is rebounding faster than sales. The average rent for a two-bedroom apartment in Brooklyn was $2,731 for the month of April, according to the Real Estate Group New York, up from $2,610 in April 2010. 

Clinton Hill, which is home to working-class families and students who go to the Pratt Institute of Art, hasn't traditionally been one of the city's hot neighborhoods, but rents have risen in recent years as people have been priced out of such trendy areas as nearby Park Slope and Fort Greene. Rents being charged at 163 Washington are among Clinton Hill's priciest. 

There are still a lot of stalled development projects collecting dust in the borough. But things have begun to pick up, and construction has renewed in areas like Park Slope as banks have begun to lend again, said John Horowitz of Marcus & Millichap Real Estate Investment Services, who wasn't involved in the deal. "There is a demand and developers are starting to recognize that," he says.

The building was designed by Karl Fischer, a prolific architect who has designed dozens of condos in New York. 

All over New York, the rental market has been performing well, said David Kramer of the Hudson Cos., a real-estate developer, who isn't involved with 163 Washington Ave. 

"Rents are going up. Concessions are going down. And that is true of the Brooklyn high-end market," he said. 

 Write to  Joseph De Avila at joseph.deavila@wsj.com 