Not only is the Bank of England Governor Mervyn King having to explain why inflation is high and rising, he's also confronted with an economy grinding its way down through the lower gears. Indeed, and to near-universal surprise, the U.K. shifted into reverse during the fourth quarter.

The data release was a real shocker. 

Analysts had already pencilled in a slowing growth rate, to a 0.5% quarter-on-quarter increase from a 0.7% rise in the third quarter and 1.1% in the second. But no one was expecting an outright decline, much less the 0.5% drop reported in the preliminary GDP estimate published Tuesday.

To be sure, December's unusually high snowfalls paralyzed much of the country and were partly at fault for the economy's weakness. Without this disruption, GDP would have been "flattish" during the quarter, according to government statisticians. 

Nowhere was this more apparent than in construction, which contracted 3.3% during the quarter (though economists disagree about how much of this was down to weather and how much of it was merely an unwind of credibility-stretching growth rates of 7.0% and 3.9% during the previous two quarters).

Growth is likely to rebound during the first quarter as the weather effects are reversed. What's more, preliminary GDP estimates tend to be revised substantially—most likely upward, in this case. That's because recent survey evidence has been relatively bullish, suggesting the underlying economy is growing solidly, albeit maybe not quite at trend. 

The picture, though, is more than usually clouded. Weather distortions last year make it hard to see quite which quarter of the past five tells the true story about the state of the economy, says  Jonathan Loynes, an economist at Capital Economics.

But even an optimistic view has to be tempered by the coalition government's austerity program. Some firms will have anticipated slowing government spending—another likely contributor to the fourth quarter's weak construction numbers—but most of the measures will only just be beginning to take effect, starting with this month's 2.5-percentage-point increase in value-added taxes.

Bridgewater Associates, a U.S. fund management firm, figures the net drag on GDP over the next six months will be an annualized 1.6%. It's hard to see where the economy's upward momentum will come from.

Unlike Germany, which expanded strongly during 2010, thanks in part to a storming export performance, and is expected to continue posting above-trend growth during 2011, the U.K.'s own exports have contributed little to GDP growth. Sure, they've risen, but imports have risen just as fast. Unfortunately, the U.K. government is banking on expanding net exports to drive growth. 

Meanwhile, commodity price inflation is proving a drag on household consumption as wage growth fails to keep pace. 

Those same commodities, however, are putting upward pressure on key inflation measures. Throw in the impact of the latest consumption tax rise and an already firm and rising underlying trend, and CPI could climb to within spitting distance of 5% over the coming months. The Bank of England has already exceeded its 2% target for almost 80% of the time over the past five years and inflation is likely to stay too high for another year at least.

  Andrew Sentance is the only one of the Bank of England's nine-member policy-setting committee to have called for a rate increase—albeit a modest one—in response to the price pressures. His contention has been that while the U.K. economy may be running short of capacity, the rest of the world isn't. And the rest of the world is the root of the U.K.'s price pressures.

Imported inflation will keep causing the bank to overshoot its target and will eventually become embedded as an ugly inflation problem only curable through aggressive rate rises, unless a more measured approach is taken now, he argues.

Others on the MPC, led by  Adam Posen, think the bigger risk is that the economy slips into deflation once the latest batch of temporary factors influencing prices work their way through the system.

The latest GDP report is likely to keep the debate at stalemate.

"If the MPC were to raise rates and then find the economy was plunging into another recession, the Bank of England's position would no longer be politically tenable," according to  Stephen Lewis, an economist at Monument Securities.

At the same time, Mr. Posen's recent arguments for additional quantitative easing to offset the economy's slowdown aren't likely to deliver a majority on the MPC. 

  Paul Fisher, another member of the committee, recently warned that the U.K.'s return to growth would be bumpy and could well entail a quarter's decline in GDP. Only he probably didn't think it would happen quite so quickly. Just as inflation has become more volatile in post-crunch Britain, so too has growth. And just as the Bank of England is looking through the temporary outruns in consumer prices, it'll want more evidence slowing growth is delivering slowing inflation before it looks to ease policy further.

Besides, just as it would be politically untenable to raise rates amid such an apparently sharp slowdown in the economy, the bank would face damaging criticism were it to loosen monetary policy at a time when inflation seems to be getting out of control.

So, for the coming months, whatever the Bank of England does, it will do no right.

 Write to  Alen Mattich at alen.mattich@dowjones.com 