Although the Mets are off to a terrible start this season, at least one aspect of their future seems bright. Pitcher Matt Harvey, the franchise's first-round draft pick last year, threw 6 1/3 scoreless innings Wednesday night for Single-A St. Lucie of the Florida State League. Harvey allowed one hit, struck out nine and got a no-decision in St. Lucie's 5-2 loss to Bradenton. In his six starts this season, Harvey, a righthander, has a 1.10 earned-run average and has struck out 39 batters in 32 2/3 innings.

—Mike Sielski

lFor the second straight year, Yankee Stadium will host college football as Rutgers and Army will play there on Nov. 12. Army played in Yankee Stadium last November, losing 27-3 to Notre Dame. The Black Knights played at the original Yankee Stadium 38 times. 

Rutgers hasn't played at the Yankees' ballpark since 1948. The Scarlet Knights played nine games there, all against NYU. Rutgers defeated Army 23-20 in overtime last season.

—Kevin Clark

The national teams of Ecuador and Greece will meet on Tuesday, June 7, at 8 p.m. in the first soccer match at Citi Field, the Mets announced Thursday. Greece is ranked 12th in the FIFA world rankings and was eliminated in the first round of the 2010 FIFA World Cup; Ecuador is ranked 56th. 

To transform the stadium from a baseball field to a soccer pitch, the end lines and goals will be placed along the third-base line and in right field.

—Mike Sielski

Backup shortstop Eduardo Nunez threw away two balls in Thursday's game against Detroit, allowing two Detroit Tiger runs to score. The miscues made for his fourth and fifth errors in only 12 games played this season. Last year, the Yankees had the offensively impotent but sure-handed Ramiro Pena as their backup middle infielder. Manager Joe Girardi said the team is going to stick with Nunez, and has no plans to send him to the minors and replace him with Pena. "We believe in this kid, and we don't believe this is who this kid is," Girardi said.

—Daniel Barbarisi