Consumers love sport utility vehicles and crossover wagons for their roominess and comfort. Now, new studies of federal crash data show they're among the safest vehicles on the road—thanks to more than a decade of effort by auto makers and safety regulators to attack the root causes of deadly SUV rollover accidents.

But this safety comes with a cost: weight. The continued popularity of secure-but-heavy SUVs and crossovers will make it tougher to cut U.S. oil consumption. 

The Obama administration has promised to roll out by Sept. 1 a proposal to boost the average fuel economy of vehicles sold in the U.S. from 35 miles per gallon—the target for 2016—to as much as 62 mpg by 2025, which is the goal favored by California state regulators.

At the same time, federal officials are struggling to figure out how this can be accomplished without reversing the sharp reductions in highway fatalities achieved during the past decade.

Making a heavy vehicle lighter will improve efficiency—but it can make a vehicle less protective of its occupants unless other vehicles slim down in proportion. Even if all new vehicles are made lighter, but share the road with older, heavier vehicles, the people in newer vehicles could suffer, safety researchers say.

Officials of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and the Environmental Protection Agency, which are working together to develop new mileage standards, have begun to wrestle with balancing fuel efficiency, safety and customer desires.

NHTSA regulators don't want to stop the decline in highway death rates to the lowest levels in 60 years, and are legally obligated to factor safety into any fuel-economy rule. The EPA is under pressure from some members of Congress to match California's push for a high fuel-economy target to cut greenhouse-gas emissions and oil use.

The 2011 Ford Explorer features enhancements to prevent rollovers and protect passengers.

Car makers say they are worried that designing vehicles that are very light will make them very expensive, less safe, or both. 

"To reduce enough to have an effect on mileage, you'll have an effect on safety," says Gloria Bergquist of the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers, the industry's Washington trade group.

Former NHTSA administrator  Jeff Runge, who in 2003 prodded auto executives to act on the rollover issue, says mandating higher fuel economy without compromising safety gains "is going to be a very, very tricky thing to do." 

The problem regulators and auto makers share is that consumers like today's SUVs and crossovers a lot—despite their mediocre fuel economy. 

A hybrid version of Ford Motor Co.'s Escape averages 32 mpg. The far more popular, conventional, four-cylinder Escapes are rated at 25 mpg. The best-selling large crossover in March, the Ford Explorer, is rated at 20 mpg. 

Higher gas prices have boosted sales of hybrid cars. But crossovers and SUVs combined still outsold hybrids by 14 to 1 through the first quarter, according to figures provided by Autodata Corp., a compiler of car-market data.

Back in the late 1990s, it was easier to hate SUVs. Federal data show that in 1999, occupants of an SUV were nearly three times as likely to die in a rollover crash as people riding in a car. 

Concerns about SUV safety came to a head in 2000, when a rash of deadly rollover accidents involving Ford Explorers equipped with certain Firestone tires touched off a scandal. Congress passed a tough, new federal vehicle-safety law that required NHTSA to start rating vehicles for rollover risk, among other things. Auto makers redesigned SUVs to make them wider, lower and less tippy—the better to boost NHTSA rollover-test scores. 

Electronic stability-control systems, plus more and smarter air bags have become standard equipment. More and more SUVs were shifted off of heavy pickup-truck frames, and on to a lower-riding chassis shared with sedans or minivans.

The result: NHTSA says the fatality rate for rollover accidents involving all SUVs was cut in half between 1999 and 2009. The Insurance Institute for Highway Safety—looking at rollover fatalities involving vehicles one to three years old—says the death rate for SUVs involved in a single-vehicle rollover is lower than for many conventional cars.

In collisions with other vehicles, newer SUVs can be more protective than cars "because they are higher off the ground," says  Adrian Lund, president of the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety.

Advocates of pushing the fuel economy envelope say tougher efficiency targets won't run SUVs off the road—so long as car makers innovate with electrification and increased use of lightweight materials such as aluminum or carbon fiber. 

Industry officials counter that technologies and materials that could safely boost SUV mileage as part of hitting a 62-mpg fleet average could make vehicles too expensive—discouraging sales, or narrowing auto makers' profit margins.

"The policy question," says Ms. Bergquist, "is how do we get consumers to buy them?"

 Write to  Joseph B. White at joseph.white@wsj.com 