TOKYO—The earthquake that struck northern Japan comes at a tough time for the world's third-largest economy, but history suggests it isn't likely to derail the global recovery. 

Officials were scrambling to assess the damage Friday as rescue teams rushed to the affected area. Early reports suggest the quake and tsunami, which took hundreds of lives, took a toll on industry and infrastructure along Japan's northern Pacific coast and disrupted production, electricity, communication and transportation in Tokyo and elsewhere.

The quake adds to a litany of problems facing both Japan and the world economy, as Middle East turmoil drives up the price of oil, and worries mount about the pace of growth in emerging markets such as China. 

Japan is relatively ill-prepared to absorb the quake's impact and shoulder the public spending that will be required to rebuild. Inflation-adjusted growth is expected to slow to close to 1% this year, interest rates are already near zero, and the country has the largest government-debt burden in the industrialized world. 

Still, economists see reason to believe the effect on growth will be limited, both locally and globally. For one, reconstruction booms tend to offset the immediate negative effect of natural disasters—something Japan experienced after the Kobe earthquake of 1995. 

Also, Friday's earthquake hit a relatively rural area that accounts for a small share of the country's economic output, as opposed to the Kobe quake, which hit a major port and industrial hub and claimed some 5,000 lives. 

"I don't view this as having a significant impact on global growth," said  Nariman Behravesh, chief economist at consultancy IHS Global Insight. "Clearly it will add to Japan's fiscal woes, but I think they can get through this one without serious problems."

Mr. Behravesh estimates that once reconstruction effects are accounted for, the quake might shave 0.2 percentage point off his forecast of 1.2% inflation-adjusted Japanese growth in 2011, down from 4.4% in 2010. The impact on his global growth forecast would be negligible.

Economists said that determining the impact from Friday's quake will require a thorough examination of the "capital stock" of the area, including private-sector manufacturing plants and public-sector infrastructure such as roads and the electricity grid. On Friday, officials declared an emergency at one nuclear plant. 

The Kobe incident suggests that while Friday's earthquake will be devastating for the hardest-hit areas, the Japanese economy can rebound quickly, much as the U.S. economy did from Hurricane Katrina in 2005. 

The Kobe quake came as the country was struggling to recover from a recession and a strengthening yen was hampering its crucial export sector— much like the situation today. But Japanese industrial production bounced back more than 3% as reconstruction efforts ramped up in February and March 2005, after dropping 2.6% in January, the month the quake happened, says  David Weinstein, an economist at Columbia University who specializes in Japan. 

The immediate impact of Friday's quake will probably be milder. The Kobe quake landed a direct blow to Japan's industrial heartland, crippling a major center of steel and automobile production, destroying highways and disrupting trade at one of the country's largest ports. The total cost came to about 13 trillion yen (about $158 billion at current exchange rates). 

By contrast, the economy of the northern Miyagi prefecture, the worst-hit area Friday, is smaller and focused more on agriculture and lumber. The area's economic output accounts for about 1.7% of Japan's total, less than half that of Kobe.

"I would not expect there to be a huge impact on the Japanese economy from this, although it will of course be a big impact on the regional economy," said Mr. Weinstein, noting that Japanese manufacturers have learned from other earthquakes how to repair their supply chains quickly.

Some factors, though, are different this time. Back in 1995, with the central bank's interest-rate target at 2.25%, policy makers were able to reduce rates to stimulate the economy. That is a resource they don't have now, with interest rates already near zero. 

And Japan's government debt, at close to 200% of gross domestic product, leaves less room to borrow the money that will be needed for reconstruction without worrying investors already spooked by government-debt troubles in Europe.

 Write to  William Sposato at william.sposato@dowjones.com 

  