NEW DELHI – The Indian government Friday sought lawmakers' approval to spend a net 689.1 billion rupees ($15.35 billion) more this fiscal year, as it doles out higher subsidies for fuel, food and fertilizers. 

The government's third demand for additional spending in the current fiscal year ending March 31 is sharply higher than November's request for 198.12 billion rupees and an earlier demand for 545.88 billion rupees.

The government, which had budgeted a fiscal deficit of 5.1% of gross domestic product in the fiscal year, had raised its total expenditure estimate last month to 12.17 trillion rupees from its initial forecast of 11.09 trillion rupees.

The new proposal won't result in any significant variation in the total estimated expenditure, said the supplementary demand for grants, tabled in parliament's lower house by Finance Minister Pranab Mukherjee. 

A major portion of the expenditure now proposed "has already been included in the revised estimates for 2010-11 and for the remaining, there would be equivalent overall savings in other grants," the government said. 

Besides savings, robust tax revenue and a one-off gain from selling assets such as high speed mobile bandwidth will help the government meet the extra funding requirements, cushioning the government's finances. 

The government plans to spend 210 billion rupees to partly compensate state-run fuel retailers for their revenue losses due to selling products at discounted rates. 

State-run oil marketing companies sell fuels at prices below market levels as the government seeks to shield the country's poor from high prices. The government in late June freed gasoline prices from state control, but it still gives a substantial subsidy on diesel, cooking gas and kerosene. 

Last year it provided 223 billion rupees for oil subsidies, while the provision made this fiscal year is for 350 billion rupees. 

The government plans also to spend 43.5 billion rupees to subsidize fertilizer companies for importing products and 39.7 billion rupees toward food subsidies. 

Mr. Mukherjee said this fiscal year's additional spending will spill over to next year, but won't push up the current expenditure estimates. 

"For bond markets this is positive news as the liquidity will improve," said C.V.R Rajendran, head of treasury at Corporation Bank. "Also I don't believe the government needs to borrow anymore through bond auctions till March-end to fund this spending," he added. 

The government had shrunk this fiscal year's borrowing aim to 4.47 trillion rupees from its initial estimate of 4.57 trillion rupees as revenue from auctioning of bandwidth had boosted its coffers. 

The government has some ambitious plans to provide education and food to the poor. It has yet to place in parliament the right to food legislation, while the Right to Education Bill has already been passed. 

—Sourav Mishra in Mumbai contributed to this article 

 Write to  Mukesh Jagota at mukesh.jagota@dowjones.com 