You first feel your bottom lip tremble as your work is critiqued in a meeting. Or maybe it's a clenching of your jaw. Or perhaps there is no warning at all. One moment you're composed and the next … waterworks. 

We can alter the shapes of our bodies, slow the signs of aging and learn to control our heart rates. Yet we're often powerless when it comes to crying. 

Some new research efforts are helping to piece together the biological and cultural forces behind crying, showing that there are different types of tears as well as differences in the way men and women cry.

Women are biologically wired to shed tears more than men. Under a microscope, cells of female tear glands look different than men's. Also, the male tear duct is larger than the female's, so if a man and a woman both tear up, the woman's tears will spill onto her cheeks quicker. "For men and their ducts, it'd be like having a big fat pipe to drain in a rainstorm," says  Louann Brizendine, a neuropsychiatrist at the University of California, San Francisco.

Social conditioning comes into play in restraining the impulse to cry, Dr. Brizendine says. When we experience physical pain or emotional sadness or frustration, the brain's amygdala, which is part of the limbic system or "emotional brain," fires up signals. If the stimulus is great enough, the energy can travel from the emotional area into the frontal motor strip. That's when breathing can devolve into sobbing.

Boys often come up with mechanisms to calm themselves before they cross the precipice from tearing up to weeping. "Boys are taught over and over again not to cry: to scrunch their faces, to think about the Gettysburg address, to distract themselves," says Dr. Brizendine, the author of the best-selling book, "The Female Brain."

Research indicates that testosterone helps raise the threshold between emotional stimulus and the shedding of tears. "It helps put the brakes on," she says. 

To teach acting students to cry at the New York Film Academy,  Glenn Kalison reminds them to consider that since they were babies, they have been building barriers to prevent themselves from crying. The trick is to imagine a character's pain and sadness, and then to connect with the barriers that character would have built, he explains. The realistic way to portray crying isn't to let tears flow, but to show the struggle not to cry.

"It's the attempt at suppressing the crying that is the familiar sensation," says Mr. Kalison, chairman of the academy's acting for film department. "Only actors want to cry." 

Studying tears and the process of crying is complex. There are two types of tears. Irritant tears help wash eyes of dust, dirt and impurities. Emotional tears are created and released in response to emotional stimulus and physical pain. All tears contain proteins, salt and hormones, among other substances, but emotional tears have higher levels of protein, says  William H. Frey II, a neuroscientist and biochemist at Regions Hospital in St. Paul, Minn., who conducted research into the composition of tears.

One hormone in tears is prolactin, a lactation catalyst. Just as it helps to produce milk, prolactin also aids in tear production. By the time women reach 18, they have 50% to 60% higher levels of prolactin in their bloodstream than men do. "We believe this is one of the reasons that women cry more easily," Dr. Frey says.

Much remains unknown. Human beings are the only species that cries emotional tears, making it difficult to study the internal mechanics of tear glands. It is also not that easy to stimulate crying in a controlled research environment.  Ad Vingerhoets, a professor of clinical psychology who focuses on stress and emotion at Tilburg University in the Netherlands, says that to elicit tears, he shows research participants photographs of people in various states of crisis to try to elicit tears of empathy. He also shows tear jerkers, like the 1979 movie "The Champ."

"We do not poke people in the eye," Dr. Vingerhoets says. "We use onions." Test tubes and vials are held to people's cheeks to collect the tears.

Researchers have a hard time getting accurate data because if people feel ashamed of crying, it can affect what they tell researchers. In recent studies conducted by Dr. Vingerhoets in conjunction with researchers at the University of South Florida, participants recorded in their diaries at the moment they cried that the episode didn't make them feel better. Yet when asked to reflect on the crying episodes later, other subjects said in retrospect that they felt better afterward. The researchers wonder if there is an initial sense of shame that comes with crying. 

"We also think men are underreporting their crying," says  Lauren Bylsma, a doctoral candidate who worked on the project.

The emotional benefits are hard to study too. "Science is hard when dealing with emotion," says Dr. Frey. "It is difficult to define feelings or emotion or to measure their intensity in a way that everyone agrees with." 

Some scientists wonder if crying even delivers emotional relief or if tears happen to come at the same time that our bodies have processed emotional strain. They signal that we're starting to feel better but don't necessarily hasten the process.

All sorts of cultural influences determine who cries and the frequency. For her new book, "It's Always Personal,"  Anne Kreamer teamed with ad agency J. Walter Thompson to survey 1,200 working Americans. She found that age and gender play a role in freeness in crying: Women under 45 are 10 times as likely to cry at work as men 45 and older.

Dr. Vingerhoets conducted a project in 37 countries to compare the different rates of crying among men and women. Women in developed Western economies cry much more than men, and much more than women in societies where women have fewer rights, he says. As men age, they cry more—often provoked by altruism, camaraderie and issues of morality, Dr. Vingerhoets hypothesizes.

"When males get older," he says, "their testosterone levels decrease." 

The male reluctance to shed tears is relatively new, says  Tom Lutz, a University of California, Riverside professor. He traces this to the late 19th century, when factory workers—mostly men—were discouraged from indulging in emotion lest it interfere with their productivity. 

Iconic historical and cultural depictions of men crying—in the Bible, Jesus wept at the death of Lazarus, for instance—have been overcome by more recent dictates discouraging men from crying. Biologically, and in the context of centuries and millennia, "male tears are the norm and males not crying is recent historical aberration," he says.

Last month, at a launch party for his newest project, the Los Angeles Review of Books, Mr. Lutz toasted the staff and felt himself getting emotional. Years ago, his father taught him to squeeze the tear ducts at the corners of his eyes with his thumb and forefinger. But the method failed. "I got weepy," Mr. Lutz says. "I couldn't stop it." 

 Write to  Katherine Rosman at katherine.rosman@wsj.com 