It was coming up on 1 a.m. when Bugs Raymond spotted the flames leaping over Harlem. From his window at 126th Street and Eighth Avenue, he looked into the night and tried to figure out where they were coming from. The feeling in the pit of his stomach told him he already knew. It was exactly 29 blocks away.

Raymond, a pitcher for the New York Giants, ran downstairs and into the nearest taxi. They sped north on Eighth Avenue to the ballpark at 155th Street. He had just been there that afternoon, when the Giants lost to the Philadelphia Phillies in the second game of the season. The cab pulled as close as it could and Raymond spilled out into the burning, crackling, gasping scene. His gut was right. 

The twisted flames he had seen from his hotel room were devouring the Polo Grounds. The next morning, April 14, 1911, the New York Tribune called it "one of the most spectacular blazes the city has ever seen." And at a time when baseball was still struggling to establish its place in the city, the fire threatened to consume its future as a viable enterprise.

The Giants' answer came quick and bold. Instead of replacing the ballpark with yet another temporary wooden structure, they erected the city's first modern baseball venue. In 11 weeks, the newest version of the Polo Grounds was a great steel-and-concrete monument to the game. 

"New York had always had these special challenges, because the real estate was so scarce and prohibitively expensive," said the author Peter Morris, who wrote about stadium development in "Game of Inches." "So having a permanent establishment in New York was a special accomplishment for baseball."

That the Polo Grounds was ultimately engulfed in flames did not come as a huge surprise. Old wooden ballparks had a nasty tendency to do that. But the man who most saw it coming was New York's fire chief, Edward Croker. He had warned the Giants, warned the National League, and warned the city that the Polo Grounds were a firetrap, a tragedy waiting to happen. So when the Polo Grounds finally went up in smoke without claiming a single life, no one was less upset than Croker.

"I am glad it is gone," he told the New York Tribune. "It is a good thing that it went as it did."

A reporter for the New York Herald tracked down the Giants' manager, John McGraw, at a billiards club at 34th and Broadway to inform him of the fire. Soon, McGraw was standing with his players in the glow of the flames, gawking with the crowd. 

The precise cause of the fire was never pinned down. One possible explanation was that a spark from a Putnam Railroad locomotive passing on the elevated tracks had touched it off. Far more plausible was McGraw's suggestion: a discarded cigar or cigarette smoldered in the heaps of dry peanut shells under the stands and eventually burst into flames. 

By 2 a.m., the flames were under control. The only parts of the park the firefighters could save were the left-field bleachers and the clubhouse, located just beyond center field. Which was apparently enough for McGraw to think that the park would be suitable for the next afternoon's game against the Phillies. He wanted to set up 10,000 chairs in the ashes and get on with baseball. 

Frank Farrell, the president of the Yankees, had a better idea. Since the two clubs did not have a scheduled home game on the same day until July, he immediately told the Giants they could play at Hilltop Park at 168th and Broadway. 

On April 15, the Giants held their second home opener in three days. This time they were on the hilltop. And the fans did not hesitate to follow. More than 23,000 packed into the American League park to watch their boys defeat Brooklyn. 

Meanwhile, Giants owner John T. Brush was planning the future of his club's real home at Coogan's Bluff.

Ever since he took control of the club in 1902, 12 years after the Polo Grounds were first built, he had chased a dream of filling 100,000 seats for a Giants game. He watched enviously as hulking steel-and-concrete structures went up in Philadelphia, Chicago, and Pittsburgh. 

The only thing stopping him from erecting one of his own was the Giants' 10-year-lease at Coogan's Bluff. It was not nearly long enough for Brush to consider the investment required to tear down a ballpark and build a new one. 

When the fire handed him a blank slate, his thinking changed.

"I want to build a concrete stand—the finest thing that can be constructed," Brush told his wife as he surveyed the wreckage, according to Stew Thornley's history of the Polo Grounds, "Land of the Giants."

Within a week, Brush convinced the landlords to extend the lease by 25 years. Now, with a firmer grip on the property, he could carry out his $500,000 plan for a 50,000-seat stadium. 

Three shifts began working around the clock. And by June 28th, Brush had his concrete stand and more.

After 11 weeks and 60 games away from Harlem, the Giants returned to find a new double-decker grandstand 1,000 feet long and eight stories tall. There were 16,000 seats on the bottom tier alone and, by the time the finishing touches were put on the park in August, the capacity would exceed 40,000.

Officially, the Giants had christened the new ballpark Brush Stadium, making it the first major league venue to use the word "Stadium" instead of Park or Field. But for all the significance of Brush's contribution, the owner's tribute to himself was not popular with the fans or the press. 

They made sure that the home of the New York Giants—in all of its wooden, burning, charred or steel-and-concrete forms—would only ever be called the Polo Grounds.