CANBERRA—Australia's Treasurer  Wayne Swan said Friday the floods that cut a swath through Queensland state in recent months are likely to be the costliest disaster in the country's history, with effects including a 0.25-percentage-point bump in first-quarter inflation as agricultural losses drive up food prices.

The worst of the economic impact will be concentrated in the current quarter as lost coal production in the resource-rich state shaves around 15 million tons from expected coal exports and trims around half a percentage point from economic growth in the fiscal year ending June 30, Mr. Swan said in a Brisbane speech. Australia is the world's largest exporter of coking coal—used for steelmaking—and the second-largest supplier of coal for power plants.

In addition to bringing Queensland's coal industry to a standstill, the floods washed out thousands of homes, roads and rail lines and killed more than 30 people across the state in December and January, disrupting exports and destroying crops.

The government on Thursday put the cost of the clean-up on the federal budget at 5.6 billion Australian dollars (US$5.55 billion), to be funded by spending cuts in other areas and a new one-off year-long tax . Applied starting July 1 to all Australians earning more than A$50,000 a year, it's expected to raise around A$1.8 billion.

The treasurer forecast that the worst-affected coal mines in Queensland—which produces about 80% of Australia's exports of coking coal—will be disrupted for months.

The state, which accounts for around 19% of Australia's national output, is also a major food bowl. The country's Treasury department forecast Friday that damage to crops representing around 7% of Australia's total plantings, including sorghum, fruit and vegetables, will cost around A$1 billion.

Any bump in food-price inflation "should be temporary," Mr. Swan said, noting that banana prices soared to A$15 a kilogram after Cyclone Larry in 2006, but then fell some months later to A$2 a kilogram. Private-sector economists and officials have previously suggested the Reserve Bank of Australia could be willing to look through such one-off inflation pressures as it considers monetary policy.

More concerning for the central bank, however, will be Mr. Swan's prediction that any rebuilding efforts will be limited by a tight labor market, exacerbating capacity pressures in an economy that is already operating at close to full employment.

"We know that the economy and parts of the labor market are already under extreme pressure from the mining boom," Mr. Swan said. "That's why we have some labor-market programs in the policy mix," referring to plans to defer nonurgent infrastructure projects in other states and fast-track temporary work visas for overseas workers.

Australia's unemployment rate fell further to a lower-than-expected 5% in December, a level considered by private-sector economists to be close to full employment. Even before the flood crisis, Australia needed migrants to augment its relatively small population of 22 million, leading to a double-digit surge in visa applications throughout Australia for the year ended May 30, according to official data.

Mr. Swan also pledged further fiscal discipline Friday to meet a government commitment of restoring the budget to surplus in the year starting July 1, 2012, even as a slowdown in economic activity across a range of industries reduces tax revenues.

Mr. Swan estimated Friday that the damage bill across other industries will be around A$500 million, while tourism revenues will fall by around A$300 million. Looking beyond the flood, the treasurer pointed to the challenges of managing a boom fueled by strong demand from developing countries like China and India for Australia's vast mineral resources like iron ore and coal.

"While the floods are very much front of mind at the moment, I'm confident that we'll overcome them and rebuild Queensland," Mr. Swan said. "And as we do, the longer-term questions we'll face are the challenges of the return of boom conditions."

He noted that by 2050, China and India are expected to make up a third of the global economy. That makes the federal government's core task to rebalance what is now a "patchwork" economy—with areas exposed to the mining boom growing faster than those relying on other sectors like retail and tourism—and so "better leverage the opportunities of the Asian century," Mr. Swan said.

Separately, the Queensland state government said earlier Friday it will contribute A$1.5 billion to the rebuilding effort in the flood-ravaged state, with its early estimates putting the damage bill at more than A$5 billion.

Queensland also forecast a wider net operating deficit of around A$3.9 billion for the fiscal year starting July 1 as a result of the flooding. State Treasurer  Andrew Fraser said coal royalties are expected to fall by some A$300 million this year alone and the state's economic growth will slow to just 1.25% in the current fiscal year, from a previous forecast of 3.75%.

State Premier  Anna Bligh warned the destruction may not be over yet, as the wet season has yet to end.

 Write to  Rachel Pannett at rachel.pannett@dowjones.com 