 Barcelona, Spain 

Lean and limber at age 72, Charles Lloyd was nonetheless tired one November morning in his hotel suite here. He was near the end of a demanding European tour with his quartet and scheduled to headline the Voll-Damm International Jazz Festival that night. Still, his eyes, which are most often obscured behind dark glasses on stage and in photos, were wide. 

"I'm both spent and exhilarated," he said. That sounds like a reasonable description of the feeling listeners may be left with by Mr. Lloyd's most recent CD, "Mirror" (ECM). Not that's there's anything remotely tiring about the album's musical elements—no overabundance of notes, no conceptual clutter. Mr. Lloyd's playing on tenor (and, on one track, alto) saxophone is breathy and ribbon-like when squiggling to or from a melodic line; firmly formed yet transparent, like the surface of a pool, on long tones. The music is frequently meditative and for the most part concisely phrased. Yet there's a demanding fullness and intensity to his emotional outpouring through the album's dozen tracks, the sort that frequently anticipates uplift.

Mr. Lloyd calls these pieces "tenderness sutras." The term has dual references: to the Hindu aphorisms central to the Vedanta spiritual practices he embraced decades ago; and to a specific need he means to address through a 10-day tour that hits Jazz at Lincoln Center's Rose Hall on Jan. 29.

"There's a hunger that I sense in the audiences I play to today," he said. "People are searching for beauty in a world that wants to shut it out. They're looking for peace in a world full of disturbances. They get so much stuff that's been packaged and put in a box. They get the cake already baked. But, you know we have to create this stuff, discover it for ourselves."

Mr. Lloyd shared his latest moments of discovery—a collaboration with Greek singer Maria Farantouri, based partly on the music of composer Mikis Theodorakis. The saxophonist's wife, photographer and filmmaker Dorothy Darr, pulled out her laptop to display dramatic images of Mr. Lloyd at ancient temples and in performance under a full moon at the Herodion Theater, at the foot of the Acropolis. She played snippets of a live recording for likely release later this year. Ms. Farantouri's haunting alto voice was framed by both the ancient sound of a lyre and the innovative approach of Mr. Lloyd's working band.

Through his hotel room window, Mr. Lloyd watched as horses circled the track of Barcelona's Real Club de Polo, and recalled those on his grandfather's farm in Mississippi, not far from Memphis, Tenn., where he was raised. In Memphis, Mr. Lloyd took early instruction from pianist Phineas Newborn Jr., and first encountered musicians such as Duke Ellington and Count Basie as they toured the South. "I was drunk with that music," he said. "It was the only thing that made sense to me."

Through the years, Mr. Lloyd has been revered as a shaman and dismissed as a showman. His 1966 album, "Forest Flower," sold a million copies. But by the early 1970s, he'd withdrawn from the music scene to curb his drug use and to devote himself to spiritual pursuits. He left New York for California—moving first to Malibu, then to Big Sur and finally to Montecito. Musically, he was silent for decade. He re-emerged only gradually in the 1980s, and then with more consistent power and purpose through a dozen ECM albums since 1989. Four of these reunited Mr. Lloyd and drummer Billy Higgins, who first met as teenagers. The last, "Which Way Is East," recorded four months before Higgins's death in 2001, was a genreless two-hour duet, arranged into eight suites, that plays like a final communion between friends. "Billy elevated nowness," he said. "And he showed me the way back."

Mr. Lloyd believes that Higgins somehow posthumously led him to Eric Harland, who is among jazz's most able and free-thinking drummers. Mr. Harland led Mr. Lloyd to bassist Reuben Rogers and pianist Jason Moran. ("He understands" was all Mr. Harland had to explain about Mr. Moran.) These three, all roughly half Mr. Lloyd's age, feed more than follow the saxophonist, and find the experience instructive in unanticipated ways. 

"I've been given the liberty to paint with certain colors within given shapes in other bands," said Mr. Rogers. "With Charles, it's 'Here's the canvas, bring your own colors and let's work it out.'"

Mr. Moran thinks Mr. Lloyd has elevated the way he works with his own acclaimed trio. "The serenity he grasps has helped me find a center in sometimes just playing one note," he said, "in respecting how a single tone sounds or decays." 

During a riveting performance in Barcelona, Mr. Lloyd offered his musicians space. Mr. Moran stretched the harmonies of the ballad "I Fall in Love Too Easily," which opens the group's recent CD, nearly beyond recognition. On "Mirror," the band invests even familiar material with new textures. While "Lift Every Voice and Sing" was simply stated for a 2002 Lloyd recording, on the new CD the spiritual floats across a skittering beat, with Mr. Moran shadowing Mr. Lloyd's phrases. And Mr. Lloyd's carefully shaped moods find deepened dimension, especially on his aching, sorrowful rendition of the Mexican folk song, "La Llorona."

Beyond his band—and this is his most cohesive and inventive one yet—it is an adherence to principles, in both the business and the spiritual realms, that enables the transcendence and tenderness Mr. Lloyd seeks. He described an aggressive approach by a major-label executive after he'd returned to recording. "I looked at their contract," he said, "and it was 43 pages about slavery. I have a one-page contract with ECM based on a real relationship."

He recalled an old college buddy who heard him perform a few years ago. "He told me I sounded better than ever, but then asked, 'What are you going to do to break through this time, like the 'Flower'?' I asked him what he meant; after all, he said that he'd loved my playing. He just looked at me and said, 'Oh, you mean you're going down with the ship?' He thought I needed a gimmick. My gimmick now is being true to myself, even if that means the ship goes down. And I'm not looking to go down, either. I'm looking to soar."

 Mr. Blumenfeld writes about jazz for the Journal.  