Sesa Goa Ltd's acquisition of Bellary Steels and Alloys Ltd's steel plant adds a full-fledged steel business on top of its iron-ore operations. It may benefit on two counts from this acquisition. It can silence critics who accuse ore producers of exporting a precious mineral resource, without adding value. And, it adds an element of vertical integration to its iron-ore business.

Sesa Goa paid 2.2 billion rupees to acquire the under-construction integrated steel plant, and 700 acres of land in the iron-ore-rich state of Karnataka. Sesa Goa already runs a pig iron-ore operation in Goa. Until recently, this unit operated as Sesa Industries Ltd, a subsidiary, and now has merged with Sesa Goa. An expansion project for pig iron is under way, and is expected to be commissioned in the third quarter of fiscal 2012.

But Bellary's integrated steel project will be Sesa Goa's major foray into steel-making. Sesa Goa is assessing how soon it can commission this project. It may need to make further investments as the plant has been under construction for years now. Its expected capacity is 500,000 tons of steel in the form of wires and rods, with a 130-megawatt captive power plant. The plant's capacity could be expanded to two million tons, if needed, by adding additional equipment. However, that will require significant investments. Producing a ton of steel requires about 1.75 tons of iron ore, as a thumb rule. Sesa Goa could then potentially use iron ore in the range of 875,000 tons at its initial capacity to 3.5 million tons, if it expands to 2 million tons.

Sesa Goa has an important choice to make, of keeping its steel business as a small part of its operations, or making it much larger. The choice will have implications on its balance sheet and profitability. The steel business needs far more significant investments compared with the mining business. In the current operating environment, margins are also higher for iron-ore producers. Sesa Goa's iron-ore business earned a segment profit margin of 56% in the nine months ended December. Tata Steel Ltd's stand-alone steel business (which uses captive iron ore) earned a segment margin of about 36%. And, this is in spite of it being one of the lowest-cost producers of steel, with economies of scale, and a value-added product portfolio comprising flat and long products.

Sesa Goa's stock rose 1.5% to 262.80 rupees on Tuesday. The steel plant will not come on stream immediately. A near-term trigger to watch out for, though, is whether the ban on iron-ore exports from Karnataka is eventually lifted.

