In the olden days, Frances Fox Piven was a cutting-edge social theorist of the hard left. In a 1977 book, she and her husband, Richard Cloward, argued "that the poor and unemployed are so isolated from the levers of power in America that their greatest potential impact is to withhold 'quiescence in civil life: they can riot,' " as Stanley Kurtz reports in National Review Online:

Piven is now in the autumn of life, 78 and widowed nearly a decade. But she still dreams of revolution, as evidenced by this article in the Jan. 10 issue of the soft-core hard-left periodical The Nation:

The first paragraph of this passage could describe the Tea Party movement. But the Tea Party is nonviolent, and the second paragraph makes clear that is not what Piven has in mind. In fact, Piven has nothing but scorn for the Tea Party, which is the subject of a bigoted rant she delivered last month, which you can hear on Glenn Beck's site TheBlaze.com:

No doubt the Tea Party's individualistic orientation also makes it anathema to the superannuated socialist. Piven has gained a degree of notoriety of late thanks to Beck, who has frequently and harshly criticized her ideas on his radio and TV shows. In a Saturday news story, the New York Times reported that "her name has become a kind of shorthand for 'enemy' on Mr. Beck's Fox News Channel program."

A three-part, 15-letter, five-syllable name is "shorthand" for a five-letter word? As we shall see, that isn't the only thing the Times got backward about this story.

This passage in the Times story sums up the Piven-Beck ruckus:

It must be said that the answer to Beck's question is no. Piven is not inciting violence.

The legal standard for incitement was spelled out by the U.S. Supreme Court in the 1969 case of  Brandenburg v. Ohio.  A local Ku Klux Klan leader was convicted of "criminal syndicalism" for "advocat[ing] . . . the duty, necessity, or propriety of crime, sabotage, violence, or unlawful methods of terrorism as a means of accomplishing industrial or political reform." 

Brandenburg had been filmed at a KKK rally, where he said: "We're not a revengent organization, but if our president, our Congress, our Supreme Court, continues to suppress the white, Caucasian race, it's possible that there might have to be some revengeance taken." He also spoke of his desire to "return" blacks--to whom he referred by a now-unprintable six-letter slur--to Africa and Jews to Israel.

In a unanimous unsigned opinion, the justices overturned Brandenburg's conviction: "The constitutional guarantees of free speech and free press do not permit a State to forbid or proscribe advocacy of the use of force or of law violation except where such advocacy is directed to inciting or producing imminent lawless action and is likely to incite or produce such action."

There was no risk of imminent lawless action when Piven wrote her piece in The Nation. It is highly unlikely that the magazine's readers are numerous and energetic enough to stage an actual riot. Thus Piven, like Brandenburg, was merely advocating violence, not inciting it. She crossed no legal line.

She did, however, cross a moral line. In the past few weeks we've heard a lot, especially from the Times, about the dangers of violent rhetoric. Most examples of such "rhetoric" consist of innocuous metaphors: a political action committee's map of districts whose congressmen are targeted for defeat, or a representative's urging her constituents to be "armed" with information. Piven's statement that "protesters need targets," taken on its own, would fall into this category. But her endorsement of European-style riots constitutes actual violent rhetoric.

The Times, however, inverts the story. In the paper's telling, Piven, the advocate of violence, is the victim; Beck, her critic, is the villain. The headline reads: "Spotlight From Glenn Beck Brings a CUNY Professor Threats."

 James Taranto on Piven and the Times. 

Piven claims to have received at least three threatening emails, which an editorial in The Nation quotes (warning: obscene language at link). None include a direct threat, but all are hostile and offensive, and two wish her dead. It is wrong to send such foul communications, and if police conclude that any of these are true threats, the senders should be prosecuted. Neither the Times nor The Nation reports that such a determination has been made.

Years ago, we covered a Ku Klux Klan rally in New York. The 16 Klansmen who showed up were vastly outnumbered by the scores of police on the scene to protect them from thousands of angry counterprotesters. The event must have cost the taxpayers a bundle, but that is the price we pay for freedom of speech, even morally repugnant speech. If Piven is genuinely under threat, the New York City Police Department should provide her with extra protection.

But the idea that Beck is to blame for these alleged threats is baseless. That is why the Times makes this accusation only indirectly, through insinuation and innuendo, consistent with its recent journalistic modus operandi. Indeed, what exactly is Beck supposed to have done wrong here? There is no allegation that anything he has said about Piven or her ideas is untrue, save for her denial in the Times that she has advocated violence, which is contradicted by her own quote in the previous paragraph.

Nor is there any claim that Beck has advocated threats against Piven. Quite the contrary, the Times reports that his website has suppressed them:

Now, "treasonous behavior" is strong language, but it reminded us of something we read in 2009:

That was Paul Krugman, star columnist of the New York Times. Glenn Beck's website enforces on its commenters a standard of civility comparable to the standard the Times imposes on staff columnists for its op-ed page. That may be an indictment of Beck, but it is not one that the Times can credibly hand up.

(We should note here that Beck's TV program appears on Fox News Channel, which, like The Wall Street Journal and this website, is owned by News Corp. His radio show and TheBlaze.com have no connection to News Corp.)

The Times story on the Beck-Piven conflict is in furtherance of a public relations campaign launched last week by a group styling itself the Center for Constitutional Rights. Its press release announcing the effort accomplishes a Times-like inversion in the very headline: "CCR Appeals to Fox News President for Help in Silencing Glenn Beck Misinformation Campaign Against Progressive Professor."

They may not agree with what you say, but they'll fight to the death for your right to remain silent.

And the New York Times will cheer them on in that fight. Why is a newspaper that has been posturing as the scourge of violent rhetoric now siding with a purveyor of such rhetoric, and blatantly slanting the news as it does so? Because her opponent is a prominent media figure from outside the old media establishment. Because Glenn Beck is a threat to the authority of the New York Times.

  Don't Know Much About History   Last week was the 50th anniversary of the inauguration of John F. Kennedy. It was also the 70th anniversary of FDR's third inaugural, the 30th anniversary of Reagan's first, and the 10th anniversary of George W. Bush's first. But the JFK myth still looms large, especially since people who were children at the time of his assassination are now at the peak of their influence, so it's not surprising that the media would focus on his semicentennial.

Nor is it surprising, two weeks after the attempted assassination of a politician, that media figures would draw unwarranted parallels between JFK and Gabrielle Giffords, between 1963 and 2011. It's an easy, lazy thing to do.

NewsBusters.org criticizes ABC News's Christiane Amanpour for doing just that, but misses her worst howler, in a question to Jean Kennedy Smith, JFK's sister and only surviving sibling:

In truth, "the political atmosphere" in 1968--when Robert F. Kennedy became the last sitting member of Congress to be assassinated in the U.S.--was vastly different from that in 1963. The 4½ years between JFK's and RFK's assassinations had seen a series of momentous events: the passage of the Civil Rights Act, the rise of the New Right, Barry Goldwater's landslide defeat, the assassination of Malcolm X, the enactment of the Voting Rights Act, the creation of Medicare, the declaration of War on Poverty, the rise of the Black Power movement, the escalation of the Vietnam War, the rise of the antiwar movement, Lyndon B. Johnson's withdrawal from the 1968 presidential race, the assassination of Martin Luther King, race riots in various American cities.

No doubt this list is less than all-inclusive. Does Amanpour mean to suggest that the political climate today is similar to that in 1963 or 1968? That the distinction doesn't even seem to have occurred to her shows you just how lazy the parallel is.

  Metaphor Alert   "We just have to make sure we're doing everything we can to unlock the productivity of American workers, unleash the ingenuity of American businesses, and harness the dynamism of America's economy."--President Obama, weekly radio address, Jan. 22

 Two Papers in One! 

 Out on a Limb 

  The Lonely Lives of Scientists   "Scientists Use Light to Make Worms 'Dance' "--headline, TechnologyReview.com, Jan. 24

  The Lonely Lives of Senators   "Senators Look for Dates to the Big Address"--headline, ABCNews.com, Jan. 23

  This Headline Certainly Won't   "Will Obama's State of the Union Rise Above the Clichés of a Stale Speech?"--headline, PoliticsDaily.com, Jan. 23

  Covered With Flowers Every One   "Where Have All the Anti-War Rallies Gone?"--headline, Commentary website, Jan. 21

  The Secret of Immortality   "Arizona Shooting Suspect Might Escape Death if Convicted"--headline, McClatchy Newspapers, Jan. 21

  New Swedish Charges Against Julian Assange   "Man Indicted for Possession of Testosterone"--headline, Enterprise-Journal (McComb, Miss.), Jan. 23

  He Lost His Job and Somebody Told Him to 'Pound the Pavement'   "Danbury Man Charged With Sexual Assault on Street"--headline, News-Times (Danbury, Conn.), Jan. 21

  I've Got a Pair of Gohills Boots   "Is Pink Necessary?"--headline, New York Times, Jan. 23

 Questions Nobody Is Asking 

 Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  Obama Believes Cantor Is a U.S. Citizen--Now That Would Be News   "House Leader Cantor Believes Obama Is a US Citizen"--headline, Associated Press, Jan. 23

  Too Much Information   "Leaky Second Period Proves Too Much for Wild"--headline, Star Tribune (Minneapolis), Jan. 23

  Breaking News From 1944   "US Fed to Tread Water as D-Day Nears"--headline, Agence France-Presse, Jan. 23

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  Net Nixes Nattering Nabob of Negativism   Keith Olbermann is no longer the worst TV personality in the world, having been defenestrated last week by MSNBC. The New York Post delivers the news in an article that refers to the fulminating fruitcake as a "broadcast blowhard," "liberal lip," "pontificating pundit," "garrulous gasbag" and "unemployed Uberdork."

Not bad, but they left out stentorian screwball, maniacal motormouth, whacked-out windbag, bombastic birdbrain and pretentious pantywaist. C'mon, guys, step it up!

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Steven Platzer, Michele Schiesser, T. Young, Stephen Levinson, Steve Schildwachter, Terry Holmes, Jeanie Ribble, Bruce Goldman, John Bobek, Ethel Fenig, Michael Morris, Tommye Lou Grenn, Dennis Powell, Lew Olowski, Mark Nicholas, John Williamson, John Bennett, Bill King, Mark Finkelstein, Ed Lasky, Richard Belzer, Rod Pennington, Will Larson, John Sanders and Hillel Markowitz. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)