LONDON—Makeshift beds and all-night refreshments are being set up in the U.K.'s House of Lords Monday, as peers in the upper chamber continue a marathon session scrutinizing the coalition government's bill to hold a referendum on voting reform. 

Peers from the opposition Labour Party are trying to hold the bill up—a tactic known as a filibuster—because it also involves the redrawing of parliamentary boundaries, which the party says will favour the ruling Conservative Party.

The government wants the upper house to approve the Parliamentary Voting and Constituencies Bill to ensure the legislation is passed in time for the referendum to be held May 5. The upper house has so far spent eight days trawling through the legislation, and at least three more days—potentially including all night sittings—are expected this week. 

According to the Electoral Commission, the bill must have received Royal Assent—the final step in the process of a bill becoming law—by Feb. 16, if the referendum is to be held on May 5. 

The progress of the bill is being closely watched because the referendum on electoral reform is at the heart of the coalition agreement between the Conservatives and their junior partners, the Liberal Democrats. The referendum will ask voters if they want to switch from the current first-past-the-post system, to the alternative-vote system where voters rank constituency candidates in order of preference. 

The Conservatives, the majority of whom are opposed to a change to the alternative vote, allowed the referendum as part of their power-sharing arrangement. 

However, it is the bill's second purpose—the resetting of boundaries—that has caused the most controversy. Many Labour lawmakers and peers in the upper house favor voting reform, but won't support the bill because the redrawing of the boundaries will reduce the number of lawmakers in the House of Commons to 600 from 650, which they say is a major constitutional change. 

"This whole issue will be hard fought,"  Clive Soley, a Labour peer in the upper house, wrote on his blog. "I think the government should also bear in mind that if we begin changing the number of MPs in Parliament without all-party agreement then other governments will do it in future—this is a slippery slope we are on." 

The has taken the rare step of providing camp beds and refreshments for peers in need of a respite from the epic session—the last time such measures were needed was in 2003 during the passage of the Health and Social Care Bill, the upper chamber's information office said. 

Meanwhile, a ComRes poll for Sunday Mirror and The Independent on Sunday newspapers Sunday found 36% of those polled thought the alternative vote should be used instead of first-past-the-post, while 30% said it shouldn't and 34% were undecided. 

The poll also found that 61% of people could be persuaded to support changing the voting system when they had heard more of the arguments for and against. 