SEOUL—Competition to develop Mongolia's Tavan Tolgoi coal mine—one of the world's biggest undeveloped deposits—is intensifying after the government narrowed the race down to six bidders from 15, a Korean participant said Monday.

Rapid industrialization in Asia, especially China and India, is prompting miners and other investors to step up their search for reserves of coking coal, key to steelmaking.

Tavan Tolgoi, estimated to contain at least five billion metric tons of coal, is close to Mongolia's border with China. That will give the winning bidder a ready-made export market, with a further option, once infrastructure is in place, to send coal by rail through Russia to the Pacific coast.

Korea Resources Corp., or Kores, said Monday its consortium of Korean, Russian and Japanese companies will begin negotiating with the Mongolian government March 15.

In addition to Kores, the consortium includes  Itochu Corp.,  Sumitomo Corp.
MT


-2.71
%




 Marubeni Corp., Sojitz Corp. and OAO Russian Railways, an Itochu spokesman said. 

Other preferred bidders include  Peabody Energy Corp.
BTU


-4.94
%




 of the U.S., Brazil's Vale S.A.,  Xstrata PLC and  ArcelorMittal,
MT


-2.71
%




 Kores said in a statement.

Peabody separately confirmed it has been selected as a preferred bidder. "We look forward to continuing to work with the government on the best approach for Tavan Tolgoi to benefit the people of Mongolia."

Peabody separately confirmed it has been selected as a preferred bidder. Xstrata also said it is one of the shortlisted bidders and that Xstrata Coal is "considering new opportunities within Mongolia." ArcelorMittal declined to comment. The China-Japan consortium of  Mitsui
MITSY


-1.01
%




 & Co. and Shenhua Group is also on the shortlist, Kores said. A Mitsui spokesman declined to comment. 

Tavan Tolgoi "is one of the few large mines left in the world that can produce soft coal used in steelmaking,"  Kim Shin-jong, Kores's chief executive, said in a statement. "(We) will do our best to win the development rights."

The development of the Tavan Tolgoi mine will likely require an initial investment of about $7.3 billion, Kores said. 

Until late last year, the Mongolian government planned to use contract miners to develop the entire site. It then shifted to giving strategic investors an opportunity to invest in and develop roughly half the deposit, in the western Tsankhi area. The government itself will spearhead the deposit's development in eastern Tsankhi using contract miners.

Tsankhi block 1, which has been opened to bids from foreign investors, has an estimated 1.2 billion tons of coal.

Previously, a person familiar with the matter said Korean members of the Korea-Japan-Russia consortium include Kores, state-run utility  Korea Electric Power Corp.
KEP


-0.09
%




, South Korean steel giant Posco, Daewoo International Corp. and LG International Corp.

 --Mari Iwata in Tokyo, Mark Peters in Chicago and Devon Maylie in London contributed to this article. 