MUMBAI—The Reserve Bank of India seemed to shake off its year-long sluggishness Tuesday, raising its key policy rate by a half percentage point. But has the bank already missed the bus?

Tuesday's increase was the RBI's ninth since March 2010, making it one of the most active central banks in the world. And the size was a clear departure from the predictable-and inadequate-quarter-point moves the RBI had made so far.

The signal is clear: The RBI realizes inflation has slipped out of its grasp and is taking a toll on economic growth.



More importantly, the continuing failure to check inflation despite frequent rate increases is hurting the RBI's credibility, and worrying investors and companies. In the financial year that ended in March, for example, the RBI raised its inflation forecast three times-yet still underestimated March-end levels.

The RBI can say it's not an inflation-targeting central bank but rather one that seeks to balance growth, prices and financial-market stability. But it now concedes that some short-term sacrifices in economic growth will have to be made to rein in surging prices.

That India's inflation stems from supply shortages and distribution bottlenecks is well-known. But food inflation has quickly spread to a more broad-based price rise as companies' input costs rise and workers demand higher wages.

The RBI's rate increases have failed to check speculation about rising prices. And the central bank acknowledges the added risk from global commodity prices that are likely to gain more through this year.

More pertinently for policymakers, losing grip on inflation could be decisive in several provincial elections this year and next. Finance Minister  Pranab Mukherjee, after months of advocating slow rate increases that wouldn't crimp growth, said Tuesday that the half-percentage-point bump had been necessary.

Monetary tightening won't entirely solve India's inflation problem, and it will be at least a year before the full effect of such measures are seen.

But the RBI is finally tuning its message to the frequency that India's price situation warrants. 

 Write to  Harsh Joshi at harsh.joshi@dowjones.com 