Apple Inc. watchers are already doing rough calculations and think Verizon Wireless could generate sales of millions of iPhones this year. 



Sales estimates vary, but many analysts agree Apple will likely sell 9 million to 12 million iPhones on Verizon's network this year, a huge boost in the iconic phone's most important market. 

To put that into perspective, AT&T Inc. sold 11.1 million iPhones in the first nine months of 2010. Piper Jaffray & Co. estimates a full-year total of 14.5 million iPhones for AT&T, accounting for 12% of Apple's overall revenue and 30% of its iPhone sales. In its fiscal year, ended September, Apple reported revenue of $20.34 billion. 

Verizon, the country's largest wireless carrier, will have the phone available in stores around the end of the month, a person familiar with the matter says.



Piper Jaffray analyst Gene Munster said Wall Street is expecting sales of the new Verizon iPhone to boost Apple's overall sales by 5%, though he believes it could have as much as twice that effect if Verizon lures enough new customers to the phone -- as opposed to those it steals from AT&T. 

"There's so much pent up demand," said Mr. Munster, who himself has set a conservative sales estimate of 9 million iPhones via Verizon in the current year. 

Some see an even bigger impact. Brian Marshall, an analyst at Gleacher & Co., said he believes the iPhone could capture 5% of Verizon's customers in its first quarter on sale, a faster rate than when it launched through AT&T in June 2007. 

"There's probably around 17 million subscribers on AT&T that use the iPhone cumulatively -- I think over time Verizon could be even bigger than that," said Mr. Marshall, who has set a 2011 sales estimate of 12 million units. 

Verizon had 93.2 million subscribers at the end of September. The company not only stands to win new subscribers, but also to increase the percentage of its customers who pay for data service each month. Carriers are looking to data to drive sales growth and offset declining voice revenue. 

Heavy demand for the iPhone could put pressure on Verizon's current suppliers of high-end smartphones. 

Motorola Mobility Holdings Inc., which spun off from Motorola early this month, stemmed years of losses last year by focusing on selling smartphones based on Google Inc. software to Verizon, which needed an answer to AT&T's exclusive hold on the iPhone. 

Motorola Mobility CEO Sanjay Jha acknowledged in an interview last month that a Verizon iPhone could widen his company's losses in the first quarter, but he believes Motorola can still compete, in part by focusing on phones that work on Verizon's new 4G network. 

HTC Corp., another big supplier of smartphones to Verizon, says its devices remain competitive. 

Opinions are split on how many iPhone customers Verizon could take away from AT&T. Charles Golvin, an analyst at Forrester Research said he believes initial sales will mostly involve existing Verizon customers who want to upgrade to the iPhone and Sprint Nextel Corp. and T-Mobile USA customers who weren't willing to switch to AT&T because of its poor network reputation. 

AT&T made it easier for its subscribers to upgrade to the iPhone 4 last summer, in the process locking them into fresh two-year contracts. Many other iPhone owners are on the carrier's family or business plans, making it trickier to switch. 

Last week, the carrier also cut the price of an older model of the iPhone, the 3GS, to $49 from $99.

"The percentage that will come from AT&T escapees is going to be relatively small because of the heavy promotion that AT&T did to lock customers to contracts," said Mr. Golvin. While Verizon could offer to help offset the costs of switching to its network from AT&T, that would be an expensive endeavor, he said. 

Kuo Ming-Chi, an analyst for Concord Securities in Taiwan, estimates that Apple's manufacturing partners in China will ship 7.1 million iPhones compatible with Verizon's CDMA network in the first quarter. It isn't clear whether some of those phones could be headed for CDMA carriers in other countries like China or India.

—Spencer E. Ante contributed to this article.



 Write to  Yukari Iwatani Kane at yukari.iwatani@wsj.com 