 ISAAC: I know exactly what I want to change for the new year -- avoid situations like this:

It's midnight. I've just returned from an extended student-government meeting and finally have time to start my homework. I have a religion paper to finish by tomorrow, a Japanese oral exam to study for, a politics memo to revise. I glance longingly at my empty bed, and my roommate asleep in the adjacent bed, before starting the water heater to make coffee. Checking my schedule for the next day, I have a radio show in seven hours, a lunch meeting with administrators, a five-hour meeting to allocate student funds and have to cook dinner for 75 people in my dining co-op.

Such nerve-racking circumstances were, sadly, all too common for me this past semester.

I am beginning to understand that the ability to fully commit to a few activities and say no to the rest may be a greater indicator of success than ambition alone. It's good to challenge yourself and maintain a full schedule of worthwhile activities. But everyone has a limit, and I have found mine.

When I first arrived on campus last year as a wide-eyed freshman, I wanted to try everything. Dad's final advice to me as he dropped me off was to take advantage of all the opportunities you can on a liberal-arts campus. And I took this advice to heart.

But this never-say-no attitude sets one up for disaster.

We overextended students scurry around campus with our eyes glazed over, running on coffee and candy, promising to do several times more work than possible in a 24-hour day. In the end, we inevitably have no choice but to practice triage with our obligations -- breaking promises, producing work below our abilities and letting our personal health suffer. We skim the readings for class, put off studying for fast-approaching exams, forget to buy more toothpaste and neglect to return Mom's voicemail from days earlier. Despite the best of intentions, our overambition becomes self-destructive.

While my anxiety has soared, I luckily haven't run into serious consequences yet. My GPA hasn't taken a huge hit, and I haven't had a serious mental breakdown. But I don't want to wait until it's too late.

So, next semester I'm going to start from scratch -- dropping all extracurriculars and taking care to commit to classes. I will consciously guard my calendar and only if I'm sure that I have extra time to spare will I dare to pencil a new obligation in.

This may end up being one of the greatest lessons I've learned from college: Take on few enough things to finish what you start, be on time, keep promises and produce the highest-quality work you can.

 STEVE: I'm taking Isaac's lead: I resolve to cut back on overcommitment this year. Just like last year. And the year before that.

Commitments are like the plants in our back garden: We prune back the bushes and flowers and vines, but a season later, it's grown back into a riotous jungle of competing vegetation. The most worthy plants don't always prevail.

I'm afraid Isaac's parents have been role models for overextension.

Karen and I, despite our demanding jobs, have been lured onto committees, nonprofit boards, speech engagements and conferences -- and still try to carve out time for avocations. Working in a vibrant city in intellectually rich professions, there are just too many opportunities to miss.

And as Isaac says, I've often preached to my kids about the responsibility they have to make the most of the blessings that have been given them -- financially, educationally, as Americans -- by exploiting the opportunities to better themselves and the world.

But Karen and I increasingly worry that we're doing a lot of good things but not doing anything well. Like Isaac, we wonder if we should cut back.

I have a fantasy: We start with a clean slate, abandoning all commitments -- perhaps even our jobs and mortgage -- and then add back in, one by one, only the commitments that speak to our core values. We'd add back in only the right ones until it's just right.

There's only one problem: Overextension can be a good thing. Overcommitment, like our overplanted backyard, sometimes yields rich surprises that a better-planned schedule might not. If we don't sign on for too much, we may miss that one thing that stands above the others.

I absolutely did not have time, for example, to start writing this column with Isaac back in 2008. It was the kind of additional commitment I'd vowed to avoid. But it's been one of the most gratifying commitments I've made.

For that matter, I wouldn't have my job at the Journal had I not, when I was already overextended as a translator in 1983 in Tokyo, agreed to work part time as a news assistant for the Journal. And I wouldn't be married to Karen but for overextension: My sophomore year in college, despite a full class schedule, I joined the college chorale; there I noticed the attractive alto in the row ahead of me.

So while I applaud Isaac's vow to cut back and focus, I'd say: Don't prune back too far, and keep up the search for new opportunities in the fallow ground of college years. Sometimes you don't know what to prune until the garden is overgrown.

For years, there was an ugly little tree in our overgrown yard that I planned to cut down. Then, one summer, it was suddenly covered with fat, ripe apricots.

—Steve Yoder is chief of The Wall Street Journal's San Francisco bureau. His son Isaac is 19 years old and a college sophomore. His son Levi is 15 years old and a high-school sophomore. Email: yoder&son@wsj.com 