DUBAI—Egyptian stocks slumped Wednesday and the cost of insuring the country's debt against default rose to the highest level in around 18 months amid concerns about escalating political tensions, after tens of thousands took to the streets on Tuesday in the largest antiregime protest in recent memory. 

Egypt's stock market, which was closed Tuesday for a national holiday, tumbled 6.1% to 6310.44 Wednesday. The region's second-best-performing market in 2010 has now lost about 12% this month alone. The cost of insuring the country's debt against default rose sharply, with the five-year credit-default-swap spread last seen at 3.55 percentage points, 0.21 percentage point wider from the close Tuesday, and significantly wider from a pre-Tunisia crisis level around 2.4 percentage points points, according to data provider Markit. 

The Egyptian pound also took a knock. Late Wednesday one U.S. dollar fetched 5.8330 pounds, compared with 5.8185 pounds late Tuesday. 

"Clearly, in the short term protests on the street will be damaging to the market, lowering volumes and increasing volatility," said one local market strategist. 

Tuesday's protests appeared to be the biggest in decades in Egypt, a country where opposition has long been kept in check and demonstrations rarely draw more than a few hundred people. According to some initial accounts, as many as 50,000 demonstrators in all turned out in Cairo, Alexandria, Suez and other Egyptian cities. At least two protesters and one security official were killed. 

Egypt's benchmark EGX 30 stock index is now down about 12% since former Tunisian President  Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali fled his country on Jan. 14 following protests against his 23-year rule. His ouster sparked concerns of a spillover of Tunisia's crisis to the rest of the Middle East and North Africa region. 

"Events in Tunisia have increased sensitivities towards political risk in the MENA region. Recent developments in Egypt and the risks of further political unrest in the short term that could negatively affect the fiscal stance in the longer term reinforce our underweight stance," said an analyst at Barclays Capital. 

In terms of individual Egyptian stocks, market bellwether Orascom Construction dropped 8.1% Wednesday to 251.30 Egyptian pounds and Orascom Telecom finished 6.7% lower at 3.92 Egyptian pounds. The financial sector was among the worst hit with heavyweight Commercial International Bank down 4.7% at 39.50 pounds and EFG Hermes 13% lower at 28.10 pounds. 

"In the near term, financials may be a prime source of weakness, for example, EFG Hermes being a market proxy and having a significant exposure to Lebanon," said a Cairo-based trader. He added that in time, pockets of strength may possibly be found in domestic demand plays; but reckoned initially these will face significant declines due to relatively low liquidity. 