President of the Nuclear Energy Institute in Washington, D.C., which has 350 member companies in 19 countries

Hard-pressed emergency crews will soon control the damaged reactors at Japan's Fukushima power plant, said Mr. Fertel, the head of the nuclear power industry's largest trade group. But he is worried there isn't enough information about the problems unfolding in the crippled faciltiy.

"The situation is very serious but my prognosis is that they will get it back under control," said Mr. Fertel. A civil engineer by training, he has worked with electric utilities on issues related to nuclear plants for much of his career.

Mr. Fertel said his group was helping to send radiation-protection gear and construction equipment to the damaged plant. He was optimistic that crews could soon restore the plant's electric power so that pumps could once again cool the reactor cores and spent-fuel ponds with fresh water.

Nuclear-power analyst at the bipartisan Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington, D.C.

The disaster unfolding at the Fukushima nuclear power plant was a preventable accident "that highlights the limitations of technology," said Ms. Squassoni.

Although the plant suffered the double catastrophe of a major earthquake and devastating tsunami, the real cause of its problems was the short-sighted design decision to rely on electric-powered pumps to cool its reactors in an emergency, said Ms. Squassoni, who has worked on nuclear nonproliferation and nuclear energy for 20 years.

"In many ways the Japanese are acting heroically," she said. "But it is a concatenation of failures. The real experts are the guys on the ground and even they don't know how this is going to turn out."

Director of Russia's Institute for the Safe Development of Atomic Energy

"What could happen at the Fukushima station has already happened—the fuel could still melt and more radiation could be released into the atmosphere, but not catastrophically more," Mr. Bolshov said, noting that the likely power of any blast at Fukushima would be far less than what was seen at Chernobyl, where a huge steam explosion lifted a giant concrete cap off the reactor, spewing the radioactive contents high into the atmosphere.

If the situation at Fukushima "develops according to the unfavorable scenario, then the melting of the fuel in all three blocs is possible, as well as the loss of the fuel in the holding pools. Plus, it can't be excluded that the fuel will melt downward," he said. 

But given the distance to Russia, "even in the worst possible scenario, our Far East won't get substantial doses that would affect human health," he said.

Former medical director at the Palo Verde Nuclear Generating Station in Arizona, the largest nuclear plant in the U.S.

The health risk to most Japanese is minimal because the faltering plant in Japan has been releasing small quantities of radioactive material and trade winds have been carrying those particles out to sea predominantly, says Dr. Bucklin.

"There are some radioactive elements that will get out there, but it's not going to be huge, and for most people, it's not going to be what we consider dangerous," said Dr. Bucklin, now a regional medical director at U.S. HealthWorks Medical Group Inc., a closely held firm based in Valencia, Calif., which runs clinics around the U.S. treating workplace injuries.

Those living near the Fukushima Daiichi facility would be at risk, but they appeared to be evacuated before the radioactive release could cause harm, said Dr. Bucklin. "People would be silly to run screaming away. It's scary, but it's more scary to think about," Dr. Bucklin said. "If you really look at the science, you should not be terrified."

Dr. Bucklin, who worked at the Palo Verde nuclear plant 50 miles west of Phoenix from 1995 to 2005, expects to see a slight increase in the cancer rate in Japan in 30 years, given the fact that there was a release of radioactive particles. "But it's not going to be the plague," he said.

No one will be able to live within miles of the damaged plant after the immediate danger subsides, and farmers won't be able to grow crops beyond that, Dr. Bucklin said, but there won't be enough stray radioactive particles that travel even farther in Japan to present a danger.

Nuclear-safety expert at the Union of Concerned Scientists, a U.S. nuclear-energy watchdog group

The damaged nuclear reactors at the Fukushima power plant riveted public attention, but a more serious danger is posed by large collections of used fuel rods stored in less-protected conditions nearby, said Mr. Lochbaum.

"With the plant in its current configuration, there's little to prevent the release of radiation from the six spent fuel pools to the atmosphere," said Mr. Lochbaum, a nuclear engineer who worked in nuclear power plants for 17 years. U.S. officials said Wednesday that the storage pond at the plant's Reactor No. 4 had boiled dry, exposing the nuclear fuel and elevating radiation hazards. 

"That radioactivity is released into the reactor building, not the robust concrete containment building," Mr. Lochbaum said. "The reactor building is not designed to contain this radioactivity."

—Robert Lee Hotz, Jonathan D. Rockoff and Gregory L. White