LONDON—Mike Leigh has never allowed any of his plays to be revived, but in response to Hampstead Theatre director Edward Hall's plea, Mr. Leigh has given him, and directed, "Ecstasy," originally created for Hampstead. The piece was set (and first ran) in 1979, just down the road in unposh Kilburn, and seemed a bit of a prophetic elegy for some working-class attitudes and values that were to be swept away by Mrs. Thatcher's broom.

The play opens with two post-coital naked figures on a single bed in a dreary bedsit. We're witnessing a scene of sexual exploitation in which Jean (Siân Brooke) is treated as a mere convenience by the swaggering Roy (Daniel Coonan), who dresses, smokes, drinks a beer and leaves the taciturn Jean to her lonely swig of neat vermouth (the drink she alternates with gin). 

Jean's girlhood friend Dawn (Sinéad Matthews) turns up, and gets the only big laugh of the night when she gives Jean a shop-lifted blouse; she uses language so ripe it's hard to believe the 1979 genteel Hampstead audience had ever heard it on stage before. Roy turns out to be violent and married to another rough north Londoner; when his wife turns up, Jean's bed is broken in the fracas. So far, so bad. 

But the second act turns things around. The impassive, almost zombie-like Jean joins in a drunken, rowdy, post-pub sing-song at her flat with Dawn, her asthmatic, preening Irish husband Mick (Allen Leech) and the gawky Len (Craig Parkinson), another day-laborer, who has returned to London after his wife left him. Mr. Leigh's gift is to find the tenderness in these characters' harsh lives, and to translate this desolate scene into an unpatronizing celebration of marital affection and friendship. Jean falls into a stupor on her narrow bed; Len sleeps on the chair. But there's hope for the morning. Despite some tedious moments, the ensemble playing is uniformly magnificent.

At the National Theatre's Cottesloe is a new play, "The Holy Rosenbergs" by Ryan Craig (until June 24), which deals with the same themes of family, friendship, loyalty and class—adding in religion. David and Lesley Rosenberg are kosher caterers with a failing business in present-day Edgware in northwest London. It is the evening before the funeral of their middle child, Danny, killed while fighting for Israel.

Their eldest, Ruth, is a big-deal international lawyer who is working on a U.N. report on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Her younger brother Jonny is an art school drop-out rebel. Saul Morgenstern is an affluent obstetrician, a boyhood friend of David's, whose daughter's classy wedding catering contract might save the Rosenberg bacon. 

Mr. Craig's convoluted plot boils down to the question of whether Ruth will be deterred by various other characters from attending her brother's funeral by the barely credible threat of demonstrations against her by pro-Israeli "right-wing, herring-chomping nutters." 

This playwright has a good ear for dialogue, and there are plenty of good jokes. Moreover, there are three fine performances, of which Henry Goodman's David is superlative—not self-hating, but self-lacerating, misremembering, deeply loving, though capable of aggression. Tilly Tremayne is a funny, wise Jewish mother and wife, and Susannah Wise, a superb, completely unvain Ruth, the Harvard-trained barrister.

However, almost nothing in this clunkily constructed play seems to happen from dramatic necessity. Danny's death, like the putative threats, seems only a contrivance that allows posturing speeches to be made, and heartstrings to be tugged, however efficiently Laurie Samson's nimble direction achieves this. You leave feeling moved—and manipulated. 

"Ecstasy," until April 9; www.hampsteadtheatre.com 

"The Holy Rosenbergs," until June 24; www.nationaltheatre.org.uk 

 Write to  Paul Levy at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 