NEW YORK—The yen tumbled after Standard & Poor's downgraded Japan's sovereign-debt rating, which highlighted fiscal concerns that have dogged most of the world's largest industrialized nations.

Citing concerns over high debt levels in one of Asia's biggest economic powerhouses, ratings provider S&P cut Japan's long-term credit rating to AA- from AA. The downgrade was S&P's second for Japan in the last decade. 

The Japanese government has floated a raft of budget overhauls, widely considered by analysts to be ineffective in tackling a debt load that by most estimates exceeds 100% of gross domestic product, a measure of an economy's size. 

The overwhelming bulk of Japan's debt is held by domestic investors, and the country's fiscal issues have long been known by the market. Still, the S&P action reverberated in a market already on edge about Europe's debt crisis and the U.S.'s burgeoning fiscal imbalance.

  Michael Mata, senior portfolio manager for a global bond fund at ING, said that the fallout from S&P's action "will be far more negative for the yen than for Japanese government bonds." 

As Japan has demonstrated the capacity to print yen and purchase government bonds with abandon, authorities can "directly monetizing the debt with hopes of keeping a lid on the level of long term rates while weakening the currency," Mr. Mata added.

By late Thursday in New York, the dollar strengthened to 82.88 yen from 82.30 yen late Wednesday, after hitting 83.20 yen. The euro jumped to 113.86 yen from 112.67 yen. The euro moved to $1.3738 from $1.3691. The U.K. pound was at $1.5928 from $1.5899. The dollar moved to 0.9456 Swiss franc from 0.9433 franc. 

Traders have purchased the euro amid speculation that inflationary pressures will force the European Central Bank to raise interest rates this year. The prospect of higher yields has helped support the euro against major currencies, especially after the Federal Reserve left interest rates unchanged on Wednesday, as expected. 

Some traders have watched developments in the U.S. with increasing worry, as it wrestles with a high debt load and a record budget deficit. Analysts have warned that its coveted triple-A credit rating could be in jeopardy, which could trigger a doomsday effect for investors. 

In an interview with Dow Jones Newswires on Thursday,  John Chambers, managing director and chairman of S&P's sovereign-ratings committee, said the U.S.'s fiscal strength and the dollar's reserve-currency status put it in a much stronger position than Japan. 

Mr. Chambers said the U.S. has many factors that work in its favor compared with Japan. S&P cut Japan's sovereign debt rating to AA-, which is three levels below the U.S., but still is investment grade.

Japan's downgrade came as little surprise to some investors, who thought the ratings providers were just beginning to catch up to the market. 

"There's a question [about] what levels of debt are sustainable. What appears to me is that ratings agencies want to make an adjustment along these lines," said  Michael Cirami, vice president and portfolio manager at Eaton Vance. "Japan is just the latest country, and I don't think it will be the last in the developed world." 

—Stephen L. Bernard and Deborah L. Blumberg contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Javier E. David at javier.david@dowjones.com 