Mayor  Michael Bloomberg tapped his multibillion-dollar personal fortune for a TV ad criticizing Albany's cuts to education and defending his stance on merit-based teacher layoffs, marking his first foray into political advertising outside the confines of an electoral campaign.

The 30-second ad—costing somewhere in the "high six figures"—began airing on cable and network TV Tuesday, said  Howard Wolfson, the deputy mayor for government affairs and communications.

The mayor decided to spend his money on the ad because the unions already spent $3 million on an ad campaign criticizing Mr. Bloomberg's budget plans. Due to cuts in state aid to education, the mayor has proposed laying off 4,666 teachers and eliminating another 1,500 positions via attrition.

The mayor and the schools chancellor,  Cathleen Black, are aggressively pushing the Legislature to change the law that forces the city to lay off teachers based solely on seniority.

The ad portrays Mr. Bloomberg as an "independent" voice, an image he and his aides have promulgated since the mayor left the Republican Party in 2007 and flirted with the possibility of running for president in 2008.

"Everyone knows these are tough times," the ad says. "Mike Bloomberg's solution is built on our core values: a balanced budget that holds the line on taxes while protecting our social safety net, fights crime and keeps vital job creation projects on track. And on education—Albany's budget cuts threaten teacher layoffs. Bloomberg is working for reforms that help keep the best teachers in the classroom educating our kids. Independence. Not for the special interests, but for all New Yorkers."

Mr. Wolfson said, "The mayor has put forward a budget that protects our values and core interest as a city, but Albany's cuts threaten teacher layoffs, and we want to make sure we accomplish those layoffs the right way."

In response to the ad,  Michael Mulgrew, president of the United Federation of Teachers, said, "Instead of pulling out his checkbook in a vain attempt to change New Yorkers' minds, the mayor should just admit that teacher layoffs are unnecessary and join us in getting a fair budget from Albany."

 Write to  Michael Howard Saul at michael.saul@wsj.com 