LONDON—The U.K.'s dominant services sector posted a surprise contraction in December, damaged by the snowy weather, weak confidence and job cuts, data showed Thursday. 

The services Purchasing Managers Index dropped to 49.7 in December from 53.0 in November, research group Markit and the Chartered Institute of Purchasing & Supply said. A reading above 50 indicates the sector is expanding, while a reading below 50 indicates it is contracting. The survey also showed that job losses increased in December, as employers prepared for the tough trading conditions. 

The contraction in the service PMI is in sharp contrast to the manufacturing PMI, which Tuesday was shown to have expanded at its fastest rate for 16 years in December. The services sector accounts for about 75.8% of U.K. gross domestic product, manufacturing makes up about 12.8% and the construction sector about 6.3%. 

The weak services data, coupled with a similar contraction in construction PMI, indicates that the U.K. economy as a whole stagnated in December,  Chris Williamson, chief economist at Markit, said. 

The U.K.'s rate of economic growth, as measured by quarterly changes in GDP, looks set to have slowed further in the fourth quarter of 2010 to about 0.4%, he said. Thursday's data also show that the U.K. is becoming increasingly dependent on manufacturing to drive its economic recovery. 

"We appear to have a two-speed economy again, but one where manufacturing and services have swapped positions,"  Nida Ali, economic adviser to the Ernst & Young ITEM Club. 

The weak figure comes as the government faces criticism that its austerity measures, such as this week's increase in the sales tax, and sweeping spending cuts will damage the delicate economic recovery. 

However, Prime Minister David Cameron on Thursday defended his government's approach, saying that they were striking the right balance between tax rises and spending cuts. 

"There are no short-cuts to economic recovery, and I don't promise the road ahead will be an easy one," Mr. Cameron said during a speech in Manchester. "But if the people of this country pull together, if central government, local government, business and communities work together, then I am confident that we can have strong growth, we can build a more prosperous and more fair economy." 

Economists said the temporary impact of December's unusually cold and snowy weather was one of reasons for the contraction, but there are also indications that underlying trends in the services sector are deteriorating. The survey showed that job losses increased in December for the third successive month, as employers prepared for tough trading conditions, while business confidence also remained weak. There was also a jump in input prices, leading cost inflation to accelerate at its steepest rate in over two years. 

Thursday's data further complicate matters for the Bank of England ahead of next week's Monetary Policy Committee meeting. The data indicate that while inflation remains high, the recovery is still fragile. The central bank is expected to keep policy on hold for some months, until a clearer need emerges for action. 

Separately, U.K. mortgage demand fell "markedly" in the three months to December and is likely to drop further in the current quarter, a survey by the Bank of England showed Thursday. 

The decline in appetite came even though access to secured credit for home purchases remained broadly unchanged in the final quarter of 2010, and despite expectations that availability would remain at a similar level this quarter. 

"This fall was largely accounted for by prime lending, which lenders commented reflected a recent fall in house prices, a general weakening of sentiment towards the housing market and uncertainty over the economic outlook associated with the impact of the government's Comprehensive Spending Review," the quarterly BOE credit conditions survey said. 

The poll—conducted Nov. 12 to Dec. 7—also showed that losses on mortgage defaults rose in the October-December period for the first time since the second quarter of 2009, although the default rate was broadly stable.

—  Paul Hannon contributed to this article.

 Write to  Ainsley Thomson at ainsley.thomson@dowjones.com and Natasha Brereton at natasha.brereton@dowjones.com 