  AT&T Mobility v. Concepcion,  a case the U.S. Supreme Court decided last month, deals with a somewhat obscure question of statutory interpretation--namely, the circumstances under which the Federal Arbitration Act of 1925 permits states to supersede provisions in business contracts providing that disputes be settled by arbitration rather than lawsuits. The editors of the New York Times, in an overwrought editorial today, frame the decision as an act of class warfare. 

The justices reversed a decision of the Ninth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals that held California state law permitted Vincent and Liza Concepcion to launch a class-action suit against AT&T. The company had offered them two free phones as part of a service contract, then charged them $30.22 in sales tax on the devices. (It's unclear, and tangential to the case, why their grievance is with AT&T and not with the state of California, which presumably mandated the collection of the tax.) By 5-4, the court held that the Concepcions were bound by a provision of the contract in which they agreed to forswear class-action complaints. 

That distresses the Times editorialists. They describe the decision as "a devastating blow to consumer rights" that entails "major setbacks for individuals who may not have the resources to challenge big companies." The subheadline reads: "The five conservatives of the Supreme Court chose corporations over everyone else."

At least the New York Times editorialists and the liberals of the Supreme Court can be counted on to choose the little guy over corporations. Except when they don't, of course. Contrast today's editorial with one from June 24, 2005, in which the Times cheered  Kelo v. New London,  another 5-4 ruling vindicating the interests of corporations against those of individuals.

 Kelo was the decision of a liberal majority (including Justice Anthony Kennedy, who also voted with the majority in AT&T Mobility.) It held that the Constitution permits the government to seize private land in the "public interest," then convey the condemned land to a private corporation so that a city "can shore up its tax base and attract badly needed jobs."

In that case, the Times scoffed at individual rights, crowing that Kelo "is a setback to the 'property rights' movement, which is trying to block government from imposing reasonable zoning and environmental regulations."

The Kelo decision prompted a political backlash, which the Times criticized in another editorial, on June 26, 2006:

Affordable housing for the New York Times Co. What great news for the little guy!

This is reminiscent of the Times's opposition to free speech in the wake of last year's  Citizens United v. FEC  decision. In that case, the Times's hatred of corporations led it to the bizarre position that, the First Amendment notwithstanding, government has the power to censor core political speech when corporations engage in it.

Well, most corporations. As we noted back then, the Times editorial did not mention that one class of corporations was exempt from the "campaign finance" law in question: media corporations such as the New York Times Co. Indeed, were it not for this special privilege, the Times would have been in violation of the law it championed every time it endorsed a candidate for federal office.

The Times editorialists pose as class warriors against corporations, but in fact are selective and self-serving. Never get into a foxhole with the Old Gray Lady; you will find she is an unfaithful ally.

  You Can't Fool an Honest Man   Defense Secretary Bob Gates elaborated yesterday on the Obama administration's reasons for withholding photos of Osama bin Laden's corpse, ABC News's Jake Tapper reports:

Meanwhile, Politico reports that "the White House has announced it will end the controversial practice of re-enacting part of presidential speeches for the sake of still photographers, after drawing criticism for doing it for President Barack Obama's historic speech announcing the killing of Osama bin Laden."

"The practice has been used for decades," the paper notes. Even though it "violates most mainstream news organizations' ethical rules against re-enacting photographs," it "has long been seen"--by news organizations, we think they mean--"as one of the aspects of flexibility required to cover a president."

We can see why top federal officials would worry about fake photos, since they have plenty of experience creating them.

  Bin Laden Wasn't All Bad. Oh Wait, Maybe He Was.   Americans for Peace and Tolerance, a group that advocates "peaceful coexistence" and keeps tabs on radical Islam, takes note of a disturbing press release from the Muslim American Society, which runs a big mosque in Boston:

The press release, titled "Agreeing to Disagree About the Death of Osama bin Laden," lauded bin Laden's early career:

A follow-up press release (released six days later, according to AFPAT, though erroneously dated May 2) was titled "Retraction of Agreeing to Disagree":

"MAS has some explaining to do," AFPAT says with dry understatement:

There's actually a third possibility. When an individual upsets people by saying X, then retracts X and claims it didn't reflect his true beliefs, it's a safe bet the last statement is a lie. Similarly, the bin Laden eulogy might simply have been a classic gaffe: an ill-considered expression of a sincere sentiment.

  The Customer Is Always Right?   David Swanson's politics are not exactly what you'd call middle-of-the-road. The author of a book called "War Is a Lie" and a blog called WarIsACrime.org, Swanson is also a signatory of a letter vowing to oppose the re-election of Barack Obama--because Obama is a war-monger!

Swanson blogs an exchange he had recently with United Air Lines' customer-service department, which began with this complaint:

Swanson has a small point here; the pilot probably should have shown a bit more restraint. Then again, his failure to do so is quite forgivable given that among bin Laden's victims were 100 United crewmen and passengers. But Swanson's letter is a wacko political screed that continues for 800 more words. Nonetheless, he received this response from a UAL customer-service rep:

OK, the customer is always right, but we occasionally fly United too, and we have to say it offends us that the airline would give this guy any more than a perfunctory "I'm sorry you feel that way" type of apology. Perhaps other United customers will let the airline know their views.

  That Didn't Take Long   Two months ago, we noted that the Washington Post's E.J. Dionne had become a sort of Baghdad Bob of American liberalism, declaring triumph win or lose. At the time, he was celebrating a legislative defeat on so-called collective bargaining in Wisconsin, arguing that it would galvanize the left. A year earlier, he had celebrated the left's legislative victory on ObamaCare, which did in fact galvanize the right.

National Review's Yuval Levin reprises a quote from the latter column, dated March 22, 2010:

Then he contrasts it with Dionne's column of two days ago:

From fundamental reform to endangered modest first step. What a comedown! If we keep the pressure on Dionne, total surrender can't be too far behind.

  Out on a Limb   "2012 Might Be One Deal Romney Can't Close"--headline, Reuters.com, May 13

 With DNC in Mind, City Bans Carrying Urine, Feces 

 'We Need to Shut Up and Move On' 

  Take That, Taliban!   " 'American Idol' Top 3 Unveiled"--headline, Hartford Courant, May 12

  With So Many Beauties She Took the Town by Storm   "Obama Declares Miss. Disaster Zone"--headline, SchnittShow.com, May 12

  Sarah Palin Draws Another Map   "Woman Trying to Make Left Turn Hurt"--headline, Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, Iowa), May 13

  What Would Lindsay Lohan Do Without Experts?   "Probation Means Lindsay Lohan Must Behave to Stay Out of Jail, Legal Experts Say"--headline, Los Angeles Times website, May 12

  The Lonely Lives of Researchers   "NU Researchers Probing Bees"--headline, Omaha World-Herald, May 13

  How 'I Got in His PJs' I'll Never Know   " 'I Feel Good' in James Brown's PJs"--headline, Globe and Mail (Toronto), May 13

  For Emergency Cosmetic Surgery   "Sultan Woman With Dog's Head Taken to Hospital"--headline, Associated Press, May 12

  Stones Are Still Permitted   "Conn. Headmaster Says Student's Prom Ban Sticks"--headline, Associated Press, May 12

  Hey, Kids! What Time Is It?   "It's Time to Dump Chomsky Into the Wastebasket of History"--headline, FrontPageMag.com, May 13

 Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  It's Always in the Last Place You Look   "Last Neanderthal Bolthole Found in Russia"--headline, Scotsman, May 13

 Too Much Information 

  News of the Tautological and the Oxymoronic   "Ensemble, Soloists a Study in Teamwork"--headline, Indianapolis Star, May 13

  Breaking News From 1988   "Exclusive--Rep. Ron Paul: 'I Am a Candidate for President' "--headline, ABCNews.com, May 13

  News You Can Use   "Five Reasons to Be Concerned Your Husband Is a Psychopath"--headline, Puffington Host, May 12

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  What's Osama bin Watchin'?   "A stash of pornography was found in the hideout of Osama bin Laden by the U.S. commandos who killed him, current and former U.S. officials said on Friday," Reuters reports from Washington:

Here's our question, though. Why no scare quotes around "pornography"? Over at Reuters, one man's terrorist is another man's freedom fighter, but as for pornography, they know it when they see it.

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Joel Engel, Michele Schiesser, Zack Russ, Edward Tannen, Michael Segal, Hillel Markowitz, David Krause, Park O'Brien, Brian Tyree, Mark Kellner, Ethel Fenig, Scott Siegel, Peter Huntsman, Abe Beyda, Scott McIntyre, Jillian Melchior, David Layfield, David Hallstrom, Kevin Burns, Mike Perry, Kyle Kyllan, John Sanders, David Gerstman, Mark King, Tad Doviak, Doug Black, Ed Grinberg, Pete Farnham, John Bobek, Stefan Sharkansky and Brian Warner. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)