By Bernard Bailyn (1974)

Bernard Bailyn had already published his seminal "The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution" (1967) when he turned his attention to the "losers," hoping to understand "why any sensible, well-informed, right-minded American with a modicum of imagination and common sense could possibly have opposed the Revolution." The result is an elegant, penetrating profile of Thomas Hutchinson, royal governor of Massachusetts. "It is hard to imagine anyone less disposed by background or heritage to betray his countrymen," writes Bailyn. Yet as tensions escalated between Britain and the colonies, the "rational, circumspect and cool" Hutchinson consistently upheld British sovereignty—only to see his "high hopes and eager expectations" descend into "disillusionment, a search for understanding, bewilderment, and finally despair." The governor's house was savagely vandalized in the Stamp Act riots of 1765; he was vilified, burned in effigy and eventually driven into exile. He died in England in 1780, feeling betrayed by both sides in a war he had fervently sought to avoid.

By Mary Beth Norton (1972)

During and after the revolution, 8,000 loyalists fled to Britain, where they lived in varying degrees of deprivation, the property they left behind confiscated or abandoned. American-born colonists had been raised to think of Britain as their true home, but these refugees quickly realized that this cold, expensive and unsympathetic island "was not in fact their home," writes Mary Beth Norton writes. The displaced loyalists "found their advice ignored, their needs slighted, and their months of exile stretching into years." The author poignantly chronicles the refugees' depressing quest to find support—which finally came for some in 1783, when Parliament established a commission to compensate them, a milestone in the development of state welfare schemes. 

By Cassandra Pybus (2006)

Stereotypes suggest that loyalists were rich white men, but their number included 20,000 patriot-owned slaves who responded to British promises of freedom in exchange for joining the redcoats. Cassandra Pybus's illuminating "Epic Journeys of Freedom" describes how, at the end of the war, thousands of these so-called black loyalists left America to chart free lives elsewhere in the empire. The results were discouraging. In the Maritimes of eastern Canada, black refugees suffered "bitter cold and grinding poverty," as well as inescapable racial tensions, and life in London was hardly better. The refugees' struggles prompted British abolitionists to sponsor a free black colony in West Africa—the origins of Freetown, Sierra Leone—for which black loyalists Thomas Peters and David George helped recruit 1,200 settlers from Canada. Less fortunate, though, were the handful of black loyalists whom Pybus, in a brilliant feat of research, traces to Australia's fatal shore: They were convicts on the First Fleet of 1787-88.

By Elizabeth Lichtenstein Johnston (1901)

Fifteen-year-old Elizabeth Lichtenstein married a fellow Georgia loyalist, William Johnston, during the war and started a family against the backdrop of British defeat. The Johnstons moved as refugees through the emptying British outposts of the South, then on to Edinburgh. The family went next to Jamaica, hoping to rebuild their lives in the empire's richest colony. Instead it broke them, as Elizabeth relates in the memoir she wrote late in life, "Recollections of a Georgia Loyalist." After the deaths of two young children and other hardships, Elizabeth decided to leave Jamaica even though it meant parting from her beloved husband. When the ship arrived, "I uttered screams that distressed my poor husband to such a degree that . . . he begged me . . . to let him go on board and bring our things back, but all I could say was, 'It is too late!' " 

By Lorenzo Sabine (1847)

For decades after independence, American historians ignored or disdained the loyalists. So when Lorenzo Sabine, a teenage history buff, moved to Maine in the 1810s, he was surprised to discover "the graves and the children of the Loyalists . . . around me in every direction." Sabine compiled a biographical dictionary called "The American Loyalists" by combing through state and family papers, interviewing survivors and inspecting tombstones. His 3,000 entries include well-documented figures such as William Franklin, Benjamin's only son, whose term as the last royal governor of New Jersey culminated in imprisonment and embittered exile. Equally striking are the entries for the ordinary women and men whose lives we glimpse, attesting to the range and depth of loyalism—and the extent to which the revolution really was America's first civil war.

—Ms. Jasanoff teaches history at Harvard University and is the author of "Liberty's Exiles: American Loyalists in the Revolutionary World" (2011).