UNITED NATIONS—The International Criminal Court's chief prosecutor told the U.N. Security Council he is seeking arrest warrants against three members of Col. Moammar Gadhafi's regime on suspicion of committing crimes against humanity in Libya.

"The evidence collected establishes reasonable grounds to believe that widespread and systematic attacks against the civilian population have been and continue to be committed in Libya, including murder and persecution as crimes against humanity," prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo said Wednesday.

Track the latest events in Libya.

Track events day by day in the region.

See the level of unrest, plus the economic and politic status of some countries across North Africa and the Middle East.

Popular demonstrations in Tunisia toppled a president and spread to countries across the region. See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

"There is also relevant information on the alleged commission of war crimes," Mr. Moreno-Ocampo told the 15-member council in New York. The Security Council in February referred the situation in Libya to the ICC to investigate possible war-crimes charges.

Mr. Moreno-Ocampo's request for arrest warrants goes to ICC judges, who can reject the request. He said he would keep the three names sealed until he presents them in a matter of weeks to the ICC judges.

He declined to say if Col. Gadhafi was one of the three, who he said appeared to bear the greatest responsibility for the alleged crimes against humanity.

The prosecutor is also investigating alleged crimes against humanity committed by rebel forces. Those allegations include mistreatment of prisoners and the "unlawful arrest, mistreatment and killings of sub-Saharan African civilians wrongly perceived to be mercenaries," he said.

The Gadhafi regime, watching rebellions in Egypt and Tunisia, brought mercenaries into Libya as early as January to prepare for possible demonstrations in the country, Mr. Moreno-Ocampo said.

Before the prosecutor spoke, Libya's deputy foreign minister, Khaled Kaim, said Mr. Moreno-Ocampo's case against the Libyan government was based on "unverified information or video footages reproduced or photoshopped by some amateur photographers."

He noted that the Libyan government had hosted a fact-finding mission from the U.N. Human Rights Council last week and was prepared to host a follow-up visit.

The U.S. ambassador to the U.N., Susan Rice, seized on Mr. Moreno-Ocampo's recommendation to press those close to Col. Gadhafi to turn against the Libyan leader, as U.S. officials have urged many times in recent months.

"The specter of ICC prosecution is serious and imminent and should again warn those around Gadhafi about the perils of continuing to tie their fate to his," she said.

The U.S. doesn't recognize the ICC but voted in favor of sending the Libya case to the court.

Mr. Moreno-Ocampo acknowledged the difficulty of arresting regime members, which would be the responsibility of the Libyan government.

He said there was evidence showing "security forces have been systematically shooting at peaceful protesters," and that between 500 and 700 people were killed in February, the month widespread protests began. Efforts to cover up the killings made the exact number of victims of the regime difficult to ascertain, he said.

He said doctors weren't allowed to keep casualty figures and he that many of the injured were arrested in hospitals by security forces.

The ICC is also probing the allged use of cluster bombs and other heavy weapons by the regime in Misrata and other urban areas, Mr. Moreno-Ocampo said. Many nations have agreed not to use cluster bombs because of the danger of civilian casualties.

The prosecutor's preliminary investigation was based on interviews with 45 people with "direct knowledge of the crimes committed" and the study of more than 569 documents, including photographic evidence.

—Richard Boudreaux in Tripoli contributed to this article.

 Write to  Joe Lauria at newseditor@wsj.com 