Making business green was once seen as a burden. It was what company's that wished to be seen as ethical did. It cost money and stood in the way of increasing a firm's margins. Today, the situation could not be more different.  Rich Green, Nokia's chief technology officer, puts it in simple terms. "Green is neither a threat, nor an opportunity. It is an obligation."

In a business environment of shrinking margins and spiralling material and energy costs, it is perhaps unexpected that one of the world's leading mobile phone manufacturers should petition the European Parliament to ban the use of hazardous substances in consumer electronics. 

Yet this is precisely what Sony Ericsson has done. "We believe the electronics industry has a responsibility to move proactively to find substitutes to replace brominated flame retardants and PVC and are therefore calling on EU legislators to show leadership on this issue by voting to tighten the RoHS directive," says company spokeswoman Holly Rossetti. 

The Restriction of the Use of Certain Hazardous Substances in Electrical and Electronic Equipment Regulations 2008 (known as RoHS) lay down strict limits for manufacturers on the use of hazardous materials such as lead, PVC, mercury and cadmium. 

Over the past 10 years, Sony Ericsson has championed what it calls a "full lifecycle approach", measuring the environmental impact of the phone from conception through to production and retirement. Although all Sony Ericsson phones exceed current European criteria, the company has also developed a range of phones called GreenHeart, which acts as a showcase for innovations that are now starting to filter through to the wider product range, including some of the Xperia Android phones. 

GreenHeart phones feature waterborne paint, recycled plastic and optimized packaging. Instruction booklets are included on the phone as a digital file, rather than as printed paper, and the smaller boxes that result not only save on packaging but on transportation costs, since more of them can fit into a shipping container. 

The company estimates that by replacing the standard manual in one million phones, it has saved 350 tonnes of paper, the equivalent of 13,000 trees and 75,000 cubic meters of water. Ultimately, says the company, the aim is "not about making one standard phone green. It is about making green phones standard." 

It acknowledges, however, that in a market where rapid turnover is the norm, consumer awareness of green issues still lags behind the technology. 

In addition to making green credentials an important factor in the decision to purchase a mobile telephone, the company wants to encourage users to recycle their old phones, and has set a target to collect 1 million handsets in 2011 under its global 'take back' program.

However, if it is an obligation, then, says  Tim Watkins, vice president of Huawei Western Europe, the growing need for energy-efficient products is a real opportunity to innovate while helping client companies save on operating costs.

"Many mobile operators around the world are now having to reassess their 20-year-old infrastructure and plan for the future," he says. "Modern technology is a lot less power-hungry than it was. The green agenda is making us more competitive and giving the customers we sell to a real benefit, because they have a green agenda they can talk about."

  Dirk van den Berg, president of Delft University of Technology, points to the fact that emerging markets are seizing the opportunities that green pressures provide. "The emerging markets, China in particular, will take a lead role. The twelfth five-year plan puts a lot of emphasis on green technologies. In the case of China regulatory provisions combined with massive investment in green technologies will certainly produce a boost in these sectors. China is already the third biggest wind turbine manufacturer in the world and also the solar energy sector is quite substantial," he says. "In Europe the picture is mixed. The European climate change system is driving a new technological market for smart, clean energy in the EU. However, a regulations induced backlash can be feared in the nuclear area as a response to the recent events in Japan." Cisco used the changing regulatory environment to create new opportunities. "We created what we call the Network Building Mediator, which allows companies to understand every energy device that takes energy off the grid in their location," says  Chris Dedicoat, president of European markets at Cisco. "Leading companies like Shell are now implementing this across their business." In that inelegant phrase, the company also eats its own dogfood. Thanks to the system, Mr. Dedicoat says: "I now know exactly what electricity is being used. I can monitor it, then we can look at options. You cannot put a figure on savings until you have the information. That old adage, 'If you can't measure, you can't manage.' There's a lot of truth in that. The other aspect is to get the mindset across the company. We reduced air travel by 45%. Huge savings. Then, we decided to provide carbon reports to individual departments in the same way that you provide financial reports. That way, you start to establish a mindset and mindshare across the company. It's through those things that you achieve change, not from having one tree-hugger in a department."

One of the main problems facing companies in the information and communication technology sector is the lack of clear guidelines and transparency in environmental claims. Neelie Kroes, the European Commissioner for the Digital Agenda, acknowledges the problem. "A main priority for 'green' ICT is to ensure transparency concerning such figures," she says. "Specifically, in our Digital Agenda for Europe we have asked the ICT sector to develop a common measurement methodology for its greenhouse gas emissions and its energy consumption. Our approach to cutting carbon emissions while maintaining growth is to improve energy efficiency. ICT has the potential to play a central and critical role in helping us improve energy efficiency and thus reduce emissions across the economy. But as a first step to achieving this, we need transparency to understand what works efficiently today, what does not and where ICT can help. Otherwise we risk making the wrong investments." 

All very well, says Mr Dedicoat, but "from an economic perspective, Europe has to stop talking about how good it is about supplying green energy in the future and asking practically what it's going to do today. The European Commission should look at sustainability when buying for itself. In Europe or any European country, procurement by the government is a key component of any industry". 

"Rather than spending months in internal meetings, all they should do is come up with simplistic approaches that could be gleaned from the work of the MacArthur Foundation and lead by example," Mr. Dedicoat says. "In this, Europe has a chance to lead the world in understanding the whole product lifecycle, and to make money by exporting the expertise to the rest of the world. It's not about making more windmills than anyone else. It's about showing the world that we can make truly sustainable goods. I think government has got to make people understand that the age when we would bury things at taxpayers' expense has got to come to an end. I think people don't really understand that there's more gold in a tonne of IT scrap than in a tonne of ore. All precious metals, among other materials, should be recycled or recyclable."

See the full Tech Council report.

