A battle is heating up over the meaning of a single word in the health overhaul that could mean billions of dollars to the makers of biotechnology drugs. 

The word is "exclusivity." Last year's health law says brand-name makers of the blockbuster medicines are entitled to 12 years of it. The question is whether makers of generics have to wait the whole period before even beginning to seek approval—or can get a head start with regulators so their copies can hit the shelves as soon as the 12 years are up.

Companies including pharmacy network  CVS Caremark Corp.
CVS


-0.19
%




 and insurer  Aetna Inc.
AET


0.86
%




 want to get their hands on the cheaper generics as soon as possible, and they're calling on the Food and Drug Administration to interpret the law in a way favorable to generic-drug makers.

Biotech medicines, or "biologics," are derived from proteins and used to treat cancer, rheumatoid arthritis and other diseases. Some cost tens of thousands of dollars a year per patient, adding a big cost burden for insurers, Medicare and others who pay for the drugs.

The health-law provision, years in the making, for the first time creates a path to approval in the U.S. for less-expensive generic biologics.

This week three Democratic senators and Republican Sen. John McCain of Arizona came to the generic drug makers' aid.

"We are extremely concerned about possible interpretations ... that could further delay the availability of generic biologic drugs, restricting access for many Americans and driving up costs for the federal government," said a letter signed by Mr. McCain, a longtime drug-industry critic, and Democrats Sherrod Brown of Ohio, Tom Harkin of Iowa and Charles Schumer of New York. 

The letter amounted to a counterattack against another bipartisan quartet of senators who asked the FDA earlier this month to preserve "incentives for innovators to research and develop new treatments."

Those other senators and brand-name drug makers such as  Amgen Inc.
AMGN


1.35
%




 said the FDA should establish 12 years of "data exclusivity." That would bar generics makers from drawing on the existing product's data during the exclusivity period, delaying the generic drug's application for approval. 

CVS Caremark interprets the law to mean that branded drug makers get only four years of data exclusivity and 12 years overall sales protection. The company, a big distributor of generic drugs, joined Aetna,  Humana Inc.
HUM


0.83
%




 and seniors' lobby AARP in a letter to the FDA, dated Jan. 20. 

"The availability of biogenerics will help reduce costs for health plans, employers and federal programs and will help make these medications more affordable to patients," said a CVS spokeswoman.

The FDA says it is reviewing all the comments. 

State pension funds in California and Ohio have called for early access to generic biologics to save money. A spokeswoman for the Ohio Public Employees Retirement System said: "If OPERS could achieve at least a 25% reduction in the cost of biologic drugs, it would save the system over $12.7 million in one year," she said.

Medicare paid more than $2 billion for three antianemia biologics in 2009, said an agency spokeswoman.

Biotech-drug makers say they need 12 years protection from generics to pay for costly research. "Congress intended data exclusivity to be an incentive for innovation," said Amgen, which makes several top-selling biologics.

The health-care law doesn't specify "market" or "data" exclusivity, said generic drug lawyer  Kurt Karst of Hyman Phelps & McNamara PC. He noted that the wrangling is only the latest episode in an the ongoing war over generic biologics, also called biosimilars. President Barack Obama's administration wanted only seven years of sales exclusivity in the bill, but he was outgunned by industry lobbyists including the Biotechnology Industry Organization or BIO. 

"This fight was bitter from the start, because the brand-name companies won 12 years exclusivity," said Mr. Karst. 

Making the matter trickier, some companies produce both brand-name and generic medicines. The world's largest generic-drug company by sales,  Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd.
TEVA


-0.49
%




, also has a branded biologic for multiple sclerosis.

Teva, which is part of the generic drug makers' trade group, applied for membership in BIO recently, a move that industry lawyers in Washington said caused consternation among BIO's established members. They said BIO members must pledge to support the group's policy positions, and it advocates 12 years of data exclusivity.

"We have publicly stated that we intend to grow significantly in biologics. Membership in BIO is a natural fit," said a Teva spokeswoman. A BIO spokesman said Teva's application "will go through our board-approved review process."

 Write to  Alicia Mundy at alicia.mundy@wsj.com 