By Jervis Anderson (1973)

Once called the "most dangerous Negro in America" by a congressman, A. Philip Randolph (1889-1979) evolved from socialist radical to respected labor leader and civil-rights statesman. His most noteworthy achievement: the decade-long drive to organize the porters for Pullman railroad sleeping cars. Randolph had to overcome a powerful corporation, politicians, communists who distrusted his democratic instincts and even some of the country's black leadership. Biographer Jervis Anderson presents an absorbing portrait of the era and of Randolph's implacable organizing work, beginning in the late 1920s, when porters would pass the hat for funds to get him to his next city. Finally, in 1937, the Pullman company signed a contract with the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters. Randolph's life is a study in moral clarity: He believed in integration, nonviolence, working-class values and the proposition that "the first condition to being worthy of help from others is for an individual, race, or nation to do something for itself."

By Richard D. Kahlenberg (2007)

Albert Shanker (1928-97) was a staunch supporter of trade unions and New Deal economics—but he was also a fervent anticommunist and unabashed patriot. As a former New York schoolteacher, Shanker became a major teachers-union advocate and led strikes in the late 1960s that shut down the city's schools. The cause of the conflict: an attempt by black radicals to commandeer the school system, a move that Shanker and the teachers union successfully resisted. He was a civil-rights partisan, but as Richard D. Kahlenberg shows in this solid portrait, Shanker's hostility to the schools "reform" earned him the enmity of many leftist friends. He never backed down, going on to build the American Federation of Teachers into a powerful union—though nowadays his brand of muscular liberalism is a rare commodity in labor circles.

By Steven Brill (1978)

Jimmy Hoffa was detested by Robert Kennedy—who investigated him as a Senate counsel in the 1950s and pursued him as U.S. attorney general in the early 1960s—and by labor's traditionalist leadership. But the Teamsters leader was admired by thousands of truckers across the country, who credited him with raising them into the middle class. The gains came at a price: Hoffa had cut a Faustian deal by forging an alliance with gangsters to ensure that Teamsters would never be out-thugged by trucking companies. As Steven Brill notes in this vivid account of the union's story, Hoffa came to regret the alliance as the mob took over the union. Hoffa wasn't the only fascinating figure from this period: Harold Gibbons created a mini-social democracy for Teamsters in his St. Louis stronghold but also lived lavishly on union funds. By the 1970s, Hoffa had been murdered, Gibbons sidelined, and the union had fallen into a coalition of the mediocre and the venal.

By Ted Morgan (1999)

Jay Lovestone (1897-1990) was briefly the leader of the American Communist Party in the 1920s, but he broke with Stalin and then spent the rest of his life fighting communism's global reach. Lovestone's special mission: combating Soviet infiltration of organized labor. In Ted Morgan's engrossing biography, "A Covert Life," we see Lovestone after World War II employing quasi-Bolshevik tactics to bar communists, then militantly opposed to the Marshall Plan, from gaining control of European labor and undermining American goals. Regarded by some as a hero of the early Cold War period, and working as a kind of labor foreign secretary, Lovestone pieced together an international network with the goal of building democratic, anticommunist unions throughout the world. His organizing efforts in places like Kenya and Tunisia ended as noble failures, but Lovestone never wavered in his belief that unions free of state control are essential to democratic societies.

By Henry James (1886)

In his only overtly political novel, Henry James addressed themes that would resonate down the 20th century: Downtrodden workers relatively satisfied with prevailing social arrangements are treated as human lab rats by an assortment of reformers and revolutionaries. The story's protagonist is Hyacinth Robinson, a bookbinder who—outraged by the plight of the poor and working class—is attracted to anarchist violence. But he has second thoughts when he is drawn into the circle of Princess Casamassima, a wealthy radical dilettante. Her friends' delusional revolutionary rhetoric puts him off (but her riches attract him). Robinson is no doubt speaking for James when he describes this group's members as "in a state of chronic spiritual inflammation."

—Mr. Puddington, the director of research at Freedom House, is the author of "Lane Kirkland: Champion of American Labor." 