 New York 

Roger Rees is so charming, so skilled at turning acquaintances into acolytes, that when he opens Tuesday in the Broadway musical "The Addams Family"—he's replacing Nathan Lane as Gomez, the pencil-mustached paterfamilias of a very perverse clan—bouquets and well-wishing missives will surely crowd him out of his dressing room. But the floral tributes had better be prepared to make way for futomaki, hamachi and otoro, all courtesy of Dame Judi Dench, Mr. Rees's close friend and fellow Royal Shakespeare Company denizen.

"She'll be sending sushi," the Welsh-born actor, 66, said confidently one morning last week over eggs Benedict at an Upper West Side restaurant. "We do it continually with each other. The night I opened a few years ago in 'Waiting for Godot' in London, a ton arrived. It was marvelous." 

Mr. Rees—who's perhaps best known to American audiences as the condescending tycoon Robin Colcord on the sitcom "Cheers" and as a loony British ambassador on "West Wing"—is, it quickly becomes clear, an enthusiast. "That's good. That's very good" is his standard comment after telling—or hearing—a flavorsome anecdote about a giant of the theater: Jonathan Miller, Laurence Olivier, Harold Pinter.

But he's at his most effusive when discussing his profession. "It's so like sex isn't it?" he asked, "so foolish. It's such a silly thing—spending your life pretending to be other people. But it's fascinating. You can never get it exactly right. That's the great thing."

Mr. Rees's fondness for musicals—and for challenges—was what impelled him, he said, into signing on for "The Addams Family." (It probably didn't hurt that "The Addams Family" is a family affair; his partner of 28 years, Rick Elice, co-wrote the libretto.) "I told Nathan: 'I'm going to step into your shoes. Will you leave them by the armoire?'

"He's my hero," Mr. Rees deadpanned. "I write to him and he refuses to answer. I'm like his worst fan."

The tango-crazed ghoul Gomez "is a big old part," he continued. "It's like Toby Belch in 'Twelfth Night.' You drive the whole play. As I'm rehearsing I go: 'That was a big scene. Oh, my God, there's another big scene.' But it's like Nike. Just do it."

Of course, the average Nike wearer doesn't cross-train with Mr. Rees's vigor. While learning the songs for the show and working with his voice teacher, he was also journeying to Minneapolis to oversee a reading of a play he'd commissioned; rehearsing his one-man show of Shakespeare miscellany, "What You Will"; and co-directing "Peter and the Starcatcher," a prequel to "Peter Pan" that opened in early March to rapturous reviews at New York Theater Workshop. "And now I'm only doing one thing: 'The Addams Family.'"

And doing it awfully well, according to Bebe Neuwirth, who plays Mr. Rees's stage wife, Morticia, and has worked with him in several plays since they met 20 years ago on the set of "Cheers." "Roger is making Gomez this real guy—a peculiar guy, but a real guy," she said. "And he's fantastic at the tango."

Mr. Rees is an old Broadway hand. Thirty years ago, he played the title role in the Royal Shakespeare Company's hit "The Life and Adventures of Nicholas Nickleby," an 8½-hour keester-testing adaptation of the Dickens novel. His performance won him a Tony Award and—briefly— made him a sensation. "Right after, I was due to do a musical in London where I played a rabbit," he said. "It was a lovely experience. And then I came back to the U.S. three months later and people looked at me and said: 'Ah, yes, yes. You were the toast of the town, but now someone else is.'

"If I'd had more thorough representation," the boyish-looking Mr. Rees continued, "I might well have stayed here after 'Nicholas Nickleby' and become Jeremy Irons or something like that. But I like to do whatever comes next." The list includes the 1995 Broadway production of "Indiscretions" with Jude Law and Kathleen Turner and the musical adaptation of "A Man of No Importance" at Lincoln Center in 2002; movies like "Star 80," "Next Stop Wonderland" and "The Prestige"; guest appearances on series like "Grey's Anatomy" and "The Good Wife"; two years in the mid-1980s as associate artistic director at the Bristol Old Vic, where Mr. Rees first began directing plays; and a three-year stint—from 2005 through 2007—running the prestigious Williamstown Theatre Festival in Massachusetts. 

"It's great," Mr. Rees said of directing. "I've learned from the greatest people, and I've got wonderful things to pass on. I like being the daddy. And I love to see people blossom."

The son of a policeman, Mr. Rees was attending art school and painting scenery at a theater in Wimbledon to earn extra money when he was approached by a director in search of a young actor. "I was a skinny 17-year-old," said Mr. Rees, listing his chief qualifications. "I don't know why, but I was really good in that first play."

The early success propelled him into auditioning for the Royal Shakespeare Company, only to be told in no uncertain terms to disappear and do something about his terrible voice. Away he went to the Pitlochry Festival Theater in Scotland to make props. When the company's resident juvenile was sidelined with an ear infection, Mr. Rees was recruited to go on in his place, playing Yasha in "The Cherry Orchard," among other parts. 

Slightly more seasoned, Mr. Rees reapplied to the RSC and was accepted "only because they wanted thick young men who could move scenery," he said. (A fellow "thick young man" was Ben Kingsley.) It was four years of playing hunters whose dialogue began and ended with "My lord." "And then," he said, "we started to get parts," including Antipholus of Syracuse in "Comedy of Errors" and Malcolm in "Macbeth."

That's how it would be for him, Mr. Rees thought: bigger and bigger roles, a grand and glorious life in the theater right up through senescence. Then the "Cheers" producers came to see him in the Tom Stoppard play "Hapgood" in Los Angeles. "My life flipped over like that," he said, inverting his hands. "And I'm thankful for it. It's good. If Shakespeare were alive, he'd be doing what I'm doing. He'd be doing some movies and some TV and some plays." 

Mr. Rees is committed to "The Addams Family" until November. After that, who knows? Not him, though Lear would be nice at some point soon—while he's still got the strength to hoist Cordelia. "This profession is meant to be up and down," he said. "You're loved, you're hated. You're loved, you're betrayed on stage and off. And it's thrilling. It's lovely. And it's because of that that I'm not working in a bank."

 Ms. Kaufman writes about culture and the arts for the Journal. 