Iran arrested opposition leaders Mir Hossein Mousavi and Mehdi Karroubi, along with their wives, and transported them to a prison operated by the Revolutionary Guards in Tehran, family members said.

Advisers to the opposition leaders said a senior commander of the Revolutionary Guards who is sympathetic to the opposition movement confirmed the news of the arrest and the leaders' whereabouts. They said he told them they were taken to Heshmatieyh prison, a high-level security facility inside a Revolutionary Guard military base in eastern Tehran.

Family members said neighbors told them that Messrs. Mousavi and Karroubi, along with their wives, Zahra Rahnavard and Fatemeh Karroubi, were taken by force from their homes Thursday afternoon. 

They said Iranian security agents made the arrests without a judicial process and without an arrest warrant, and said no official has taken responsibility.

Iran's government hasn't confirmed the arrest. Fars news agency, affiliated with the Revolutionary Guards, posted a comment from an anonymous judiciary official denying opposition leaders were arrested and saying they were at their homes.

The report of arrests comes on the eve of the "Tuesday of Protest"—nationwide antigovernment demonstrations the opposition hopes will increase pressure on Tehran and ride the momentum of revolts around the region.

The news infuriated opposition supporters Monday night. Many posted messages on Facebook and Persian websites and blogs pledging to take to the streets Tuesday. 

Videos posted online showed Iranians on rooftops Monday night chanting "Death to the dictator" and "God is great."

A post on the Green Movement's Facebook page read, "The regime crossed the red line. Tomorrow will be our turn to rise up against them."

"We consider our parents abducted hostages in the hands of Iran's regime," said a statement from Mr. Karroubi's family posted on opposition websites.

Mr. Mousavi's website, Kalame, said Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei ordered the arrests in reaction to antigovernment protests on Feb. 14 and 20 calling for his ouster.

"The Islamic Republic feels very threatened right now and it took a gamble by arresting the leaders," says Roozbeh MirEbrahimi, an Iranian political analyst in New York.

On Sunday, National Security Council spokesman Tommy Vietor said, "The United States strongly condemns the Iranian government's organized intimidation campaign and arrests of political figures, human-rights defenders, political activists, student leaders, journalists and bloggers."

Messrs. Mousavi and Karoubi were placed under house arrest after the Feb. 14 protest, when antigovernment demonstrations erupted across Iran in solidarity with the uprisings in the Arab world. Iranian officials immediately called for the prosecution of opposition leaders, calling them "agents of U.S. and Israel" and some parliament members even called for their execution.

Iran's chief prosecutor, Gholam Hossein Mohseni Ejeih, told reporters on Monday that opposition members had been isolated and further action against them and supporters of the opposition, inside and outside of Iran, could follow.

"Those who are working against the Islamic regime and spreading rumors abroad, whether they are Iranian or foreign, should know that they will be hunted down," Mr. Ejeeh said Monday.

Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, speaking at a U.N. human-rights meeting in Geneva on Monday, reiterated her criticism of Iran's government for its human-rights violations and systematic crackdown on opponents.

 Write to  Farnaz Fassihi at farnaz.fassihi@wsj.com 