Brows will likely be furrowed and hands wrung during this year's "Jazz Forum" discussion within the annual Association of Performing Arts Presenters conference at Midtown's Hilton New York and Towers. At least, they were last year. The audience is aging, the arts professionals said, the music's identity either too diffuse or too narrow. And given the digital offerings available at home, it's hard to lure people out for live music of any sort. What can be done?

This year, as last, many conference attendees will find answers a few miles south of the Hilton at one of five West Village clubs during the seventh New York Winter Jazzfest this Friday and Saturday night. 

A club crawl through two frigid January nights may sound counterintuitive. But don't tell that to Brice Rosenbloom, whose Boom Collective organization will pack more than 60 bands into three Bleecker Street clubs and two more spaces on Sullivan and West Third streets. Or to the nearly 4,000 people who darted from venue to venue during last year's event.

Mr. Rosenbloom, who curates music year-round at (Le) Poisson Rouge (one Jazzfest venue) created the festival seven years ago, initially filling the old Knitting Factory's three floors. In 2009, he shifted to the present format. He was inspired a bit by the annual South by Southwest Festival in Austin, Texas, which blends an indie-rock club atmosphere with music-industry buzz; by GlobalFest, which showcases world-music artists in New York each January; and chiefly by the APAP conference, which he felt programmed too few jazz showcases and presented them in the dead space of a hotel.

At his home in Fort Greene, Mr. Rosenbloom focused on Jazzfest's evolution. "It's become this great scene," he said, "with band after band playing, and musicians hanging around, checking each other out. For these two nights, Bleecker Street is a completely different place." 

That's partly due to the programming format—eight or nine groups in each venue, from roughly dinner time until 3 a.m. It also owes to Mr. Rosenbloom's liberal aesthetic. "If you as a musician consider what you're doing to fit within what you consider jazz," he said, "I'm fine with that."

Stylistic considerations aside, the event breaks down a more forbidding barrier: price. Single-night passes cost $25; two-night full-festival passes are $35. For enterprising festivalgoers, that can mean just a few dollars per band. APAP attendees get free admission: The confluence of working arts presenters and free-ranging fans seems to benefit both groups. 

Adam Schatz, one of two co-presenters Mr. Rosenbloom enlisted, heads his own innovative jazz-presenting company, Search and Restore. "I think if you went to Winter Jazzfest not knowing it was connected to the presenters' conference, you'd have no idea," he said. "The passion behind this festival makes even the most industrious of industry folk—the kind who carry around notepads—become fans in an audience rather than talent assessors." 

Winter Jazzfest's lineup skews toward the young and the new—then again, Friday night at (Le) Poisson Rouge ends with a sextet led by 89-year-old drummer Chico Hamilton. There's ample chance to discover fresh, iconoclastic bands, such as Andrew D'Angelo's Agogic quartet, including the innovative trumpeter Cuong Vu, and the three-trombone-based quartet Water Surgeons. 

Not to mention established names doing new things. If you missed clarinetist Don Byron's excellent New Gospel Quintet at Jazz Standard in 2009, here's another shot. One don't-miss centerpiece is Friday night's "VisionFugitive!" collaboration, which expands tenor saxophonist J.D. Allen's trio to an 11-piece ensemble and distills his music through Lawrence D. "Butch" Morris's transformative "conduction" process. 

Feeding from many streams, Jazzfest also documents how musical tributaries flow—via musicians. Before listening to the influential music of alto saxophonist Steve Coleman on Saturday night, one can check out two members of his Five Elements band—vocalist Jen Shyu and guitarist Miles Okazaki—showcased through their own projects. Or follow pianist Jason Lindner on Friday night from (Le) Poisson Rouge, where he plays in clarinetist Anat Cohen's quartet, to the Zinc Bar, where he performs in drummer Dafnis Prieto's Proverb Trio, and finally to Kenny's Castaways for a midnight set with Mr. Lindner's own trio. If bassist Derrick Hodge and drummer Kendrick Scott intrigued you within trumpeter Terence Blanchard's band, separate sets will reveal their visions as leaders.

Jazzfest's greatest virtue may be a conjuring of the communal spirit absent from other New York jazz events, save for the Vision Festival. Its shortcoming is that most of these bands play in an organic style requiring time to fully unfold, but sets rarely run more than 40 minutes. So call this a tasting menu—yet still a diverse bounty rooted in but not ruled by whatever we call jazz.

—Mr. Blumenfeld writes about jazz for the Journal. 