NEW DELHI—India's inflation rate accelerated in December fueled by high food prices, underscoring the need for government measures unveiled earlier in the week and increasing the likelihood of an interest rate rise later this month.

The wholesale price index, which is India's standard inflation measure, rose 8.43% in December from a year earlier, quicker than November's provisional 7.48% rise. Food inflation was at 16.91% in the week to Jan. 1, after hitting 18.32% in the week to Dec. 25.

The Reserve Bank of India, the nation's central bank, meets Jan. 25 for a policy review and economists said the bank was now under intense pressure to raise rates further—after a series of six rate increases in 2010—to stem inflation. High food prices, in particular, are a very politically sensitive issue in India because of their impact on the masses of poor.

"Unless there is some substantial decline in food prices in the next two weeks, in my view perhaps some tightening may be required," C. Rangarajan, chairman of the prime minister's economic advisory council, told reporters Friday.

The anticipated inflation-fighting move, coupled with Friday's move by the People's Bank of China to raise the share of deposits banks must keep on reserve by 0.5 percentage point starting Jan. 20, underscores the extent to which fast-growing emerging economies are now striving to beat back inflation.

India's central bank faces a further predicament, however, because data released Wednesday showed industrial output growth slowed to a 20-month low in November, up just 2.7% from a year earlier after a rise of 11.3% in October. The small rise was attributed in large part to India's festival season falling in November rather than October as it did in 2009. But economists said concern about not further quashing economic growth may limit the central bank to an interest rate rise of 0.25 percentage point rather than the 0.50 percentage point some have anticipated.

The pick-up in inflation has been driven by food prices, pushed higher largely by growing demand for protein-rich food as Indians become wealthier. In addition, rain in some parts of the country has damaged crops including onions, choking supplies.

India has been trying to stem food prices for weeks by, for instance, banning the export of onions, a culinary staple. Authorities have been scrambling to address the problem but after days of wrangling, a government announcement on inflation Thursday contained no major policy steps on food or other prices.

Instead, the government sought to downplay concerns about prolonged price pressures and warned of stern action against hoarders of essential commodities. "The government will take stringent action against hoarders and black marketers manipulating market prices," a government statement said.

The Bombay Stock Exchange's Sensitive Index closed down 1.7% at a four-month low of 18,860.44 Friday. 

 Write to  Anant Vijay Kala at anant.kala@dowjones.com 