The former chief executive of Freddie Mac has received notice that he may face civil action from the Securities and Exchange Commission as part of its continuing probe of whether the firm properly disclosed its exposure to subprime loans.

Richard Syron, who was ousted as the company's CEO in 2008 when the government took over the mortgage titan, received a Wells notice from the SEC and last month submitted a written response to rebut potential charges. A Wells notice indicates that the SEC staff is preparing to recommend civil-enforcement actions and gives individuals the opportunity to persuade regulators against such an action.

News of the potential civil charges against Mr. Syron was reported by the New York Times.

One of the key issues being examined by SEC officials in its long-running investigation into Freddie Mac and its larger cousin, Fannie Mae, is whether the firms adequately disclosed their purchases and holdings of subprime mortgages, according to people familiar with the matter.

The proposed charges are "completely without merit," said Thomas Green, Mr. Syron's attorney. Mr. Syron's response to the commission shows that he "oversaw a very rigorous and fulsome disclosure process and that the company's disclosures were in fact wholly accurate and complete," said Mr. Green, senior counsel at Sidley Austin, in a statement. 

Mr. Syron, currently an adjunct professor of finance at Boston College, serves on the board of directors for  Genzyme Corp. and is the former chief executive of the American Stock Exchange. 

Two of Mr. Syron's former colleagues have also disclosed receiving notices from the SEC. Anthony "Buddy" Piszel served as chief financial officer until 2008 and last month resigned as the finance chief from  CoreLogic Inc.
CLGX


0.81
%




 Donald Bisenius, who currently serves as the executive vice president in charge of Freddie's single-family credit guarantee business, will leave the company on April 1. 

Daniel Mudd, the former chief executive of Fannie Mae, last week received a Wells notice. 

All of those individuals have indicated that they plan to submit rebuttals to the agency.

Fannie and Freddie, which owned or guaranteed nearly $5.5 trillion in mortgages, increasingly relaxed their loan-purchase standards as the housing boom inflated. The federal government took control of Fannie and Freddie in 2008 as rising loan losses wiped out thin capital levels. 

Mr. Green said that it is "senseless to go after Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae when they were striving to implement the government's policy with respect to housing and to ignore the incredible amount of misconduct that occurred in the origination of these loans throughout the country."

A spokeswoman for the SEC declined to comment.

 Write to  Nick Timiraos at nick.timiraos@wsj.com 