Rafael Nadal has won three of the last four majors and is the favorite at the BNP Paribas Open in Indian Wells, Calif. Novak Djokovic is undefeated this year and just won the Australian Open. But by one tennis maven's reckoning, the best player in the world and best bet to win Indian Wells is the one who has exited his last two events in straight-set losses to Djokovic: Roger Federer. 

Federer is ranked second in the men's tour's official ranking, way behind Nadal and just ahead of Djokovic. But he's No. 1 by a large margin according to Jeff Sackmann, who blogs about tennis numbers at heavytopspin.com and has been trying to develop alternative rankings with more predictive value. The key differences between Sackmann's rankings and the ATP World Tour's: He uses two years of results instead of one; weights recent results more heavily; adjusts for surface and quality of opponent; and treats all matches equally, except for slightly more emphasis on Slams.

These factors all aid Federer to some degree, as he won three majors less than two years ago but more than a year ago; rarely loses to much-weaker opponents; and has been a fixture of the quarterfinals—and usually semifinals—of majors. His No. 1 ranking and his 25% chance of winning Indian Wells—according to Sackmann's simulations that account for the draw and players' head-to-head records—don't suggest he should necessarily be favored head-to-head against Djokovic or Nadal. But they reflect Federer's better chances of advancing far without getting knocked off by an upstart along the way. 

Over the past two years, Sackmann's system would have correctly predicted the winner of matches 69.5% of the time, four percentage points better than using the official rankings and on par with the forecasting systems developed by college-basketball and NFL analysts. Tennis rarely has gotten the sort of statistical treatment of those sports, and Sackmann's system could be a step toward changing that. This all depends, of course, on whether his rankings predict matches going forward as well as they do when applied to the past. Indian Wells represents their first big test. But no pressure, Roger. 

—Carl Bialik

How a new predictive ranking, which incorporates two years of results and weights recent matches more heavily, differs from the ATP's top 10.

 Note: Probability based on draw and results through Wed. 