LONDON—Dirt has a bad name. "It encompasses dust, refuse, excrement, bacteria and soil, and is used to describe unethical, irreligious or obscene behavior," notes Kate Forde, curator of the Wellcome Collection's imaginative, sometimes scary big, new exhibition. 

"Dirt: the Filthy Reality of Everyday Life" (and the accompanying, excellent but un-indexed, paperback book-cum-catalog; Profile, £20) exemplifies the great anthropologist Mary Douglas's dictum that dirt is "matter out of place." Depending on context, dirt can excite disgust, moral outrage or sexual excitement. It is also a marker of civilization—the more urban we are, the larger the quantity and variety of waste we generate.

The exhibition visits six places: a domestic interior in 1683 Delft, depicting Dutch society's obsessive cleanliness coinciding with Antonie van Leeuwenhoek's discovery of microscopic "little animals"—bacteria. Then we go to the London streets, starting with the cholera outbreak of 1854, traced by physician John Snow to a single parish water pump, which showed that the cause of disease was germs, not "miasma," foul air; and the Big Stink, when the drains backed up in 1859. This event led to the heroic construction of the enclosed London sewer system by Joseph Bazalgette in the 1860s.

In 1867 we go to Glasgow, where Joseph Lister's epidemic-preventing hospital reforms included disinfectants; then in 1930, to the Hygiene Museum in Dresden. There, cleanliness is not just the absence of bugs and dirt, but a doctrine of "purity of blood." The association of dirt with otherness is a startling aspect of racism and anti-Semitism.

Another part is devoted to New Delhi and Kolkata today. Grim reflections on the Dalits, the former "untouchables," show vividly how societies have relied on an underclass to do their domestic and municipal cleaning. A film of the annual Durga Puja celebration is flanked by a giant idol of the goddess (made of clay from the sacred river, plus some requisite dust from a brothel), like the ones the film shows being immersed ritually in the Ganges.

Finally, there is a future section, dealing with the Fresh Kills Landfill on New York's Staten Island that was recommissioned to take the debris of 9/11, and how it is—movingly—being renewed as a park. The show ends with two vials containing air from the cleanest and dirtiest cities on earth, part of the ambitious "Ghost Forest" project by British artist Angela Palmer. 

There is a good deal of contemporary art on display. I particularly relished Igor Eskinja's decorative, extraordinarily fragile dust carpet; and Serena Korda's glorious idea of gathering dust from interesting locations and incorporating it into house-bricks. Some of the dust came from the Sussex farmhouse of Vanessa Bell and Duncan Grant, so probably includes some dead skin cells of the celebrated Bloomsbury Group, and there is dust from the houses of Sigmund Freud and Charles Dickens, as well as the House of Commons and Royal Albert Hall. You're invited to contribute some of your own. 

The organizers deserve applause for having the imagination to have included a selection of mid-19th-century photographs and manuscripts showing British civil servant A.J. Munby's fetish for working-class women made grimy by their work (he secretly married one of them).

A video piece of handwashing by Bruce Naumann sits comfortably with a splendid display of Delft tiles; and a blue-and-white chamber pot and several life-size sofa-type objects with their "backs" made from tons of processed human feces somehow go nicely with the 1661 English delftware plate deflatingly inscribed "You and I are Earth." 

 Until Aug. 31 

  www.wellcome.ac.uk   

 Write to  Paul Levy at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 