They aren't going to make the team, and they aren't a factor in the heated rotation battle underway in Yankee camp, but all eyes are on Manny Banuelos and Dellin Betances this spring.

The top two Yankee pitching prospects—Banuelos from the left side, Betances from the right —are seen as the future of this club, and in their first major league camp, they're turning heads. 

Betances blew away the Phillies on Sunday, striking out three while walking one in his sole inning of work. Banuelos might have been even better, cutting up the heart of the Detroit Tigers order Monday in his first taste of big-league hitters —getting All-Star Victor Martinez to ground out, then striking out Jhonny Peralta and Brandon Inge on curveballs. 

Neither player is going to make the major league club— Yankee General Manager Brian Cashman has already said that they're starting in the minors. But they are auditioning for possible roles midseason, and they know that they need to make the higher-ups take notice. 

"I just want to make a good impression," Betances said. "I came in here knowing that it's going to be tough because I haven't had that much experience. I feel good and I'm just going to keep working every time I get the ball. I'm going to try to make the best out of it." 

Physically, the two couldn't be more different. Betances, 23, is a mountain at 6 feet 8 inches, with power and sink to his fastball, which has hit the high-90s on occasion. 

At a stocky 5 feet 10 inches and only 19 years old, Banuelos still manages to generate mid-90s velocity and has a sharp break to his curve. Cashman said that he has the kind of repeatable mechanics that allow him to generate speed despite his size. 

"It's mechanics, it's God-given ability, first and foremost," Cashman said.

More than that, the Mexican native has poise, and confidence. 

"I think people are really pleased with his presence, and his confidence, and things of that nature. They stand out on the mound," Cashman said. 

After his outing, that confidence was bubbling out of Banuelos. The pitcher felt he had passed his first trial by fire. 

"That's what I wanted, against big-league hitters to see how can I pitch?" Banuelos said. "I know those are great hitters. Now I know I can pitch in the big leagues."

Banuelos and Betances headline a group of young pitching prospects that would be the envy of any organization. Baseball America ranked Banuelos No. 41 and Betances No. 43 among baseball's top 100 prospects, with pitcher Andrew Brackman, the third of the Yankees' "Killer Bs", at No. 78. 

Pitching coach Larry Rothschild knows he has a lot of clay to mold here. 

"It's not a usual group," Rothschild said. "Whether it's exceptional or not, I think time tells that. There's a lot of kids here that have a lot going for them stuff-wise and with arm strength, and being able to spin the ball, which is good to see for young kids." 

Considering the vacancies in the back end of the Yankee rotation, many have wondered whether Banuelos and Betances could be ready right away.

 But the Yankees think they have valuable long-term commodities in the pitchers, and they value their development over a few months of major league help. There's a chance both could be called up to help the Yankees this summer, however. 

"Whether they're ready during the course of the season or next year, I can't answer that. They'll answer that," Rothschild said. 

That timetable doesn't bother Banuelos, and he knows he's ticketed for Double-A Trenton. Still, he wants more. After his strong debut, he said he still harbors hopes of pitching so well this spring that he forces his way into the big-league rotation early. 

"I hope so. I mean I want to. We never know....That's what I want, to do the best job in this spring training and maybe we can change that," Banuelos said. 