PARIS—French voters delivered a blow to President Nicolas Sarkozy ahead of next year's presidential election, choosing Socialist and National Front candidates in regional elections on Sunday.

The elections were to choose the representatives of France's cantons who will sit on the general councils of the country's departments. But they were a key test of voter mood 13 months before French voters decide their next president.

Mr. Sarkozy's center-right Union for a Popular Movement gathered about 20% of the votes cast nationwide, well behind the Socialist Party, which had about 36%, according to the Interior Ministry. The National Front gained 12%.

"We in the majority can be a bit disappointed," said Jean-François Copé, general secretary of the UMP. "We must take lessons [from] these results, and of course we will, in particular over the surge of the Front National."

The vote showed the rising popularity of the FN party, which in January elected Marine Le Pen—a 42-year-old daughter of the party's founder, Jean-Marie Le Pen—as its leader.

"The restructuring of French political life is under way," Ms. Le Pen told French television after the vote.

She has tried to rid the party of its racist image, and instead focused her message on economic nationalism. 

She has compared Muslim street prayers to the Nazi occupation of France in World War II. But she also wants France to exit the euro, which France shares with 16 other countries, and she wants to protect French business from imports.

"We need a strong state," Ms. Le Pen said last week in an interview with Dow Jones Newswires and The Wall Street Journal. "We're for the market economy, but we consider that the state must act pre-emptively to avoid the excesses of the market."

The FN threatens France's two main political parties because she is attempting to combine their key populist attractions.

The Socialist Party has drawn support over the years for its moves to tame corporations, for example through high payroll taxes and laws reducing working hours.

Mr. Sarkozy has led a high-profile campaign to rid France of illegal gypsies and to ban women from wearing the full-body niqab outfits favored by a small number of Muslims.

However, his main problem is the economy. He was swept into office in 2007 with a promise to put France back to work. The financial crisis and recession derailed his plans, leaving the French economy with weak growth and high unemployment, which was 9.2% in the fourth quarter of 2010.

The president's approval rating has been around 30%, according to recent opinion polls. 

The two main parties fear that Ms. Le Pen could match the feat of her father, who reached the second round of the 2002 presidential election. 

Mr. Le Pen beat Socialist candidate Lionel Jospin in the first round, on voter fears of collapsing law and order. But he then lost in the second round to the center-right Jacques Chirac, whose party Mr. Sarkozy has inherited.

The cantons send representatives to the general councils of France's 100 departments, its main administrative divisions. The departmental councilors also vote in elections to France's senate, or upper house, as the councilors play a role in voting for senators.

Voter turnout Sunday appeared low, at around 46%.

 Write to  Sebastian Moffett at sebastian.moffett@wsj.com 