The president of Nintendo Co. acknowledged that the company's recent warning against young children playing its new hand-held 3-D game machine could hurt its sales, but said the 3DS isn't a "dangerous" product.

"We are being proactive about informing our customer, even though it may not necessarily be positive for our sales," said  Satoru Iwata, Nintendo's president, in a rare interview. 

The health-related warning, which said children six years old and younger shouldn't play games in 3-D mode on the soon-to-be released 3DS hand-held game device, was meant to be a precautionary measure to inform customers, said Mr. Iwata. He did not deny the view that concerns over possible litigation was one of the factors behind the warning, but he also said that it was not the main reason.

The company said on its website late last month that looking at 3-D images for long periods of time could have an adverse effect on eyesight development. The warning caused a stir, in part because it didn't provide details on the medical evidence.

Kyoto-based Nintendo has become one of the most successful gaming companies in the world. It hopes that the new 3DS will transform the gaming landscape—like its Wii home console has done since its 2006 release—and help the company regain sales momentum. 

Last year, Nintendo reported declines in revenue and operating profit in the April-September period, signaling that the fast pace of growth, thanks to the Wii and the portable DS, may be fizzling out. Sales of the DS fell 43% during that period from the same time a year earlier.

The market for games has become more crowded with newcomers: Cheaper games are now offered online or as applications for mobile devices, such as  Apple Inc.
AAPL


-0.04
%




's iPhone. Nintendo hopes that the 3DS will help kick-start a new cycle of growth and also remind people that well-crafted games are still worth the money.

Mr. Iwata, an unassuming 51-year-old former programmer, joined Nintendo in 2000 and took the helm in 2002 as the company's first president unrelated to its founding family. He has led the company through a period of rapid growth since then, with the success of its DS and Wii game machines helping the home of Super Mario win a broad customer base—most crucially, winning over people who previously had little interest in videogames.

The 3DS goes on sale first in Japan on Feb. 26 and then in the U.S. and Europe in March. In Japan, 3DS will cost about $300. 

Mr. Iwata said the company is sticking with its shipment target of 4 million 3DS units world-wide by the end of March; 1.5 million of those will likely be in Japan. The hand-held console is among the first mainstream products to deliver 3-D images without requiring special glasses. 

One big shift for Nintendo with the launch of the 3DS is that it is working more closely with outside software developers, rather than relying mostly on popular in-house games to drive the initial hardware sales. 

At a three-day 3DS tryout event this weekend for consumers held in Chiba Prefecture, a Tokyo suburb, visitors tried 16 games for the 3DS, including new titles from the "Resident Evil" and "Street Fighter" franchises.

Parents seemed, for the most part, nonplussed about the recent warning.  Toshiaki Iwata (no relation to Nintendo's president) had just finished trying out a new game for 3DS called "Nintendogs + Cats" with his wife and 3-year-old daughter. "Some people are extra-cautious because this is something new, but once parents get used to it, I think they will start letting their kids play with 3-D too," "I've heard about the safety concerns but I wonder if there's any clear scientific basis for it,Right now, I'm not so worried about it." he said.

Nintendo's notice on 3-D viewing for children is similar to the warnings on 3-D televisions and other 3-D products from other manufacturers, and is based on the opinions of experts that the company has consulted, said Nintendo's president. He didn't identify the experts. 

People tend to use game machines continuously for longer hours than other 3-D devices, said Mr. Iwata, the Nintendo president. "Parents sometimes use video games almost as a babysitter for their kids."





Last week at the Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas, Panasonic Corp. said it is working closely with the Japanese government to establish an international set of rules to govern healthy approaches to displaying 3-D images.

Barclays Capital analyst  Haruka Mori expects that the 3DS will initially appeal to people who are knowledgeable about games and tend to spend more money on them, as opposed to younger kids and other casual players that Wii and DS have captured with family-friendly games. 

Whether the 3DS can be successful long-term will depend on its appeal to the players who aren't actively seeking out new games, Ms. Mori said. And that may be not be as easy this time, because there are many more options for playing free games, she said.

Mr. Iwata acknowledged the challenge posted by declining prices of game software due to online and mobile-game services. But he said that the increase in the number of options for playing games, through new platforms like the iPhone, isn't necessarily negative for Nintendo. "A threat is often the flip side of an opportunity," he said.

People who haven't played games before might start playing the cheap options, and later upgrade to games on specialized platforms, Mr. Iwata said. 

Despite the popularity of inexpensive online and mobile-gaming services, Mr. Iwata said Nintendo wouldn't consider offering its software titles to those outside platforms—such as the iPhone—because doing so would only hurt the unique value of Nintendo's games.

 Write to  Juro Osawa at juro.osawa@dowjones.com   Corrections & Amplifications: A previous version of this article incorrectly implied that Nintendo President Satoru Iwata said litigation was one of the main reasons behind the company's recent warning against young children playing 3-D games on its new hand-held device. Mr. Iwata did not deny the view that possible litigation was one of the factors behind the warning, but he said that it was not the main reason.