

NEW DELHI – India's food inflation rate continued to stay stubbornly high in the week through Jan. 15, but the government's still-loose fiscal stance is limiting the effects of a tight monetary policy aimed at bringing down prices. 

Prices of onions continued to swell--a major concern as the vegetable is a staple in Indian cuisine--and sky-rocketing prices have cooked up a political storm. 

The wholesale price index for food articles was little changed at 190.8 in the week ended Jan. 15, compared with 190.6 in the previous week, according to data issued Thursday by the Ministry of Commerce and Industry. 

From a year earlier, the food inflation rate was 15.57%, compared with 15.52% in the previous week. 

Onion prices rose 4% from the previous week, and are now more than double what they were a year earlier. 

Nitesh Ranjan, an economist at the state-run Union Bank Of India, said food inflation is easing gradually. But "it won't come down to single digits anytime before March as the base [index level] was quite low in February last year."

The food inflation rate surged to more than 18% in December as vegetable prices, particularly those of onions, spiked after unseasonal rain damaged crops. 

A slew of fiscal measures by the government helped bring down prices a little, although the slow pace of the decline has ratcheted up concerns of a prolonged period of high inflation. 

Thursday's data showed that the index for primary articles rose 0.3% to 193.6 in the week through Jan. 15. From a year earlier, the index was up 17.26%, compared with a 17.03% increase in the week ended Jan. 8. The fuel products index was unchanged at 150.9. 

Primary articles comprise food and non-food articles, as well as minerals. 

Government bond prices slipped after the data on renewed worries of rate hikes by the central bank if prices don't cool rapidly. 

The most-traded 8.08% 2022 bond was last trading at 99.26 rupees ($2.18), compared with 99.39 rupees before the data. But it was still higher than Tuesday's close of 99.12 rupees. 

Reserve Bank Of India Deputy Governor Subir Gokarn Thursday said there is a high risk of supply pressure translating into more widespread inflation. 

The supply pressure "will not be directly addressed by monetary actions" but if the pressure spills over into the wider inflation process, "that is something that monetary policy should and can address," Mr. Gokarn said. 

"That's what we are trying to do."

However, the government's high fiscal deficit isn't aligned with the RBI's tightening stance, diluting its efforts to control inflation. 

"There has to be fiscal adjustment in line with monetary tightening for the anti-inflationary stance to work," RBI Governor D. Subbarao said. 

The federal government's budgetary deficit widened to a gaping 6.6% of Gross Domestic Product in the last fiscal year ended March as it increased spending to support the economy during the global economic crisis. 

The government expects it to narrow to 5.5% in the current fiscal year, but that is still wide enough to complicate the central bank's efforts to anchor inflationary expectations. 

The RBI Tuesday raised its lending and borrowing rates by 0.25 percentage point each, the seventh increase since March 2010, as it seeks to control inflation while being careful not to hurt economic growth. 

It also raised its general inflation estimate to 7% by the end of March from 5.5% earlier, but said inflation is expected to ease in the April-June quarter. 

Deputy Governor Gokarn said vegetable prices have begun to cool and will reflect in the data due this month. 

Many economists said Tuesday's tepid rate move could set the stage for continued monetary tightening through 2011. 

A recovery in the global economy and firming commodity prices will likely add to domestic price pressure. 

"Unless you take pre-emptive measures, it will be difficult to respond at the last moment," said Union Bank Of India's Ranjan. 



 Write to  Anant Vijay Kala at anant.kala@dowjones.com 