From modern paintings to marble statues, sales of fine art have recovered from the recession, and then some.

Christie's International PLC on Thursday said it sold ₤£3.3 billion ($5.25 billion) of fine and decorative art last year, up 53% from 2009 and surpassing its £3.1 billion in sales during the art market's prior peak in 2007.

The latest sales figures from the London-based auction house indicate that collectors spent more on art last year than they did before recession hit the art market, thanks in large part to new buyers from the U.S. and Asia. Art experts say these newcomers have been buying luxury goods for years but have only recently started to invest in blue-chip paintings. Other collectors are amassing art now because they saw art values soar a few years ago and bet they will profit from any similar run-up this time around.

Christie's Chief Executive  Steven Murphy credited the auction house's performance to a "perfect storm" of factors, from the 23% uptick in first-time bidders last year to the availability of coveted, post-war pieces coming out of American estates built a half-century ago. 

Sotheby's hasn't yet released its consolidated sales, but the New York-based company said it auctioned off $4.3 billion in art last year, up 87% from $2.3 billion in 2009. And on Thursday, an anonymous European collector paid Sotheby's in New York $16.8 million for Titian's "A Sacra Conversazione: The Madonna and Child with Saints Luke and Catherine of Alexandria," a record for the Renaissance master at auction.

Two years after art prices plummeted amid the recession, seasoned collectors also began to shop for art in earnest in 2010, packing auction houses and filling aisles at major art fairs like Art Basel in Basel, Switzerland, and Frieze Art Fair in London. Private gallery sales remain difficult to analyze, but dealers from Denver to Dubai have lately reported a pick-up in sales to both local and faraway clients. Online art sales are also gaining a higher profile.



Christie's biggest success of the year was from the estate of Los Angeles-based collectors Sidney and Frances Brody, when one of the couple's trophies, Pablo Picasso's 1932 portrait of his mistress, "Nude, Green Leaves and Bust," sold for $106.5 million in May, the highest price ever paid for a work of art at auction.

Prices were up for all of the auction house's major art categories, including £766.6 million in Impressionist and modern art, up 53% from 2009;₤£602.6 million in post-war and contemporary art, up 148%; ₤£569.6 million in Asian art, up 145%; and ₤£334.2 million in jewelry, jadeite and watches, up 55%.

Christie's major sales hubs around the world fared well. The company sold ₤£1.3 billion in the U.S., more than double from the year before. Sales across Europe rose 9% to ₤£1.1 billion. 

Its sales in Hong Kong more than doubled to £465.8 million. Hong Kong real-estate billionaire Joseph Lau paid Christie's ₤£10.7 million for a pair of imperial cloisonné crane censers, a type of incense vessel, during a Hong Kong sale in December. 

Christie's is beginning to face tougher competition from local Asian auction firms like China Guardian and Poly. In December, Poly sold $44.3 million of Asian art, twice as much as it got from a similar sale last spring. 

Mr. Murphy said Christie's aims to increase its staff in Hong Kong by at least a third this year.

Not all markets are rocketing like Asia's, however. Christie's sales were flat for Russian and Latin American art, along with its sales of collectible books and manuscripts.Its sales of Old Masters and 19th century art rose slightly.

Christie's sold a total of $158 million of art by Picasso. It also owes a lot to sculptor  Alberto Giacometti, whose work brought in $79 million. 

Christie's overall sales figures include £369.3 million in privately brokered art sales, up 39%.

The next major test for the art market will come during a round of major auctions of modern and contemporary art at Christie's and Sotheby's in London beginning Feb. 8. 

 Write to  Kelly Crow at kelly.crow@wsj.com 