 The European Union is proposing an area-wide framework for confronting bank and investment firm failures that includes getting bondholders to share the burden.  

 Greek Prime Minister George Papandreou sought to allay investor concerns over the country's staggering debt burden, saying the country isn't in talks to restructure government debt held by private bondholders and will return to the bond markets this year if conditions allow. 

 China has been increasing its holdings of European Union countries' debt, including Spanish government debt, since the outbreak of the European sovereign debt crisis, Chinese Vice Commerce Minister Gao Hucheng said.  

Retail sales across the euro zone slumped unexpectedly in November as weak consumer demand in debt-laden economies such as Spain and Ireland outweighed strength in France and elsewhere, official data showed. 

Separate data released by the European Commission showed confidence among retailers and manufacturers rose in December, painting a mixed outlook for the bloc. 

The U.K. government's cost-cutting plans were dealt a blow, as an influential parliamentary committee said a cull of independent agencies has been "botched" and will fail to generate significant savings. The comments echo criticisms from labor unions and the opposition Labour party of the government's plans.

The U.K.'s dominant services sector posted a surprise contraction in December, damaged by the snowy weather, weak confidence and job cuts, data showed. 

The survey also showed that job losses increased in December, as employers prepared for the tough trading conditions. 

 U.K. health officials told the country's doctors to use stockpiled pandemic flu vaccine where appropriate to help cope with a shortage of seasonal flu medicine. Interim Chief Medical Officer Sally Davies said the move was needed due to a "mismatch" of demand for influenza vaccines and a lack of supply in certain parts of Britain.  

Ireland's banks could be forced to transfer billions more euros in healthy assets to a new National Asset Management Agency or an extension of the existing agency, raising the prospect of further discounts, the Central Bank of Ireland confirmed. 

 Johan Vande Lanotte resigned as mediator of talks between Belgium's two main language groups, prolonging a deadlock that has left the country without a government since elections in June and sparking fresh worries on bond markets about the country's ability to repay its debt. 

German manufacturing orders rose far more sharply in November than expected thanks to an increase in orders from beyond the euro zone, the economics ministry said. 

 German Vice-Chancellor Guido Westerwelle might stir up friction in the coalition government as he tries to rally his party's support after plunging polls triggered rank-and-file calls for his resignation as chairman of the Free Democratic Party.  

Auto makers Daimler and Volkswagen will sign deals with Chinese partners on the sidelines of a meeting between German Vice-Chancellor and Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle and Chinese Vice Premier Li Keqiang on Friday.

In addition, shipping firm Bernhard Schulte and Oerlikon Neumag Textile will sign contracts with Chinese partners. 

 French President Nicolas Sarkozy is likely to make a provocative suggestion when he visits U.S. President Barack Obama on Monday: give the dollar a less prominent role in the world economy. 

Portugal reduced the government's budget deficit to 7.3% of its gross domestic product in 2010 as planned and is confident about achieving its 2011 debt program, Budget Secretary Emanuel dos Santos said. Santos noted that the final budget results will be confirmed around the middle of February. 

The number of U.S. workers filing new claims for jobless benefits rose slightly less than expected last week as the labor market continued along a slow path toward recovery. The four-week average of new claims, which aims to smooth volatility in the data, fell. 

 President Barack Obama named former Commerce Secretary Bill Daley as his new chief of staff. Daley, who works for banker J.P. Morgan Chase, will be a fresh face in a White House that has faced criticism for being too insular.  

 Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner sent a letter sent to all members of Congress, saying that the U.S. could reach its debt limit of nearly $14.3 trillion as early as March 31, setting up a showdown with a new House Republican majority that first wants billions of dollars in spending cuts. 

Secretary of Defense Robert Gates unveiled sweeping changes to the Pentagon's spending priorities, part of a plan to sustain the military in what he described as an era of "extreme fiscal duress."

In Maryland, federal and state authorities were investigating reports of two explosions in the mailrooms of state government office buildings. The Maryland Emergency Management Agency sent out a bulletin that two packages delivered to state facilities had "detonated" creating small explosions. 

 Bacteria made quick work of the tons of methane that billowed into the Gulf of Mexico along with oil from the Deepwater Horizon blowout, clearing the natural gas from the waterway within months of its release, researchers reported.  

 Ireland's government is set to fund a $5.3 million initiative to support a vast array of arts programming in the U.S.—encompassing 400 events in 40 states—during 2011, the country's minister of culture is set to announce Friday in New York. 

 Chinese Vice Premier Li Keqiang, in an apparent attempt to address concerns raised about China's investment climate, wrote in an op-ed article that China will continue to strengthen intellectual-property protection and improve the business environment for foreign firms, saying they are entitled to the same treatment as their Chinese counterparts. 

 The annual death toll from tobacco-related illnesses in China could triple over the next two decades, health experts warned ahead of a deadline for the country to implement international commitments to curb smoking that activists say Beijing has failed to meet.  

 The U.S. government said it has strongly protested Vietnam's treatment of a U.S. diplomat who was detained and wrestled to the ground while attempting to visit a dissident Roman Catholic priest—a development that could further inflame concerns in the U.S. about the Southeast Asian nation's human-rights record. 

India, the world's second-largest cotton producer and exporter, marginally raised its output estimate for this crop year to an all-time high of 32.9 million bales, as production is expected to increase in some key growing regions, a senior government official said. 

A highly anticipated report on a southern Indian region's demands to create a new state called Telangana from what is currently Andhra Pradesh offered a range of possible solutions but seemed unlikely to dim the controversy that has surrounded the issue.

 Afghan and coalition officials are considering a plan to boost the manpower target for Afghanistan's security forces to around 400,000 soldiers and police, roughly a 25% increase over the current goal for the allied training mission.  

 Pakistan's government withdrew an increase in fuel prices which could derail the International Monetary Fund's economic overhaul program for the country.  

 Christian groups say Iranian authorities have arrested dozens of Christians around the country in the two weeks since Christmas, the latest challenge to the Mideast's small but still-vibrant Christian communities.  

Iranian authorities have detained a 55-year-old American woman on spying charges, local media reported. The state-owned newspaper IRAN alleged the woman had spying equipment hidden on her body when customs authorities detained her in the border town of Nordouz, 370 miles northwest of the capital Tehran. 

iii

A Zambian court issued arrest warrants for two Chinese managers accused of shooting at least 13 miners at a Chinese-owned coal mine in October during a wage protest, court officials said.

Anti-American cleric Moqtada al-Sadr, one of Iraq's most controversial and powerful figures, returned to Iraq on Wednesday after operating from Iran for more than three years, a homecoming that promises an unwelcome new headache for both the U.S. and Iraqi governments.

 The floods ravaging Queensland state have taken a toll on local tourism, even as the industry nationwide grapples with a rising currency and higher interest rates. 