The beverage is so ubiquitous on St. Patrick's Day that it's practically the holiday's sponsor (and in many bars, it is): "Brought to you by Guinness." Not that there's anything wrong with that. 

The dark stuff from Ireland is a fine beer—smooth, satisfying and surprisingly low-carb. But when it comes to pure flavor, Guinness cedes its foamy crown to American-brewed Irish-style stouts. 

On this side of the Atlantic, craft brewers are known for their powerful beers, and most stateside stouts are not Irish, but Russian, made to mimic the extra-strong brews that warmed the Russian Empire in the 18th century. 

However, when brew masters tone down the booze and go for drinkability instead of decadence, as demonstrated in our picks here, the results are uncommonly good—enough so to mix up your St. Paddy's Day fun, if not rebrand the shamrocked banner above the bar.

—William Bostwick



North Coast is probably more famous for their intense Russian stout, Old Rasputin, but save that one for dessert. For day-long drinking, go with Old No. 38, a smooth, rounded beer with a bit more chocolate and fruit sweetness than a typical Irish dry stout. Soft edges and a mellow, woody finish make it wonderfully complex. 5.5% ABV  northcoastbrewing.com  



Don't be spooked by its daredevil name—this beer is bunny-slope smooth. It's dry as a bone, and surprisingly refreshing, with a clean, roasted bitterness. Not as viscous as other Irish stouts, this one leads with its nose instead of its body. Down it too fast and you'll miss an aroma of caramel, coffee, and just a hint of smoke, like barely burnt toast. 6.3% ABV,  averybrewing.com   



Anderson Valley brews Barney Flats with oatmeal, a protein-rich grain that gives this beer extra body without extra booze. It might not be a traditional Irish stout, but those distinctions rarely matter in the glass. Barney Flats has an oily, earthy sweetness, like raw chocolate, and a toffee-colored head thick enough to float a shamrock.5.7% ABV, avbc.com   