  Daniel Nicholson firmly believes in the value of company loyalty. At 46, the vice president of global quality has worked at  General Motors
GM


-0.28
%




 in Detroit for 29 years, though he admits that his longevity isn't the norm.

"When you've been at a company for a long time, you really build a network of people that know what you can do," he says. "They tend to trust you more and that brings opportunity. That's what's worked for me."

After years of layoffs and pay cuts, the thawing job market is giving some frustrated employees an opportunity to jump ship. But career experts say that staying put should be a top option.

"You've already weathered the worst of the recession. If you believe the company can turn it around, why not recommit yourself to your job and see what the hard work that you've already put in can get you?" says  Patrice Rice, a Washington recruiter who specializes in the hospitality industry. She says loyalty can open doors to more opportunities, and loyal employees are more likely to keep their jobs.

Committing to one company is a simple formula that's worked for  Jackie Warrick, now 26, director of content at CouponCabin.com, an online aggregator of store coupons. She's worked at the Chicago start-up for four years, and despite a number of job offers from other companies, she has no plans to move. "I prefer to work on something I believe in, as opposed to hopping around and not knowing where you belong," she says.

Experts also add that when you don't retreat from a job, you learn to deal with less-than-optimal situations and people, which is a negotiation skill that hiring managers value.

The first thing you should do is prioritize what's important to you so you can work on what's missing.

Dissatisfaction isn't always about money or benefits, according to a 2010 Monster.com poll. Employees also highly value opportunities for advancement, recognition, good bosses and co-workers, and challenging work.

Many of these issues can be worked on. If boredom is making you restless, for example, investigate other opportunities within the same company. Mr. Nicholson kept his work interesting by moving to different GM offices around the world.

Assess your prospects and make adjustments. The past few years have been difficult for employers and employees, so look beyond cost cutting and find out if the company will be able to meet your future needs in terms of education, engagement and advancement. You may need to reassure your boss that you are committed to company goals since training is a big investment.

Remain professional at all times and always do your best work. Maintaining value to your company can actually become a fulfilling goal and it can help justify your position if cutbacks are made. Remember that loyalty and trust are qualities that take a lot of time to cultivate but virtually no time to tear down.

—Email: sjdnishi@gmail.com 