The Indian defense ministry's decision late last month to select two non-U.S. entrants as finalists in its multi-billion dollar Medium Multi-Role Combat Aircraft competition was a major disappointment for the U.S. companies involved. The two finalists—France's Rafale and the Eurofighter, the product of a European consortium—will now compete to win the world's richest fighter jet contract, worth anywhere between $10 billion and $12 billion. 

The U.S. government, as well as the competing firms Boeing and Lockheed Martin, were surprised by the decision since they viewed the competition as the next big boost in U.S.-India defense ties. Still, it's key for Washington to understand New Delhi's way of thinking. It's also key for India to understand what the U.S. wants out of a burgeoning bilateral relationship.

From America's perspective, the Indian decision was a bit of shock. Over the past half-decade, the U.S. has invested heavily in the bilateral partnership by brokering a landmark civil nuclear deal and taking steps to facilitate greater technology transfers to India. Last November, President Barack Obama publicly voiced U.S. support for India's desire to obtain a permanent seat on the U.N. Security Council. Each of these endeavors required the U.S. to expend significant diplomatic and political capital. 

Questions will undoubtedly be raised by Washington officials regarding India's commitment to the bilateral partnership. While the U.S. has viewed the relationship as a long-term endeavor, the fighter competition was still viewed as a bellwether of India's future strategic direction. As U.S. Ambassador Tim Roemer said before the decision, "This will be a very important indicator of where this relationship goes in the 21st century." As the U.S. government and industry take stock of what this decision means and how to move forward, it is important to maintain some perspective on how far the bilateral defense relationship has come in such a short period of time. 

In less than a decade the U.S. and India have created a partnership where India now conducts more exercises with the U.S. than any other country, and have transacted billions of dollars in defense sales to include the Indian purchase of C-130J transport and P-8I maritime reconnaissance aircraft. These sales will not only build Indian military capabilities but will also contribute thousands of jobs to the U.S. economy. The pending sale of ten C-17 aircraft will add another 22,000 jobs and $4.1 billion.

For America, the pace of activity can never be fast enough as the U.S. looks to India to become, in Secretary Gates' words, "a net provider of security in the Indian Ocean." The U.S. feels it has invested a tremendous amount into a partnership that appears to have yielded few tangible benefits thus far—recent defense sales aside.

The view is rather different from the Indian perspective. For a country that is sensitive about its foreign-policy autonomy, bilateral defense cooperation has proceeded at a pace that some Indian security officials may feel is too fast. In the end, the latest selection of a fighter plane represented the essence of New Delhi's foreign policy orientation, which is to maintain its strategic autonomy and not become too closely aligned with any single foreign power. 

At this point, both sides need to calibrate their respective expectations of this partnership. The U.S. should not allow this setback to deter it from pursuing closer defense ties. With India projected to spend $80 billion on defense modernization over the next five years, the U.S. should focus on future deals to build deeper defense relations.

The U.S. must understand that India will never rely on the U.S. for all its defense equipment and that no defense sale tender should ever be seen as too important. Instead, it should focus on insisting that each defense competition the U.S. competes in is consistently open, transparent, efficient, and fair to ensure that U.S. companies get a fair chance. 

India should also understand that while multi-billion dollar defense deals are welcome, the U.S. does not sell military equipment to India solely for corporate profit or U.S. jobs. Rather, it sells this equipment, along with a wide array of bilateral defense exchanges, for the greater purpose of developing the military capabilities of a future partner that can cooperatively address converging strategic interests.

These interests include maritime security in the Indian Ocean, securing key energy and trade corridors, countering transnational threats such as piracy and terrorism and working together on humanitarian disasters. In short, the U.S. aims for a partnership that goes far beyond the profit from defense sales or the pleasing optic of joint exercises. 

India will continue to safeguard its strategic autonomy, like America does. But it should understand that no nation, including the U.S., can address the challenges that threaten our mutual interests alone. America and India need each other in this complex and evolving security environment of the 21st century, and should not allow the scorecard of defense trade wins and losses, or concerns about an imbalanced partnership, stymie our collective ability to unlock the full potential of this relationship. 

 Mr. Latif is a visiting fellow at the Center for Strategic and International Studies and served as the director for South Asian Affairs in the Office of the Secretary of Defense from 2007-2011. Mr. Inderfurth is Senior Advisor and Wadhwani Chair for U.S.-India Policy Studies at the Center for Strategic and International Studies and served as the assistant secretary of state for South Asia affairs from 1997-2001.  