When  Prince William gave his fiancée  Kate Middleton a blue sapphire engagement ring that belonged to his mother, Princess Diana, it's unlikely he gave a second thought for how many other commoners would want their own part in the fairytale. "We first found out about the Kate Middleton and Prince William engagement when our company servers crashed. We have never had that number of hits on our website," says the head of investment at The Natural Sapphire Company,  Evan Guttman.

Read the complete  Watches and Jewelry report.  

Sales at The Natural Sapphire Company grew by a whopping 300% after the royal pair announced their engagement. The company's success with this specific style of ring has prompted it to add thousands of new sapphires to its inventory to fill orders for clients that include Cartier. It has expanded its offices to take over another floor and opened another international office near the sapphire mines so it can acquire stones as quickly and efficiently as possible.

"Demand has been amazing. We're happy Prince William kept the tradition his parents started, and it seems the public feels the same way," Mr. Guttman says. "We have had more orders for sapphires and sapphire jewelry now, than we have had since the recession began." The Natural Sapphire Company offers Princess Diana/Kate Middleton lookalike rings valued from $1,000 to $1.4 million. 

It's an effect that's been mirrored across all levels of the retail chain from the most luxurious top end designers to the high street. U.K. High Street jeweler  H. Samuel was first off the mark. It issued a copycat ring on the very same day as the engagement and claims that sales of the ring contributed to a stronger than expected final quarter of 2010. 

The engagement also spurred a flurry of activity in China, where manufacturers have been cashing in on the wedding by churning out tens of thousands of replica royal engagement rings. Dozens of factories in Zhejiang province have rushed to produce copies of the ring. Sapphire values have steadily gained ground over the last thirty years. Kate Middleton's engagement ring cost £28,000 when it was bought by  Prince Charles for the then  Diana Spencer in February 1981 from crown jewelers  Garrard of Mayfair. In today's prices, the oval 18 carat blue sapphire surrounded by 14 diamonds would cost £85,000. Unlike diamonds and gold, there is no widely-accepted price list that sets sapphire values, which makes for tricky investment planning. The blue gems are widely thought to be rarer and therefore harder to find than diamonds. 

In many cases, sapphire yields are simply too low to make mining a sustainable enterprise. 



In locations where sapphires are mined, most of the recovered stones are so poor in quality that they never enter the gem trade. Consequently prices for very fine quality rare gemstones are extremely strong. "It's very important for investors considering buying sapphire jewelry to understand exactly what they're buying," says  Jack Ogden, chief executive of the Gemological Association of Great Britain. Experts in the trade say collectors looking for a healthy return on investment need to hunt for quality sapphires over 10 carats, Kashmir sapphires or an untreated sapphire. More than 90% of sapphires on the market have received some form of processing treatment, making untreated specimens extremely rare and very valuable. "We have many customers who are collectors and have used sapphires as investments and come out on top after holding them for a few years," says Mr. Guttman. 

History tells of a number of infamous sapphire collectors. According to legend, Helen of Troy owned a large star sapphire which held the key to her desirability, while King Solomon is said to have used the magic of Sri Lankan sapphires to seduce the Queen of Sheba. Sapphires belonging to Charlemagne were later worn by Empress Josephine, wife of Napoleon at her coronation in 1804. In November, Christie's sold a cushion-cut 17.45 carat Kashmir sapphire and diamond ring for £1.06 million. While at Sotheby's a 9.47 carat sapphire and diamond ring from Monture Boucheron recently sold for £690,000. 

So, while diamonds may be a girl's best friend, carefully selected antique sapphires may in the end prove the better investment. 