The government of Pakistan President Asif Ali Zardari appeared set to hang on to power despite a disintegration of the ruling coalition Sunday, following signs that a key opposition party is unlikely to force a no-confidence vote. 

But the government's shaky standing will limit its ability to take unpopular steps, including a tax overhaul, that foreign donors say are needed to avert an economic meltdown.

The Pakistan-Muslim League (N), the main opposition party, is likely to decide at a Tuesday meeting of its executive committee not to attempt to topple the government, said Raoof Hasan, a media consultant to the party who is close to Shahbaz Sharif, president of the PML(N) and brother of party founder Nawaz Sharif, the former prime minister.

Prime Minister Yousuf Raza Gilani met with Shahbaz Sharif, who is also chief minister of Punjab province, in Lahore on Monday in a bid to avert a crisis. PML(N) executive board member, Chaudhry Nisar Ali Khan, said after the meeting that the party had agreed not to destabilize the government, but didn't elaborate, the Associated Press reported.

On Sunday, a key coalition partner of the Pakistan People's Party-led government, the Muttahida Qaumi Movement, joined the opposition, depriving the administration of a majority in the National Assembly—the lower house of Parliament—making it difficult to pass much-needed economic overhauls.

Where the government has pushed overhauls, such as slashing petroleum subsidies, it has faced a backlash in the National Assembly. The MQM on Sunday cited rising petroleum prices as one reason for joining the opposition.

Under Pakistan's parliamentary system, a government doesn't fall automatically on losing a majority but must be voted out by a no-confidence motion, passed by a majority of lawmakers. Pakistan's opposition is also fractured, making it unlikely that the PML(N) could win such a vote, Mr. Hasan said.

Farhatullah Babar, a spokesman for Mr. Zardari, said the government believed the opposition wasn't united enough to win a no-confidence vote. The government now faces the challenge of tackling an escalating economic crisis without a majority in the National Assembly.

Foreign donors including the International Monetary Fund, World Bank and Asian Development Bank have been frustrated over Pakistan's failure to tackle a growing budget deficit by implementing changes aimed at boosting revenue and cutting spending. 

The U.S., one of the largest donors to multilateral institutions, has publicly called on Pakistan to do more. In October, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton told a meeting of Pakistan's foreign donors in Brussels that the country must boost tax returns, which currently are equal to 10.2% of gross domestic product, one of the world's lowest ratios.

But the prospect of boosting tax returns appears bleak amid the current political crisis, Pakistani and Western officials say. 

Mr. Zardari's government has faced opposition from the PML(N) to its efforts to bring in a general sales tax, a move backed by the U.S. and other donors. The PML(N) says such a tax will hurt ordinary Pakistanis. The party wants sectors that benefit the elite but are currently exempt, such as agriculture and construction, to also face taxation.

Pakistan's budget deficit has grown to between 6% and 8% of GDP, above a 4% target for the current fiscal year to June 30. To fund the shortfall, the government borrowed $3.6 billion from the central bank from July 1 to early December, a move that amounted to printing money, stoking inflation.

Foreign donors have begun over the past six months to withhold aid on which the government depends until tax overhauls and other changes, such as reducing electricity subsidies, are implemented.

The World Bank and Asian Development Bank haven't transferred any of a combined $3 billion in budget support pledged for this fiscal year, said a senior Pakistan Finance Ministry official. The IMF has withheld $3.5 billion from an $11.3 billion emergency loan package.

To be sure, donors are unlikely to allow Pakistan's economy to spiral out of control, given the central role the country plays in supporting the U.S.-led war against the Taliban in Afghanistan.

For now, Pakistan's foreign reserves are worth five months of imports, meaning the government hasn't yet reached a balance of payments crisis like one in November 2008 that forced the country to call in the IMF.

The situation could change, however, if the government fails to take action to reduce its deficit, forcing donors to re-evaluate their strategy of withholding funds, said a senior Western official in Islamabad.

 Write to  Tom Wright at tom.wright@wsj.com 