European leaders could announce broad outlines of a new deal to boost the euro zone's bailout funds at a summit on Friday, paving the way for a final agreement when they next meet in March, European officials say.

It isn't yet clear whether enough agreement will emerge at the meeting to make an announcement about the rescue funds, but European officials said they expected discussions over the issue Friday as part of a two-step process that will be concluded in late March.

The summit will come days after euro-zone leaders and senior politicians took the opportunity at the World Economic Forum in Davos to try to convince top business figures, bankers and government officials of their commitment to the euro.

French President Nicolas Sarkozy said Germany and France "will never abandon the euro." German Chancellor Angela Merkel described the euro as "much more than a currency," saying: "If the euro fails, Europe fails."

Many bankers and economists, though, still argue that the weaker economies of the euro area remain at risk of financial or banking shocks, and that growth will remain sluggish for years. Many say Greece, at least, will have to restructure its debt, a prospect repeatedly denied by Greek Prime Minister George Papandreou.

If those risks are to be contained, a big part will be played by the rescue funds to be discussed Friday. Having bailed out Greece and Ireland in 2010, governments are seeking ways to convince financial markets that they will stand behind Portugal, Spain and others in case they need help.

Leaders will debate how to boost the lending capacity of the euro zone's currentbailout fund from €250 billion ($340 billion) to €440 billion, and ways of making it better able to deal with debt crises. They are also discussing a permanent rescue fund that comes into being in 2013.

As a price for this deal—which will likely require Berlin committing to lend more money to weak euro-zone states if needed—Germany wants what it calls a comprehensive agreement aimed at improving the competitiveness of euro-zone countries' economies. Berlin officials see a lack of competitiveness in some euro-zonecountries as a cause of excess debts on the bloc's periphery, especially in Southern Europe.

Among other targets, Germany wants euro-zone members to sign up to higher retirement ages, balanced-budget amendments, more flexible labor markets, and stronger alignment of national tax policies. It is also seeking an end to policies in some countries that automatically raise wages and pensions in line with inflation.

The different views of bankers and officials on the future of the euro zone were illustrated Saturday morning in Davos. A group of senior bank CEOs huddled with finance ministers and central bankers at the conference center. Some bankers pushed for a more muscular response, including buying hundreds of billions of euros of bonds issued by financially weak countries like Greece, Ireland and Spain.

Banks would be big beneficiaries of a bond-buying program as they own a lot of the bonds. 

The government officials' response appears to have been chilly, based on remarks at a panel discussion immediately afterward. "We've had too much discussion" about the euro zone's woes, said German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble. "The situation in Europe is not so traumatic."

He said, "Outside the euro zone, people don't really understand" the area's common economic policy and currency. "We are ready and we are able to defend the euro zone."

Minutes later,  Barclays
BCS


0.44
%




 PLC Chief Executive  Bob Diamond said he thought the crisis could fester. "It will be more chronic as opposed to acute," he said, citing the likelihood of euro-zone market volatility "from time to time."

The remark clearly irked French Finance Minister Christine Lagarde. "I'd like to disagree with Bob Diamond," she said, swiveling in her chair to face the CEO.

 "The euro zone has turned a corner," she said, adding, "Let's not short Europe, and let's not short the euro zone." The audience applauded

As the90-minutesession drew to a close, Mr. Diamond clarified his statement. "I think the question of the strength of Europe and will the euro stay together is last year's issue," he said. 

—Geoffrey T. Smith contributed to this article.

 Write to  Stephen Fidler at stephen.fidler@wsj.com, David Enrich at david.enrich@wsj.com and Marcus Walker at marcus.walker@wsj.com 