LONDON—A distant alarm bell may be starting to ring at the European Central Bank after data showed the euro zone's inflation rate is rising, manufacturing is powering ahead, unemployment is easing and the economic recovery is spreading to countries at the heart of the currency area's debt crisis. 

Economists are confident the central bank's Governing Council won't raise its main interest rate from a record low of 1% at its next policy meeting Thursday, but that doesn't mean ECB President  Jean-Claude Trichet won't harden his anti-inflation rhetoric to signal the bank's intentions. 

"We are in an environment when we do need to be braced for something of a shift in the language of the Governing Council," said  Julian Callow, chief European economist at Barclays Capital. "The language may be shifted to signal a move coming as early as [the second quarter], perhaps even in April." 

Tuesday's economic releases showed the euro-zone's annual inflation rate rose to a 28-month high of 2.4% in February—above the ECB's medium-term target of just below 2%. 

The European Union's Eurostat agency doesn't release a breakdown with its preliminary, or flash, estimate of inflation, but economists suspect higher energy and food costs are behind the rise. Full figures for the month of January released Monday showed inflation is being fueled by higher prices for energy, transport fuels and tobacco. 

Nevertheless, economists also note that core inflation—a gauge of underlying inflation that excludes energy, food, alcohol and tobacco prices—remains very low at just 1.1% on a yearly basis in January, suggesting there isn't any immediate reason for the ECB to tighten policy. 

"Although we expect Mr. Trichet to stress that the ECB is ready to counter upside inflation risks, he is unlikely to pave the way for an early interest-rate rise by using the phrase 'strong vigilance' in his statement,"  Martin van Vliet, an economist at ING, said in a note. 

But in a sign that pressure is building on ECB rate setters, Executive Board member  Jürgen Stark said Feb. 21 that the central bank would act "quickly and decisively" on any indication of a sustained upward shift in inflation expectations, while fellow policy maker  Yves Mersch has said the economic situation warranting low rates has changed. 

Recent economic figures suggest the euro-zone economy may be in better shape than some were expecting, raising the possibility that the ECB might feel more inclined to act sooner rather than later. 

In its first forecast of 2011, the European Commission on Tuesday raised its prediction for euro-zone growth this year to 1.6% from 1.5%. The EU executive body also increased its inflation forecast for the 17-nation currency area to 2.2% from 1.8%, but said the indicator should end the year at close to 2%. 

Manufacturing, driven by exports to stronger economies across the world, is leading the recovery. The final results of a survey by financial information firm Markit out Tuesday showed the euro zone's manufacturing sector grew at the strongest rate for nearly 11 years in February. 

The Markit final euro-zone manufacturing purchasing managers' index, a gauge of activity in the sector based on a survey of about 3,000 companies, rose to 59 in February from 57.3 in January, the highest reading since June 2000. 

Markit said there was record manufacturing growth in Germany, Austria, and the Netherlands, a near-11-year high in Italy, and steady expansion in France. Perhaps more significantly, growth in Ireland and Spain, long at the centre of Europe's debt crisis, helped fuel growth outside the currency area's top two economies to its fastest since mid-2006. 

But the survey also showed manufacturing output prices increasing at record rates in February as input costs were driven up by higher prices for a range of goods from chemicals and energy to food products. 

"Steep increases in raw-material prices may deter firms from recruiting, or drive selling prices even higher in order to protect margins,"  Chris Williamson, the chief economist at Markit, said in a statement. "The recent uptick in oil prices will only add to firms' cost pressures." 

There are also signs that the euro-zone labor market is turning a corner, although sharp divergences remain between member states. Eurostat said the currency area's unemployment rate dipped to 9.9% in January from 10.0% in December, the lowest reading in 13 months but still at a level that is unlikely to fuel wage inflation. 

"Unemployment data for the euro area confirmed that a cyclical turning point has indeed been passed,"  Klaus Baader, an economist at Société Générale, said in a note. 

As in previous months, the highest jobless rates were recorded in the member states at the heart of the debt crisis, such as Spain and Ireland, suggesting they will remain a drag on growth in the single-currency area as larger nations like Germany and France forge ahead. 

More up-to-date figures from Germany appear to make that prospect more likely. The country's Federal Labor Office said the number of unemployed in Europe's biggest economy fell 52,000 in February—pushing the jobless rate down to 7.3%, the lowest level since comparable records began in 1999. 

"Although the euro-zone debt crisis, related banking-sector concerns and fiscal tightening in many European countries including Germany remain as risks for growth and the labor market outlook, the economic recovery clearly has sufficient inherent momentum to lead to continually declining unemployment during 2011,"  Timo Klein, a senior German economist at IHS Global Insight, said in a note. 

—Alex Brittain in London, Riva Froymovich in Brussels and Nina Koeppen in Frankfurt contributed to this article.

 Write to  Nicholas Winning at nick.winning@dowjones.com 