I've been wearing glasses since the sixth grade and I don't think I've patronized more than two opticians during that entire period. The first was Marter and Parsons, a mom-and-pop operation on West 72nd Street. I well remember Mr. and Mrs. Marter, the couple who ran the store (though their real name may have been something like Goldstein). Kindly Mr. Goldstein would fit your glasses while Mrs. Goldstein held court with the customers.

In more recent years, my business has gone to Loft Opticians on Lexington Avenue in the 70s. Besides superior service and affordable prices, they have a candy jar filled with Tootsie Pops, and they don't mind if you stop by on your way to the subway and swipe one, even if you're not planning to invest in a new pair of glasses any time soon.

When my eye doctor retired recently—the same one who's been examining me since the Marter and Parsons era—and a friend suggested her ophthalmologist, the doctor and his staff started trying to convince me I needed new glasses as soon as I walked through the door. (Was it a coincidence that they had a side business selling their own lenses and frames?) 

I was so turned off by their hard sell that I never returned, even though they told me tests showed I might have early symptoms of glaucoma. A subsequent visit to an eye doctor who didn't sell glasses revealed: one, that I didn't have the disease, and two, that I didn't need new glasses.

I wouldn't have bought my glasses from an eye doctor in any case. One's friendly, neighborhood optician occupies a special, trusted place in the pantheon of local commerce. Lower, perhaps, than your personal physician, but in the same league as your barber or hairdresser. They're de facto beauty consultants, guardians of your personal image. (Nonetheless, I suspect Marter and Parsons deserves some of the blame for me not getting a date between eighth and 11th grade. They outfitted me with plastic nerd frames before it was cool to be a nerd—the kind that mimicked the eyebrow and faded from dark brown to clear; by all rights the wearer should also have worn a pocket protector.)

I mention all this only because I was tempted to cheat on Loft recently, though I remained steadfast. It occurred when I was on Orchard Street and passed Moscot Eyewear. I'd heard of them not because  Johnny Depp is among their star clientele but because people have told me they carry something almost identical to my increasingly hard-to-find frames. 

Called "The Miltzen" at Moscot, they're round plastic, mine flesh-colored, and popular among secretaries of state and CIA directors of a bygone era. "I sold a pair of Miltzens maybe 10 minutes before you came in," reported Jay Gropen, one of the staffers. The store feels like you've boarded a time machine and traveled back to the black-and-white '50s, probably because Moscot has been at the same location—118 Orchard St.—since 1950. "He had tattoos on his knuckles," Mr. Gropen added.

Besides Mr. Depp, Moscot's celebrity clientele includes  Sam Shepherd, Jeff Goldblum and  Renée Zellweger (their names listed in magic marker on a board above the counter). However, off the top of their heads neither Mr. Gropen nor his colleague Achilles Sotos could think of any current star who sports the Miltzen. 

On second thought, maybe they could. "The show 'Bored to Death?'" Mr. Gropen said. "The chubby pale guy? He wears the Miltzen." 

The salesman recalled a scene where the frames actually get destroyed. "You see them sitting there and then you see this boot come crushing down," he said, confiding that he had mixed feelings about the episode. 

On the one hand, he was happy they showcased the merchandise. On the other, "they destroyed one of our frames."

The Miltzen, by the way, is named after a family uncle, said Harvey Moscot, the store's president and the fourth generation of the Moscot family to run the business. It was started by Hyman Moscot, who arrived on Ellis Island in 1899 and started selling eyeglass frames from an Orchard Street pushcart.

Indeed, the names of several of the frames are family references. The Nebb, favored by actor  Paul Rudd, comes from the word nebbish. That's somewhat ironic because the one thing no one wants to be called in a Jewish family, or any family for that matter, is a nebbish—a wet noodle, timid, ineffectual. 

Come to think of it, one might go so far as to say the problem with contemporary fashion, if not Western civilization in general, is that people think it's cool to run around looking like nebbishes. Take my word for it: At this very moment Jewish grandmas are turning in their graves all over Brooklyn, Queens and Westchester.

Whatever. Moscot also sells the "Hesh," named after Harvey Moscot's Uncle Heshy. Then there's the "Koopa," a new style set to debut in Milan in March, which, according to Mr. Moscot, 50, comes from the Polish koopa, and was what the Moscot kids said when they had to go to the bathroom. "We had to make a koopa," Mr. Moscot explained helpfully. 

"We have an 'Etta' frame we're introducing," he added, "after my great aunt, Sol Moscot's sister. It speaks to her eccentric, quirky personality. It's one of the frames she wore in the '40s."

The Zulu is named after Heshy's brother. "He was a bookie," said Mr. Moscot, himself an eye doctor who sees patients at their second location, on West 14th Street, two days a week. "Zulu was his underground name."

Mr. Moscot said his family has never made a conscious effort to be fashion-forward. They simply had the foresight to locate on Orchard Street years before the neighborhood became a haven for starving artists, who started patronizing the store. "We never try to be hip," he explained. "A 100-year-old company is not a trend."

There's even a fifth generation waiting in the wings—Mr. Moscot's son Zach, 20, a design student at the University of Michigan. "He has a passion for the brand," his father said. 

And, one hopes, for Yiddish.

—ralph.gardner@wsj.com