ZURICH—Switzerland's federal prosecutor has opened a criminal investigation into alleged money laundering by the regime of former Ivory Coast President Laurent Gbagbo, the first such move against any of the recently deposed Middle Eastern and African leaders. 

Meanwhile, a Swiss lawyer raised allegations that Mr. Gbagbo diverted the proceeds of the sale of a luxury Swiss villa that belonged to the Ivory Coast state.

Bruno de Preux, a prominent Geneva lawyer, filed a complaint with Switzerland's federal prosecutor on behalf of the Ivory Coast government in March against Mr. Gbagbo, his family and a number of close associates whom the attorney declined to name. The move wasn't made public then. 

The prosecutor subsequently opened an investigation into unknown persons associated with the regime, although a spokeswoman declined to specify when. According to Mr. de Preux, the complaint is signed by Ivory Coast's Justice Minister Jeannot Ahoussou-Kouadio and Finance Minister Charles Koffi Diby. The complaint alleges that the wealth controlled by Mr. Gbagbo and his inner circle is inconsistent with the salaries earned by public officials. 

A lawyer for Mr. Gbagbo said Swiss authorities haven't informed him or his client about any investigation. He said Mr. Gbagbo doesn't have a bank account in Switzerland and would deny accusations of money laundering.

"I am not at all worried," said Marcel Ceccaldi, Mr. Ggagbo's lawyer. Mr. Ceccaldi said he would deal with the other allegations against his client in due course.

Mr. de Preux and Mario Stasi, a Paris lawyer, also have raised questions regarding the sale of a villa near Geneva for 15 million Swiss francs ($17.1 million) in May 2010. They have evidence that at least a portion of the money was deposited into an account controlled by a Parisian notary, rather than in the Ivory Coast's official account in Paris, according to Mr. de Preux. Mr. Stasi added that the lawyers are looking into assets Mr. Gbagbo may have in France. 

In January, the Swiss government ordered a freeze on assets belonging to Mr. Gbagbo and 90 other people associated with his regime, as well as 11 banks and businesses with close ties to his government. 

Last week, the government said Swiss banks had frozen a total of 80 million francs of assets. 

Also last week, Alassane Ouattara took the oath as president of the Ivory Coast after months of civil conflict. Supporters of Mr. Ouattara fought the forces of Mr. Gbagbo after he refused to relinquish his president's post following his election defeat in November 2010. 

The push to recover assets comes as Ivory Coast prosecutors over the weekend questioned Mr. Gbagbo, who has been under house arrest since April 11, regarding his role in the post-electoral violence that left at least 3,000 dead. Ivory Coast prosecutors have said they also would question the former president over allegations that he stole proceeds from the country's central bank. 

Mr. Ceccaldi and another lawyer for Mr. Gbagbo have complained they were denied entry into the Ivory Coast and couldn't represent his client during his questioning on Saturday. 

In Ivory Coast, fighting has continued in the southwestern region of Bas-Sassandra, some 62 miles east of the border with Liberia. Residents there said the army has sealed routes leading to the border, trapping pro-Gbagbo soldiers and Liberian mercenaries believed to have fought for the former president in the heart of the cocoa-producing belt. 

"The mercenaries can't blend in because of their accents and we also know who is pro-Gbagbo here," said Aboubacar Ouedrago, a resident in the important growing region of Soubre. Heavy-weapons fire was heard across the area all day, he added.

The Hague-based International Criminal Court has said it was planning to launch an investigation into alleged widespread killings in Ivory Coast, a probe that could involve both sides of the conflict.

Ivory Coast government officials have promised to investigate the mass graves of about 800 people found in the western town of Duekoue last month. Human-rights groups said forces loyal to Mr. Ouattara were behind the massacres. Mr. Ouattara has previously said no crime would be left unpunished, even if perpetrated by his supporters.

Meanwhile, new governments in Tunisia and Egypt are pressing ahead with efforts to recover assets after regime changes. Tunisia has been in discussions with lawyers and other advisers about assisting with the asset-recovery process. 

Switzerland and other financial centers have frozen hundreds of millions of dollars of assets belonging to former Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak and Tunisia's former president, Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali. However, no charges have been filed outside these countries. 

In Egypt, a court has sentenced the former interior minister to 12 years in prison for corruption, the first conviction of a senior former regime official since a popular uprising drove Mr. Mubarak from power on Feb. 11. Many top officials from Mr. Mubarak's regime are behind bars pending corruption investigations, including the former prime minister and Mr. Mubarak's two sons, Gamal and Alaa.

—Monica Mark and David Gauthier-Villars contributed to this article.

  