MUMBAI -- India has passed a milestone in its push to become one of the world's biggest producers of solar power, but executives warn investment could dry up if concerns including low returns and credit access aren't resolved.

India is embracing renewable energy as it faces up to rising emissions growth caused by reliance on coal for power generation. Energy insecurity is also driving the change as India has few resources of its own to meet its rapidly growing economy and is dependent on energy imports from abroad.

Last month, India auctioned 620 megawatts of solar projects to 37 companies, an early step in a program that aims to have 20 gigawatts of solar generating capacity by 2022. Achieving this goal would see India outpace many nations in installing solar power--the International Energy Agency predicts the U.S. will have 17 GW of solar capacity by 2020.

India has committed to a feed-in tariff for solar power--a preferential policy that allows generators of renewable energy to charge more for their output because it is more expensive than traditional electricity production. Around 50 countries have a feed-in tariff policy to encourage renewable energy development.

However, aggressive bidding by project developers has resulted in government-set tariffs of 12.16 rupees per kilowatt hour for solar photovoltaic power and 11.48 rupees/kWh for solar thermal power. That's much lower than the 18 rupees/kWh estimated by regulatory bodies previously.

"At current capital costs of 150 rupees-160 rupees million for each megawatt, solar projects are only profitable if tariffs are at least 14 rupees/kWh," said Narasimhan Santhanam, co-founder of Energy Alternatives India, a consultancy firm.

  Deepak Verma, chief operating officer at consultancy Emergent Ventures India, said "in order to build viable projects at these low tariffs, developers will have to cut corners and squeeze vendors."

This has "cooled enthusiasm for solar in the country," Mr. Verma added.

Analysts say the early rush of investors who expected high returns may slow to a trickle, putting the future of the solar program at risk.

Thinner margins also affect Indian solar developers' ability to secure non-recourse bank financing. Such loans are popular in the power sector because repayments only need to be made when a project starts generating revenue.

The government rejects these complaints, maintaining that the tariffs are reasonable.

  Bharat Bhargava, director of solar photovoltaics at the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, says the tariffs are set by the market because they result from competitive bidding.

New Delhi-based Azure Power Ltd., which took part in the federal solar program, also says concerns about low tariffs are overblown as they mirror global norms.

But there are other challenges as well that could stifle development of the fledgling solar program, it says.

Solar developers will be paid by provincial utilities that are cash-strapped and carry a high risk of defaulting on payments, experts say. This counter-party risk, and the lack of a payment guarantee mechanism, has forced banks to restrict financing of solar projects.

"It seems to be a Herculean task for the 37-odd companies that have secured projects to secure debt funding," said Shonit Dalmia, director at Mumbai-based Konark Group.

Konark Group, with interests in textile, renewable energy and real estate, is among the companies that shunned the federal solar program, and instead invested in the solar program of Gujarat state in the country's western region that offers better terms.

Others like Tata Power Co. Ltd., India's largest private power producer, have also skirted the federal program so far due to its drawbacks and opted for state-level programs.

"If the issues aren't resolved, they could deter larger investors from participating in the projects under the solar mission,"  Upendra Bhatt, managing director of cKinetics, a consultancy, said.

 Write to  Eric Yep at eric.yep@dowjones.com 