"Who is going to wear all of those ridiculous, short-sleeved coats that are out there in the stores?" the editor of a fashion magazine asked indignantly at a dinner I recently attended in London in honor of the mother-daughter cosmetic combo, the Chantecailles. Her question was met with general approbation, although I did notice the aforementioned makeup maestros catching each other's eye across the table. They, of course, knew the answer, because they live in the home of indulgent dressing, or, should I say, extravagant purchasing, Manhattan. From whence, readers, I report this week on the phenomenon that is spring shopping and dressing, Manhattan-style 

Where shopping is concerned, New Yorkers aren't just on another continent, they are on another planet. For the purposes of anthropological study, I'm going to narrow down that sweeping statement and concentrate on one area of Manhattan in particular, which is where, in my opinion, the purest and most extreme form of mad Manhattan dressing and purchasing takes place—the Upper East Side (or UES, as it shall now be known). The neighborhood, which stretches roughly from 59th Street up to 96th Street, is where the majority of Manhattan's elite private schools are housed. It has some of the most expensive real estate (the closer to Fifth Avenue, the more expensive); the chicest shopping areas (Madison Avenue, from 59th to 88th Street); the highest percentage of nannies, yummy mummies, soccer moms and dog walkers; the greatest number of doctors and plastic surgeons; endless traffic jams of chauffeur-driven, black Chevy Suburbans; and two of the world's most preposterously Eurotrash cafés—Sant Ambroeus, known as St. A, and Via Quadronno, or Via Q. If you need further explanation, let's just say that Madonna has ended up on the UES; Jackie Kennedy Onassis used to walk the Central Park Reservoir daily from her home on Fifth Avenue; Tory Burch, the designer who borrowed the style of the Upper East Sider, repackaged it and sold it back to them, resides in a favorite UES watering holes, the clubby, grand Pierre Hotel; and Mickey Drexler, chairman and CEO of J. Crew, the brand of all wannabe prepsters, lives in the area, too.

Before we get to the shopping itself, let's discuss what Upper East Siders wear to shop in. It's a given that all New Yorkers are immune to fashion trends, having, as they do, specific uniforms for particular climates and seasons, regardless of what comes down the runway. Nowhere is this more apparent than on the UES, where even the teenagers from private schools like Nightingale, Spence and Chapin (girls), and Buckley and St. Bernards (boys) have their own particular "thing" going on, as "Gossip Girl" captures so well. For the girls, it's short school skirts, bare legs (regardless of the weather), lots of blown-out hair and baggy Westwood boots; for the boys, it's a kind of baggy, subversive prep—Ralph Lauren meets P. Diddy, complete with acid-colored Ralph Lauren polo shirts, baggy khakis and Moncler puffer jackets. 

For the grown-ups, the uniform is predicated on the weather forecast (rarely inaccurate). Mixed weather patterns whilst I was in New York meant that all three current uniforms were on display. On the first unseasonably warm day, the aforementioned sleeveless coats came out, along with fur gilets, Alexander Wang bags, J Brand jeans tucked into high, black Louboutin or Jimmy Choo boots. On the second, pouring rain meant that St. A was jammed with the black-raincoat crowd (from J. Crew, Bottega Veneta, Burberry, Calvin Klein or Jil Sander for Uniqlo). Beneath the macs: black leggings or stretch jodhpurs, gray or navy cashmere crew necks and the occasional Chanel or Prada rain hat. Hunter wellies—blue, black or brown—are de rigueur, as are waterproof totes from Prada and Bottega Veneta. On the third day, the weather had reverted to its seasonal norm—chilly, windy, below-zero temperatures—increasing the "riding vibe," with thicker leggings and jodhpurs, flat black-leather riding boots (see Hermès, Cole Haan and Gucci) or sneakers (Prada and Lanvin), heavy woolen pea coats, cashmere scarves (Lora Piana) and Chanel bags. Notably absent from the back of any serious Upper East Sider, last year's "thing": Moncler puffer coats, suggesting that Manhattanites, as is their wont, have taken that trend, worn it and swiftly consigned it to the youth and B&T (bridge and tunnel) crowd.

You may well ask just what these hoards of uniformed individuals (mostly women) were doing, roaming Madison Avenue during the hours of 10 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. The answer is, of course, that they were indulging in the birthright of every wealthy Upper East Sider: shopping whilst their children are in school. But this isn't just any old shopping; this is Manhattanite shopping, a process that involves locust-like descent, swift purchase and a lengthy wait to wear the goods, if, in fact, you ever do. The spring/summer season in Manhattan is breathtakingly short. Starting at the end of May and ending when everyone vacates the city in July and August, it barely leaves enough time for the Upper East Sider to wear everything purchased in a frenzy during the chilly climes of February and March, the unseasonable moment when most spring/summer fashions are sold. "Don't think about buying a bikini during the 90 degree heat of August," says one resident. "By then the stores are deep in winter coats and furry boots." 

"The Manhattan woman has a hoarding mentality" says Lisa Pomerantz, communications marketing specialist and former Bottega Veneta vice president. "She will cruise the stores at least twice a week and buy stuff immediately, with a view to either returning it or wearing it at some point. It doesn't have to be this season. The purpose is to buy the piece before your friends do." Lax return policies mean that so long as you have the tags, clothes can be returned at almost any point—anathema to those of us in Europe, but helpful for fostering a relaxed approach to five-figure fashion. Also unimaginable to us is the idea of the "flash" or "friends and family" sale, a spontaneous event that may occur as often as every six weeks in some stores. "There is no law about when you can go on sale here, which means the merchandise moves through the stores very quickly," says Pomerantz, who points out that American merchandise has the shortest shelf life of anywhere in the fashion world. Some of the best merchandise doesn't even hit the shop floor. Personal shoppers sift through the clothes as soon as they arrive, sending their choices to clients on consignment. All of which increases the desirability of special pieces amongst those who neither have nor want a personal shopper, and builds the momentum attached to the process of shopping itself. "It's partially the thrill of the chase," says Pomerantz.

So what's being hoovered up on the UES at the moment? No self-respecting Upper East Sider would pass by the new Ralph Lauren mansion on 72nd and Madison without a drop in. Dedicated to womenswear and home (and opposite the existing menswear mansion), the building has the type of grandeur Edith Wharton might have reserved for one of her heroines. Purple silk floral shirts ($898), a hemp-and-leather bomber jacket ($2,298) and an oyster silk halter-necked evening dress ($3,298) were all being closely scrutinized by locals, whilst tourists fingered the black-and-white hunting prints and brought trinkets on the cavernous ground floor. The patron saint of established Upper East Siders is Michael Kors and for good reason. His chic, understated but überluxe fabrics and cuts chime with the UES lifestyle approach: spend a lot, but look like you haven't. In shopping baskets: an olive-green shift dress ($1,490), a daffodil cashmere, ribbed maxi ($995) and a purple, tiered, chiffon, flounce minidress ($2,595)—uncharacteristically "show offy" for an Upper East Sider, but, as she confided in a Manhattan whisper (at the top of her lungs) to the sales assistant, "it's for a batmitzvah."

"Manhattanites are shopping for color," the Jil Sander sales assistant at Barneys tells me. This is evidenced by the fact that Sander's collection, one of the most popular and colorful of the season, has been picked clean. "They took it all," says the sales assistant, plucking woefully at the last pair of "skirt pants" in emerald green ($2,175). Elsewhere in the store, a sixtysomething woman with the body of a teenager is standing in a black bias-cut Azzedine Alaia minidress in front of her husband, who exhorts her to "find a dress in purple, honey; I can't stand any more black"; a Desirée Rogers look-alike undecidedly fingers the Barbara Tfank floral taffeta and brocade, '50s-inspired dresses, whilst a teen of not more than 14, shadowed by her blonde, slim mother in leather jacket and Balenciaga boots, tries on jewel-toned Lanvin cocktail dresses for a party ($2,595). "There's just nothing here she likes," intones the mother impatiently to her personal shopper.

Of course, when all's said and done in Manhattan, and most especially on the UES, the question is whether you measure up to the impossible standards of your current socialite icon. It was ever thus. From Pauline de Rothschild and Babe Paley to Slim Keith and Jackie Kennedy and, later, her daughter-in-law Carolyn Bessette to current-day stars like Lauren Santa Domingo, Amanda Brooks and Lauren Bush (scion of that family and about to marry David Lauren of that family); what you wear and how you look is crucial to your social and economic standing. If this seems like a somewhat shallow approach, consider that one of the most talked-about books of the moment in the U.S. is "Every Day Icon: Michelle Obama and the Power of Style" by former Harper's Bazaar editor Kate Betts.

 Write to  Tina Gaudoin at Tina.Gaudoin@wsj.com 