If you build it, profits will come. That's been the axiom for China's private-sector property developers, and Beijing's new housing push might seem bullish for them. But it isn't. 

Premier Wen Jiabao's work report, delivered to the National People's Congress Saturday, promised to start construction on 10 million new budget residences in 2011. That is roughly equal to half the total volume of residential housing that started construction in 2010. 

There is reason for skepticism on whether the government will be able to deliver on its target. Local governments have, in the past, shown little enthusiasm for allocating land to low-price affordable projects when there is more money to be had by selling to luxury developments. 

But even if the government makes progress on only half its target total, combined with millions of affordable homes that were started in 2010, that still adds up to a wave of cheaper housing to crash over the property market. 

Listed developers aren't interested in getting in on the act. According to Nicole Wong, head of regional property research at CLSA, net profit margins for developers in the private market are 10% to 20%. For those building affordable housing, they're more like 5% to 7%.

But construction of affordable housing on such a massive scale will affect the private market too. The government's big push on social housing will bid up the cost of land, labor and building materials, squeezing the margins of listed developers. 

If that happens, private developers won't get any sympathy from Mr. Wen. In an online chat with China's Internet users, he said: "I haven't investigated profit margins at every single property business, but I believe developers have a social responsibility, they should have virtue in their blood." 

The effect on demand is more difficult to predict. One view is that the affordable and private markets are separate. The low-income buyers who will benefit from affordable housing would never have entered the private market. 

But the division isn't perfect. Middle-income households and recent graduates will also be eligible for affordable housing. With prices of budget homes at a significant discount to market prices, buyers that would previously have been marshalling their family savings for a first home on the private market will now have another option. 

The latest wave of restrictions on speculators—launched at the end of January—plus a tighter credit environment with higher interest rates and lower new loans, and excess supply in the private market will also keep a lid on property prices. Few expect a hard landing, but prices that continued to creep up over the course of 2010 should now start to stabilize, and a correction in some first-tier and second-tier cities is a distinct possibility. 

There will be winners from China's investment in affordable homes. But it's the cement kilns and steel mills, rather than the listed developers watching from the sidelines, that will be reaping the benefits. 