Longtime friends, Melissa Hamilton and Christopher Hirscheimer worked together at Saveur magazine. Five years ago, the pair struck out on their own and began publishing the Canal House cookbook series. Working out of their atelier in Lambertville, N.J., they photograph, paint, style and, above all, cook food. The studio is filled with sunlight that pours in from French doors and windows that overlook a canal. Named after this special place, their serial, published quarterly, brings some of the duo's lovely-to-look-at and delicious collaborative results to the rest of the world. This month marks the release of their latest edition, Canal House Cooking, Volume No. 6, The Grocery Store, themed in honor of what the partners call their shared "love-hate relationship with supermarkets." Here's a taste of what goes on behind the scenes. 

 Right now, we're crazy for escarole—either cooked or raw—and Fra' Mani handcrafted salumi. We love just about everything that Paul Bertolli makes, but especially his smoky-spicy Salametto Piccante. We load up on half-pound blocks of salted Kerrygold butter when we are at the grocery store. At the Apple Farm in Philo, Calif., they make an apple cider syrup that we pour over pancakes and waffles, but we also use it to add layers of sweetness to savory dishes. 

 The dish we're best known for is our paella. We build a wood fire outside and drag out our big, 30-inch paella pan. Then, we move the party outside, pour everyone a glass of wine and we stand around the fire and cook and let the smoke perfume the rice as it bubbles away. Everybody wants to borrow our pan after they've had the paella experience.

 Our kitchen is small. It's open, simple and highly functional. When we wash the dishes, we can see what's going on outside—ducks swimming, kayakers paddling by, fishermen hanging out on the banks waiting for a catch. We use the old carpenter's workbench as our work surface. There are two apartment-sized stoves that sit side-by-side, so, without taking up much room, we get eight burners and two ovens for cooking. 

 For storage we hang all our pots, sieves and colanders on a pot rack that is suspended from the 20-foot-high ceiling. Everything is within arm's reach.

 Our favorite serving paraphernalia is heavy white or cream Staffordshire platters that we find at various antiques stores—and there are many—in the area. We like thin, all-purpose drinking glasses from CB2, and coin silver flatware that we find, again, from local antique stores. For basic dinnerware, it's the  Williams-Sonoma
WSM


-0.11
%




 "Brasserie" line of 12-inch white plates and their Apilco ware. There's a beautiful line of porcelain from Pillivuyt. We also have imported antique kitchenware from the Marquis of Debris.

 The two most underrated ingredients are salt and pepper.

 We eat a lot of rice. Vialone Nano for risotto, bomba rice for making paella and our everyday rice is premium grade Nishiki medium grain, which has very plump, toothy grains. It's just delicious.

 We order our spices from thespicehouse.com. Most recently, we ordered their caraway seeds, Tellicherry black peppercorns, pimenton, fennel seeds, saffron and Aleppo pepper. 

 This season, we're most looking forward to cooking crab cakes (see recipe at right). Ours are small piles of perfect canned jumbo lump crabmeat with just the scantiest coating of batter holding them together, and they are the best Maryland crab cakes we've had. There are two secrets. The first is to mix all of the ingredients except the crab together, then fold the meat in ever so gently, and always by hand. The second is to use buttery Ritz crackers instead of breadcrumbs. We like two-bite crab cakes—their smaller size makes them easier to cook. 

 The most surprising meal we've had recently was the drunken sauerkraut with smoked pork chops that we feature in the book. The sauerkraut is braised in a lot of dry vermouth and gin with butter and smoked bacon. Heaven. That's not a word most people use to describe sauerkraut, but it fits this dish. 

 Our favorite local place to shop for food is the great German butcher Illg's, in Bucks County, Pa., where we buy our Easter ham and smoked pork chops. Everything is delicious and beautifully prepared. Buying from a real butcher is such a treat. 

 Our biggest indulgence is Grower Champagne. We use it to celebrate happy occasions and when we need a little consoling. Our favorite at the moment is Pehu-Simonet. It has notes of apple that we're crazy for. 

—Edited from an interview by Charlotte Druckman

 Makes a dozen 2-inch cakes 

2 tablespoons butter  3 ribs celery, minced  3 scallions, minced  1 egg  3 tablespoons mayonnaise  1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice  1 teaspoon Worcestershire sauce  1⁄2 teaspoon dry mustard  2 teaspoons Old Bay Seasoning  1⁄2 teaspoon salt  1⁄2 teaspoon pepper  8 Ritz crackers, crushed into coarse crumbs (1⁄3 cup)  1 16-ounce can jumbo lump crabmeat, drained  1 tablespoon vegetable oil

 What to Do: 

 1. Melt 1 tablespoon of the butter in a skillet over medium-low heat. Add celery and scallions and cook until soft, 7–10 minutes. Remove from heat and let cool.

 2. Whisk together the egg, mayonnaise, lemon juice, Worcestershire sauce, mustard, Old Bay Seasoning, salt and pepper in a large bowl. Stir in the cracker crumbs and the cooled celery and scallions. Add the crabmeat and mix together very gently with your hand. Don't break up the crabmeat.

 3. Make 12 small, plump 2-inch crab cakes, gently pressing each cake together in your hands, and arrange the cakes on a parchment-lined tray. It may seem like the crab cakes are in danger of falling apart, but chilling them will hold them together. Loosely cover the tray with plastic wrap and refrigerate for 1–2 hours.

 4. To cook the crab cakes, heat the remaining tablespoon of butter and the vegetable oil in a large nonstick skillet over medium to medium-low heat. Fry the cakes until golden brown on each side, 4–6 minutes. Serve with lemon wedges, tartar sauce and saltine crackers, if you like.