BMW's first-quarter net profit soared to €1.2 billion ($1.78 billion) from €324 million last year, in the latest sign that booming demand in China and a recovery of the U.S. market are driving earnings in the luxury-car sector.



Italian tire maker Pirelli raised its revenue target for the year after its first-quarter net profit more than doubled to €81.4 million ($120.7 million), compared with €38.9 million for the same period a year ago, on burgeoning demand for tires in all markets. 



Boeing can expect pressure from Virgin Group to pay more compensation for the repeatedly delayed 787 Dreamliner, Chairman Richard Branson said, adding that he's optimistic about the international aviation industry following the killing of terror leader Osama bin Laden in Pakistan.



 Deutsche Bank withstood a drop in market share to retain its position as the world's largest currency-trading bank for the seventh consecutive year, according to the annual Euromoney foreign-exchange survey. 



BNP Paribas reported a 15% increase in first-quarter net profit to €2.62 billion ($3.89 billion), aided by a sharp decline in provisions for bad loans.



Standard Chartered is working hard to control costs, as it reported a strong first quarter that its finance director said produced record revenue. The U.K.-based, Asia-focused bank doesn't report quarterly earnings, but said revenue rose by double digits compared with the first quarter of 2010. 



Banco Popular Espanol said first-quarter net profit fell 9% to €185.7 million ($275.4 million) as it set aside more cash for soured loans and took a big write-down on foreclosed real estate. 



 Siemens said second-quarter profit jumped 89% to €2.79 billion ($4.14 billion) on the sale of its stake in nuclear-power venture Areva NPand that demand for its goods remains strong. 



Cement and building-materials producer Holcim reported a return to first-quarter profit of 10 million Swiss francs ($11.6 million) compared with a 68 million franc loss a year earlier, and said it expected construction markets in mature countries to recover this year. 



Anheuser-Busch InBev said price increases offset declining volumes in its main U.S. and Brazilian markets in the first quarter, as it reported a doubling in net profit to $964 million, from $475 million a year earlier.



SABMiller, the global brewer of flagship brands Grolsch, Peroni Nastro Azzuro and Miller Lite, saidchief financial officer, Malcolm Wyman, will retire after 25 years at the company, and will be succeeded by James Wilson, finance director for SABMiller's Europe division.



The European Commission approved a proposed joint venture between Brazilian companies Citrosuco and Citrovita that would have the capacity to produce 25% of all orange juice world-wide.



Norway's Statoil said higher energy prices gave it a boost during the first quarter, as it posted a 44% rise in net profit to 5.98 billion kroner ($1.13 billion).



Engineering and train company Alstom said fiscal full-year net profit fell 62% to €462 million ($685.3 million), hurt by restructuring in its power business. 



Salvatore Ferragamo, the Italian fashion business, might float up to 25% of the company as part of its plan to list on Milan's stock exchange by the end of June, said people familiar with the situation. 



Allianz's first-quarter profit fell by around 43% to slightly above €900 million ($1.33 billion) on high costs for disaster claims and lower realized capital gains.



Ralcorp Holdings, a maker of private-label foods, rejected a sweetened $4.9 billion buyout offer from ConAgra Foods.

iii

IntercontinentalExchange's first-quarter profit rose 27% to $128.9 million as it continued to make its case for a takeover of NYSE Euronext. 



Deutsche Börse published the tender offer for its planned tie-up with NYSE Euronext, after the German financial regulator formally approved the merger documents.

 Glencore International sold an unusually large portion of its shares to so-called cornerstone investors even as it valued itself short of its most ambitious target. The IPO, which seeks to raise about £6 billion, or about $9.9 billion, comes at a time of booming commodities prices.  



 News Corp.'s fiscal third-quarter earnings declined 24% to $639 million as weakness at its film and publishing divisions, coupled with a litigation charge, more than overshadowed a strong performance from its TV businesses. 



Actelion said it will appeal against the final U.S. jury verdict that awarded Asahi Kasei Pharma compensatory damages of up to $547 million and punitive damages of $30 million. 



U.K. retailer Next lifted its full-year guidance, offering a glimmer of hope in an otherwise gloomy sector, but cautioned that shoppers who brought forward their summer spending are likely to soon snap their purses shut again. 



Dunkin' Brands Group, which franchises quick-service restaurants, filed to sell at least $400 million of stock in an initial public offering. 

 Intel will use a new breed of three-dimensional transistors in its next generation of chips, packing more circuitry by building vertically from a wafer's surface. 



 Sony told U.S. lawmakers that an intruder left a taunting message for the company in a recent computer attack but it still doesn't know who stole personal information for more than 100 million of its online-gaming accounts. 



Chip-equipment manufacturer Applied Materials agreed to acquire Varian Semiconductor Equipment Associates for about $5 billion in cash, betting that the demand for popular gadgets such as smart phones and energy-efficient technology will drive growth.



Chinese social-networking Web site Renren's initial public offering of 53.1 million American depositary shares priced at $14 apiece, which was at the high end of its projected range. 



ZTE, the Chinese telecommunications equipment maker, said it stepped up its legal battle with rival Huawei Technologies, filing motions in multiple countries to invalidate various Huawei patents and a Huawei trademark. 



Chinese online search provider Baidu said it launched a test version of a service offering free licensed downloads of songs, a move that could ease tensions with the music industry over how it has handled intellectual property rights. 



Mexico's Supreme Court dealt Carlos Slim—the world's richest man—a major setback, ruling that his cellphone company can't block competitors by using court injunctions to ignore the rulings of the country's telephone regulator. 