NEW DELHI – India's inflation rate accelerated in December as food prices continued to soar, adding to the case for another interest-rate hike when the Reserve Bank of India meets later this month. 

The wholesale price index rose 8.43% in December from a year earlier, quicker than November's provisional 7.48% rise and in line with the median estimate of 8.4% in a Dow Jones Newswires poll of 18 economists. 

The data will fuel authorities' concern over the recent sharp increase in food prices and add to pressure on the RBI to further tighten monetary policy, as previous rate hikes and a series of fiscal measures and have failed to check runaway prices. 

Government bond prices were little changed after the data but fell after the People's Bank of China increased banks' reserve requirement ratio by 50 basis points effective Jan. 20, raising expectations the RBI may also tighten monetary policy as the world's two fastest-growing major economies fight inflation. 

The stock market didn't react much initially but later succumbed to the increasing likelihood of rate hikes. The Bombay Stock Exchange's Sensitive Index closed down 1.7% at a four-month low of 18860.44. 

"The way weekly fluctuations took place in December, it was apprehended that the month-wise wholesale price index may be a little more," Finance Minister Pranab Mukherjee told reporters. "It is a little more than November, but monthly wholesale prices are coming down and that trend is being maintained." 

Food inflation was at 16.91% in the week to Jan. 1, after hitting 18.32% in the week to Dec. 25. 

The RBI hasn't quite defined its inflation comfort zone, except to say that current levels are well beyond it. The RBI predicts inflation will ease to 5.5% by the end of the fiscal year in late March, but most economists say it will be 6.5%-7.5%. 

The pick-up has been driven by food prices, pushed higher largely by growing demand for protein-rich food as Indians become wealthier. In addition, rain in some parts of the country has damaged crops including onions, choking supplies. 

The government has been facing intense criticism over food prices in Asia's third-largest economy, where about 40% of the 1.2 billion population lives below the poverty line, earning less than $2 a day. 

Authorities have been scrambling to address the problem but after days of wrangling, a government announcement on inflation Thursday contained no major policy steps on food or other prices. 

Instead, the government sought to downplay concerns about prolonged price pressures and warned of stern action against hoarders of essential commodities. That just highlighted the government's reluctance to roll out steps that potentially are necessary, but could be unpopular. 

Thursday's anti-climactic announcement followed several steps last month to boost supplies of onions, a key ingredient in Indian cuisine. The government banned onion exports, arranged for imports and asked two state-backed cooperatives to sell onions at subsidized rates. 

Economists said those steps will likely be followed by new rate hikes this month. After pausing at its December policy review, the RBI is widely expected to raise its lending and borrowing rates by 0.25 percentage point each--the seventh increase since March--when it meets Jan. 25. 

The rate hike expectations firmed up after the chairman of the prime minister's economic advisory council said the RBI may have to tighten policy more. 

"Unless there is some substantial decline in food prices in the next two weeks, in my view perhaps some tightening may be required," C. Rangarajan told reporters on the sidelines of an event. 

Some economists have predicted a 50 basis-point move, but Sujan Hajra, chief economist with Anand Rathi Securities, said tepid industrial activity could deter the central bank from hiking by more than 25 basis points. 

Data out Wednesday showed industrial output growth slowed to a 20-month low in November, up just 2.7% on-year after October's 11.3% rise. 

Besides, rising global commodity prices, especially of crude oil--India's largest import--are likely to add fuel to domestic prices. 

Nomura said in a research note inflation will remain sticky, averaging 7.5% in the next fiscal year. 

"With no long-term concrete plan to resolve these (supply) constraints and food price inflation a political hot potato, the RBI will have its work cut out in fighting inflation," it said. 

Nomura expects the RBI to raise policy rates by 1 percentage point by March 2012. 

Friday's data showed the index for food articles rose 3.7% to 186.9 in December from November. Prices of non-food articles rose 2.3% to 171.6. 

The index of manufactured products rose 0.4% to 128.9 in December, while the fuel-products index rose 1.0% to 150.1. 

The government also raised October's overall inflation reading to 9.12% from a provisional 8.58%. 

 Write to  Anant Vijay Kala at anant.kala@dowjones.com 