PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla.—On his way outside to play catch Tuesday, Jason Isringhausen muttered, "I'm going to go blow out my elbow." After his first throw to Mets pitching coach Dan Warthen, who stood a mere 20 feet away, he shouted, "Ouch!" Then he smirked, and kept on throwing.

This is how Isringhausen deals with the fragility of his body. He jokes about it. He accepts it. But he also knows that every pitch could be his last.

"I don't have much time left," he said. "If I try to throw tomorrow and I can't do it, that could be it for me. I know this."

At age 38, Isringhausen has made an improbable resurgence this spring. He came to the Mets without a uniform or a contract. Only after a tryout did they give him a minor-league deal. Since then, he has emerged as the elder statesman of the bullpen and an appealing choice to be the Mets' setup man.

But everything he has worked for—coming back from this third reconstructive elbow surgery, returning to the team with which he began his career—hinges on his health.

He hasn't pitched since Friday because of inflammation in the elbow. And while he downplayed the severity of the injury, he will need to prove his health over the next week to hold on to his roster spot, which otherwise appears secure.

"I think it's a factor you have to take into account," Mets general manager Sandy Alderson said. "Whether it turns out to be significant or not, we'll know in the next few days."

There is little financial risk in putting Isringhausen in the bullpen. His $500,000 salary is non-guaranteed, meaning he will be paid at that rate only as long as he is on the major-league roster.

But there are other pitchers competing for a bullpen spot that the Mets would risk losing to other teams if they do not make the roster. Pat Misch and Manny Acosta would have to be placed on waivers. Pedro Beato, a Rule 5 draft pick, would be offered back to the Baltimore Orioles before being placed on waivers.

If Isringhausen makes the team and is injured, the Mets could end up without both him and one of the pitchers who would replace him.

"Obviously, it's a 162-game season, so you have to think not about a 25-man roster, but realistically, you have to think about 30, 35, over the course of a season," Alderson said. "It's probably a bigger impact in that regard than the money."

That the Mets are even considering all this represents significant progress for Isringhausen, who hasn't pitched in a major-league game since 2009.

After undergoing his third Tommy John surgery, he thought his career was finished. He didn't even try to rehab the elbow at first. But while playing right field last year for a beer-league softball team near his home in Troy, Ill., he discovered he could still throw the ball hard.

The Mets discovered the same thing this spring. Isringhausen's fastball has been consistently clocked between 90 and 91 mph. And his curveball still causes hitters' knees to buckle.

What teammates talk most about, though, is his role in the clubhouse. Isringhausen has given catcher Josh Thole pointers on calling a game, urged Mike Pelfrey to become a more vocal leader and offered younger players advice on dealing with the media.

In 14 years in the majors, Isringhausen has gone from phenom to bust to elite closer. His 293 career saves rank second among active players. When he speaks, teammates listen.

"Something you can't put a number on is him off the field and the leadership in the clubhouse and the presence I think he will bring," Pelfrey said. "I think he's going to pitch well, but I think that leadership is going to be more valuable."

In trying to latch on with the Mets, Isringhausen has also reconnected with his past. Last weekend, he went to a local bar to watch a mixed-martial arts fight on television with Bill Pulsipher, his former Mets teammate and a Port St. Lucie resident.

And scribbled on a piece of paper in his locker Tuesday was a phone number for Paul Wilson, the other one of the three Mets pitching prospects nicknamed "Generation K" in the mid-1990s.

Pulsipher, 37, plans to pitch in the independent Atlantic League this summer. Isringhausen offers hope.

"I see the Mets are giving old-timers opportunities, so there's reason for me to still play," Pulsipher said. "If he can do it, why can't I do it?"

Isringhausen's story is an oasis of optimism on a Mets team that has elicited mostly pessimism so far. But for it to continue, his elbow must cooperate.

He said he felt good playing catch with Warthen Tuesday, but a bigger test will be how he feels throwing off a mound Wednesday.

"As of right now, I'm looking at being ready to go at the end of camp," Isringhausen said. "But I know everything could change."

The Mets' Jason Isringhausen , at right, trails only Mariano Rivera. 

  

