LONDON—Jeremy Hunt, the U.K. culture secretary, Wednesday launched a thorough review of media regulations and laid out plans for a new communications act to regulate the fast-changing media industry. 

Speaking at the Oxford Media Convention, Mr. Hunt said the Communications Act was already seven years old and it needed to reflect changes in the media since then. 

"I am prepared to radically rethink the way we do things," he said, adding the act would look at how and what the government would regulate and whether there are areas which could be deregulated. "This is not about tweaking the current system, but redesigning it—from scratch if necessary—to make it fit for purpose." 

Mr. Hunt said after a consultation period the government would publish a green paper at the end of year which would set out the full scope of the bill, which would then be put in place in 2015. The culture secretary also announced plans for a new television station dedicated to local news content. 

Mr. Hunt invited local media outlets to register their interest in providing content for the local channels by March 1 and hopes to be able to award local TV licenses by the end of 2012 with the new TV channel launching soon afterwards. 

The new channel will be under consultation initially and the exact plans are currently fluid, but Mr. Hunt said he was favoring a model which awarded a national network license, the content of which would be provided by local media outlets who would be awarded local licenses. 

Speaking to reporters after making his keynote speech at the conference, Mr. Hunt said he was following due process in considering the takeover of  British Sky Broadcasting Group PLC by  News Corp. Mr. Hunt has responsibility for deciding whether to refer the News Corp. bid to the Competition Commission following a report by communications regulator Ofcom in December. He said he wouldn't rush any decision. 

News Corp. is bidding to buy the remaining 61% stake in BSkyB it doesn't already own. News Corp. also owns Dow Jones & Co., publisher of this newswire and The Wall Street Journal. 