HONG KONG—Investors in Hong Kong who lost money from investing in so-called Lehman minibonds will receive compensation of up to 96.5% of their investments, up from about 60% agreed to in 2009, banks in the city announced Sunday. 

The joint announcement by the 16 banks follows a conditional settlement deal between Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc. and its receivers and trustees to allow investors in Lehman-linked derivatives to recover some of the underlying collateral assets.

Hong Kong lenders sold millions of dollars worth of so-called minibonds linked to Lehman before it collapsed in 2008. The bankruptcy triggered a slump in the value of the products and sparked protests by investors, who complained they had been misled by banks' staff when buying the products. 

In July 2009, under pressure from regulators, the banks that sold the minibond products agreed to buy them back from retail investors. The banks spent a combined 6.3 billion Hong Kong dollars ($808.3 million) to pay back about 60% of the original value to eligible investors. 

Some investors have continued to demand a 100% buyback, arguing that lenders were mainly to blame for misleading them in believing that the Lehman minibonds were safe investments. Many regularly camp outside branches of local banks with banners and loudspeakers to voice their grievances. 

On top of the value of the collateral assets, the banks have also agreed to give a special payment to eligible minibond investors "as a goodwill gesture," according to the joint announcement.

The recovery of the underlying collateral assets and special payments by the banks will enable eligible minibond investors to receive 85%-96.5% of the principal amount they invested, the banks said. 

Kam Nai-wai, an opposition lawmaker who has represented some of the minibondinvestors, told reporters Sunday that the latest buyback amount doesn't reflect the responsibilities that banks need to bear for wrongly marketing the products. Investors should at the least receive a full repayment, he said.

Hong Kong Monetary Authority deputy chief executive Arthur Yuen called the latest settlement "an important development which not only allows investors to avoid lengthy litigation and potentially costly fees and legal uncertainty, but also represents the concerted efforts among regulators, the participating banks and the relevant investors to recover the invested amount as far as practicable." 

Securities and Futures Commission Chief Executive Martin Wheatley said the additional payment by the banks "will bolster the market's confidence in Hong Kong's financial institutions following the global financial crisis". 

The 2009 buyback agreement excluded those considered professional investors, who were assumed to be able to make more informed investmentdecisions. In Hong Kong, individuals with a portfolio of HK$8 million or more are labeled professional investors, according to the Securities and Futures Ordinance.

These investors will now benefit from the settlement allowing them to recover underlying collateral. While professional investors won't likely receive the special payment offered by the banks, most minibond investors will be able to recover more than 80% of their original investment from the collateral, according to PriceWaterhouseCoopers, the receivers of the relevant Lehman minibonds. 

 Write to  Chester Yung at chester.yung@dowjones.com 