JERUSALEM—Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on Tuesday pressed for tougher international sanctions against Iran's nuclear program, amid upbeat assessments by senior U.S. and Israeli officials about efforts to significantly slow Iran's bid to build a nuclear weapon.

"Those sanctions have not yet achieved their objective," Mr. Netanyahu said at his annual news conference with foreign journalists at a Jerusalem hotel.

He said the sanctions imposed on Iran need to be "materially strengthened" and "followed by a credible military option" led by the U.S.

U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said during a visit to the United Arab Emirates on Monday that the international campaign against Iran was working thanks to material shortages and technical problems.

Israel's outgoing intelligence chief, Meir Dagan, said on Thursday, his last day in office, that Iran couldn't build a nuclear device until 2015, a dramatic scaling back of previous Israeli estimations.

Israeli Deputy Prime Minister Moshe Yaalon last month offered a similarly confident assessment, saying Iran would need at least three years to build a nuclear weapon.

Mr. Yaalon is a member of Mr. Netanyahu's Likud Party and is considered to have hawkish views on security.

Mr. Netanyahu neither endorsed nor disputed Mr. Dagan's assessment, but noted there were differing opinions within the Israeli security establishment.

"I think intelligence estimates are exactly that: they're estimates," Mr. Netanyahu said when asked about Mr. Dagan's assessment. "They range from the best case to the worst case."

Mr. Netanyahu's cautionary comments appeared to reflect a skepticism voiced by some Israeli officials and analysts in recent days that too much public confidence about the actions to limit Iran's nuclear program could weaken international resolve to continue pressing on with tighter sanctions.

The buoyed confidence on Iran among many in the U.S. and Israel follows reports that Iran is struggling to obtain sufficient materials necessary for its enrichment efforts, such as special kinds of high-strength steel and carbon fiber.

Western officials also said a computer worm, known as Stuxnet, caused temporary work stoppages at Iran's primary enrichment facility Natanz last year.

 Write to  Charles Levinson at charles.levinson@wsj.com 