Warner Bros. Entertainment said it will start renting movies via Facebook, the latest effort by movie studios to find new revenue sources as consumers buy fewer DVDs and spend more time online.

The studio, owned by  Time Warner Inc.,
TWX


0.19
%




 created the rental application independently of Facebook Inc., enlisting a third party to host and stream the movies. The first movie on offer is "The Dark Knight," the 2008 hit Batman movie.

The initiative represents one of the first times that a major media company has used the social-networking site as a means to directly offer movies.

Warner Bros.' move also indicates that, at least for now, Facebook prefers to simply allow other companies to use its popular platform to set up their own virtual screening rooms, with Facebook taking a cut of sales.

Facebook is becoming an increasingly popular site for uploading and streaming video but the company hasn't announced any plans to launch a paid video service of its own. It also has done little so far to make money directly from the videos it serves itself. There are no ads before or after such videos, aside from the regular display ads along the right-hand side of the site. 

In January, Facebook.com was the sixth-most popular video site in the U.S., with 42 million viewers and an average of 15.4 minutes per viewer, according to comScore Inc. Facebook's popular video content includes user-generated clips and music videos

Fans who "like" "The Dark Knight" can pay to watch the film using 30 Facebook Credits, costing $3. As it does with all transactions using the currency, Facebook keeps 30% of that fee. Warner said it will be offering new titles down the line. The service went live Tuesday.

Last month Warner Bros. began offering mobile-device "app editions" of "The Dark Knight" and "Inception." Those editions play the movies within a freestanding application for iPhones or iPads, rather than through a download service like Apple's iTunes Store or  Wal-Mart Stores Inc.
WMT


-0.26
%




's Vudu. The app editions cost around $10, the same price as the iTunes Store charges to buy the movie.

At $3, the Facebook proposition is pricier than a rental from  Coinstar Inc.'s Redbox—though it lasts 48 hours, instead of the 24 hours allowed by Redbox's $1 DVD-rental kiosks.  Apple Inc.
AAPL


0.85
%




's iTunes Store also charges $3 to rent "The Dark Knight." 

The movie isn't available via  Netflix Inc.
NFLX


-1.56
%




's Web-based on-demand service.

Warner's president of digital distribution,  Thomas Gewecke, said the studio chose "The Dark Knight" as its launch title largely because it has already been "liked" by 3.9 million Facebook users.

Though Warner Bros. describes its "Dark Knight" and "Inception" apps as tests, they highlight Hollywood's need to deal with the threat of the Web.

Movie studios and other companies are eager to keep up as consumers increasingly go online for their entertainment. They also are mindful that their video content has to be current, convenient and at prices that won't drive consumers to seek out illegal, pirated options, which remain plentiful on the Internet. 

  Amazon.com Inc.
AMZN


-0.71
%




 recently started offering a subscription plan for instant watching of movies and TV shows. 

Adding major online distribution channels could dilute the power wielded by established players like Apple and Netflix in their dealings with Warner Bros. and other studios. Many in the recorded-music industry have lamented ceding too much influence to Apple, whose iTunes Store, now the biggest music retailer, is effectively able to dictate terms to record labels. 

Studios can no longer count on DVD sales and are experimenting with new ways of earning revenue online. Last year, U.S. sales of DVDs totaled $7.8 billion, down 43% from their 2006 peak of $13.7 billion, according to media-tracking firm IHS Screen Digest. From 2009 to 2010 alone sales of the discs plunged roughly 20%.

Studios would need many more rental transactions in order to make up for the revenue lost to declining DVD sales. According to an analysis  Walt Disney Co.
AMZN


-0.71
%




 recently showed investors, movie rentals, on average, generate about 20% as much per transaction as DVD sales. An average video-on-demand viewing generates 30% as much as a DVD sale, the company said.

Renting movies on a popular site like Facebook, where hundreds of millions of users already spend their time—and, increasingly, their money—could help boost that volume.

"Our strategy in general is to expand the reach of our content and make it readily available and attractive to consumers," said Warner Bros. Mr. Gewecke. 

The mere threat of a Web giant like Facebook entering the movie-streaming arena was enough to spook investors in Netflix and Coinstar. Netflix shares were down $11.95, or 5.8%, to $195.45 in 4 p.m. Nasdaq trading Tuesday. Coinstar shares fell $2.36, or 5.3%, to $42.18 Tuesday on the Nasdaq.

Some analysts on Tuesday said that Facebook could evolve into a serious competitor for Netflix and other online video services.

"We believe that on a short-term basis, this is not an immediate threat to Netflix," wrote Goldman Sachs analyst Ingrid Chung in a note. "On a longer-term basis, we think that Facebook could become a credible threat as its video business evolves."

  Steve Swasey, a spokesman for Netflix, said that "we've said for a long time when you have a big growing market there will be competition."

In January, Netflix pulled back on its own tie-up with Facebook, which had let Netflix users share film ratings on Facebook. The company said that it is retooling the service, but didn't give details.

 Facebook has a team of executives that work on partnerships with media companies, which so far have mostly involved integrating social sharing capabilities into media sites.

 Write to  Michelle Kung at michelle.kung@wsj.com and Geoffrey A. Fowler at geoffrey.fowler@wsj.com 