 New York 

Most visitors to Paris's Notre Dame cathedral, craning their necks to take in the vast Gothic interior, marvel at a masterpiece of medieval architecture—the perfectly balanced proportions of massive pillars below and intricate filigree stonework above, the dizzying level of detail organized into a harmonious whole. Amid the clanging of hammers and anvils during the main period of the cathedral's construction from 1163 to 1250, a different kind of foundation was laid here, too: polyphony. It was on the Île de la Cité, at the threshold of the 13th century, that composers developed not only a style of writing for several voices that reached unprecedented levels of complexity but, just as crucially, the means of writing it down.

Church of St. Mary the Virgin,

New York

 Jan. 22 

With "Voices From the Island Sanctuary," the early-music ensemble Sequentia presents a series of concerts across the U.S. dedicated to the music of the Notre Dame school. This month, the tour includes stops in New York, Cleveland and Ann Arbor, Mich. Led by Benjamin Bagby, an American scholar, singer and harpist living in Paris, the ensemble will perform religious and secular works that reflect the hum of a medieval island city alive with political and cultural ferment. In fact, Notre Dame and the Île de la Cité then constituted a city within a city with its own port, staff, students, clerics, small churches and colleges that would soon become Europe's second university. The result, Mr. Bagby says, was "a very intense and lively intellectual milieu within a very small space."

Part of his program gives voice to what he calls the "angry young men" of their time, cosmopolitan youths from every kingdom who lived in an environment both sheltered from the real world and acutely well informed about it. Thus the new polyphonic music found expression not only in the elaborate liturgies for feast days in the cathedral, but also in secular songs lampooning the greed of the curia and the hypocrisies and excesses of Rome.

"This worldly class of impoverished young scholars was highly attuned to injustice, greed, corruption and incompetence," Mr. Bagby says. "They were cynical and merciless in their condemnation of corruption, and this found expression in Latin poetry, which was performed using the latest in 'new music' techniques."

In essence, these techniques amplified the already ancient Gregorian chant through polyphony. Settings for two, three or four voices pitched flexible vocal lines against the measured notes of the Gregorian melodies. Coordinating and notating the movement of these lines against each other was an exercise in mathematical proportion, and it was no accident that the rise of this rhythmically intricate music coincided with the blossoming study of the liberal arts across Europe.

For singers, the technical demands of the resulting music can be daunting. Wide vocal ranges, intricate ornamentations and phrase lengths requiring immense breath control attest to the virtuosity of medieval choristers. "One of the reasons that we hear so little of the really interesting solo chant repertoire today," Mr. Bagby says, "is that it is simply too difficult for most of today's singers to master. This gives us a false impression that medieval chant is relaxing, austere, laid-back and even a bit boring. . . . But a new generation of singers is working to strip off the sticky sugar coating and let the medieval originals breathe again."

With written sources stubbornly mute on the subject of performance practice, medieval-music specialists are forced to search for clues between the lines. One approach Mr. Bagby has used is the study of rhetoric. "We know from descriptions of performance, the reactions of listeners, and from the rhetorical treatises themselves, that the performers were often master rhetoricians and the effect of their art was engrossing, emotional and immediate."

The physical spaces of the cathedral itself offer another clue. "I can't help but speculate on how the physical environment of this transformation affected the structural thinking of the singers themselves," Mr. Bagby says. "The new architecture employed repetitive motifs which were in 'musical' proportion to the other sets and which gave rise to immense forms based on harmonious relationships. In the medieval worldview, number and structure were musical expressions, and for singers in Notre Dame—all of them well-educated and ambitious young men—this would have been obvious as they created new sonic structures within the architecture taking shape in the dusty, drafty spaces around them."

Those spaces would continue to change. The choir, the musical inner sanctum of the medieval Notre Dame, used to be a virtual church unto itself, a closed-off space covered with tapestries that would have made for much softer acoustics than those offered by the present-day choir, a vacant space behind the altar open to the rest of the church.

Even so, once a year, Mr. Bagby finds himself there, transported back in time, when he sits on the exam jury of the cathedral music school. "To sit in the choir of a deserted Notre Dame, on the exact spot where the creators of this music sang 800 years ago, bathed in the evening light streaming in through the great western rose window, listening to those young students singing the ancient chant, reminds me of what the human voice can conjure in the complexity and depth of medieval liturgical spaces. The ghosts are eloquent and encourage us to sing again."

 Ms. da Fonseca-Wollheim writes about classical music for the Journal. 