It's not a trick question. I'm going to answer it by deconstructing three rooms by Jacques Grange, the inimitable French decorator who has come to stand for an eclectic and personal style that is very much in favor right now, and because of its lack of teachable rules, is probably the hardest thing to achieve in decorating.

His rooms have an optimistic elegance, as if his clients got rich but stayed bohemian. Mr. Grange is one of the inventors of this taste, which, while French in origin, is completely unlimited in terms of the cultures and periods it references. Since the early 1970s, his work for Parisian clients such as Yves Saint Laurent and Pierre Bergé has established him among the most imaginative of his generation of designers, fearless—and committed to the fusion of energy and elegance. In the last decade he has brought his style from Paris to New York in the form of baronial apartments for financiers on Park Avenue and, most recently, for Valentino on Fifth Avenue as well as the Mark Hotel. His monograph, full of ravishing photography of 30 years of work, was published last year. 

I chose these three rooms because they represent distinct periods of Mr. Grange's career, but it would be too dull to call them early, middle and late. We'll call them "1973," "White" and "Paneled." Let's see if we can find some clues as to how he does it.



If you are a truly stylish person, you know the importance of comfort. You can be sure Mr. Grange knows it, and we find all three rooms crowded with chairs and seating of completely diverse character. The chairs are there for two reasons: so there will be no problems keeping conversation going at a cocktail party, and, simply, as interesting objects. From the White room's surprising Louis XVI marquise—so dark it's almost hiding in the fireplace—to the fleecy deep blue Jean Royère club chair in the Paneled room, chairs in a Grange room are characters in a play.

Most of us employ pairs to anchor a room. A pair of chairs or porcelain vases, set wide apart in the conventional style, is a way to "close the deal" and make a room look solid and complete. Mr. Grange, on the other hand, uses pairs to do something surprising—as in the 1973 living room where the two Grange-designed orange leather ottomans are split up informally and appear to be giant pumpkins growing out of that green carpet. With objects of a different scale, he uses a different method: The blue bird sculptures are grouped close together, as is the pair of Arts and Crafts ceramic vases in the foreground of the White room. The point is, he never does what you're supposed to do with pairs. He does whatever has the capacity to delight and is unexpected, and a little exotic, which is what makes a great decorator. 



All three of these spaces, if stripped to the bare shells, would seem surprisingly unfinished for architecture in rooms by a great decorator. I think this is by intent, since for Mr. Grange, architecture is not an end in itself, but a setup for the brilliant compositions of objects to come. There are curious and original choices about what to leave in and what to cut. The 1973 room, with its strong Asian-inspired character, borrows the black seams of tatami mats to give a minimum of interest and architectural rhythm to the walls—but only vertically. The White room is, well, stark matte white. And if empty, the Paneled room would look like many a suburban basement rec room, save for the lone adornment of a hefty cream-painted chair rail to add a little discipline to the blank expanses of plain wood. If there had been a fancy crown molding, Mr. Grange would probably have taken it out. I will take the liberty of speculating that Mr. Grange feels it is a little bourgeois to get all hung up about architecture—that it takes away some of a room's potential for mystery to have it be too complete—and that this is a very calibrated strategy to get the sense of informality he is after. Note: Do not attempt this at home unless you have retained Jacques Grange.

For the most part, Mr. Grange is a designer of modern rooms. But how he arrives at this result is highly unexpected, because when you look at his interiors there is plenty of period furniture. Take the White room: If you know about antiques you know that it is extremely rare to find a set of four wall lights as we do in here (pairs are usually the rule). It is even more unusual to group them together in vertical stacks on one wall. The precious things, instead of being treated with requisite dignity, are arranged with fearless invention (and a 1930s Picasso never hurts). In the thoroughly contemporary Paneled room, nothing could look more exotic than the unexpected view from all that modernism to an 18th-century bed. A "lit a la Polonaise" isn't a hip acquisition to most, but it has become one through this juxtaposition and context. And why stop there? Hang an enormous black-and-white fashion photograph behind it. Mr. Grange makes you see familiar things through new eyes, making the 18th century a rock star again.

He knew it in 1973, he knew it in the White room and he knows it now. Sculpture is everywhere in Mr. Grange's projects, as though each client was secretly an artist. But it is the designer who is the artist here. Great decorating is alchemy, and in Mr. Grange's hands the apartment of a robber baron can become as sunny and romantic as an atelier for Camille Claudel. Good deal, non?

—Mr. Netto is a Los Angeles-based writer, designer and creative director of the Maclaren Nursery furniture line.