LONDON—The International Energy Agency said the world will need more crude from OPEC amid faster-than-expected oil-demand growth—or risk high prices that damage the economic recovery. 

The report by the IEA, which represents major energy-consuming countries, will increase pressure on the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to lift its production ceiling amid a growing debate between the agency and the oil producers' group over the causes and implications of higher crude prices.

The IEA January monthly report boosted demand estimates for 2010 and 2011 by 320,000 barrels a day from its December report. The agency now sees 2010 oil demand having risen by 2.7 million barrels a day year-to-year to 87.7 million barrels a day, and a subsequent rise in demand of 1.4 million barrels a day in 2011 to 89.1 million barrels a day.

While global oil inventories declined somewhat compared with the IEA's December report, they remain fairly high by historic standards. The overall energy consumption patterns "suggest that the economic recovery has been more pronounced than expected earlier," the IEA said. 

The raised IEA demand forecast, which comes on the heels of OPEC's upgrade Monday to its own 2011 global oil demand forecast, was largely due to stronger-than-expected consumption from Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development nations. The report in particular cited euro-zone activity, largely driven by Germany.

The IEA has become vocal in highlighting the threat to the global economy from runaway oil prices. On Monday, IEA's Executive Director  Nobuo Tanaka said, "OPEC must continue to be alarmed" over the price rise and suggested that formally increasing its output ceiling could ease oil prices. 

But in written remarks to The Wall Street Journal, OPEC secretary general  Abdalla Salem El-Badri insisted commercial stocks and the group's spare capacity remained robust. OPEC has repeatedly decided to maintain its production ceiling during recent meetings amid calls by some OPEC members to defend ever-higher prices. 

"Any assumption that there is tightness in the market ... is incorrect," Mr. El-Badri said. "There is more than enough oil on the market." Mr. El-Badri said the current rise was tied to the weak dollar, speculation and temporary downtime in Alaska and the North Sea. 

"Supplying the world's media with unrealistic assumptions and forecasts will serve only to confuse matters and create unnecessary fear in the markets," Mr. El-Badri said. "The IEA must be consistent in their remarks." The IEA didn't respond to a request for comment. 

In its report, the IEA said that if oil becomes entrenched at $100 a barrel in 2011, global oil expenditures could rise to 5% of gross domestic product, a level associated with economic problems in the past.

Separately, U.K. oil and gas company BP PLC said Wednesday that OPEC's power within the oil market will only grow in the coming decades, with influence accumulating to the only two members of the group able to significantly expand output—Iraq and Saudi Arabia. 

"Huge growth from OPEC is needed to satisfy demand," between now and 2030, said BP's Chief Economist Christof Ruehl as he presented the company's internal long-term energy market projections to the public for the first time. 

 Write to  James Herron at james.herron@dowjones.com 