In the past few years, Manchester City has transformed English football, signing some of the sport's biggest names, making a mockery of transfer records and turning the Premier League's balance of power upside down.

But as the club prepares to play Stoke City in Saturday's FA Cup final at Wembley Stadium, the team's fans have found something that's really worth celebrating: The chance to unburden some old baggage.

While Manchester United has dominated English football the past two decades, it is 35 years since Manchester City last won a major trophy, a fact commemorated by a giant banner in United's Old Trafford stadium. 

The so-called "City Ticker" is on permanent display in the stadium's famous Stretford End and updated each Feb. 28 to mark the date of City's last meaningful success—a 1976 League Cup triumph. Since it was first unfurled more than a decade ago, City fans have rarely stopped grousing about it.

Garry Cook, the club's chief executive, said the sign "drives us all nuts" at a supporters club meeting last year. On his arrival as Manchester City coach in 2009, Roberto Mancini said his priority was to "take that banner down." Micah Richards, the Manchester City defender, says "it's something that drives the boys on a bit."

Now, even as the team closes on its first silverware in a generation, fans are focusing on the prospect of a small victory over their biggest rival. "There will be no greater delight than seeing United's fans have to take down that banner," said Dennis Tueart, who scored City's winning goal in the 1976 League Cup triumph. "It's been a long time coming."

"I can't wait to see them tear it down," said Lee Clayburn, a 33-year-old municipal worker and a member of the Manchester City fan club. "They've been rubbing our noses in it for years."

That the sign has emerged as a focal point in the days before Saturday's final speaks to an increasingly gripping competition between the planet's most famous club and what may be its richest. "It's all part of the banter between the two clubs now," said Darren Fletcher, the United midfielder.

Until lately, this rivalry was hardly a contest. While United accumulated trophies, City accumulated coaches: The club has hired 14 different managers since Sir Alex Ferguson was appointed United coach in 1986. 

But it's been shaken up—like much in English football—by Sheikh Mansour bin Zayed al-Nahyan's takeover of Manchester City in 2008. Having spent more than $350 million on a roster of superstar players, City qualified for next season's Champions League tournament for the first time Tuesday with a 1-0 win over Tottenham Hotspur.

"We don't think there's too much in it now between us and United," says Richards. "We've got a good team and the backing of the chairman, so hopefully times will change."

Indeed, even as Manchester United prepares to celebrate a record 19th English championship this weekend, a quirk of the schedule means its crowning achievement could be overshadowed by the club across the city playing its biggest game in recent history. 

Because London's Wembley Stadium is hosting this year's UEFA Champions League final on May 28, the FA Cup final has moved from its traditional slot after the conclusion of the league season to this weekend. The result is that English football's showpiece occasion, which commands a U.K. TV audience of around 7 million, will kick-off roughly 30 minutes after United finishes its game against Blackburn. (United would clinch the championship by avoiding defeat in that game.)

This isn't the first time one of these teams has trumped the other in its moment of triumph: United became the first English club to lift the European Cup in 1968, the same year City won the domestic championship. But some United fans aren't prepared to allow the team's resurgent rival to steal the limelight. There is talk of a new version of the Stretford End ticker, this time marking 43 years—the length of time since City last won the title.

"If City do win the FA Cup the first thing they'll be asking is for that banner to come down. The players, managers, fans, they're all obsessed by it," said Andrew Kilduff, of the Stretford End Flags fan group, in the Daily Telegraph. "It'll stay up if they don't win it and if they do, it might come down, but there are lots of other options."

 Write to  Jonathan Clegg at jonathan.clegg@wsj.com 