KAMPALA, Uganda—The main opposition leader behind escalating anti-government protests in Uganda said Saturday he would again take to the streets next week and warned that internal discord could lead to a "messy" government collapse.

Kizza Besigye, the presidential candidate for Uganda's biggest opposition party, Forum for Democratic Change, said in an interview that he would participate in an anti-government march Monday and that the protesters "are purging fear and asserting themselves more" despite a violent crackdown.

"These protests can reach a situation where government becomes dysfunctional," he said.

Despite calling for a transition from the 25-year rule of President Yoweri Museveni, Mr. Besigye said large-scale protests leading to government collapse would be "unfortunate" because "such a transition would be messy."

He said the government needs to organize genuine talks with the opposition and other major stakeholders to resolve the unrest before it gets out of hand. Mr. Besigye faulted the government for not implementing policies to promote food security, leaving farmers at the mercy of middlemen.

On Friday, Mr. Museveni said he was expanding his cabinet, and he is expected to appoint opposition members to key posts, in a move to defuse the unrest.

As street protests over rising food prices and opposition to Mr. Museveni's government have gathered steam, the president has been quietly reaching out to select political rivals, according to people familiar with the situation. Over the past two weeks, he has placed personal calls to several opposition lawmakers, appealing to them to abandon street marches in return for cabinet positions, these people say.

The overtures underscore how the Ugandan leader, who was re-elected in February, is coming under strong political pressure, which could offer a test case of whether popular protests that toppled governments on the north of the continent will spread to other parts of Africa.

The president's main challenger in the most recent election, Mr. Besigye, has frequently pointed to protests in the Arab world to rally his own supporters. He accuses the ruling party of rigging votes in favor of Mr. Museveni. Rising food prices in Uganda have fueled the turmoil.

Daudi Migereko, the chief whip for the ruling party in parliament, and a powerful ally of the president, said Mr. Museveni was ready to meet with his rival.

"It's up to Besigye where and when they meet. [Besgiye's] lack of faith in the democratic process is the crux of the problem, said Mr. Migereko. He added that the opposition "is giving ultimatums and preconditions and I don't think that's the way to go."

Mr. Besigye said he hadn't been personally contacted by anyone in Mr. Museveni's administration.

Mr. Besigye returned Thursday from a Kenyan hospital where he had been undergoing treatment following injuries sustained during a violent arrest last month. Crowds of supporters pulsed through the streets, resisting efforts of Ugandan security forces to disperse them. The march, which lasted about nine hours, ended up overshadowing the president's inauguration ceremony. About a dozen people have died in the last month of protests.