PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla.—Jenrry Mejia stepped on a mound Tuesday, and for the better part of an hour, it was like spring training 2010 all over.

The Mets' top pitching prospect unleashed his signature pitch, a 95-mph fastball with biting movement. Hitters were baffled. Observers were captivated.

"Everybody was asking me, 'What did you throw?'" Mejia said. "I said, 'Four-seam fastball.' They said, 'Oomph, man.'"

Only this was different. Mejia was pitching on a practice field in a simulated game, not on the main field. And the people drooling over him were minor-league prospects, not front-office executives. For the Mets, this was progress.

A year ago, Mejia embodied the desperation of former general manager Omar Minaya and manager Jerry Manuel, who put him on the Opening Day roster at the age of 20. But now, he is a reflection of the long-term thinking of the Mets' new management.

Though Mejia is still technically in major-league camp, he is bound for the starting rotation at Triple-A Buffalo. The Mejia-mania that swept over this place a year ago has given way to caution and measured optimism.

"Last year, we were looking for a way to improve our bullpen," Mets pitching coach Dan Warthen said. "He was a guy coming up and throwing high-90s and doing things that we didn't have anybody to do. Now, I think we're more open to development of good guys like him for the future."

Before, the Mets had an infatuation. Now, they have a plan.

The Mets will give Mejia time to develop as a starter in the minors, to see if he can hone the command of his off-speed pitches. If he succeeds, he could be in the big-league starting rotation in 2012. If he fails, he could still be an effective major-league reliever on the strength of his cut fastball.

"They have to make that decision for me, but I'd like to be a starter," he said.

Patience and development are not revolutionary concepts, but they were noticeably absent around this time a year ago. In his first major-league camp, Mejia put on a dazzling performance. He finished with a 1.59 ERA and nine strikeouts in 17 Grapefruit League innings.

The seduction was too great for Manuel to resist. By early March, he was comparing Mejia to Mariano Rivera.

The fact that Mejia had spent only 10 games in Double-A and had never pitched in Triple-A was irrelevant. But then, the Mets under Minaya made a habit of aggressively promoting top prospects.

Baseball Prospectus published a study last month that found that, between 2005 and 2009, on average, Mets players had the fewest minor-league plate appearances and innings pitched prior to their major-league debuts of any team in baseball.

"It's a careful balance between challenging the player while also giving him the opportunity to experience success," said Paul DePodesta, the Mets' head of player development. "The most difficult situations arise when someone has an advanced skill, say defense or a big fastball, while the rest of the skills are behind."

Mejia proved to be an adequate middle reliever, with a 3.25 ERA in 30 appearances, before being sent back to the minors to become a starter. He struggled in three major-league starts in September, allowing 10 earned runs in 11 1/3 innings, before a shoulder injury ended his season.

Warthen said Mejia could still be an effective major-league reliever today. But it's also easy to see why Mejia needs more time to develop. His command of his curveball and changeup is still "considerably below average," Warthen said.

The temptation to promote him lingers, but this time, the Mets are determined to resist it.

"You always kind of think, 'God, if we put him in our bullpen, he'd be a good guy,'" Warthen said. "But I think we're smart enough organizationally to say all right, let's find out if this kid can do the other thing."