NEW YORK—Blue-chip stocks tacked on a second straight session of gains this year, boosted by encouraging economic data and relief over a quiet set of minutes from the Federal Reserve's last meeting. 

The Dow Jones Industrial Average gained 20.43 points, or 0.2%, to 11691.1, extending the gains from its surge on Monday, the first trading session of the year.

Other benchmark indexes closed with modest losses. The Nasdaq Composite fell 10.27, or 0.4% to 2681.25. The Standard & Poor's 500-stock index shed 1.69, or 0.1%, to 1270.20.

Materials weighed on the S&P 500 after UBS cut its stock-investment ratings on two construction aggregate companies to "neutral" from "buy," noting the stocks' strong performances in the fourth quarter even as the political appetite for road spending grew more uncertain.  Vulcan Materials
VMC


-0.49
%




 fell 5.2%, while  Martin Marietta Materials
MLM


-0.98
%




 shed 6.5%.

Food retailers also lagged after Bank of Montreal downgraded  Safeway, Vitamin Shoppe
VSI


1.83
%




 and Whole Foods to "market perform" from "outperform," noting limited upside. Safeway fell 3.8%, Vitamin Shoppe was off 4.6%, and Whole Foods shed 3.4%. BMO also reduced its estimates for  Supervalu,
SVU


-2.19
%




 noting the chain's inability to drive traffic, and  Kroger,
KR


-0.71
%




 saying the fiscal year 2011 consensus could be too high given the challenging environment. Supervalu tumbled 6.4%, while Kroger lost 1.4%.

Morgan Stanley also cut Safeway and Supervalu, to "underweight" from "equal weight," saying Supervalu's strategy to reduce prices will collide with inflationary food costs.

  General Motors
GM


0.28
%




 rose 2.3% after its U.S. light-vehicle sales climbed 8% in December thanks to continued strong demand for crossovers and pickups. GM on Tuesday also forecast that U.S. auto sales industrywide will reach 13 million to 13.5 million in 2011 as economic growth picks up and unemployment declines.

Traders said the market felt some relief that the minutes of the Fed's policy-making committee's Dec. 14 meeting contained no major surprises.

In the minutes, the central bank said a stronger U.S. economy is among the reasons behind the rise in government-bond yields, which may undermine its efforts to keep the recovery going via low interest rates. In November 2010, the Fed announced a $600 billion bond-purchase program, known as "quantitative easing," or "QE2." Despite the improvement in the economy, Fed officials "generally felt that the change in the outlook was not sufficient to warrant any adjustments to the asset-purchase program," the minutes showed.

Market strategists were encouraged to see the Fed echo what many have characterized as a gradually recovering economy, and relieved to see no major changes to the quantitative-easing program, said  Bill Vaughn, portfolio manager at Evercore Wealth Management.

Investors "certainly would have been worried if there had been a sudden change in policy," he said.

Tuesday's key data point was encouraging. The Commerce Department reported that U.S. factory-goods orders unexpectedly rose 0.7% in November, when economists had been predicting a 0.1% decline. 

Still, stocks beyond the Dow couldn't shake off mild losses as investors took a breather after the market's recent surge.

The market had "a really nice run in December, and I think a lot of that is playing a part in what's going on today," said  Tom Villalta, lead portfolio manager at Jones/Villalta Opportunity Fund. The Fed's view that the economy is gradually strengthening presented few surprises, he said. "There's nothing in there that we found particularly shocking." 

Crude-oil prices dropped more than 2% to settle just above $89 a barrel, while gold futures advanced.

The dollar strengthened against both the yen and the euro. The U.S. Dollar Index, which tracks the currency against a basket of others, rose 0.4%.

Meanwhile, the telecommunications sector gained, as shares of  Motorola Mobility Holdings
MMI


-0.40
%




 rose 9.5% and  Motorola Solutions
MSI


0.29
%




 gained 6.6% after Motorola's long-awaited split into two entities officially took place Tuesday. Motorola Mobility consists of the company's consumer-focused smartphone and set-top-box business, while Motorola Solutions focuses on hand-held communication devices and public-safety radios.

Among stocks in focus, U.S.-listed shares of  BP rose 2.5%, following reports that compensation payouts for the Gulf oil spill may be much lower than expected and amid lingering rumors that the company is a takeover target.

  Borders Group plunged 13% after the troubled book retailer's Counsel  Thomas Carney and Chief Information Officer  D. Scott Laverty resigned. A unit of closely held Ingram Industries said it would continue to supply books to Borders despite the chain's difficult financial situation.

  Quanta Services
PWR


1.05
%




 rose 4.2% after winning a contract valued at $118.5 million by a coalition of Pennsylvania colleges and universities as well as economic development and research and development organizations to install a statewide fiber-optic network.

 Write to  Kristina Peterson at kristina.peterson@dowjones.com 