A New Jersey-based landlord is attempting to improve its strained relationship with tenants in some of its New York City apartments. 

Urban American Management Corp., a real-estate investment and management company based in West New York, N.J., plans to renovate 200 so-called Section 8 apartments in four of its apartment complexes across the city under a test program. 

Each apartment is located in huge complexes where there are a mix of market-rate and Section 8 tenants, who receive housing assistance. 

Under the program, the Section 8 apartments will get the same renovations as market-rate apartments. The upgrades will cost between $15,000 and $25,000 per apartment. 

Urban American owns or operates around 15,000 apartments in the city. It purchased the four properties, which have about 3,000 units and are located in upper Manhattan, in 2007.

The buildings are former participants in the state's Mitchell Lama housing program, and about 70% of the tenants have their rents subsidized by Section 8 vouchers. 

Tenants chosen for the program will either be transferred to renovated apartments or will be temporarily moved while renovations are made to their current units. 

"We hope this will result in the renovation of all of their low-income units, sending the message that all tenants should be treated to the same standard regardless of income," said  Douglas Apple, deputy commissioner for the city's Department of Housing Preservation and Development.

After the renovations, Urban American expects to be able to raise rents in the upgraded apartments by around 5%. "We have a commitment to our investors to generate good returns," said  Douglas Eisenberg, chief operating officer of Urban American.

Section 8 tenants won't be on the hook for the rent increases. The increases will be covered by bigger Section 8 vouchers. That program is funded by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development and is administered in the city by the housing department. 

Officials with the housing department said the 5% increase in rents for upgraded units isn't guaranteed. It will depend on annual evaluation of rents in the building that factors in things like market conditions and the quality of improvements. 

Urban American's relationship with its tenants has hit rough patches over the years. In 2008, the company wanted some of its tenants to begin paying for their own electricity usage, the cost of which had been included in their rent, a system called submetering. 

Tenants were outraged and said their bills would skyrocket because the buildings have antiquated electrical heating systems and poorly insulated apartments. Several elected officials opposed the plan as well. 

The New York State Public Service Commission disapproved Urban American's application for submetering. The commission ordered Urban American to make energy efficiency improvements to the buildings before it could receive approval. Urban American is in the process of reapplying to begin submetering. 

"It has been a constant battle" to get the company to make improvements in the buildings, said  Dina Levy, director at the Urban Homesteading Assistance Board, a housing advocacy group that is advising Urban American tenants. 

Since Urban American bought the properties in 2007, it has invested nearly $60 million renovating the common areas for the buildings, according to Mr. Eisenberg. "It takes time," he said. 