TOKYO—An increase in taxes is necessary to fund Japan's reconstruction efforts after the March 11 earthquake, but the rise shouldn't be limited to the sales tax, the head of a government advisory panel said. 

Makoto Iokibe, chairman of the Reconstruction Design Council, said the council would likely call for some kind of tax increase to avoid relying on government bonds, which would burden future generations. 

"Unless the effort is supported by all the Japanese people—those living now—it would be a shame," he said in an interview this week. "But if we were to do so all with just the sales tax, then it would hurt the economy and would not be good." 

Raising the 5% sales tax is seen as the easiest way to quickly boost revenue, but some economists warn it would damp consumption and further hurt the economy, which is already reeling from the impact of the earthquake. 

Mr. Iokibe, who is also president of the National Defense Academy, added that experts should look into a combination of tax increases, and said it isn't the council's mission to come up with a specific tax proposal. 

"There are various ways of sharing the burden; there should be a 'best mix,' " he said. 

The panel—which includes academics, business leaders and local governors—is to submit to Prime Minister Naoto Kan a blueprint for reconstruction by the end of June.

The magnitude-9 quake and ensuing tsunami have left about 25,000 people dead or missing, and are estimated to have caused ¥16 trillion to ¥25 trillion ($200 billion to $311.72 billion) in direct damage to buildings and other infrastructure. 

Mr. Iokibe, who survived the magnitude-7.3 quake that destroyed his hometown of Kobe in January 1995, killing more than 6,400 people, said he sees his role as an adviser to Mr. Kan as a chance to return the helping hand his family received 16 years ago.

The Kobe quake destroyed his house and separated his family. His wife and daughters moved in with a friend in Hiroshima, while he stayed in Kobe, where he was teaching at the local university. 

"When I went to see them in Hiroshima, the older girls in the neighborhood came by to go to school together with our daughter, and she seemed so happy," the 67-year-old Mr. Iokibe said. "I found myself crying, realizing that so many people all over Japan were supporting us, that there was still a 'good Japan' where people offer support and unity in time of need." 

Mr. Iokibe offered some ideas from the Reconstruction Design Council, a panel formed to advise on rebuilding after the March disasters.

A "hill of hope" built from the rubble left by the tsunami's destruction would serve both as a memorial of the natural disaster and protection against future tsunamis, he said. Such a hill would be constructed along the coastline, and trees would be planted on top to minimize the power of any tsunami. "But we may call it a 'requiem forest,' given the magnitude of the disaster, to keep the memories of lost ones."

Mr. Iokibe said there also were plans for a new type of fishing community, where residences would be on higher ground, and offices and fishing bases near the port would be housed in concrete buildings at least five stories high. 

"There is a wider scope of human knowledge now," he said. "People need not just give up in the fierce face of mother nature. We can build a safe and secure community."

He brushed aside criticism by some politicians and local residents that the panel was a "dream team" of intellectuals preoccupied with grand visions rather than practical ideas to help the victims. 

"We're a panel of intellectuals; we're not 'macho' and can't be counted on to 'come to the rescue,' " he said. "But we can come up with an overall plan toward reconstruction. If people can see the light at the end of the tunnel, then they can endure the darkness." 

—Miho Inada contributed to this article.