CHICAGO—The Illinois Supreme Court ruled 7-0 Thursday that Rahm Emanuel can run for mayor of the nation's third-largest city.

The unanimous decision ends a three-month campaign to force the former White House Chief of Staff off the ballot in the race to succeed Mayor Richard M. Daley. It also opens the door for a first-round win on Feb. 22 by Mr. Emanuel, whose popularity surged during the dispute over whether he qualified as a legal resident of Chicago.



In a 25-page order, the court overruled an appellate court that earlier this week removed Mr. Emanuel from the ballot. The Illinois Supreme Court said the appellate court's decision was "without any foundation in Illinois law."

Mr. Emanuel greeted voters at an elevated-train station in downtown Chicago minutes after the ruling was issued, with many giving him high fives and shaking hands. 

"This decision ultimately should be made by the voters," Mr. Emanuel said in an interview. "They should decide who should be the mayor and the good news is they will now have that right to make this decision." 

Mr. Emanuel said he received a congratulatory call from President Barack Obama but declined to say what was said. "Obviously, it was on the positive side," he said.

Those who objected to Mr. Emanuel's candidacy said they wouldn't seek further legal action. "It's been a long journey, but we respect the Supreme Court's decision," said attorney Matthew Welch, who helped represent the objectors. "We were going against the tide here."

"Game on," said mayoral candidate Gery Chico, a former chief of staff to Mr. Daley. "Emanuel's residency drama has made this election into a circus instead of a serious debate about the future of Chicago."

Mr. Emanuel's name will appear first on the six-person ballot. He has built a substantial lead in the polls along with a campaign war chest of nearly $12 million, more than twice as much as his five opponents combined.

Mr. Emanuel's front-runner status appears to have solidified during the controversy, with one recent poll showing him with more than 50% of the vote—enough to avoid a runoff. 

Immediately after Mr. Emanuel filed to run last fall, more than 30 voters challenged his residency status. They argued that because he had moved to Washington to serve as Mr. Obama's chief of staff and had not lived in Chicago this past year, he was ineligible to run.

The Chicago Board of Election Commissioners and a Cook County circuit judge both ruled that Mr. Emanuel should remain on the ballot. Then the appellate court on Monday ruled against Mr. Emanuel's candidacy. The next day, the high court ordered a halt to printing of ballots without Mr. Emanuel's name while the court considered the case.

The drama ended Thursday, with the final high-court ruling.

Kari Guhl, an artist's agent rushing to meet friends for drinks outside the train station where Mr. Emanuel had just appeared, praised the decision.

"It's as it should be," she said. "If it wasn't some long story, it wouldn't be Chicago politics."

Illinois election law says that to qualify to run for mayor a candidate must have resided in the city he or she hopes to serve for one year prior to the election.

Mr. Emanuel was born in Chicago, owns a house here and represented the city's North Side for three terms in Congress before he moved to Washington in early 2009 to work for President Obama. He didn't move back to Chicago until October. 

Objectors cited his absence to disqualify him. Mr. Emanuel argued that even though he moved to Washington, he maintained his residency by renting out his house instead of selling it, paying property taxes, keeping his cars registered in Chicago and voting in city elections. He also stored family heirlooms in a locked crawl space in the basement of his home.

Mr. Emanuel further argued that Illinois law provides an exception for candidates who leave the state on business for the U.S. government. The appellate court ruled that a person running for office must be physically present in the city and the government exception applied to voters but not to candidates.

In their opinion, five of the Illinois Supreme Court justices chastised the appellate court for its "mysterious" analysis that it said resulted in "tossing out 150 years of settled residency law in favor of its own preferred standard." 

The justices said that under the appellate court's analysis, congressional representatives living in Washington or state representatives living in Springfield would be constantly subjected to "confusion" with respect to their residency. 

Instead, the court upheld the long tradition of using "physical presence" and "intent" when interpreting residency questions in Illinois. It also said that the only way to lose residency once established is through "abandonment" of the physical presence, also a question of intent. 

In Mr. Emanuel's case, the court said, he did not abandon his residency because his intent was clearly to remain in his Chicago house. "The candidate left many personal items in the Hermitage House, including his bed, two televisions, a stereo system, a piano, and over 100 boxes of personal possessions," the court said.

Justice Robert R. Thomas wrote the majority ruling, with Chief Justice Thomas L. Kilbride and Justices Rita B. Garman, Lloyd A. Karmeier and Mary Jane Theis concurring. 

In concurring opinions, two of the seven justices agreed with the majority opinion, but they disagreed with part of their reasoning. Those two justices, Charles E. Freeman and Anne M. Burke, said that "this case is in no way as clear-cut as the majority makes it out to be." It further said that over the years the court "has not always spoken clearly on what is meant by residency, and the majority should acknowledge this fact."

 Write to  Douglas Belkin at doug.belkin@wsj.com and Lauren Etter at lauren.etter@wsj.com 