A 17,000-square-foot, six-bedroom, seven-bathroom home on 0.6 acres with beachfront on the Caribbean island of Grenada. 

 DETAILS: The fully furnished Moorish-style home has access to two small private beaches. There's also a private apartment, a movie theater, a 50-foot swimming pool and a dock. 

 TUB LIFE: The beachside Jacuzzi is reached by wooden beach deck through a tropical garden.

 COLD ONE: The Beach Cabana at the Mount Cinnamon resort is about a 10-minute drive from the house. 

 FRIDAY'S FORECAST: Scattered showers, high 83 degrees. 

 SOURCE: Catherine Gazder of Lila Delman Real Estate in Newport, R.I., a Christie's International Real Estate affiliate, 401-789-6666, catherine.gazder@liladelman.com. 

A 3,500-square-foot, three-bedroom, five-bathroom home on 0.1 acres on Mission Bay.

 DETAILS: The recently rebuilt beachfront home has an outdoor kitchen and is close enough to SeaWorld that nightly fireworks are visible from the deck. The house, which comes furnished, also has a wine cellar and a five-car garage.

 TUB LIFE: The hot tub and swimming pool are solar-powered and overlook the bay. 

 COLD ONE: The home is near the Catamaran Resort Hotel. Moray's Lounge has a large saltwater aquarium and a bar. 

 FRIDAY'S FORECAST: Sunny, high 75 degrees.

 SOURCE: Lori Ebeling of Coldwell Banker Residential Brokerage in Palm Desert, via Realtor.com, 760-831-1501, lori@loriebeling.com. 

An 11,600-square-foot, seven-bedroom, 11-bathroom home on 1.84 acres in a gated golf community in North Scottsdale. 

 DETAILS: The Tuscan-style home, built in 2001, has vaulted ceilings, mountain views, a billiard room, movie theater, elevator and a two-bedroom guest house. There's also a large home gym and sauna. 

 TUB LIFE: The home's Jacuzzi and two swimming pools are connected by a cascading waterfall. There are expansive city views. 

 COLD ONE: The Mountainside Office Bar & Grill is about 1½ miles away and serves a variety of drinks.

 FRIDAY'S FORECAST: Sunny, high 72 degrees. 

 SOURCE: Tom Locati with Russ Lyon Sotheby's International Realty, via Realtor.com, 480-600-2345, tomlocati@me.com.

—Candace Jackson