BERLIN—Germany's government will present a clear timetable for a change in energy policy away from nuclear power, German Chancellor Angela Merkel said Thursday, signaling that the country may accelerate its exit from nuclear power. 

"We will use the period of the moratorium to speed up the turnaround in energy," Mrs. Merkel told parliament in a statement on the consequences of the nuclear crisis in Japan. "We want to reach the era of renewable energy as fast as possible." 

The government on Tuesday ordered that the country's seven oldest nuclear plants be switched off at least temporarily for a three-month security review. Mrs. Merkel didn't say whether the government would restart any of those plants after the three-month moratorium, but said some may have to be switched off faster than planned. 

"Everything will be checked," she said. 

The shutdowns have provoked criticism from the head of German utility  E.ON AG, and German's Sueddeutsche Zeitung Thursday reported that E.ON and other German power utilities are considering launching legal proceedings against the government. The chancellor said Thursday the temporary shutdown of the seven plants is allowed in German nuclear law.

E.ON Chief Executive  Johannes Teyssen late Wednesday said the government's decision to close some nuclear reactors was purely politically motivated, and warned of a knee-jerk reaction to the threat of a nuclear disaster at the Fukushima nuclear plant in Japan. 

"The [German] plant shutdowns aren't justified from a technical safety standpoint," Mr. Teyssen told a gathering of journalists. 

He tempered his criticism by adding that the company agrees that further study is necessary, and repeated his call for a mutual European approach to nuclear energy. 

"Since Friday, the world, including the energy world, is a different one," he said. A safety analysis will take time, "and there will be several answers, not just a German one," he said. 

Amid pressure from a public increasingly averse to nuclear power, it seems unlikely all seven nuclear plants that are being shut down now will be switched back on by the government. 

But Mrs. Merkel Thursday said that an exit from nuclear power needs to be done with caution in order to safeguard energy supply and also take into account greenhouse gas emissions. 

The nuclear crisis in Japan has forced Mrs. Merkel's government to backtrack from its previous position; last autumn it reversed a decision by an earlier government to phase out nuclear power by 2022, and granted nuclear power plants an average life-span extension of 12 years. With that, Germany's last nuclear reactor would be switched off in 2036. 

Sigmar Gabriel, leader of the opposition Social Democrats, doubted Mrs. Merkel's credibility given that the shutdown of the nuclear plants for now is only planned for three months. 

"No more lies," he said in parliament Thursday. 

Separately Thursday, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development said nuclear power would remain essential to Europe's electricity production, even though potentially rising costs for higher safety and insurance requirements might curtail its role.

"Nuclear power in Europe is an essential element of electricity production," said the head of the OECD's nuclear-energy agency, Luis Echavarri, said in an interview. Future increased safety requirements might raise the costs of nuclear investments, which in turn could limit the development of some plants, he said. 

Mr. Echavarri also said the information on the nuclear crisis provided by Japanese authorities has been "reasonable," given the emergency situation they face. He added that he doesn't foresee a Chernobyl-style catastrophe occurring at the Fukushima plant in Japan. 

—Alessandro Torello contributed to this article.









 Write to  Bernd Radowitz at bernd.radowitz@dowjones.com 