JAKARTA—Indonesia will suspend import duties on wheat, soybeans, fertilizer and other food-related items for the rest of the year, escalating its fight against soaring food prices that have driven up inflation in Southeast Asia's biggest economy and other countries in the region. 

It's the latest move by Jakarta to contain inflation, which is turning into a serious political headache for the government and has shaken confidence of foreign investors who are among the largest holders of Indonesian government bonds. 

Bambang Brodjonegoro, acting head of the fiscal policy board at the finance ministry, said the government will allow duty-free import of select food products until Dec. 31 to prevent supply shortages pushing up food prices further. "The policy is also to help curb inflation," he told reporters Friday. 

"There was no import duty on wheat until last month but a 5% tariff was levied Dec. 22 as part of a program to harmonize tariffs under WTO guidelines, but now the government has reverted the tariff on around 57 products to zero," said Franciscus Welirang, chief executive of Bogasari, Indonesia's largest flour mill. 

After the government earlier scrapped the import duty on rice products until March 31, state-run logistics agency Bulog has already contracted 820,000 tons of rice for imports from Thailand. 

Food is the biggest component in Indonesia's consumer-price index basket. Disruptions in production and distribution caused by adverse weather have pushed annual inflation to near 7% in December, above the government's 2010 target of 4%-6%. 

Rising commodities prices have also stoked inflationary pressures in other countries across the Asia-Pacific, posing challenges to authorities that have kept fiscal and monetary policy settings mostly geared to spurring economic growth as the U.S. and Europe struggle. 

Some have been reluctant to take their foot off the accelerator. Central banks in Indonesia and the Philippines, for example, have held interest rates at historically low levels even as inflation has picked up. 

But others have moved into tightening mode. The Reserve Bank of India on Tuesday hiked interest rates by a quarter percentage point, citing inflation as a "dominant concern" as it raised its inflation estimate for the end of March to 7% ,from 5.5%. 

In the Philippines, Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas Governor Amando Tetangco Friday said a steeper-than-projected increase in commodity prices could push up inflation to between 3.8% and 4.2% -- higher than a previous estimate that had already been raised to 3.6% from the initial forecast of 2.4%. 

Despite the upside risk to inflation, Tetangco said there isn't any significant pressure to force an immediate change in monetary policy stance. The revised inflation projection is still within BSP's target range of 3%-5%. 

China, where the government has already started tightening monetary policy, has blamed the super-easy monetary policy of the U.S. Federal Reserve for driving up global commodities prices and inflating prices bubbles in various markets. 

According to the United Nations food price index, world food prices hit an all-time high in December, passing the previous peak from June 2008. 

According to the document seen by Dow Jones, the Indonesian government will review the new policy of food-related import duties in October to see if it needs to extend the measure beyond the Dec. 31 deadline. 

Food-related items are expected to drive inflation in the near-term, Rusman Heriawan, head of the country's statistics agency, said earlier this month. 

Earlier Friday, Heriawan said on-month inflation will likely be close to 1% in January, slightly above December's 0.92%. The Central Statistics Agency is scheduled to release the CPI data Tuesday ahead of a central bank meeting next Friday to discuss rates. 

 Write to  Farida Husna at farida.husna@dowjones.com 