In the late 1970s, the psychologists Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky began asking their students to bet on coin flips. If the coin landed on heads, the students had to pay the professors $20. Messrs. Kahneman and Tversky wanted to know how big a potential payoff their students would demand for exposing themselves to this risk. Would they accept a $21 payoff for tails? What about $30?

If the students were rational agents, they would have accepted any payoff larger than the potential $20 cost. But that's not what happened. Instead, the psychologists found that, when people were asked to risk $20 on the toss of a coin, they demanded a possible payoff of nearly $40. According to the psychologists, this is because the human brain is more sensitive to losses than to gains. In fact, the pain of a loss is approximately twice as potent as the pleasure generated by a gain. We are biased toward exaggerating bad news.

This simple mental quirk of "loss aversion" has profound implications. In recent years, it's been used to explain the poor decisions of investors (who are often unwilling to sell stocks at a loss, which means they end up losing even more) and the bad choices of NFL coaches (who punt far too often because they're afraid of losing the ball on fourth down). Loss aversion even influences our personal interactions. Studies of married couples, for instance, demonstrate that every critical comment made to a spouse requires at least five compliments as compensation. The hurt lingers.

We live in a time of losses. Our homes are worth less than they were a few years ago and our 401(k) accounts have shrunk in value. Governments everywhere are slashing funding and promises. Public employees are taking to the streets, and many private-sector workers are still worried about layoffs. It's hard to remember a time when our lives were so defined by the specter of making do with less.

In a more rational world, people would understand that such losses are the flipside of gains. What goes up must come down; the same budgets that ballooned during the bubble must now be slashed in the aftermath. But we don't live in that world. People are still shocked when home prices fall. Though the public might tell pollsters they're concerned about the national debt, that abstract concern has to compete with the emotional pain of higher taxes and fewer government services. We want a balanced budget, but we want it to be balanced on someone else's back. 

Politicians seem to know this. As many analysts have pointed out, the current frenzy of budget cutting in Congress—House Republicans have proposed more than $60 billion in discretionary spending cuts, while President Obama has declared a five-year freeze on parts of the federal budget—is a mere blip in the larger context of entitlement reform. Every president since Reagan has tried to fix Medicare, Medicaid and Social Security, but no politician has succeeded in instituting any meaningful change.

The difficulty of fixing entitlements returns us to the power of loss aversion. Numerous experiments have demonstrated that, once people are endowed with something—that is, given some kind of "property right" to it—that thing dramatically increases in value. In one classic experiment, subjects who had been given a certain coffee mug believed it was nearly twice as valuable as subjects who assessed it without having an ownership stake. As a result, losing that possession becomes even more painful: The mug might be ugly, but at least it's ours! The challenge of entitlement reform is that voters have been paying into these social programs for much of their working lives. They feel entitled to their entitlements, which is why even the smallest proposed changes pack a big emotional wallop. 

There is no easy way around loss aversion. Although the public knows that losses are necessary—the status quo is unsustainable—these losses will still hurt to an irrational degree. What we need now are politicians willing to make us angry.

 Write to  Jonah Lehrer at Jonah.Lehrer@dowjones.com 