WASHINGTON—Securities and Exchange Commission Chairman  Mary Schapiro said she regretted her handling of the agency's former top lawyer, who inherited money tied to  Bernard Madoff's fraud and worked on agency decisions related to the Ponzi scheme.

Ms. Schapiro, responding to questions from Republican lawmakers, said Thursday she now wishes former SEC General Counsel  David Becker had removed himself from agency work related to the Madoff case.

Mr. Becker, who became SEC general counsel in 2009 and left the agency last month, is now the target of a lawsuit filed on behalf of victims of Mr. Madoff's Ponzi scheme. During his time at the SEC, Mr. Becker was allowed to work on an SEC proposal involving the compensation of Madoff victims. 

"Knowing those things now, I wish that Mr. Becker had recused himself. Absolutely," Ms. Schapiro said Thursday in sworn testimony to a House Oversight subcommittee. 

Mr. Becker and his brothers inherited $2 million from their late mother's account with Mr. Madoff. Mr. Becker told Ms. Schapiro about the account shortly after joining the SEC, and later received clearance from the agency's ethics counsel to work on Madoff issues.

In 2009, Mr. Becker's office recommended to the SEC's five commissioners that the agency call for victim payouts to be increased for longer-term investors to account for inflation, a method that could benefit him and his brothers. 

The opinion differed from the recommendations by the trustee and the Securities Investor Protection Corp. An appeals court is expected to rule on the issue soon.

Republican lawmakers seeking to cut the SEC's budget have seized on the episode as evidence of the SEC's mismanagement. The matter poses "the greatest challenge to the SEC's credibility" since the SEC failed to detect Madoff's huge fraud, the panel's chairman,  Darrell Issa (R., Calif.), said. 

Rep.  Connie Mack (R. Fla.) lectured Ms. Schapiro on the SEC's ethics rules requiring employees to seek to avoid conflicts of interest or the appearance of conflicts, reading the rule to her. "It seems to me that you weren't completely knowledgeable of this rule at the time you hired David Becker," he said. 

  Elijah Cummings (D., Md.) said he was troubled by the episode because it created the appearance of a conflict. He cautioned Ms. Schapiro that the incident could overshadow the strides she has made to overhaul the agency. "The sad part about this is that one of those little incidents can destroy that trust," he said. 

Ms. Schapiro said the incident had taught her to be more thoughtful about ethics matters. 

"I have to be looking around the next corner, looking beyond the horizon and thinking above and beyond what may be appropriate advice from ethics counsel to make sure nothing occurs that raises questions about the commission's mission or process," she said.

Ms. Schapiro has directed the SEC's internal watchdog to conduct an investigation of the matter and has ordered a review of the agency's conflict-of-interest policies. She said the SEC had made significant strides since she took over an agency reeling from enforcement breakdowns.

The Obama administration is seeking around $1.4 billion in funding for the SEC in 2012, an increase of $264 million from its 2011 spending level. 

Ms. Schapiro said the agency needs the bigger budget to take on wider responsibilities it was given by the Dodd-Frank financial law. Republicans have said the securities regulator needs an overhaul before Congress increases its funding.

The case for boosting the SEC budget was bolstered Thursday by an independent report that concluded the agency would need more staff to fulfill its new duties even if it improves its efficiency. 

The report, which was mandated by the Dodd-Frank law and prepared by the Boston Consulting Group, said Congress should consider giving the agency more funding "to allow the SEC to better fulfill its current role" or "change the SEC's role to fit available funding." 

At a separate hearing, an SEC official said the agency is scrutinizing hedge funds that consistently offer above-market returns amid concern that such results could be the result of malfeasance.

"We're now doing things like canvassing all hedge funds for aberrational performance," SEC enforcement director  Robert Khuzami told a House Financial Services subcommittee. He said the focus was on "anybody who is beating market indexes by 3% and doing it on a steady basis." 

He added, however, that budget constraints could hamper the effort.

—Jamila Trindle  contributed to this article.