BEIJING—Xia Bin, a member of the Chinese central bank's monetary advisory committee, said China should aim for full yuan convertibility over the next 10 years. 

Such a move is important, Mr. Xia said, for a "rising power" like China. "Our longer-term goal must be integrating into the floating exchange rates of the international system," he said. But he wouldn't comment on whether the current pace of yuan appreciation versus the dollar is moving rapidly enough to fulfill that goal. 

"Hiking the exchange rate is definitely beneficial for curbing inflation," said Mr. Xia said. "But we can adopt many other ways to achieve that goal. [Boosting the exchange rate] isn't the only measure we could take." 

Over the weekend, for instance, the National Development and Reform Commission, China's most powerful economic ministry, said it would increase agricultural production and use grain reserves to try to reduce price increases. 

Mr. Xia is also director general of the Development Research Council's Financial Research Institute, which advises the State Council—the government's top decision maker—on development issues. 

The U.S. Treasury and other Group of 20 ministers have been trying, without success, to persuade China to increase the pace of yuan-dollar appreciation from the current 6% annual average by positioning the exchange rate as an inflation-fighting mechanism. A more valuable yuan makes imports cheaper for Chinese buyers. 

"We have been doing reform in the exchange rate, but that needs to be done gradually in coordination with the speed of [China's economic] development," Mr. Xia said. 

By 2020, he said, China should aim to have the yuan account for about 3% to 4% of total international reserves. Currently, the total is so low that the International Monetary Fund doesn't list yuan reserves. It's part of a group of "other currencies," which in total accounts for 4% of global reserves. 

More international use of the yuan, Mr. Xia said, would make it simpler for Chinese companies and foreign firms that do business in China to trade and borrow without worrying about the ups and downs of the dollar. 

 Write to  Bob Davis at bob.davis@wsj.com 