WASHINGTON—Candidates to head the Republican National Committee took shots at its embattled chairman, Michael Steele, at a packed debate Monday less than two weeks before committee members will pick a leader heading into the 2012 election. 

Mr. Steele has faced heavy criticism within the GOP over funding problems and a series of political gaffes. But he has assiduously sought support in recent months from the 168 committee members who elect the chairman.

Still, Mr. Steele faces an uphill battle to secure a second term, with many committee members predicting he will lose. Four candidates have stepped forward to challenge him. 

The debate, held before a capacity crowd in the ballroom of the National Press Club, marked the first time Mr. Steele has faced off against his main challengers. 

One candidate, veteran Missouri GOP official Ann Wagner, blasted Mr. Steele's stewardship, describing the RNC as a "broken" institution gripped by a continuing crisis and awash in debt. 

Mr. Steele has left the RNC nearly $20 million in debt, as many large, conservative donors have turned to independent groups, instead of the party's core campaign organization, as a way to back the candidates and causes they support. 

Mr. Steele defended his two-year tenure, telling the audience that he took over at a time when the party was dispirited and the organization "hemorrhaging supporters." In November, Republicans made sweeping gains in state-level elections, picked up seats in the U.S. Senate and won control of the U.S. House.

"I'm a glass-half-full kind of guy," Mr. Steele told the forum, which included a number of his own supporters. "I don't see the crisis as others would see it."

One candidate, Reince Priebus, chairman of the Wisconsin GOP and a former Steele acolyte, said the committee was at "a moment of crisis," particularly on the financial front. He said the next chairman would have to focus heavily on fund-raising and embracing all strands of the conservative movement. 

Mr. Priebus has faced fire from some Steele opponents, who criticize him for having supported the current RNC chairman until recently. 

Former Bush administration official Maria Cino also appears to have strong support within RNC ranks. She has won the endorsement of former Vice President Dick Cheney and other prominent GOP leaders, including Ed Gillespie, a former RNC chairman. 

 Write to  Neil King Jr. at neil.king@wsj.com 