The willingness of banks to lend money to consumers rose more than it has in 17 years, but sluggish loan growth is weighing on a key measure of profitability.

Big banks eased lending standards and businesses sought more loans in the first quarter of the year, the Federal Reserve said. In its quarterly Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey released Monday, the Fed said the share of banks "that reported having become more willing to make consumer installment loans rose to its highest level since the first half of 1994."

But consumer demand for loans is spotty. Demand for auto loans increased, but credit cards and other installment loans remained flat while mortgage demand continued its slide, according to the survey.

The slack demand has kept a lid on banks' top-line revenue growth. While banks have been reporting solid profits, much of that has come from the release of reserves to cover bad loans. Revenue growth remains elusive and has been shrinking at most major banks.

That is one reason why bank stocks have performed poorly over the past year, with the KBW Bank Index falling 7.9% while the broader market as measured by the Dow Jones Industrial Average surged more than 16%.

Such low revenue squeezes one key measure of bank profitability, net interest margin, or the difference between what they earn on assets minus the cost of deposits and other liabilities. Last year, aided by the Fed's reduction of short-term interest rates to close to zero in 2008, depositors received the lowest interest rate—0.86%—since the 1950s, according to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. Net interest margin for big banks hit an eight-year high of 3.77% in 2010.

But the NIM has been declining steadily since last year's first quarter. When loans mature they are either being replaced with lower-interest loans, or not being replaced at all. As a result, while first-quarter net interest margin rose slightly at  J.P. Morgan Chase
JPM


-0.05
%




 & Co., it was flat at  Bank of America Corp.
BAC


3.62
%




 and fell at  Citigroup Inc.
C


0.91
%




 and  Wells Fargo
WFC


1.06
%




 & Co.

Banks are "running harder to stand still," said  Brian Foran, an analyst at Nomura Securities International Inc.

The challenges of making more loans are obscuring the benefit of holding depositors' cash at rock-bottom interest rates, which should raise net interest margins. Customers are keeping a record 75% of their $5.9 trillion in bank deposits in liquid accounts, which pay just 0.44%, instead of in certificates of deposit which tie up the money for up to five years, says  Dan Geller, executive vice president of Market Rates Insight.

With short-term rates expected to rise over the next few years, banks' NIM is "going to expand as rates go up," says analyst  Richard Bove of Rochdale Securities. When rates rise gradually, banks can boost the rates on loans faster than on deposits, analysts say.

When big banks reported their first-quarter earnings last month, some executives were peppered with questions about when their NIM would resume rising.

On Citigroup's April 18 earnings call, four out of 11 analysts asked about Citi's projection that NIM of 2.91%, down from 3.34% a year earlier, would continue to fall in the second quarter.

At first, Citi's Chief Financial Officer  John Gerspach responded lightheartedly. 

"I am probably going to disappoint a whole bunch of NIM-ites out there,' he said. "But…I don't wake up in the morning and actively worry about what is going on with my NIM."

But when another analyst asked about it, too, Mr. Gerspach backpedaled. "I do think about NIM every day. I just don't wake up thinking about it," he said. 

Later, he said, he expects Citi's NIM to "stabilize" in the second half. 

Executives at Bank of America painted that same picture in their own analyst call. After BofA beat its own 2.5% NIM projection by coming in at 2.67%, down slightly from 2.69% in the fourth quarter, Chief Executive  Brian Moynihan said the result could be even better if rates start rising.

If the rate on Fed funds, currently just 0.25%, rises to 2% or more, Mr. Moynihan said, that "ought to push us back up to 2.75% and higher in the margin."

Wells Fargo could boost its NIM if it can replace some loans with higher-interest debt while keeping its rock-bottom consumer deposit costs of just 0.35%, compared to 0.75% for its peers.

Analysts also grilled Wells executives about holding more than $100 billion in safe short-term funds that earn just 0.29%.

Wells CFO  Tim Sloan said keeping the high cash-reserve level positioned the bank to invest the money more profitably when rates rise.

 Write to  Randall Smith at randall.smith@wsj.com 