Twitter Inc. co-founder and former chief executive  Jack Dorsey may return to work at the closely held messaging service, even as he continues to run mobile electronic-payments company Square Inc., said people familiar with the matter.

Mr. Dorsey, 34 years old, is currently non-executive chairman of the board at Twitter, and has been more involved in decision-making at the company since co-founder  Evan Williams stepped down as CEO last fall, the company has said. Mr. Williams replaced Mr. Dorsey as Twitter CEO in 2008 and the men had personal differences, people familiar with the matter have said.

  Sean Garrett, a Twitter spokesman, said the company is "fortunate" that Mr. Dorsey "has been able to get even more engaged in the company. His assistance has and will continue to be invaluable."

 Mr. Dorsey's possible move was earlier reported by industry website Business Insider.

  Kay Luo, a spokeswoman for Square, the mobile payments company that Mr. Dorsey founded in 2009, said "it's business as usual" and that Mr. Dorsey's role isn't expected to change.

Square has seen momentum since launching a product last fall that allows anyone with a smartphone to accept credit card payments. It is already processing more than $1 million a day in credit card transactions and has more than 65 employees.

Twitter, meanwhile, has experienced a meteoric rise in perceived value as investors have bid up prices of its shares on secondary exchanges in recent months. In December, the company, which lets people "tweet," or share information online via messages of 140 characters or less, was valued at around $4 billion during a financing round. In low-level talks with potential buyers since then, representatives of Twitter have argued it is worth several billion dollars more, people familiar with the matter have said.

Twitter launched its advertising initiatives about a year ago and is expected to generate about $150 million in ad sales this year, according to research firm eMarketer. Twitter also allows search engines run by  Google Inc., Microsoft Corp.
MSFT


0.50
%




, and  Yahoo Inc.
YHOO


-1.00
%




 to display tweets in exchange for tens of millions of dollars a year in licensing fees, people familiar with the matter have said.

 Write to  Amir Efrati at amir.efrati@wsj.com 