PARIS—French fashion house Chloé replaced its designer Monday, the latest ínstance of increased impatience for designers to make a strong impact early in their tenure.

Chloé, part of luxury-goods giant Cie.  Financière Richemont SA,
CFR


0.45
%




 said  Hannah MacGibbon's contract wasn't renewed after three years at the house's design helm. She will be succeeded by  Clare Waight Keller, previously the creative director for knitwear label Pringle of Scotland. Ms. Keller has also worked for Gucci and Ralph Lauren.

"Fashion is not just about having a creative talent in the studio but also about communicating it," said Chloé Chief Executive  Geoffroy de la Bourdonnaye. He added that, in addition to a talent for designing clothes, Ms. Keller has "good communication expertise [from] having worked at power brands." Mr. de la Bourdonnaye is also a relatively recent addition to Chloé, having joined the house last fall from British department store Liberty PLC.

Chloé has yet to regain the critical following it had under designer  Phoebe Philo, who departed five years ago. (Ms. Philo now designs for rival women's wear brand Céline, part of LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton SA.) Ms. Keller will be the third designer to try to revive the house's popularity since Ms. Philo.

Mr. de la Bourdonnaye said Ms. Keller's recruitment should "help us continue and accelerate our growth." Richemont doesn't break out sales or profits for Chloé, but analysts estimate its booming sales growth has slowed in recent years.

Designer turnover has occurred at a particularly fast pace this year. The most high-profile departure involved Christian Dior designer  John Galliano in March. Dior dismissed him after he engaged in a drunken anti-Semitic rant, which is a crime in France; his trial date is due to be set Thursday. However, there had been tensions between Mr. Galliano and Dior for some years over the label's creative direction. Balmain, Gianfranco Ferré and Trussardi also cut ties with their designers.

Many executives expect their designers to make a splash with their first or second collection for a brand. Ms. MacGibbon's '70s-inspired apparel never generated a must-have item. Ánd while the immediate success of Ms. Philo's collections for Céline after her arrival in 2008 shows how quickly a brand's fortunes can be revived, many more brands fail than succeed. Mr. de la Bourdonnaye sees Ms. Keller's experience under  Tom Ford at Gucci, who reignited the Italian brand with racy advertising, design and self-promotion, as a major asset.

Chloé has given some of fashion's most successful designers their first big jobs. In addition to Ms. Philo,  Stella McCartney and  Karl Lagerfeld worked for the house early in their careers. By comparison, Ms. Keller is a more established recruit. "We've never had someone with such seasoned experience before," said Mr. de la Bourdonnaye.

 Write to  Christina Passariello at christina.passariello@wsj.com 