Honda Motor Co. said Friday that it will suspend automobile and motorcycle assembly operations in Japan through Wednesday, as some of its suppliers need more time to restore their production facilities damaged by the devastating quake a week ago. 

The statement followed a warning from Honda to U.S. dealers that it isn't sure if it will be able to resume full production at certain Japanese plants before May, a sign the auto industry may face greater disruption due to the earthquake and tsunami than previously feared.

Honda and several other Japanese auto makers have halted production in Japan due to the chaos caused a week ago. On Friday,  Daimler AG
DDAIY


-0.58
%




's Japanese truck unit said it would extend its production halt until Tuesday, and Renault SA said it would slow production at a Korean plant.

Honda said Friday that it is exploring the possibility of resuming production of parts from Monday. 

A Honda spokesman said about 30% of the company's 110 suppliers for its four- and two-wheeled vehicles based in the quake-hit area are finding it hard to resume operations anytime soon. 

Its production halt since Monday will result in a production loss of 27,000 cars and light trucks and 4,000 motorcycles, the spokesman said. 



In a memo distributed Wednesday, a top Honda executive told U.S. dealers the company has stopped taking orders for several models made in Japan, including the Honda Fit, a subcompact; the Civic hybrid; the Insight hybrid, and the Acura TSX, TSX Wagons and Acura RL. 

Also affected are the CR-V sport-utility vehicles that Honda makes in Japan. Most of its CR-Vs are made in North America. 

"While we plan to resume automobile production in Japan as quickly as possible, we cannot say with certainty when those production plants will return to their full capacity,"  John Mendel, the executive vice president of American Honda, said in an email to U.S. dealers that was reviewed by The Wall Street Journal. 

A Honda spokesman confirmed Mr. Mendel sent a update on production in Japanese plants to dealers on Wednesday, but declined further comment. 

In view of the uncertain production plan, Honda has decided "not to include any Japan-sourced vehicles in the dealer ordering system for May production," the memo said. 

Mr. Mendel added that the move "should not be viewed as an indication of the May production plan; Honda will produce vehicles in May."

At a later date when more information is available, he added, Honda "will allocate vehicles built in May to dealers."

Honda has suspended virtually all production at its Japanese plants until Sunday. Its facilities in the Tochigi area were damaged in the earthquake and one person was killed at its research-and-development facility.

So far, the quake has had a limited impact on Honda's operations in North America. About 80% of the vehicles it sells in North America are made there. 

Similarly,  Toyota Motor Corp. and Nissan Motor Co. make about 70% of their vehicles sold in North American in the region. 

  General Motors Co.
GM


-1.35
%




 on Thursday became the first U.S. auto maker to close a factory because of the crisis in Japan. GM said it plans next week to idle a Shreveport, La., plant that builds small pickup trucks. The company cited short supplies for a Japan-made part it didn't identify and didn't say when it expected to restart production.

Daimler's Japanese truck unit Mitsubishi Fuso Truck and Bus Corporation will extend its production halt until Tuesday,  Andreas Renschler, head of Daimler's trucks division, said Friday. 

Almost all German employees have returned home and the Japanese staff and their families have been able to travel to more southern regions since the earthquake and tsunami struck last week, Mr. Renschler said. 

Daimler has almost 13,000 employees in Japan, the majority of them employed by Fuso. Daimler said the Fuso plant in Kawasaki has only incurred minor damage. 

Also Friday, French car maker Renault said it is trimming back production of high-end sedans at a plant at Busan, South Korea, operated by its Renault Samsung Motors subsidiary due a shortage of parts caused by Japan's earthquake last week. 

A spokesman for Renault said production of the SM7, the top model in RSM's product range is being reduced by between 15% and 20% because the plant is running low on stocks of engines and gearboxes. 

—David Pearson and Katharina Becker contributed to this article.

 Write to  Mike Ramsey at michael.ramsey@wsj.com 