BERLIN—German authorities intensified their search for al Qaeda-linked terrorist suspects over the weekend after foiling what they described as an Islamist plot to detonate a large bomb in a crowded public area in the vicinity of Düsseldorf, one of the country's largest cities.

Authorities have taken three suspects into custody in connection with the case, but said they believed at least seven others remain at large. The alleged conspiracy was ordered by a senior al Qaeda figure, German officials said without offering further details.

The three men in custody were in the final planning stages of an attack and preparing a dry run, according to prosecutors. The three were are accused of trying to construct a home-made bomb from readily available chemicals that prosecutors say they had planned to detonate in a crowded area. The trio face charges of supporting an international terrorist organization and are being held without bail.

The alleged conspiracy underscores how serious the threat of Islamic terrorism in Germany remains, authorities said. Officials have been warning of a potential attack on German soil for months, citing what they described as credible intelligence that terrorists were considering an assault on a major landmark such as the Reichstag, the federal parliament building in Berlin. It's unclear if the alleged conspiracy is directly linked to the pervious terrorism warnings, however.

Germany's military engagement in Afghanistan and support for U.S.-led antiterrorism initiatives have made the country a target.

Prosecutors said the three suspects—a 29-year-old Moroccan citizen, Abdeladim El-K.; a 31-year-old dual German-Moroccan national, Jamil S.; and a 19-year-old dual German-Iranian national, Amid C.—conspired to construct and detonate a bomb made with hydrogen peroxide and other household chemicals. Prosecutors didn't disclose the suspects' surnames.

A person familiar with the investigation said the suspected leader of the group, Abdeladim El-K., traveled to Afghanistan-Pakistan border region in early 2010, where he trained in small arms and bomb building at an alleged al Qaeda terrorist training camp.

The suspect returned to Germany by way of Morocco in May 2010, according to the person.

German authorities began monitoring the man several months later after U.S. and Moroccan intelligence services warned that terrorists were planning to attack locations in Europe. The warning focused on jihadists in Germany and other European countries who had received military training in terrorist camps near the Pakistan-Afghanistan border, according to people familiar with the matter.

In November, Germany's Interior Ministry cited an imminent terrorist threat, increased police presence in railway stations and airports and closed most public access to the Reichstag.

The intelligence information was alarming, but it didn't provide a concrete lead, so German police further increased their monitoring of extremists with suspected links to terrorist camps, including the suspected leader of the Düsseldorf group.

Police monitoring of the three suspects at the center of the Düsseldorf case increased further in December after they allegedly began downloading instruction manuals for building explosives and detonators, prosecutors said. Police wiretapped the suspects' homes and cars, the person familiar with the investigation said.

In addition, investigators watched as one of the suspects, identified by prosecutors as Jamil S., allegedly sought funds and forged documents required by the group, the authorities said. Another suspect, Amid C., was responsible for encrypting messages according to standards set by the al Qaeda leadership, prosecutors say.

In the past weeks, police documented purchases of bomb-making materials and listened in as the suspects discussed plans to detonate a bomb in a large crowd, prosecutors said in their statement. Prosecutors said the suspected terrorists were never capable of actually launching a terrorist attack because police were closely watching the group.