  Donald Trump and the city's powerful New York Hotel Trades Council entered into a labor agreement Wednesday that they say could pave the way to reopening the storied Tavern on the Green if the city awards Mr. Trump the operating license to run it.

  Peter Ward, president of the union, said the five-year agreement would go into effect provided that the city awards Mr. Trump an operating license to run the closed restaurant. 

Labor negotiations between  Dean J. Poll, who won a license in 2009 to operate the Tavern, and the union broke down last May. Since then, the Tavern has become a Central Park visitor center with food trucks parked outside. The city hasn't issued a request for proposals for the space and wasn't involved in the labor negotiations between Mr. Trump and the union. 

"The City is not ready to announce any future plans for Tavern on the Green and has not had any discussions with possible restaurant operators," said  Jason Post, a spokesman for the Mayor.

Mr. Ward said he believes the city's charter has a provision that would allow it to bypass a request for proposals and award the license to Mr. Trump because he is currently a vendor for the city in good standing. Mr. Trump operates Central Park's Wollman Rink for ice skating.

The Trump Organization says that it's not looking to bypass any city process, but instead is "trying to help everybody," said  Ron Lieberman, vice president for special projects for the Trump Organization. Union negotiations were a "stumbling block" he said, adding that "it's up to the city to decide on the next step in terms of process."

Messrs. Ward and Lieberman declined to comment on the specifics of the deal. Mr. Liebeman said that the deal "gives us an opportunity to bring back a significant number of employees that have been displaced" and Mr. Ward said only that he was "thrilled with the agreement."

Mr. Trump plans on spending at least $20 million to renovate the Tavern, including the glitzy Crystal Room, which was dismantled by the city's Parks Department last year. Though Mr. Trump's resurrected Crystal Room won't be exactly the same. "We don't think that was so great. We want to do something that's really top quality," said Mr. Lieberman. 

The union and Mr. Trump have been in talks on and off for the past few months. Mr. Ward said he had been in talks with a number of other operators interested in running Tavern, but had not reached an agreement with anyone else. He declined to say who the other operators are.

Sumathi Reddy contributed to this article.

 Write to  Melanie Grayce West at melanie.west@wsj.com 