The runner-up in President Alexander Lukashenko's disputed re-election in Belarus was sentenced Saturday to five years in prison, a decision expected to deepen the authoritarian leader's rift with Western governments.

  Andrei Sannikov had been arrested following an anti-government demonstration after the polls closed on Dec. 19. Baton-wielding police broke up the largely peaceful gathering in central Minsk and detained about 700 people as the president was being declared the landslide winner over nine rivals. 

Mr. Lukashenko was credited with 80% of the vote, to Mr. Sannikov's 2.4%. International election observers said the vote count was seriously flawed. 

A district court judge found Mr. Sannikov guilty Saturday of organizing mass disturbances and sent him to a high-security prison. The defendant's lawyer said he would appeal the conviction.

Five presidential candidates were put on trial in connection with the demonstrations. Mr. Sannikov, a former deputy foreign minister, was the first to be convicted and sentenced. More than 20 other opposition activists have been sent to prison in a sweeping post-election crackdown on dissent.

After hearing the judge's decision, the 57-year-old defendant turned to human rights activists, journalists and Western diplomats gathered in the courtroom. "Take care of my relatives," he said.

The trial of his wife, journalist  Irina Khalip, for her part in the protest is expected to conclude on Monday. Authorities had threatened to take the couple's 3-year-old son into state care but eventually appointed Ms. Khalip's mother as his guardian.

The U.S. State Department condemned the conviction of Mr. Sannikov as politically motivated and said "the results of ongoing trials will be taken into account as the United States continues to review its relations with Belarus and consider further measures."

The U.S. and the European Union have already imposed travel bans on Mr. Lukashenko and about 150 close associates.

The crackdown has diminished any chance that Belarus can secure Western backing for assistance from the International Monetary Fund, leaving Mr. Lukashenko more reliant on Russia to shore up his country's ailing economy.

Belarus, a former Soviet republic, has dwindling reserves of foreign currency. Long lines form at currency exchange points and import-dependent businesses are crippled.

Russian Finance Minister  Alexei Kudrin said last week that Russia could offer no more than $1 billion this year, one third of what Belarus was seeking.

Analysts said Russia wants to squeeze Mr. Lukashenko into selling major state assets coveted by Moscow in return for a bailout. Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin travels to Minsk on May 19 and is expected to discuss terms for a loan.

Mr. Lukashenko, who has ruled Belarus since 1994, has accused unnamed foreign government of trying to destabilize the country.

 Write to  James Marson at j.r.marson@gmail.com 