MUMBAI—India's Tata Steel Ltd. set a price range for the sale of new shares that could raise as much as 34.77 billion rupees ($766 million) in the country's first big-ticket capital-raising of the year.

The share sale will be keenly watched in estimating investor appetite, as it comes amid a weak domestic stock market and is a forerunner to an even bigger fund-raising effort by the country's largest steelmaker by capacity, state-owned Steel Authority of India Ltd., expected in mid-February. 

For Tata Steel, the world's seventh-largest steelmaker by capacity, a successful follow-on offer would mean some respite from its heavy debt burden. But market participants expect the aggressive pricing to make the sale a challenge, especially because investors will have the option of subscribing to Steel Authority's shares next month. 

"Investor appetite is falling and, in a market this fragile, anything can happen. The pricing is quite expensive and it seems like they are serving up a dinner to investors who've just finished their lunch," independent investment advisor S.P. Tulsian said. 

Tata Steel on Saturday set the indicative price of a proposed public offering of additional stock between 594 rupees and 610 rupees. That represents a discount of 1.9% to 4.7% to Friday's closing price of 621.70 rupees.

But after a 17% surge in 2010, 2011 has begun on an unfavorable note. The 30-share Sensitive Index has skidded 8% in the first two weeks of the year, including a 1.7% loss on Friday, amid the menace of runaway food inflation that is expected to push the central bank into raising interest rates. A falling market usually is a negative for fresh shares coming into the market, as investor appetite is on the wane.

In addition there is the competition from Steel Authority's share sale. The offering, which will comprise a 5% stake from the government as well as fresh shares from the company that amount to another 5% of its total equity, is expected to raise about 66.64 billion rupees, based on its current market capitalization.

Investors lapped up offering from Indian companies last year. They raised about $29.1 billion through 167 stock sales in 2010—the second-highest yearly volume on record, according to data tracker Dealogic. Of that, $10.7 billion came through initial public offerings.

 Tata Steel, meanwhile, recently refinanced £3.5 billion ($5.45 billion) of debt taken to fund its purchase of Anglo-Dutch steelmaker Corus and has been looking to reduce the debt. The company—part of the Tata Group, whose firms make products as diverse as salt and software—had $10.7 billion of net debt on its books as of Sept. 30. 

The company plans to sell 57 million equity shares, including nearly 8.33 million shares to anchor investors and 1.5 million shares reserved for its staff. 

Anchor investors, or cornerstone investors as they are known in other parts of the world, help ensure a listing's success by agreeing not to sell shares for a set amount of time, providing subsequent investors a degree of confidence. In return, they stand a better chance of getting the number of shares they want. Potential anchor investors have been told to place their offers on Tuesday, a day before the offering is opened to other investors. The share sale closes Friday.

The company plans to use the issue proceeds to partly finance expansion of its plant in the eastern Indian city of Jamshedpur and to pay back some debt as well as for other general corporate purposes. 

Last month, Managing Director  Hemant Nerurkar said Tata Steel wants to reduce its debt-to-equity ratio to 2.5 from the current 2.8. 

Tata Steel is expanding the capacity of its Jamshedpur plant to 10 million metric tons a year from 6.8 million tons. The company, which has plants in Singapore, Thailand, the U.K., South Africa and the Netherlands, plans to build two more factories in India. It currently produces 27.2 million tons of steel annually. 

 Write to  John Satish Kumar at john.kumar@dowjones.com and Ameya Karve at AmeyaAnil.Karve@dowjones.com 