U.S. Trade Representative Ron Kirk told senators Wednesday that the Obama administration was committed to resolving the remaining issues with the Colombia and Panama trade agreements this year. 

Panama has recently agreed to take the necessary actions to complete the free-trade deal, which should be done this year, Mr. Kirk told the Senate Finance Committee, and senior Colombian officials will visit Washington on Thursday to discuss U.S. concerns about labor rights in the country. 

"I am committed to working with you to address the concerns identified this year and to prepare the [Colombia] agreement for congressional consideration immediately thereafter," Mr. Kirk said in the text of opening remarks for a hearing on the administration's trade agenda. 

Laying out in further detail the administration's demands for fixing the Colombia and Panama trade agreements, Mr. Kirk said he is "seeking the same widespread support" that the South Korea trade pact has attracted. 

Business groups and pro-trade lawmakers on both sides of the aisle have stepped up pressure on the administration to drag the Colombia and Panama deals over the finish line and submit them along with the recently reworked Korean agreement. But unions, led by the AFL-CIO, say it will take more time for labor conditions in Colombia to improve enough. 

Senate Finance Committee Chairman Max Baucus (D., Mont.) said he agreed that Colombia needed to take additional measures, but that the administration must act quickly. 

"I believe that he is willing to work with us to take more steps, but he needs to know what we want him to do," Mr. Baucus, who had just returned from a trip to Colombia, said in reference to Colombian President  Juan Manuel Santos in opening remarks. "We must map a course, and we must act now." 

Mr. Kirk's office led an interagency team to Bogota late last month after announcing that the U.S. was intensifying its efforts to address outstanding issues with the governments of Colombia and Panama. 

A Colombian official told Dow Jones Newswires on Tuesday that there had been no discussions between the two governments on the free-trade deal, nor any new demands from the Obama administration, since the U.S. fact-finding mission two weeks ago. 

Colombian Ambassador Gabriel Silva said Tuesday that while the administration wasn't discussing reopening the core agreement negotiated with the Bush administration, "we believe we can work constructively and quickly with the administration and the U.S. Congress to address the outstanding issues." 

Divisions over the handling of the three trade pacts held over from the Bush administration, along with an impasse over expired benefits for laid-off workers, has threatened to stall momentum on congressional passage of the South Korea deal. Mr. Kirk announced earlier this week that the administration is ready to start technical discussions with Congress on approving the South Korea agreement, which it hopes will take place this spring. 

 Write to  Tom Barkley at tom.barkley@dowjones.com 