  One of the great vanishing acts in the history of magic is Howard Thurston, who in the early decades of the 20th century performed the world's largest magic show—40 tons of equipment and costumes, for appearances around the globe—but today is little known outside the magic community. While Thurston's arch rival, Harry Houdini, remains an instantly recognizable figure from American popular culture, the mastermind of "The Wonder Show of the Universe" seems to have disappeared with the wave of a wand.

Few historians of magic are as qualified as Jim Steinmeyer to bring Howard Thurston back onstage and describe his mystifying illusions, like the one called Vanishing Horse. It involved locking a white Arabian stallion and a rider in a container, hoisting the box 10 feet over the stage, Thurston's shooting a blank pistol into the air, and the box crashing to the stage, its horse and rider gone. Mr. Steinmeyer himself has created illusions, for the Ringling Bros. circus and for celebrated magicians, including Doug Henning, Siegfried & Roy, and David Copperfield.

In "The Last Greatest Magician in the World," Mr. Steinmeyer describes many of the "wonders" that dazzled audiences over the course of Thurston's four decades as an entertainer, roughly 1895-1935. Some of the illusions were simple but marvelous. In Birds of the Air, he waved an empty butterfly net, seeming to capture from the empty air around him a white pigeon. Others were elaborate in the Vanishing Horse style, as with Triple Mystery: An assistant climbed into an Egyptian mummy case onstage only to disappear—and then turn up in a painted trunk that had all the while been hanging from the theater's ceiling.

Occasionally Mr. Steinmeyer explains Thurston technology. His version of the classic Rising Cards, for instance, a playing card chosen by an audience member was returned to the pack and the pack was placed in a goblet, over which Thurston waved his hands until the chosen card rose into view. The secret relied on an ultra-thin black silk thread—an "invisible clothesline," the author calls it—stretched horizontally across the stage, just over Thurston's head. Certain cards had small clips on their backs. In waving his hands over the pack, Thurston contacted the thread, pulling it down. He then slipped the thread under the clips on the audience member's card, which Thurston had made sure was at the back of the deck. Then the magician let go of the thread, which smoothly lifted the card, making it seem to soar into the magician's waiting hand.

Thurston refined his methods throughout his career, constantly searching for ways to offer new surprises to his audiences. Ultimately he turned Rising Cards into a sort of miracle. Instead of asking audience members to select a card from the deck, he invited them simply to call out the names of cards, any cards they wanted to see rise from the deck in the goblet—and, one after another, the cards did.

By one account, 60 million paying customers around the world witnessed Thurston's illusions, from New York and Montreal to Shanghai and Calcutta. In addition, he performed at veterans hospitals and gave benefit matinees for orphaned or hospitalized children brought to the theater in buses and ambulances. Mr. Steinmeyer records the costs of such fame. Thurston's shows alternately gained and lost him lots of money, and they brought many legal problems. In 1930, for instance, he was ordered to pay $20,000 to a family whose young son had been bitten by a monkey used in the performances.

At least early in his career, Thurston was said to rise every morning at five and spend two or three hours practicing his tricks before full-length triple mirrors. As he aged and his face sagged, he several times underwent plastic surgery, having his wrinkles smoothed by injections of paraffin. He died at age 66, in 1936, after suffering two strokes, one of which paralyzed his left arm.

Though the narrative of "The Last Greatest Magician in the World" concentrates on Thurston's stage career, Mr. Steinmeyer also keeps an eye on his troubled personal life. Born in Columbus, Ohio, and beaten by his father as a child, young Thurston hopped freight trains, lived with hobos and became a pickpocket. As an adult he lied about his past, representing himself as the nephew of a U.S. senator, abducted as a child and educated for the ministry.

His four marriages brought him little happiness. The first was to a 15-year-old dancer named Grace Butterworth, with whom the 28-year-old Thurston performed in beer halls as brother and sister. Her husband's inner life, Grace said, was a "torture chamber." His outer life was tempestuous: Thurston hit her with his hand, she swung a chair at him; they accused each other of flirting with others and then ended the marriage after four years.

In his early 40s Thurston remarried, for another four years, to an actress named Beatrice Foster, who assisted him onstage. He suspected her of adultery; they began living apart and divorced in 1914. Later that year he married a recently divorced actress named Nina Fielding. Unlike his previous wives, Nina was well-off—she owned an apartment building—and independent. The marriage lasted two decades, but she eventually became addicted to barbiturates and apparently took an overdose to commit suicide in 1934. Thurston married a year or so later—this time to a 25-year-old former assistant. He died soon after and left most of his estate to her, on the condition that she discontinue her heavy drinking.

 By Jim Steinmeyer  Tarcher/Penguin, 377 pages, $26.95

One of the book's attractions is its fascinating portrait of what it was like to work as a magician in Thurston's era. We learn about the professional spying and infighting, the competition between new styles of magic and the slower Victorian conjuring. Many magicians make cameo appearances, notably Thurston's close friend Harry Kellar, the last and most illustrious of the old school. But the fellow magician who looms largest in this story is of course Harry Houdini—the book's subtitle is "Howard Thurston Versus Harry Houdini & the Battles of the American Wizards."

In Mr. Steinmeyer's view, "Thurston won" in their career-long competition by having "a bigger show, a more successful reputation, and the title of America's greatest magician." As the author describes the two men's "prickly" relationship, it is clear where his allegiance lies: Houdini, we're told, had an "awkward approach to magic," was "small and unimpressive onstage," and possessed an off-putting "New York East Side personality." Even if accurate (doubtful), none of this prevented Houdini from surviving as not simply a magician or escape artist but a figure in American history.

Both Houdini and Thurston investigated spiritualist phenomena that were popular at the time. Houdini exposed the mediums' table levitations and other supposed spiritual effects as merely good tricks. Thurston also caught out some frauds—but at the same time he believed in spirits. Ascribing psychic powers to a renowned Italian medium named Palladino, Thurston said that she resorted to trickery only when unable to reach genuine spirits. "I lean to the belief," he said, "that these effects are produced by an intelligent force, which can manifest itself mentally and physically to some people under certain circumstances."

Mr. Steinmeyer's authorial performance is not impeccable. The book profits from his access to rare source material from private collections, but it is marred by mishandling of titles for some books and articles and by a casual approach to some quotations. He decided to run together and edit material from more than one source, he says, to "dramatize the account." But when he writes from his own understanding and experience, "The Last Greatest Magician in the World" vividly conjures up Howard Thurston's troubled life and great illusions.

—Mr. Silverman is the author of "Houdini!: The Career of Ehrich Weiss" and, most recently, "Begin Again: A Biography of John Cage."