BRUSSELS—Belgium's government Wednesday said its budget deficit could fall below 4% of gross domestic product this year after decreasing to a lower-than-expected 4.6% in 2010, as it tried to quell worries that a political gridlock was affecting its financial stability. 

Belgium had targeted a deficit of 4.8% of GDP in 2010 and total debt of 100.6% of GDP, under a budget plan approved by the European Union last year. The government said Wednesday that public debt fell to 97.2% of GDP in 2010. 

The country's finance minister said the ratio of debt to gross domestic product could start falling as soon as next year, during a joint press conference with the prime minister and other colleagues to present the 2010 budget numbers.

The better-than-expected figures may reassure investors, who have grown worried that the country's political vacuum will hamstring any efforts to improve Belgium's fiscal position. The country hasn't been able to form a government since early elections last June because of divisions between the Dutch-speaking Flemish community and French-speaking Wallonians. 

In a bid to ease concerns, King Albert II Monday asked the current care-taker Prime Minister Yves Leterme to draft a budget for the year and cut the deficit to less than the 4.1% of GDP goal it had agreed upon with the European Commission. Mr. Leterme said Wednesday that a decision on the budget will be taken in mid-February. 

At the same time, talks to form a government and reform the country's institutions are continuing after the king refused the resignation of the latest mediator. The king reappointed the mediator and asked him to continue the negotiations in close cooperation with the presidents of the two main parties that won the June elections. 

The Belgian political gridlock has added to the debt crisis gripping the 17-nation euro zone, with bond investors worried that Portugal might soon join Greece and Ireland in seeking an international bailout. 

Belgium hasn't faced problems with issuing debt so far because it has a high domestic savings rate and a flawless repayment record, but investors fear runaway budget deficits should the political paralysis continue.

 Write to  Alessandro Torello at alessandro.torello@dowjones.com and Matthew Dalton at Matthew.Dalton@dowjones.com 