The group I breakfast with at a local restaurant includes a man who served on the destroyer USS Myles C. Fox, which participated in the occupation of Japan at the end of World War II. I admire Jack for his patriotism and service to country. 

After the war, he went to Fordham University, worked at an interesting assortment of jobs, and then entered local politics, ultimately rising to head the Republican Party in Tarrytown, N.Y. I admire that, too. I admire Jack's spirit of public service. 

I also admire the fact that he drives a Buick, keeps in great shape, smokes Lucky Strikes with impunity, is bellicosely proud of his Irish-American heritage, swears like a sailor and says exactly what he thinks about everything. But the thing that I admire most about Jack is that he never, ever wears sneakers.

The very snappiest of dressers, often sporting a jaunty cap and fashionable calf-high boots, Jack believes that wearing sneakers with dress pants is a crime against humanity. Eschewing the tragic look so fashionable among males of his generation, Jack will not and does not wear sneakers with blue jeans, does not wear sneakers to his part-time job, does not wear sneakers to the social club, does not wear sneakers to weddings or funerals or Memorial Day parades or Yankee Stadium or the racetrack or anywhere else. "Sneakers," he avers, "make you look like a slob."

Though I do not share Jack's Jurassic views on various social issues, and I joke that the crisp $20 bills he bandies about are still being plucked from a brown paper bag dumped on his lawn in the dead of night by Richard Nixon's operatives in 1972, I do share some of his views about sneakers.

I'm a generation younger than Jack, so my views aren't quite as draconian. I have no objection to sneakers being worn with shorts—I wear them myself—but I cannot abide it when men wear sneakers with jeans or slacks, which make them look like dorks.

Young people say that they worry about their future. This may be because it's hard to muster much optimism about a country where so many adult males in positions of power think that stone-washed denim jeans with white sneakers is still a good look. It is not. It was not a good look when it was introduced on April 12, 1973, and it is not a good look now.

White sneakers, particularly on a tall man, make him look like a duck. A sad, clownlike, poorly shod duck. I don't care whether the man in question is a 90-year-old Latvian or a 57-year-old Tejano or a 14-year-old African-American or Jerry Seinfeld. We are all in this thing together. White sneakers with trousers make men look like ducks. 

On the whole, women are much less likely to make fools of themselves wearing sneakers. This is because women, by and large, hate being mistaken for Bozo the Clown. The one obvious exception is tourists, who descend on New York like witless cormorants, wearing fanny packs and garish sneakers that scream: "Visiting from Peoria. Dumb as a post. By all means, mug me!"

The other exception is young women who wear sneakers to work and change at the office. This look proclaims: "I don't care how stupid I look on the street or the subway; I only worry about looking like Peppermint Patty in front of my co-workers." 

This is why I never ride the subway. Former New York mayor Ed Koch, a snappy dresser, once told me that the sneakers-and-skirt look originated with the 1980 subway strike, thus making him in a way the spiritual father of this fashion trend. No wonder he got voted out of office. 

I'm particularly exercised by retiree doofuses who wear sneakers to the opera or the theater or even to hear someone appalling like John Tesh. Such individuals are irredeemable slobs; not even Mr. Tesh deserves this. Sneakers are a way of saying: "Nothing is special to me anymore. I'm not even going to try. I'm going casual till the Grim Reaper turns up."

The Grim Reaper, to his credit, does not wear sneakers. Neither do the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse. Neither does John Tesh. At least not on the job. 