BENGHAZI, Libya–A series of air strikes by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization Tuesday hit command centers in Tripoli, while the alliance stepped up its campaign to halt Col. Moammar Gadhafi's advance on rebel-held areas by pounding government forces near the town of Ajdabiya.

In an operation that rebel commanders said was coordinated with NATO, rebel units equipped with Grad rocket launchers launched an attack westwards from Ajdabiya toward the oil town of Brega.

The rebels claimed to have destroyed 14 pick-up trucks belonging to Col. Gadhfai loyalists in the attack, but said that instead of advancing west following the battle, they immediately retreated to bait pro-Gadhafi forces into a trap.

A rebel commander said that NATO had told the rebels to pull back for about 12 miles after making the preliminary assault, in order to provide a zone in which NATO bombers could hit any target they could see.

"There was a really large force of Gadhafi forces heading towards Adjabiya," said Col. Ahmed Omar Bani, the spokesman for the rebel army. "As they moved on Adjabiya they were hit by NATO forces." 

Abdul Jawad, commander of Omar Mokhtar Brigade who took part in the rebel assault, said that after attacking the pro-Gadhafi positions the rebel forces under his command retreated.

"NATO gave us strict instructions to withdraw 20 kilometers," he said. Mr. Jawad said he was unsure how many tanks were struck by the NATO raids.

Mr. Jawad said that with the NATO bombings, he was confident that rebel units could hold the line west of Ajdabiya. However, he cautioned that the rebels lacked tanks and heavy artillery which would allow an advance on the key oil town of Brega.

"We expect to be able to capture Brega but it will take time. Our training is improving," he said.

In Brussels, NATO said its air strikes overnight included attacks on command and control centers around Tripoli, including an intelligence bunker, which was hit for the first time. NATO officials said earlier strikes on military command and control bunkers had forced commanders to move sites.



—Stephen Fidler contributed to this article.