Health-care landlords, which have been known for playing it safe when managing properties, could be taking on more risk by assuming a role in the operations of the medical facilities they own.

The change in strategy, which has fueled a spate of mergers and acquisitions among owners of medical offices and senior housing, is partly the result of a federal law passed in 2008. The law, among other things, made it easier for landlords of health-care facilities to establish taxable subsidiaries to oversee the management of operations, such as hiring an independent contractor.

Prior to 2008, health-care real-estate investment trusts, or REITs, refrained from adopting this model because the tax rules were disadvantageous, and they had to be careful about not violating tax rules requiring they derive at least 75% of their gross income from rent, as defined by the Internal Revenue Service. The IRS didn't consider revenue from medical buildings to be rent because the patient stays were short term.

REITs could collect the rent while tenants were responsible for maintaining the property and paying for related expenses like insurance, cleaning and maintenance.

The law was changed in part because heath-care providers no longer wanted the additional expense of maintaining real estate as they confronted rising health-care costs. At the same time, well-capitalized landlords were looking for ways to expand.

Now, a number of companies are taking advantage of the change, which analysts said will allow them to manage properties more efficiently.

Last month, Health Care REIT, of Toledo, Ohio, announced three acquisitions for $1.3 billion using this structure, including its partnership with Benchmark Senior Living. The assets that  Ventas Inc.
VTR


0.37
%




 recently purchased from Atria Senior Living also adopts this operating model. 

"We are very big believers in having these management structures in the right kind of assets as part of our portfolio,"  Debra Cafaro, chief executive of Chicago-based Ventas, said in an interview. 

Ventas said Monday that it agreed to acquire  Nationwide Health Properties Inc. for $5.8 billion. While the deal doesn't feature this operating model now, the company is weighing such opportunities down the line.

"Adding the Nationwide portfolio really gives us the latitude to accelerate the growth in that area," Ms. Cafaro said. 

But some analysts said taking on operating companies can expose REITs to added risk. In good times, operating risk is a boon for the REITs and shareholders. It boosts profits, which can result in higher dividends. 

In bad times, it exposes companies to poor revenue and heightens exposure to issues related to labor, insurance and litigation.

Other REITs, such as those for hotels and shopping malls, have been allowed to indirectly operate their properties, which involves doing everything from hiring maintenance staff to picking store outlets, for more than a decade. The arrangements have made them more volatile than other REITs. During the recession, hotel and retail real estate bore the brunt of the downturn because rents were closely tied to the business cycles of tenants, who suffered from drops in tourism and retail sales.

Some analysts said the income stream of health-care REITs could become more volatile in the future. These REITs that take on operations will "really go up the risk spectrum, but management teams are willing to take the risk," to get the growth from the operating revenue, said  Jeff Theiler, an analyst at Green Street Advisors, referring to improving real-estate prices and the economy.

On the other hand, ratings company Moody's Investors Service said the law will allow health-care REITs to manage properties more efficiently and possibly lead to higher credit ratings if they refrained from "riskier, more volatile" activities.

Until recently, Ventas was the only REIT to adopt the operator model with its acquisition of Sunrise Senior Living Real Estate Investment Trust in 2007. The deal was used as a model to help formulate the REIT Investment Diversification and Empowerment Act, which passed a year later. This law granted heath-care companies the same tax treatment as hotels to have third-party managers operate properties for REITs.

For health-care REITs, taking on operating risk is a departure from their typical business model. These companies are considered the safest bets among REITs because they are just rent collectors. 

"Investors would pay a very high premium for a company that is in the triple net lease world because they don't have operating risk," said John Rayis, a lawyer at Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom LLP who advises on some health-care REIT deals.