 EL CHALTEN, Argentina—The block of ice bounced off my helmet hard enough to make my ears ring and make me wonder if I might pass out. My partner Jim and I were climbing an ice-choked chimney high on a mountain called Standhardt. We were several pitches up the chimney, no wider than my shoulders in places, and there was no safe spot to put the belay. We hung a backpack off of an ice screw to block some of the debris funneling down the chute, but mostly all I could do was hold the rope and cower while Jim led up. 

Suddenly a rope dropped on Jim's head. Another team of climbers was rappelling down the route, over our heads. At best, this meant gridlock; at worst, a climber-triggered ice fall.

So this is what Patagonia has become, I thought: crowded and overrun by climbers. Once, not all that long ago, Patagonia was the end of the world, a place where the best climbers on the planet came to test themselves against steep, technical peaks that are routinely thrashed by storms and wind of epic proportions. Just getting near Fitz Roy and Cerro Torre was an adventure—a grueling multiday journey down the unpaved Ruta 40, one of the loneliest roads on earth. The weather is still mostly awful—but, for better or worse, the experience of climbing in Patagonia has changed dramatically. 

That's because, in 1985, the Argentine government built the town of El Chalten, a few hours' hike below the Fitz Roy base camp. Now you can fly into Buenos Aires in the morning, catch a connecting flight to the airport at El Calafate, then ride a bus on a paved road to Chalten. It's a bustling place packed with hikers and, when the weather doesn't cooperate (and it usually doesn't), grumpy climbers. There's a variety of restaurants in Chalten (as long as you like steak), Internet service (sloooow) and even an ATM (usually out of cash). Returning this climbing season, I noticed new bakeries, restaurants, hotels and travel agencies—all in buildings that didn't exist a year ago. 

All of which makes town a comfortable place to wait for a good weather window—the obsessive topic of conversation among climbers, who are constantly downloading the latest weather forecast from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration website and picking over the charts like seers deciphering the entrails of a sacrificial animal. 

During a recent month in Chalten the weather was good enough for Jim and me to venture into the mountains four times—and three times it turned foul not long after getting to basecamp. The one time decent weather lingered for more than a day, base camp was so crowded that we had to wander around the moraine looking for another spot flat enough to put up a tent. 

We slept for three hours and set off at midnight. We weren't up early enough. Two teams were already ahead of us. If the forecast was correct, we could expect calm conditions until late afternoon, when strong winds were supposed to start gusting.

Five hours later we were climbing snow slopes to the base of Cerro Standhardt (just under 9,000 feet tall), the shortest of three peaks rising in increasing height and elegance on the Cerro Torre massif. Across the Torre Glacier, a beautiful dawn was bursting out behind Fitz Roy, a blood-orange sun climbing above the horizon, throwing saffron shadows on the snow in front of us. We roped up at the Standhardt Col, a pass overlooking the Southern Patagonia Ice Field, one of the largest expanses of frozen water on the planet. 

We were following Exocet, the first ascent route of the peak, put up in 1988. 

I started up the first pitch, a rock slab veneered with ice. I followed a vague, thin crack system, having to scrape ice out of the fissures to find any placement for my axes. Most of the time I nervously skittered up the slab, dreading every move and trying not to think of the consequences if I slipped. 

My two rock pitches seemed to take forever. We followed an easy snow ramp to the base of the chimney. The weather was beautiful. Jim took off up the chimney like a missile. The climbing was steep and fun—at least for him. I'd never been so badly battered by ice in my life. Then we had to wait while the two climbers rapped over us, knocking more ice down on my head. 

Eventually we were able to start climbing again. We were near the top of the chimney, not far, we hoped, from the ridge that led to the summit. 

Jim disappeared in a spindrift avalanche. It was like a dump truck was pouring snow on us. Jim reappeared, but every minute or two another cascade of powder washed over us. The wind had arrived. 

We decided to retreat. Avalanches pounded us the whole way down the chimney. Conditions were better once we escaped into the lee of the mountain. A dozen rappels put us on easier terrain just as the sun set. We slogged back toward camp. 

Or at least toward where we thought camp should be. We seemed to wander for hours in the dark. It had been 25 hours since we left the tent. Jim suggested we find someplace to sleep for a few hours until dawn. I was tired enough to agree, only no rocks anywhere in the area were flat enough. I climbed up the moraine, hoping to find a better place to bed down on the other side. 

My headlight bounced off the reflective tape of half-a-dozen tents—base camp. Then I turned to the left and, caught in my beam, the tape on a lone tent off in the distance shone. Our tent! I was glad, for once, that Patagonia was so crowded.

 Mr. Ybarra is the Journal's extreme sports correspondent. 