WASHINGTON -- Despite being part of the most powerful legislature in the world, members of Congress have virtually no security outside the U.S. Capitol. Lawmakers, shaken by the shooting of a popular colleague, wonder if that's about to change.

"One of the protections members of Congress have is that something like this is unthinkable," said Rep.  Brad Sherman (D., Calif.), who considers injured Rep.  Gabrielle Giffords (D., Ariz.) a friend. "That protection has been stripped away. If there are lunatics who wouldn't have thought of it, now they've thought of it."

Many members of Congress, and House members even more than senators, spend lots of weekends holding open events, as Ms. Giffords was doing when she was attacked. These events are widely advertised and rarely have even a single security guard or police officer.

"I hate to put this in the newspaper, but we don't have any security," Mr. Sherman said. "The word 'balance' implies your life is a compromise between constituents and security. For most of my colleagues, there isn't any balance; you just get out there."

Prominent political shootings involving members of Congress.

Following the shooting of Ms. Giffords on Saturday, which left her seriously injured and at least six people dead, the U.S. Capitol Police issued a statement to lawmakers saying that "all members and staff are advised to take reasonable and prudent precautions regarding their personal security."

Rep.  Joseph Crowley (D., N.Y.) said that despite the danger highlighted by the attack, he didn't anticipate changing the way he interacts with constituents.

"There is nothing about life that is foolproof," Mr. Crowley said. "It's an honor to serve and live the life we do. From time to time, people become angry, and you may have someone who is deranged. As of right now I don't feel threatened and I will continue to do business."

Many members of Congress feel threats against them have increased in recent times, though numbers are hard to come by. Several lawmakers said they've seen a far more heated tone in the political discourse recently, starting with the raucous town hall meetings of August, 2009, after Congress began work on the health care overhaul.

An FBI spokesman said the agency noted a spike in threats against members of Congress after the health law passed last March, adding that there have been a number of arrests as a result. Rep.  Raul Grijalva (D., Ariz.) said he and Ms. Giffords were both threatened during last fall's campaign. 

"Gabby and I used to talk about…the threats on her office, the windows being shot out in her office, mine too," Mr. Grijalva said. "We went about our business, because we felt those were unique, isolated and different. Unfortunately, after today, all of us are going to have to take more precautions."

Several lawmakers noted that when House members read the Constitution aloud last week, it fell to Ms. Gifford to recite the First Amendment, which guarantees the rights of citizens "peaceably to assemble, and to petition the government for a redress of grievances." That underlines the crucial role of citizens communicating freely with their representatives, they said.

As lawmakers heard the news of Ms. Giffords' shooting, many clearly felt as though one of their own had been targeted. "An attack on one who serves is an attack on all who serve," said House Speaker  John Boehner (R., Ohio), one of the few lawmakers who does get a security detail.

"Gabby is one of the dearest, sweetest members of the House," said Rep. Jeb Hensarling (R., Texas.) "Like so many members of Congress, I consider her a personal friend."

After the vote on the health law, a spate of minor vandalism erupted at lawmakers' offices. The brother of then-Rep.  Tom Perriello (D., Va.) found a gas line at his home cut by someone who evidently mistook his home for the congressman's. The glass front door of Ms. Giffords' Tucson office was shattered.

Former Rep.  Jim Kolbe, a centrist Republican who held Ms. Giffords' seat from 1984 to 2007, said that in the latter period of his tenure temperatures rose in his district, especially when Congress debated immigration. After he received threats, his staff added plainclothes security guards for extra protection.

"There were the most hostile kind of comments being made," Mr. Kolbe said." I never felt scared anytime for my own safety, but my staff was scared at various times."

  Jim Gilchrist, who founded the immigration-law enforcement group Minutemen Project, said he senses a "violent streak" in American politics and brings a bodyguard to public events. "I am in fear of my life from people like this who are on my side of the argument," as well as from extremists "from the ultra-left," Mr. Gilchrist said.

Mr. Gilchrist sought a congressional seat himself in 2005. "It was really dangerous when I was running for Congress," he said. "The more public events I do, the more dangerous it gets."

In an indication that most members are going ahead with public events for now, House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D., Calif.) appeared at a 2 p.m. New Year's celebration in her district as scheduled, her office said.

"That is part of what being a representative is," Mr. Crowley said. "The title is 'representative,' and unlike the Senate, which is a little further removed, for us it's about running every two years and being amongst the people."

Several people pleaded guilty last year to making threats against members of Congress. A Pennsylvania man admitted threatening Rep. Eric Cantor (R., Va.), who is now the House majority leader. In San Francisco, another man pleaded guilty to making harassing calls to Ms. Pelosi's office.

A man also pleaded guilty in July to leaving threatening voicemail messages for Sen.  Patty Murray (D., Wash.).

—Alexandra Berzon and Gary Fields contributed to this article

 Write to  Naftali Bendavid at naftali.bendavid@wsj.com and Siobhan Hughes at siobhan.hughes@dowjones.com 