LONDON--The Ivory Coast looks almost certain to default on its $2.3 billion bond on Feb. 1 unless the political crisis that has left the West African nation paralyzed for more than a month can be resolved quickly. 

The world's largest cocoa producer has been left in political turmoil since the end of November, when a disputed presidential election left the incumbent leader  Laurent Gbagbo refusing to step down despite the international community recognizing opposition leader  Alassane Ouattara as the winner. 

Mr. Gbagbo's refusal to bow to international pressure has sent more than 22,000 Ivorians fleeing the country because of fears that a civil war might resume. Economic activity has plummeted in what used to be one of the most prosperous countries in the continent.

"The payment will probably be low on the authorities' list of priorities and a default at the end of January is therefore quite likely," said  Benoit Anne, head of emerging market strategy at Société Générale in London. "It's all about the political situation; if it gets resolved in the next few weeks, then the next interest payment would probably be serviced," he said. 

The Ivory Coast's $2.3 billion Eurobond maturing 2032 was issued last year as part of the restructuring of its Brady bonds, on which it defaulted back in 2000.

The West African nation has already missed a Dec. 31 interest payment of $30 million due on the 2032-dated Eurobond. However, it is not technically in default yet, owing to a 30-day grace period that expires Feb. 1. 

"Ultimately, this is not an ability-to-pay crisis but a political-willingness-to-pay problem," said  Timothy Ash, head of emerging Europe research at the Royal Bank of Scotland in London. "Should Gbagbo decide to step down, there is a possibility interest payments will be honored before the end of the grace period." 

The bonds have already suffered substantially since the crisis escalated, with yields, which move inversely to prices, rising as high as 16%. They are likely to see even more pressure if the country fails to pay within the grace period. 

"I expect it will lead to further downside in bond prices; quite clearly, a few more points could be dropped," said Mr. Anne at Société Générale. 

A technical default on the bond bears big consequences for the Ivory Coast but it doesn't necessarily mean bondholders will never get paid. 

"If an end to the political crisis is reached, then we would expect an agreement to be reached on how missed payments will be made up," said  David Cowan, an analyst covering sub-Saharan Africa at Citigroup in London. 

-Write to Clare Connaghan at clare.connaghan@dowjones.com 