By M.F.K. Fisher (1943)

Readers unfamiliar with M.F.K. Fisher might begin with "The Gastronomical Me," where she describes an intense, youthful love affair—during the 1930s, as war in Europe looms—with the food of Burgundy and an older man whom she calls Chexbres. Her seduction begins at a favorite Dijon restaurant, where she nervously orders a menu for their first dinner together. Later they restore a pretty house with red tile floors in Vevey on Lake Leman. She cooks. They garden. One night she makes dinner "for several charming but rabid fascists from Rome, one of them a priest," while Chexbres is dining in the village below with two socialists on their way to fight Franco. With war now certain, the lovers leave Vevey and don't look back. Chexbres is dying of an unnamed illness, but "we drank and ate and saw and felt and made love better than ever before," she writes, leaving the reader no less hungry for a good dinner, a fine Burgundy and love.

By Frank Pellegrino (1998)

Today's voguefor fancy Italian regional food has its merits, but I prefer the cooking of the old Italian region of upper Manhattan, brilliantly presented in all its authentic simplicity in Rao's precious, 10-table shrine at 114th Street and Pleasant Avenue. Twelve years ago, when I was editorial director at Random House, I heedlessly published "Rao's Cookbook," by the restaurant's host, Frankie Pellegrino. The book became, alas, a best seller, so now the world knows the secret, and I can no longer get a table at Rao's. But I have the cookbook, and when I feel like a Rao's night, I listen to "Tosca" and cook up a dish of Chicken Scarpariello or hot and sweet sausage with broccoli rabe and orichetti, open a bottle of Amarone, and don't have to think about the long ride home. 

By Buwei Yang Chao (1945)

I learned the basics of Chinese cooking from this book by Buwei Yang Chao, translated by her husband, Yuen Ren Chao. She was a doctor, he a distinguished comparative linguist; they moved to the U.S. in the late 1930s. The mostly Cantonese recipes are simple, authentic and easy to follow, but what makes "How to Cook and Eat in Chinese" especially interesting is its discussion of Chinese culinary terms—snacks, for instance, are called tien-hsien, meaning "dot hearts," or something to touch the heart, now transliterated as dim sum. The term ch'ao, "with its aspiration, low rising tone and all cannot be translated into English," we're told. "Roughly speaking ch'ao may be defined as big fire-shallow-fat-continual-stirring-quick-frying-of-cut-up-material-with-wet-seasoning. So we shall call it stir fry." We call it chow. The book was originally published in 1945; Random House published a paperback in 1963, which is now also out of print. Enterprising publishers take note.

By Alice Waters (1982)

The secret of successful book publishing, as in much else, is to know when you're at the right place at the right time. One night in the late 1970s, I was in San Francisco to join a friend for dinner. He wanted to eat in Berkeley. I resisted. Berkeley meant hippies and macrobiotic restaurants. We crossed the bridge and ended up at Chez Panisse. I was instantly caught up in the spirit of the place, its rightness, authority and charm. When I saw the menu, I thought: cookbook. That night, we had the bouillabaisse, with fennel, saffron and pernod blending with ocean creatures to re-create the Mediterranean in a bowl. Alice Waters, the creator of Chez Panisse, joined us for coffee. She is small and intense, with a hint of other-worldliness signifying genius. Upon the shoulders of Julia Child, Alice had created a revolutionary American cuisine that was both sophisticated and pure. I suggested a contract. She wanted to choose the typography and design. Always the chef.

By Fernand Point (1969)

The great Fernand Point was the father of post-Escoffier French cuisine and the inspiration of today's master French chefs. From 1925 until his death in 1955 at age 58, the 300-pound Point—whose motto was "butter, give me butter, always butter" and who drank champagne by the magnum—presided over the restaurant La Pyramide, in Vienne, 30 miles south of Lyon. Paul Bocuse, Alain Chapel and other gifted chefs trained with Point and passed his cuisine on to the current generation. The posthumously published "Ma Gastronomie" is not really "by" Point so much as about him—it includes passages from his handwritten notes, many recipes and fond memories of a man enraptured by food, whose enthusiasm swept up countless others. 

—Mr. Epstein, the author of "Eating: A Memoir," was for many years the editorial director of Random House. He is now chairman of On Demand Books, proprietor of the Espresso Book Machine. 