In the vineyard, the New Year begins with winter pruning. Across the Northern Hemisphere, wine regions are dotted with small fires burning freshly cut vines, as well-wrapped-up vineyard workers brave the freezing conditions to remove the small shoots that have grown in the previous year. The aim of this practice is to ensure the vine produces fewer but larger bunches of grapes, with more concentration and flavor; the idea being that the next vintage will be better than the last. 

 Domaine du Coulet  

Cornas, Rhône Valley, France

 Vintage: 2006

 Price: About £25 or €30

This is one producer and domaine I will be looking out for in 2011. Mathieu Barret is a young winemaker who not only farms his estate organically but, keen to experiment, is also moving into biodynamics. I first tasted wines from his tiny estate in November and was impressed by their purity and elegance. Cornas isn't the easiest appellation to appreciate and the Syrah produced here can tannic and challenging when young. With age, the wines develop beautifully and offer real value compared with their neighbors in Hermitage and Côte-Rôtie. Mr. Barret's wines are characterized by an abundance of forward, juicy fruit and pin-point purity. The 2006 is a little more mature, with blackberry, zippy acidity and very dry tannins.

For the consumer and the wine trade, 2011 will begin with the Burgundy en primeur tastings, at which the 2009 vintage will be shown to the international press, consumers and buyers. In many regions, 2009 was a superb year with near-perfect viticultural conditions, and Burgundy was no exception. The few I have tasted from that vintage show great promise; the red wines are ripe, with soft tannins and very forward flavor. So, 2011 could either be the year wealthy Asian buyers wake up to the quality and style of Burgundy and push up the prices or, as I suspect, the last year when prices for good Burgundy remain in reach of the average buyer.

Looking forward, 2011 will also be another important year in Bordeaux as the 2010 vintage is tasted for the first time. Growers there are very hopeful that the quality of the 2010 could be as high as 2009. But whether the market can sustain another price hike from the region's châteaux remains to be seen. 

Fine-wine sales saw a record year in 2010. Global sales through Sotheby's wine auctions totaled $88.27 million, more than double last year's figure and the highest in the company's 40 years of wine auctions.

January will see the sale of part of Andrew Lloyd-Webber's cellar in Hong Kong, and some have predicted this could be the height of the boom. But brokers I speak to in Hong Kong say that in terms of sales they have barely touched the surface and I'm predicting Asian demand for the very best wines will continue apace. A good tip both for Bordeaux and Burgundy during good vintages is to stock up on the cheaper wines and house blends, as their quality is considerably higher than other vintages but the prices hardly move.

Elsewhere, 2011 will continue to see an oversupply of grapes, particularly in countries that have experienced a sustained wine boom. Australia appears to have got on top of the situation but I fear some of those growers who planted vineyards in New Zealand to cash in on the phenomenon of Marlborough Sauvignon Blanc will realize the economics simply don't add up. 

I also hope—probably in vain—that 2011 is the year winemakers across the globe realize alcohol levels need to be brought down. With the climate changing, a predisposition to ripeness and the fact that many of the wines we now drink are produced in semi-desert locations, alcohol levels of 14.5% aren't uncommon. 

One of the trends I have observed at first hand is that the more attention a winemaker gives to viticultural practices and general vineyard husbandry such as canopy management, producing lower yields and growing better quality grapes, the higher the alcohol levels. 

Master of Wine Jasper Morris says people originally worried only about sugar ripeness, which relates to the acid and sugar in the grapes. Then the buzzword became phenolic ripeness, which relates to tannins, pips and skins. So by waiting for phenolic ripeness, producers have sometimes ended up creating excessively alcoholic wines.

They are then obliged either to run with these high levels, or water the wine down, or else to use technology such as spinning cones to reduce the alcohol.

Despite this trend, one California winemaker has written to me saying that in 2010 grapes have been picked at 11.8% alcohol with perfect ripeness. In his words: "With the right focus in viticultural techniques, we do see a possibility of ripeness without relatively high grape sugars." Which is very good news.