NEW YORK—A winter storm that could dump nearly a foot of snow on parts of the Middle Atlantic region and on the Northeast is due to hit later Tuesday, raising prospects of closed roads, delayed flights and other transportation nightmares.

Coming just after a blizzard essentially shut down New York and other major cities for several days at the end of 2010, the new storm has already snarled traffic and led to the cancellations of thousands of flights in the Southeast.

From Norfolk to Boston, airlines are girding for the potential chaos, with a handful— Delta Air Lines Inc.,
DAL


0.67
%




 United Continental Holdings Inc.,
UAL


-1.17
%




 AMR Corp.'s American Airlines and  JetBlue Airways Corp.
JBLU


2.09
%




—already offering waived fees for changes to flights at airports from Atlanta to Manchester, N.H. 

United is also offering waivers for travelers moving through its main hub in Chicago, where two to four inches of snow are expected. About 200 flights out of Chicago O'Hare International Airport were canceled Tuesday although delays were only averaging about 30 minutes.

American has activated its command center for managing serious service disruptions, said Arthur Torno, head of the company's operations in New York, while on the sidelines at an unrelated event in the city.

Several dozen flights to New York's La Guardia Airport, mostly from the South, had been canceled Tuesday before a single snowflake fell. 

According to Weather.com, accumulations topping 10 inches "are likely in southern New England [and] possibly southward into parts of the New York City metro area," as the storm barrels northward. However, they predict that "a repeat of Dec. 26 is not anticipated in New York City, as they are forecast to have less snow" as the "heaviest snow swath looks to be about 100 miles east of that swath from Christmas weekend." 

Still, accompanying high winds could well bring blizzard-like conditions, causing "severe disruption to air travel," Weather.com said.

Snow is expected to arrive in Baltimore and Washington on Tuesday afternoon and then hit Philadelphia, New York and Hartford in the evening. Boston and Portland will get their doses on Wednesday before things begin to taper off that night.

However, Weather.com noted that travel headaches could continue as "strong winds, [and] blowing and drifting snow persist even in areas where snow has stopped." 

 Write to  Christopher Hinton at christopher.hinton@dowjones.com 