Rock 'n' roll fashion designer John Varvatos's studio and atelier in New York's West Village is remarkably civilized. There are no bug-eyed groupies lying on the taupe calfskin sofas, nor any music to speak of echoing through the clean-lined industrial showroom, which features the latest subtle-hued collection.

As I step into Mr. Varvatos's office, however, his persona is unleashed. Every centimeter is covered with band posters from The Who to Jimi Hendrix; platinum discs—gifts from his huge coterie of musician pals—dominate one entire wall.

With two fashion labels—John Varvatos, a classic menswear line that celebrated its 10th anniversary last year; John Varvatos Star USA, an edgier, younger collection and the most profitable of the lot—and a collaboration with Converse, the 56-year-old designer now has nine stores in the U.S., a robust ecommerce site and plans to open stores in London and Berlin. His brand is sold across Europe in stores such as Matches in London, Gallery Madrid in Spain, Mientus in Berlin and Harvey Nichols and Beymen in Istanbul. Although there are no dates yet for store openings, he has a pop-up shop in Galeries Lafayette in Paris through Saturday, with a permanent collection shop slated for February. These shops feature his John Varvatos and John Varvatos Star USA collection. 

Known for fusing rock 'n' roll with fashion—which comes from a lifelong passion for music, as well as enduring friendships with rock acts such as Iggy Pop, Franz Ferdinand and Alice Cooper, who feature in his advertising campaigns—his clothes are classic and beautifully cut. His focus is on expert tailoring, producing sleek, slim-cut suits that are classic enough for business wear but edgy enough to wear casually. Mr. Varvatos also produces a range of ultra-thin, supersoft cashmere sweaters, well-cut trousers, slim-fitting shirts and one-button jackets. 

Mr. Varvatos's passion for music was nurtured through escapism. "I grew up in Detroit," the designer says, with "seven people in a little three-bedroom house, and the only way to get away from all the commotion was to put my headphones on. It started there." There was also an early love of fashion. "My sister is a great artist. When I was a kid, she started sketching shoes. I started trying to emulate her."

He put his fashion yearnings aside to study science at Eastern Michigan University. It was while working in menswear stores to pay his way through college that his career trajectory took hold. At 25, he was a partner in a men's store called Fizgerald's in Michigan. But it was a small store, and if a customer needed something altered, Mr. Varvatos realized he needed to learn how to do it himself. So at 29, he went to study at the Fashion Institute of Technology in New York, where he learned illustration, tailoring and pattern making. "I needed to have the tools of design," he says.

From there, he went to Calvin Klein, where he rebuilt the underwear brand, headed menswear design and oversaw the launch of the CK brand. Next was Ralph Lauren, where he was head of design and created the Polo Jeans Co. "At these places I was exposed to so much product, everything from head to toe. I understood that you need to build the top brand but also need things that are more available to the consumer. I learned about marketing and business," he says.

"I spent five years at the business end, which entailed fiscal responsibility. Most designers don't have that," says Mr. Varvatos. "I still start designing with the creative side for the personality and freshness, but then I balance everything with the business side. What I learned from the business end of it was creating the whole lifestyle image, and the importance of having people buy into your brand."

When he opened his first John Varvatos store in New York's SoHo more than a decade ago, there was an immediate buzz. He quickly became known as a designer who could add some edge to a classic wardrobe. "John Varvatos gets it. He's probably the only high-fashion designer I can handle," musician Slash says.

Designs from the current collection for Mr. Varvatos's high-end line include a military coat with silver buttons that, with its sharp lines and fine materials, is a grown-up twist on a New Romantics classic, and a silver waistcoat that evokes an 18th-century gentlemen's look, but with the added modern touch of double silver zips at the pockets. His grandfather boots, with side buttons and two types of leather, fuse both a Victorian and biker look. These target the older rocker, who has grown out of grungy band T-shirts but isn't quite ready for pinstripe and Oxford brogues. 

"The whole rock 'n' roll thing has changed." he says. "People used to think of it as black leather; today musicians dress up, they dress differently....It's now about beautiful masculine clothes."

Mr. Varvatos insists this image wasn't contrived. "The whole rock thing has come organically. If I had tried to force it, it would seem a little conceited or hokey. But because it's natural and comes from the relationships I have with musicians, it's all about friendships." 

It was through his passion for music that he started as a teen attending concerts and meeting the various musicians he now considers friends. Mr. Varvatos sang in his own band and still plays the guitar.

Mr. Varvatos has also turned his Bowery store, located in the former site of the legendary CBGB punk nightclub, into something of a destination for music lovers. Amid the cashmere sweaters and sharply tailored suits are Alice Cooper platinum discs, a Captain Fantastic pinball machine, scores of original music posters and books. Many of the sales assistants are musicians. Shoppers, including pals such as Ringo Starr, are invited to take part in impromptu jams that take place on the stage in the middle of the room.

"It is very much in the spirit of music in the Bowery and we have had some legendary times," he says. "Guns N' Roses came to the Bowery store to headline New York Fashion Week and they were meant to perform four songs for me. In the end, they played for two and a half hours solid. It was a complete surprise and an amazing show that was talked about for weeks. One of the guys from ZZ Top said it was one of his five greatest moments in music."

 Write to  Jemima Sissons at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 