Montana Gov. Brian Schweitzer said he would allow a controversial bill restricting the state's medical-marijuana business to become law without his signature.

The Democratic governor said Friday he still wasn't happy with some aspects of the bill, which will close down Montana's large marijuana-growing operations and make it more difficult for people to get medical marijuana to treat "severe chronic pain." But he said he preferred to have the new rules go into effect rather than continue the existing system, which he called "the wild, wild West."

Montana has been struggling to manage its medical-marijuana industry since voters overwhelmingly approved a law in 2004 allowing patients and caregivers to legally possess some marijuana plants and usable marijuana if they have a doctor's prescription. 

The number of Montana users had soared to about 30,000, and medical-marijuana dispensaries had mushroomed across the state.

Earlier this year, Mr. Schweitzer vetoed a bill that would have repealed the 2004 law outright.

Under the new law, which will take effect July 1, patients will have to provide stronger proof of a qualifying illness to get a medical marijuana prescription. Those who are approved may grow their own marijuana or get it free from a provider who may grow it for up to three people.

The governor said Friday that he was concerned some legitimate patients would lose access to medical marijuana because they wouldn't be able to grow their own. He urged lawmakers to take up the issue again the next time they convene, in 2013.

Medical marijuana is legal in 15 states and the District of Columbia, but the U.S. Justice Department recently warned officials in states such as Montana, Colorado, Washington and California that even licensed marijuana operations could be targeted for federal raids. Marijuana is illegal under federal law. In March, federal agents raided marijuana businesses across Montana.

The recent Justice Department crackdown reversed a freewheeling atmosphere for the medical-marijuana industry that had prevailed since 2009, when then-Deputy Attorney General David Ogden sent a memo to U.S. attorneys saying the federal government wouldn't try to prosecute individuals who used medical marijuana in compliance with state law.

 Write to  Amy Merrick at amy.merrick@wsj.com 