LONDON—International investors rushed to take part in the first bond to be issued by the new European Union facility to save euro-zone governments from default, underscoring confidence in the EU's efforts to safeguard the euro. 

The new €5 billion ($6.82 billion) issue by the European Financial Stability Facility was close to eight times oversubscribed with bids totaling more than €44.5 billion, as investors from Asia bought 38% of the total amount. 

"To get €44.5 billion on the EFSF was mind-blowing," said  PJ Bye, head of the public sector syndicate at  HSBC Holdings PLC, one of the banks acting as lead manager on the deal. 

The EFSF's bond, aimed at funding Ireland's bailout, was a test of investor support for the facility. The five-year deal priced at 0.06 percentage point over mid-swaps, which is the standard by which new bonds denominated in euros are measured. The benchmark rate is derived from the cost of swapping fixed- and floating-rate interest payments. 

"I asked myself whether the price was too cheap and came to the conclusion that we should not try to push it further down,"  Klaus Regling, the chief executive officer of the EFSF, said at news conference Tuesday in Frankfurt. "It's the first issue, so we wanted to be on the safe side." 

However, as an inaugural issue, investors were looking at more than just the fundamentals. 

"This was the first EFSF bond to be issued and everyone wanted to be a part of it. It's a collectors item and it was almost like the price didn't matter," Mr. Bye at HSBC said. 

The massive demand left a lot of investors short of the total amount they had wanted to buy, according to  Philip Brown, head of public sector capital market origination at  Citigroup 
C


0.77
%




Inc.

The positive reception also set the market up for further supply. 

"The huge support for this deal reflects the increasing confidence in the market at the moment towards the periphery, with investors increasingly of the opinion that Europe is going to get through this crisis and that Germany is behind it," Mr. Brown said. 

Citigroup, HSBC and Société Générale CIB were lead managers of the deal.

Japan's government purchased more than 20% of the issue, reflecting its early commitment to contribute to European financial stability, the EFSF said in a statement. 

Other buyers included Germany, which bought 12%; France, which took 7%, and North America, which bought 2%.

Among the different types of investors participating in the deal, central banks took up the largest share at 43%, followed by fund managers at 31%.

 Write to  Art Patnaude at Art.Patnaude@dowjones.com 