TOKYO—In its first output halt in Europe after the massive earthquake and tsunami in Japan,  Toyota Motor Corp. said Wednesday that it will suspend five plants in the region from late April to early May due to a disruption in parts supplies from its home country. 

The planned stoppage in production in Europe follows its suspension decided earlier this month in North America, underscoring the increasing impact from the lack of auto parts on the company's global manufacturing operations.

The latest plan for Europe also comes after Toyota decided last Friday to idle its production in Japan of vehicles and parts from late April to early May after operating for two weeks from April 18.

The spreading impact outside Japan from the March 11 disaster could make it hard for Toyota to get its North American and European plants back on normal operations. 

Toyota joins its Japanese rivals  Nissan Motor Co. and  Honda Motor 
HMC


0.44
%




Co. in cutting back output volumes in Europe. 

Nissan plans to idle its U.K. factory later this month, while Honda halved production levels in Britain from this week as a result of disruptions in its parts-supply chain. 

Toyota said Wednesday it will suspend five auto and engine production plants in Europe from late April to early May because of the disruption in parts supplies from Japan. 

Toyota, the world's biggest car maker by volume, said it will halt output at three auto plants in the U.K., Turkey and France and two engine factories in Poland and the U.K. on April 21-22, April 25-29 and on May 2. The engine plant in Poland will also be nonoperational on May 3, a Toyota spokeswoman said. 

These plants will run at a reduced volume during the remainder of May, the auto maker added.

The company's other auto assembly plants in Europe—those in the Czech Republic and Russia—have no plans to suspend production, although they also use parts from Japan, the Toyota spokeswoman said.

However, the company remains undecided whether the plants in those two countries will continue their operations in May and afterward, she said.

In North America, Toyota won't operate its plants April 15, 18, 21, 22 and 25.

 Write to  Yoshio Takahashi at yoshio.takahashi@dowjones.com 