Do not adjust your newspaper: The Knicks really did play an early January game that somehow involved playoff positioning. And they really did win. 

The Knicks, currently in sixth place in the Eastern Conference, defeated the seventh-place Indiana Pacers 98-92 on Sunday afternoon and for the first time since the 2000-2001 season are five games over .500 this late in the season. 

Though the Knicks proved themselves against a team currently in playoff contention (they had only defeated four of those), the game itself was disjointed and sloppy and didn't exactly scream "two playoff teams." 

"It was one of those nights where we just had to grind it out. People didn't have their legs," Knicks coach Mike D'Antoni said. 

Every Knicks starter was in double figures—Amar'e Stoudemire scored 26 points, Danilo Gallinari 19 and Raymond Felton 14. Center Ronny Turiaf had six blocks to lead an impressive Knicks defense that held Indiana to 37 percent field-goal shooting and 37 second-half points, the fewest by a Knicks opponent this season. The team's 12 blocks were a season high. 

The Knicks had a major scare in the fourth quarter when Pacers guard Brandon Rush missed a layup and fell into the left knee of Mr. Gallinari, the Knicks' starting small forward. Mr. Gallinari said he heard a click in his knee and went down in pain. The diagnosis, for now, is a sprained knee. He limped off with the help of Mr. Stoudemire and center Timofey Mozgov. After the game, Mr. D'Antoni said Mr. Gallinari will miss anywhere from a few days to a couple of weeks, but it is not expected to be a long-term absence. The team will know more on Monday, when Mr. Gallinari has an MRI. 

"I feel discomfort, but I can walk," Mr. Gallinari said. 

Mr. D'Antoni said that the Knicks continue to have problems with coming out flat—the Pacers carved out a nine-point lead in the first quarter. Mr. D'Antoni said the team was slow reacting to the ball, which he said particularly concerns him because a team with a small lineup like his cannot afford to be slow. The Pacers outrebounded the Knicks 57-45 and scored 46 points in the paint to the Knicks' 34. 

It was the first Knicks game since Nov. 27 in which both teams failed to score 100 points. 

Size continued to be a problem for the Knicks on Sunday. Roy Hibbert, a 7-foot-2 center, took advantage of the Knicks' lack of height, coming off the bench to score 10 points in 16 minutes. The Knicks caught a break when long-limbed 6-foot-11 defensive specialist Jeff Foster, who started in Mr. Hibbert's place, fouled out in the fourth quarter, leaving 6-foot-8 forward James Posey on the 6-foot-10 Mr. Stoudemire. Pacers coach Jim O'Brien said that Mr. Foster was the team's best chance "by far" to guard Mr. Stoudemire, and that the team knew it would be an uphill battle without him. 

The situation proved costly with the score 91-90 in the fourth quarter. Mr. Stoudemire blew by Mr. Posey for a layup. Then on the next possession, he jumped into him while laying it in to make it 95-90. After a Pacers basket, Mr. Stoudemire showed his range, hitting a 19-footer, making it 97-92 and effectively ending the game.

He had nine points in the fourth quarter on Sunday afternoon. Mr. Stoudemire averages 7.3 points per game in the fourth quarter, No. 1 in the league. It was Mr. Stoudemire's 18th straight game with at least 20 points, the longest such streak since Patrick Ewing did it 28 straight times in 1990. 

Forward Wilson Chandler only scored 10 points, but had some of the flashiest plays of the game. He hit a 40-foot, half-court, buzzer-beating 3-pointer at the end of the third quarter to put the Knicks up 79-77. Then he hit a 3-pointer from the left corner with 3:56 left to give the Knicks a 90-87 lead. 

"This was definitely huge. It was a big game for us," Mr. Stoudemire said. "Indiana is right behind us as far as the playoff race.''

 Write to  Kevin Clark at kevin.clark@wsj.com 