The ceramic artist Edmund De Waal's runaway best-seller "The Hare with Amber Eyes" follows the plight of a collection of 264 Japanese netsuke across borders and battles, and from one household to another. The book, which homes in on the importance of objects and their histories (if only they could speak), also raises the question: How do you best display these precious items? 

One could argue that many of us take the equivalent of a Grand Tour every time we go on holiday. We come back clutching objects, textiles and prints that caught our eye there, only to arrive home and be faced with the task of blending these new pieces in with the rest of the decor, already littered with earlier Grand Tour finds.

Even works of art, which once came with strict rules as to height and lighting, are no longer getting the gallery treatment. Instead, designers like Cath Kidston choose to prop them—sometimes still in plastic—on rows of shallow shelves that line the walls. In fact, Ms. Kidston is so enamored with her collection of cards and "things" from all over the world that she has dedicated a whole room to displaying them. "By creating shelves where I can prop, I can constantly move things around," she says. "Our grandparents put all the best china in wood-and-glass cupboards; today, we might hang all of [our inherited] plates over the expanse of a whole wall, turning it into an instant installation." Though Ms. Kidston had a joiner design her shelves, a concealed white shelf by IKEA (www.ikea.com) is an easy alternative.

Walk into any trendy boutique in London and you will see vintage "cabinets of curiosities" that once sat in museums being used to display jewelry, ceramics, handbags (Anya Hindmarch's Pont Street boutique is lined with old cabinets from the Victoria & Albert Museum) and even books. At Gripoix, the French jeweler on Mount Street, the costume items are displayed in a former pharmacist's cabinet, while necklaces are casually strewn over Stockman mannequins. The display forms from Paris-based Siegel & Stockman (www.siegelstockman.com), which have reached cult status in the fashion world, come in an array of colors and fabrics (try the haute couture mannequin on wheels, from €444).

"Jewelers now like to show items in [glass-topped] console tables and cabinets, which are giving homeowners ideas," says London-based jewelry designer Cassandra Goad, famous for the ever-changing window displays in her Sloane Square store. "People love to look at their jewelry: Why not frame it and hang it on your dining room wall?" In fact, Ms. Goad is so inundated with requests from customers for things to display their necklaces and bracelets on—everything from coral and glass to old family busts—that she is considering launching a display collection of her own. Hugo McLaughlin, owner of the Albrissi design store in London, known for its superb styling, throws necklaces around Chinese ceramic horses and Ming Dynasty vases or has them pouring out of ancient ceramic pots. At popular fashion store the Cross, owner Sam Robinson hangs necklaces on bits of scrapwood and coral or on plastic hands, placed under glass domes once used to display stuffed birds. These bell jars, with wooden bases, are now so sought after that Liberty's and Selfridges have both run out of supplies (you can order some on www.displaycases.co.uk). Fortunately, international outlets like Anthropologie and Umbra now sell the sorts of display items that were once only available to the trade, including concealed shelves for your books from Umbra (www.umbra.com) and ceramics, and glass jewelry stands for bracelets from Anthropologie (www.anthropologie.com). Anthropologie also sells vintage-looking stands, such as the "Decker" bookshelf (£598), ideal for composition enthusiasts.

Many people today collect an eclectic assortment of objects, which isn't always easy to put together in a home interior. This is often when a professional should be called in. Designer Nia Morris of Cloud Studios breaks every rule in her own home. Her living room is dotted with the objects she has found on trips around the globe: a large, pink feather cushion; a tray with pieces of ceramic; vintage crystal glasses; architectural busts and family photographs. "I love each one of the items and the composition—it's all to do with scale, shape and color," she says. "I like to mix old glass with contemporary objects, the juxtaposition of the two gives each individual item more impact." Ms. Morris and her business partner Louise Holt often help arrange clients' collections; for one banker, they created a gallery space on the top floor of his home for the sole purpose of displaying a trove of often-changing treasures. 

Tricia Guild has made a name for herself (and built a business, Designers Guild) on her ability to effortlessly know where things should go, and how. "I love to display objects and arrange flowers, and set tables. I think it's all the same," says Ms. Guild, who was an early collector of Mr. De Waal's ceramics. "What links a collection of objects together is color and texture, or perhaps a story. I like to change things around, which is why I try to use freestanding vintage cabinets. I also like to put things inside glass coffee tables. For paintings, I am a fan of propping. It means you can move things around." Though there are rules that govern the art of grouping objects, such as working with odd numbers and following the lines of a pyramid with larger objects at the back and smaller at the front, Ms. Guild follows her intuition. "The point is to experiment," she says. "The lovely thing about display cabinets is that you can change them whenever you like."

It also means you can put them wherever you like. For their catalogue, B&B Italia (www.bebitalia.it), the first company to hire stylists to mix books, art work and knickknacks on their display cabinets, chose to photograph an acrylic shelf by Japanese designer Naoto Fukasawa (€2,570) in a bathroom. It could just as easily feature in a kitchen or a living room. In fact, shelf and storage units such as the "Random" bookshelves by MDF Italia (£1,640 at Viaduct, www.viaduct.co.uk) were designed for the sole purpose of displaying books and objects as one sees fit, sideways or stacked or both. Many designers like to mount clients' collections behind glass in bathrooms; once solely utilitarian places, they are now increasingly mini-museums. 

Displaying clothes is no different. Many magazine editors like to show off their favorite couture dresses on Stockman busts in their living rooms. Those with odd collections, such as ballet shoes or miniature perfume bottles, can commission Carew-Jones (www.carewjones.co.uk), the company known for its Perspex, to custom design anything from a display table to a large pedestal on which to place the giant Buddha bought in Thailand. 

The trick to a gorgeous display of "stuff" on your coffee table, dressing table or kitchen cabinet is to be courageous, says Albrissi's Mr. McLaughlin. "My favorite game is composition—I've been doing this since I was 12," he says. "I think the art of display is the art of looking; people often don't. When we go to a museum, we focus and we really see." Mr. McLaughlin, who uses the museum specialists Plowden & Smith (www.plowden-smith.co.uk) to mount African masks, urges people to take risks. "Why can't you put Indian with contemporary or a rock and a Buddha together? Prop them all on a chair even?" There are no rules; all that matters is appreciation of, in Mr. De Waal's words, "our favorite things." 

 Write to  Helen Kirwan-Taylor at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 