BEIJING—Looking to head off the kind of anger that is reshaping the Middle East, China's leaders pledged to boost incomes for its less wealthy citizens and to tame inflation, goals accompanied by the mobilization of police to snuff out online appeals for antigovernment protests.

The country's economic plans for this year and for the five-year period through 2015, unveiled at the National People's Congress, the annual legislative session that started Saturday, commit to raising income levels at the rate of economic growth, and call on companies to boost worker wages so they match productivity gains. Incomes haven't kept up with economic growth for at least five years in China.

"We need to reconfigure the line of thinking when it comes to growth," Zhang Ping, head of China's most powerful economic ministry, the National Development and Reform Commission, told a news conference Sunday. "In the past five-year plan, it was absolutely necessary to prioritize maintaining growth," Mr. Zhang said. "Now we want to put more emphasis on ensuring and improving people's livelihood."

The plans, which were hatched well before the outbreak of the so-called Jasmine Revolution in Tunisia in December, build on previous pledges to try to narrow a widening wealth gap in China, while also keeping economic growth humming. China's leaders have long seen economic gains as the key to maintaining social stability, and over the last two weeks, several senior officials have cited growth as the main reason why people are not responding to online appeals over the last two weeks for a Chinese "Jasmine Revolution." 

But Wen Jiabao, China's Premier, acknowledged at the start of the congress Saturday that the government needed to urgently address problems such as inflation that threaten social stability and future economic growth.

"We must therefore make it our top priority in macroeconomic control to keep overall price levels stable," Mr. Wen said in his annual work report—roughly equivalent to the U.S. president's State of the Union address.

Sunday, Premier Wen said that China aimed to "basically eradicate poverty" by 2020, the state-run Xinhua news agency reported, and to "greatly" raise its poverty line of 1,196 yuan ($182) per person a year.

Chinese authorities have also launched a massive security crackdown since appeals for antigovernment protests began appearing on Twitter and other web sites that are blocked inside China, but still visible to those who use proxies or virtual private networks to get around China's Internet controls.

Sunday, Beijing government spokesman Wang Hui said protest calls were bound to fail in the capital because people want stability. 

"All clear-minded people will know that these people have chosen the wrong place and have the wrong idea. The things they want to see take place have not and cannot occur in Beijing," said Mr. Wang, according to the Associated Press. He vowed that Beijing "will have no such incidents."

Chinese authorities are not taking any chances, however. They have detained dozens of political activists, and deployed thousands of uniformed and plainclothes police around sites in Beijing, Shanghai and other cities where online activists have urged people to stage silent Sunday "strolling" protests.

They have also stepped up Internet controls, and re-imposed many of the restrictions on foreign journalists that were lifted in the run-up to the 2008 Beijing Olympics. The Beijing government said Sunday that all foreign reporters now need prior permission to conduct reporting activities anywhere in the city center. In Shanghai, meanwhile, police detained about a dozen foreign reporters for reporting from the designated protest site without prior permission, according to the Foreign Correspondents' Club of China.



Reflecting the concern, the government Saturday projected spending on internal security items like police, courts, and jails would rise 14% to $95 billion this year, faster even than the growth in China's defense spending.

China's heavy-handed response highlights leaders' pre-occupation with maintaining social stability ahead of a once-a-decade leadership change next year, when President and Communist Party chief Hu Jintao and others are due to retire from their party posts.

During the past five years, worker income matched growth in productivity and gross domestic product in only three of China's 27 provinces and autonomous regions, according to the National Development and Reform Commission. For the new five-year plan, 15 provinces have set the labor-income goal-or picked a higher one—as their target.

In the past, local officials have been graded and promoted on their ability to boost growth. Mr. Zhang didn't specify what measures would be taken to enforce the new goals, but the agency's written directions in a report released over the weekend were clear: Local governments "should not seek rapid growth at all costs or compete for the fastest rate."

Tough enforcement, though, is bound to produce political confrontation. Export industries depend on cheap labor to compete internationally and China's huge state-owned industries have seen their profits increase sharply over the past decade as they were able to keep labor costs at a rate well below increases in productivity.

Moreover, steeper boosts in labor costs could conflict with controlling inflation, which hit 4.9% in January.

Mr. Zhang said the Chinese state was capable of handling inflationary pressures, largely driven by food prices, by tapping grain reserves, giving farmers incentives to produce more and, on occasion, selling food from granaries to drive down consumer prices.

His remarks came a day after Mr. Wen told the National People's Congress that the government aims to cap inflation for the full year "around 4%." The consumer price index rose 3.3% in 2010, higher than the 3% target set last year.

Mr. Wen also said that China would even use its "considerable foreign exchange reserves" to rein in inflation—leading a number of economists to wonder what he meant. Using the reserves to purchase grains, for instance, would push up prices, unless it was matched by price controls or subsidies for Chinese consumers.

 Write to  Bob Davis at bob.davis@wsj.com and Jeremy Page at jeremy.page@wsj.com 