New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie has selected Cami Anderson, a top New York City schools official, to lead the state-run Newark Public School system, according to several people with knowledge of the selection.

Ms. Anderson, 39 years old, will attempt to reform the largest and one of the most troubled public school systems in the state, a district that is the focal point for Mr. Christie's education policy. Newark has about 38,000 students, and only half of them graduate from high school in four years.

Newark is being closely watched in education circles around the country. In September, Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg said he would give a $100 million grant to the Newark schools, saying he had faith in the Republican governor and his close ally, Newark Mayor Cory Booker, a Democrat. The grant is predicated on Mr. Booker raising an additional $100 million, of which he has raised $44 million so far.

The pick of Ms. Anderson ends a months-long search with few viable candidates, as major districts such as Chicago and New Orleans hunted for chief executives simultaneously. 

Though a final salary hasn't been decided, the $280,000 salary of the district's former superintendent is a "benchmark," said Christopher Cerf, the acting state education commissioner. The former superintendent, Clifford Janey, was told in August his contract wouldn't be renewed.The state board of education, which votes on the superintendent, will have the appointment on the agenda at the next possible meeting, Mr. Cerf said. 

Ms. Anderson, who worked on Mr. Booker's unsuccessful mayoral run in 2002, emerged as a candidate only within the last month. The other finalist for the job, Maria Goodloe-Johnson, had been fired in March as head of Seattle's school system, but was considered a strong candidate.

U.S. Education Secretary Arne Duncan, who visited Newark last month, praised the selection.

"This a critical time and a tremendous opportunity for Newark's local leaders, educators, community members and business partners as they work to create lasting education reform," he said. "Cami Anderson has built a track record of extraordinary leadership in education, and I believe she can provide the kind of bold vision that will help Newark continue its crucial work toward providing all children the opportunity for a high quality public education."

Ms. Anderson has been a teacher, both in Montessori schools and through the Teach for America program. But the bulk of her career has been in management. 

She was executive director of Teach for America in New York and worked for a leadership nonprofit before being hired in New York City in 2006.

Joel Klein, the former New York City schools chancellor, recruited Ms. Anderson to lead District 79, the group of programs for the city's most challenging students—those who have been through the prison system, returning drop-outs, or otherwise have multiple risk factors for dropping out. Ms. Anderson's "personal life commitment has been really devoted to working with the most under-served," said Mr. Klein, now an executive for News Corp., owner of The Wall Street Journal.

Ms. Anderson made the decision to close schools for pregnant students or young mothers under the belief that segregating those young women from their peers was harmful.

Ms. Anderson was itching to "totally transform the system in three and a half minutes," said Randi Weingarten, president of the national American Federation of Teachers, who was head of the New York City teachers union at the time. Instead of simply closing schools and leaving teachers to find jobs on their own, the two worked out a deal that required teachers to re-apply for their jobs.

"Initially it was a bumpy start, but then we actually worked together fairly decently," she said.

Ms. Anderson made the GED program full time, adding services and classes to help students to make the transition into college or into the work force, said Tim Lisante, deputy superintendent, who works with Ms. Anderson.

Ms. Anderson will face an outspoken and involved public, many of whom think the school governance needs to be more transparent and many of whom don't trust current leaders.

Nicole Singletary, a parent a daughter in the Newark schools, said that she understood Ms. Anderson "has no connection to the city of Newark" other than working for Mr. Booker's campaign.

"Do you see where the outcry comes from?" said Ms. Singletary, who attended a raucous school advisory board meeting Tuesday night.

 Write to  Barbara Martinez at Barbara.Martinez@wsj.com 