PARIS—A French court on Tuesday suspended the trial of former French President Jacques Chirac until a higher court rules on a constitutional claim lodged by a codefendant.

The trial could resume June 20, the Paris court said.

Mr. Chirac is due to stand trial on embezzlement charges related to his stint as Paris mayor. In 2009, investigating magistrate Xavière Simeoni ordered Mr. Chirac to stand trial on criminal charges of allegedly adding several people to the city payroll while he was mayor of Paris between 1977 and 1995, even though their work was of no use to the city.

Mr. Chirac has repeatedly denied the allegation and argued that the jobs were legitimate.

Lawyers for Mr. Chirac said the former president wasn't behind the constitutional claim that caused the suspension.

"I am convinced that Mr. Chirac will be disappointed not to be able to come here and argue his case," Georges Kiejman, one of his lawyers, said after the court announced the suspension.

The investigation, which began more than a decade ago, was suspended for many years while Mr. Chirac was president, because he benefited from judicial immunity.

At the start of the trial, on Monday, a lawyer for Rémy Chardon, a codefendant in the trial who was Mr. Chirac's chief of staff at the time, submitted a constitutional claim to the court. 

The claim challenges an earlier decision by prosecutors to dismiss the statute of limitations in the case. The claim argues that the basis for the prosecution's decision violates France's constitution.

On Tuesday, the Paris court said the claim was "serious," and had to be referred to a higher court. In turn, the high court will have three months to decide whether it wishes to refer the claim to France's Constitutional Council—a jurisdiction of which Mr. Chirac is a member.

If the council gets to examine Mr. Chardon's claim, Mr. Chirac will abstain from taking part in the review, said Marc Guillaume, the council's secretary-general. 

When he was president, Mr. Chirac also appointed the council's chairman, Jean-Louis Debré, and another of the council's 11 members, Pierre Steinmetz.

Mr. Debré would abstain from reviewing Mr. Chardon's claim, a person familiar with the matter said.

Mr. Steinmetz, who couldn't immediately be reached for comment, hasn't yet said what he would do. 

 Write to  David Gauthier-Villars at David.Gauthier-Villars@wsj.com 