  Volkswagen AG and  BMW AG reported record 2010 profits and signs of a strong first quarter on the back of surging Chinese auto sales, underscoring the outsized role China is playing in German car makers' bottom lines. 

In China, Volkswagen's local auto-manufacturing joint ventures—which produced most of the nearly two million cars Volkswagen sold in that country—generated an operating profit of €1.9 billion ($2.63 billion) up €1.1 billion from the previous year, the company said. Volkswagen now sells nearly one in three of its cars in China, after a 37% increase in sales there last year. 

That result, though, doesn't include the cars that Volkswagen exports to China, nor the 600,000 German-made gearboxes and engines it sold there in 2010. Thanks to a weakened euro in the first half of last year, those sales helped contribute to a €1 billion profit boost that Volkswagen said it gained in 2010 from exchange-rate effects. 

The key role China is playing in auto makers' bottom line signal how little mass-market car manufacturers like Volkswagen are likely earning in their European home markets.

Though Volkswagen doesn't break down earnings by region, analysts say few mass-market manufacturers are generating a profit in Europe amid the overcapacity and stagnant growth that plagues the industry. 

"No one is making money in Europe," said  Philippe Houchois, auto analyst at UBS in London.

Separately, BMW said it would boost its dividend fourfold to €1.30 a share after its 2010 profit leapt to €3.2 billion from €210 million the year before. A 19% rise in revenue, to €60.5 billion, fueled the better-than-expected results, and reflected an 85% jump in Chinese auto sales. 

Volkswagen, which last month posted a sevenfold increase in 2010 profit to €6.84 billion, provided more detail Thursday as to how much China and its various brands, from luxury marquees Audi and Bentley to Czech auto maker Skoda Auto AS, contributed. Global sales in January and February climbed 17.5% to 1.2 billion vehicles, it added, putting the year on course to exceed 2010 profit and revenues. 

Auto executives have begun to caution a deceleration in China's break-neck growth is inevitable. On Thursday, BMW sought to emphasize that it aimed for a "balanced relationship" in sales in its three main regions—Europe, Asia and America—as it seeks to sell more than 1.5 million BMW, Mini and Rolls Royce cars this year. Last year it sold 1.46 million cars in total. 

Volkswagen Chief Executive  Martin Winterkorn, though, made clear China and other emerging markets, such as Brazil and Russia, will play an ever-increasing role in its growth. For example, Volkswagen said it plans to launch its unprofitable Seat autos in China as part of its latest plan to bring the troubled Spanish unit to profit by 2013. 

Volkswagen reported earnings as its ambitious empire-building efforts have stalled recently. On Thursday, Mr. Winterkorn said that the tax and legal hurdles that have held up the completion of its planned takeover of  Porsche Automobil Holding SE, including a German probe of Porsche's former managers, "are not insubstantial." But he reiterated that Volkswagen remained committed to the plan, which calls for merging with Porsche's holding company. He added that plans for a capital increase by the end of May to reduce Porsche's debt load for the merger remained on schedule. 

Volkswagen estimates that a full integration with Porsche, already under way, would cut some €700 million in annual costs and the auto makers have already achieved one-third of those savings. But until the takeover is completed, much of the remainder can't be realized, Volkswagen finance chief  Hans Dieter Poetsch said. 

Mr. Winterkorn acknowledged that "cultural differences" had slowed progress in its small car development pact with Suzuki Motors Corp. Volkswagen bought a 19.9% stake in Suzuki in December 2009 as part of a cooperation agreement aimed at tapping the Japanese car maker's small-car expertise and presence in India, where Volkswagen has yet to make inroads. 

But some of the plans have hit snags, he said. "We ... are sometimes more willing to make decisions" compared to Suzuki's more consensus-oriented Japanese culture, he said, while voicing optimism that the two car makers would make progress on several joint projects this year. 

 Write to  Vanessa Fuhrmans at vanessa.fuhrmans@wsj.com and Christoph Rauwald at christoph.rauwald@dowjones.com 