OLDHAM, England—The U.K.’s coalition government is predicted to lose its first major electoral test Thursday, the clearest sign yet that 2011 will be a tough year for Prime Minister David Cameron’s eight-month-old administration. 

Opinion polls suggest the opposition Labour Party will comfortably win the Oldham East and Saddleworth by-election amid widespread dissatisfaction with the government’s deep spending cuts. 

That will provide a boost for Labour’s new leader Ed Miliband, who says the government is cutting spending too much and too fast. 

However, with the Liberal Democrats set to garner more votes than their Conservative Party partners, the coalition seems likely to avoid an outcome that would have increased strains between its two constituent parties. 

The loss of a by-election is hardly the stuff of a crisis. Government parties tend to get a kicking in these one-off votes and the Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition continues to dominate the political agenda and hold a comfortable majority in parliament. 

But if it is to push through the £81 billion ($126 billion) cuts that have helped ease investor concerns about the high level of its debts, the government will have to last the full five-year term in office, and a succession of electoral defeats will make that less likely. 

That could have serious implications in the credit market. 

“I think the bond market has not been paying attention for the simple reason that there are such serious issues for the market outside the U.K.,” said Matteo Regesta, fixed-income strategist at BNP Paribas in London. 

“I think that could change if the markets sense that the Liberal Democrats are cornered and they feel that they could die a slow political death and, as a result, that would seriously threaten the survival of the coalition.” 

A court triggered the Oldham race in November by stripping Labour lawmaker Phil Woolas of his seat after ruling that his campaign had deliberately lied about his Liberal Democrat opponent in May. Mr. Woolas, who was banned from running again, won with a margin of just 103 votes. 

The Liberal Democrats had hoped voters would respond to that judgment by electing their candidate at the second time of asking. But two weekend opinion polls put Labour 17 points ahead of the Liberal Democrats, with the Conservatives third. 

Concerns about rising unemployment and the impact of the government’s austerity program appear to be the main reason for Labour’s resurgence. 

Richard Hulme voted for the Liberal Democrats in the election, but said he plans to vote Labour Thursday. The 39-year-old is out of work for the second time in a year after being laid off from a window-making factory just before Christmas. 

“Labour has the best vision for creating employment and they wouldn’t have cut spending as quickly,” he said. 

All three main parties are acutely aware of how closely the by-election will be watched and have trotted out their top brass to woo the voters in this former cotton-mill town of 100,000 located just east of Manchester in north-west England. 

Mr. Cameron, who leads the senior Conservative party in the coalition, last week became the first prime minister for 12 years to visit a constituency during a by-election while Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg, who leads the Liberal Democrats, has made three visits, as has Labour’s Mr. Miliband. 

Mr. Clegg was in the constituency Tuesday, joining candidate Elwyn Watkins to knock on doors in Saddleworth, a predominantly middle-class village. 

He was adamant the Liberal Democrats are still in the race, saying the party’s private canvassing of 35,000 homes showed it was still a close race. 

The residents of Oldham seem somewhat bemused by the sudden attention the town is garnering. Previously, Oldham was better known for its claim to host England’s first chip shop. It is also the largest town in the country with no cinema. 

One side issue Thursday will be whether hard times could mean a resurgence of the far-right British National Party. 

Oldham, which has a large Asian Muslim population, has a history of interracial tensions and there were riots in the town in 2001, a year when the far-right British National Party polled 11% in the general election. 

The BNP received almost 6% of the vote last year and is expected to come fourth Thursday. 

For Mr. Hulme, the concern is that the growing threat of unemployment and hardship in Oldham could make it again a fertile ground for the BNP. 

“The more unemployment there is, the more desperate people become,” he said. The focus of the by-election, though, will be on the Liberal Democrats and their future in the coalition. 

Andrew Hawkins, chairman of polling firm ComRes, said Thursday’s election will illustrate the shift in the political landscape since May’s election, but stressed that by-elections tend to exaggerate the woes of governing parties. 

However, he said there will be close attention paid to who comes second on Thursday and whether the Liberal Democrats finish above their coalition partners. 

“If the Liberal Democrats are pushed into third position it will be devastating for them,” he said. 

The Liberal Democrats have had a torrid time in recent months as left-leaning voters have deserted the party following its decision to join the Conservatives in government. 

Recent national opinion polls have the party’s support at record lows at around 10% support, down from 23% in May’s election. 

The party disappointed many former supporters when it decided to back the tripling of a cap on tuition fees for university students, having campaigned against fees in the general election. 

Sameer Malik, a 23-year-old actuarial student, had previously voted for the Liberal Democrats but said he no longer has faith in the party after its change of policy on tuition fees. 

“They say one thing just to get into power, then they completely go back on it,” Mr. Malik said. “I’ve lost respect for what they say.” 

For the Liberal Democrats, the coming months are likely to offer a major test of their mettle. 

With the economy expected to slow markedly in the first half of 2011, the party faces a very tough set of local elections in May. It will also see the public vote in a referendum on electoral reform that was one of the biggest concessions the Liberal Democrats won from the Conservatives as a condition of joining the government. 

If the public votes down the referendum, the party’s commitment to staying the course may waver. 