BEIJING—Chinese President Hu Jintao voiced confidence in the government's ability to fight inflation, following a central bank move to curb lending that economists think is the first of what's likely to be a series of further tightening measures this year.

In a written response to questions from The Wall Street Journal and another U.S. newspaper ahead of his trip to the U.S., Mr. Hu said that inflation in China "is on the whole moderate and controllable. There is a basic balance between total supply and total demand, and the material basis is strong enough to maintain market supply and stabilize the overall price level."

"We have the confidence, conditions and ability to stabilize the overall price level," he added.

Mr. Hu was speaking ahead of his visit to the U.S. from Jan. 18 to 21, during which he is expected to discuss a wide range of issues with U.S. President Barack Obama, including economic policy. 

Mr. Hu also dismissed suggestions that China's gradual loosening of controls on its currency, allowing the yuan to appreciate slowly, will be driven by the need to contain inflation pressure. 

"Changes in exchange rate are a result of multiple factors, including the balance of international payment and market supply and demand. In this sense, inflation can hardly be the main factor in determining the exchange-rate policy," he said.

The People's Bank of China said Friday it would lift the reserve-requirement ratio—the share of deposits that banks must keep on reserve—by half a percentage point. The move, effective Jan. 20, follows six such increases last year, and two interest-rate increases since October.

The changes are aimed at tamping down inflation after China's consumer-price index in November rose by 5.1% from a year earlier, its fastest clip in 28 months.

While many economists expect new government data due Thursday to show that price increases leveled off in December and economic growth slowed in the fourth quarter, officials remain concerned about inflation risks and further tightening moves are widely expected in the coming months, including another interest rate rise.

Yao Jingyuan, the National Bureau of Statistics' chief economist, said Sunday that China's gross domestic product growth in 2010 was around 10% and last year's consumer price index will not exceed 3.5%. 

Commodity price inflation was a serious problem last year and is now being fueled in China by the U.S. "issuing money," Mr. Yao said at a forum, adding that he was personally surprised by the extent of inflation in 2010. But prices for goods such as mobile phones, televisions and autos are decreasing and despite inflation pressures, there will be no "severe" inflation, Mr. Yao said.

Commodity currencies such as the Australian dollar and the Canadian dollar weakened against the U.S. dollar Friday after the Chinese announcement, reflecting fears that government efforts to constrain growth in China could sap its demand for minerals and other natural resources. 

Inflation has been spreading across the world's largest emerging economies, even as developed economies like the U.S. continue to struggle with weak growth and stagnant prices. Central banks in Brazil, Russia, and India, in addition to China, have all raised interest rates in recent weeks.

South Korea's central bank raised its benchmark interest rate Thursday and the government issued a package of measures to stabilize consumer prices amid building inflationary pressures there. That followed a rate rise Wednesday in Thailand.

The fight against inflation is causing strains for Beijing and other emerging markets, who worry that raising interest rates will draw more speculative capital from economies like the U.S., where rates are low and central bankers have been increasing the supply of money. Those inflows complicate authorities' ability to manage their economies, and put upward pressure on their currencies.

China's yuan appreciated 0.6% against the U.S. dollar last week after the central bank guided the daily reference rate for the yuan to record strong levels for three consecutive days. The move is aimed partly at damping U.S. criticism of China's currency policy, but also at cooling inflation by lowering the prices of imports in yuan terms.

But some Chinese officials and observers say expectations of yuan appreciation could also help fuel bigger inflows of hot money into China this year, which in turn could add to inflation pressures.

Mark Williams, an economist at research firm Capital Economics, said the People's Bank of China's repeated use of the reserve-requirement ratio, instead of more aggressive interest rate rises, "in part reflects fears that interest rate increases would attract more hot money."

Still, Xia Bin, an adviser to the central bank, said he thinks there is still room for more interest-rate increases in China and that negative real interest rates—meaning the return on bank deposits is below the rate of inflation—are unfair to the average person.

Senior Chinese central bankers, including People's Bank of China Gov. Zhou Xiaochuan, have made remarks in recent weeks about plans to use a broader array of tools to manage credit and liquidity growth, including varying the reserve requirements for different banks based on their lending patterns.

China's official reserve-requirement ratio for most banks will be 19% after the latest increase takes effect, based on the PBOC's announcements. Friday's ratio increase announcement comes after the PBOC raised benchmark lending and deposit rates Dec. 25, the second such rise last year.

—Victoria Ruan, Aaron Back and Yajun Zhang contributed to this article.