WASHINGTON—President Barack Obama renominated 42 people for judicial posts after their nominations expired without receiving a Senate confirmation vote in the last Congress. 

The judicial nominations are among more than 80 presidential picks for various posts, including ambassadorships, that the president sent to the Senate on Wednesday as the new Congress took office. 

The president, as expected, picked Virginia Seitz, a veteran Washington lawyer, to head the Justice Department's Office of Legal Counsel. The office provides legal advice to the president and executive-branch agencies on constitutional and other major issues. 

The office has become the focus of partisan battles. During the administration of President George W. Bush, the office produced legal opinions that endorsed harsh interrogation methods used by the Central Intelligence Agency to question terror suspects.

Among the judicial nominees who face a second round of Senate scrutiny is Goodwin Liu, a University of California, Berkeley, law professor chosen for the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals. Republicans have staunchly opposed Mr. Liu, citing what they said were his liberal writings, including support for using international law in judicial rulings.

At the end of the 111th Congress in December the Senate held a flurry of votes to approve judicial nominees who had been waiting for months. However, the full Senate didn't vote on 19 judicial picks who had been approved by the Senate Judiciary Committee. Their nominations expired, along with the nominations of 24 others who had yet to face committee votes.

The lone judicial nominee who was not renominated is U.S. District Judge Robert Chatigny of Connecticut, who was initially nominated for the Second Circuit Court of Appeals. During hearings last year Republican lawmakers raised questions about his handling of sex-offender cases and his decision to temporarily delay the 2005 execution of serial killer Michael Ross. An official familiar with the matter said Judge Chatigny asked not to be renominated.

Separately, Mr. Obama renominated Nobel laureate Peter Diamond, a Massachusetts Institute of Technology economist, to a vacant seat of the Federal Reserve Board. Some Senate Republicans blocked a vote on his confirmation last year.

 Write to  Evan Perez at evan.perez@wsj.com 