Good morning, idiots! I'm sure you're wondering what crazy things I am going say about our big, scary opponent this weekend, the New York Jets. Look, I don't want to get drawn into some kind of [bleep] contest with those guys down there, but you know me, old Bill Beli-rex. I can't help myself. I can't shut my [bleep] mouth.

So here you go: I despise the Jets. I really do. Can't take the uniforms, can't take the logo, can't take Cromartie, can't take the fireman dude. I can't stand having to come down here to this press conference and talk to you media clowns about those clowns down in the Meadowlands.

Seems like a waste of time to even host this playoff game. What part of 45-3 did the Jets not understand? Don't you guys want to talk about our next game, versus the Steelers or Ravens?

Now I know what you're thinking: there he goes, Wild Bill Beli-rex giving the New York Jets some major motivational bulletin board material? Well, you're assuming the Jets know how to read.

OK, maybe that's mean. Sorry! The Jets have some great players. 

There's Joe Klecko. What's that? Joe Klecko's retired? OK, well at least the Jets have that smart little running back kid, Danny Woodhead. What's that? [smiles] Woodhead's on our team? Whoops!

Now they've got a good coach down there in New York, I'll grant you that. Rex Ryan does things a little different than I do. He keeps quiet—and lets his team do the talking on the field. You folks know that's not my style. I like to open my mouth, have fun, show off my Super Bowl rings. I'm proud, and I ain't shy.

In fact, I consider this game to be a statement about me and Rex Ryan. 

Write it down. Whoever coaches the best wins. Just to make it competitive, I'll wear a blindfold and drink half a bottle of Jager.

It's just the Patriot way. We're not all business. We like to have fun. 

Why, the other day I let the guys watch an entire movie. Granted, the movie was the black & white game film of our August preseason game with the St. Louis Rams. But still: Technically, it was a movie!

Rivalry? You guys have been around me long enough to know that I don't really consider the Patriots and the Jets a rivalry. Does Coke freak out about a kid's lemonade stand?

We consider the Colts a rival. The Steelers are a rival. I might even be scared of Auburn.

But the Jets? They wouldn't scare me unless they sent me a text message with a photo attachment.

You guys know I go back with those Jets a long way. They once offered me the job coaching the team. It was a long time ago. I believe Ivana Trump was the owner. Nice lady. She took me to the Olive Garden with her dog in a handbag. I resigned on a napkin.

You know that I'm just trying to [bleep] entertain. I love my players, and I believe in letting people say what they want. I believe in my team. 

Like every coach in the league, I want my players to think they're the best team in football—that they have the confidence to go out there any Sunday and beat any team in the league.

The difference is, my players do it. That's why they call us the Same Old Pats.

 Now seriously, who wants to talk Steelers and Ravens?