LONDON—U.K. house prices fell more sharply than expected in February, reversing a similar rise in January and suggesting the market is set to decline modestly this year, mortgage lender Halifax said Friday. House prices fell 0.9% in February from the previous month, after a 0.8% rise in January. 

"Uncertainty over the economic outlook is likely to weigh down on housing demand this year," said Halifax Chief Economist  Martin Ellis. He predicted a 2% fall in prices this year. 

Signs of continued weak demand are clear in Bank of England data that show the number of mortgage approvals—an early indicator of house market activity—remains historically low. There were just under 46,000 approvals in January, up slightly from December but less than half the levels regularly seen before the financial crisis hit in 2007. 

The property market has been fluctuating in recent months. Steep falls in prices in 2008 and 2009 were followed by a bounce back in 2010, but this proved to be limited and quickly lost momentum. The overall trend for 2011 appears to be a gradual decline, many economists say. 

Rival lender Nationwide said Tuesday that its own measure of house prices edged up 0.3% in February on the month earlier, but it also predicted the market will be flat or slightly weaker for the year as a whole. 

Prices fell an average 2.8% in the three months to January from the year-earlier period, the biggest decline on that measure since October 2009 and deeper than the 2.4% drop in the three months to January. Economists had predicted a 2.5% fall. 

Some prospective home buyers have been put off by factors including fear of job loss, scarce credit, and expectations that interest rates are soon to rise. The Bank of England is expected to increase its key rate from an all-time low of 0.5% this year, after three of its nine-strong policy committee voted for tighter policy in February. Its next decision is due March 10. Low BOE interest rates in the past two years haven't benefited all homeowners because mortgage rates being offered are usually much higher. 

Banks in coming years face having to repay billions lent to them by central banks and markets during the financial crisis. That may further curb their appetite to lend at generous rates. However, Halifax's Mr. Ellis said a shortage of houses for sale might limit the decline in property prices this year. 

"Fewer properties have been coming on to the market in recent months," he said. "This trend, if sustained, should improve the balance between demand and supply and help to prevent a more significant fall in house prices." 

The average house price was £162,657 ($264,627) in February, Halifax said. The company is owned by  Lloyds Banking Group PLC. 