NEW DELHI – Indian iron ore export prices have fallen by up to 50% in the past month due to low demand from main buyer China, two industry executives said Friday. 

"There is an oversupply situation in the market and a lot of [iron ore] stocks at the ports," said a senior executive at a Goa-based miner and exporter, who didn't want to be named. 

The export price of ore with 58% iron has dropped to about $140 a metric ton, including cost and freight, from $168 a ton in February, while the price of ore with 50% iron has halved to $40 a ton, he said. 

Poor demand from China, a proposed increase in export tax by the Indian government, and a hike in railway freight rates this month will stifle supplies from the world's third-largest supplier by volume. India usually exports nearly half of its iron ore production to China. 

"Prices had gone into almost a free fall and there are very few inquiries from overseas buyers," said Glenn Kalvampara, secretary of the Goa Mineral Ore Exporters Association. 

Shipments from India slipped 18% during the April-January period to 75.11 million tons due to an export ban in the southern state of Karnataka and transportation issues in the main exporting state of Goa. 

While Karnataka banned export of iron ore to check illegal mining, the federal government's proposal to increase export tax to 20% from 5% earlier is aimed at boosting local supply. 

Chinese buyers are yet to return to the Indian market after their New Year celebrations last month, and industry officials expect prices to remain around current levels as stocks with buyers are not likely to be depleted in the next few weeks. 

According to preliminary data issued Thursday by Chinese customs authorities, the country imported a total of 48.64 million tons of iron ore in February, down 29% from 68.97 million tons in January. 

Meanwhile, a revival of coking coal exports from flood-hit Australia has pushed up shipping freight rates, making Indian ores costlier to transport. 

The Baltic Dry Index, which measures sea-borne freight rates for bulk goods such as iron ore, coal and grains, has gained 47% since Feb. 4 to 1,538 Thursday. 

Shipping rates of Supramax vessels have risen 10% to about $20/ton in the last two days, the Goa-based executive said. Supramax are bulk carriers with 50,000-60,000 deadweight ton capacity. 

 Write to  Arpan Mukherjee at arpan.mukherjee@dowjones.com 