Is  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
GS


0.10
%




 feeling guilty?

Guilt may be too strong a word. But some of the investment bank's recent moves, especially its about-face in the Facebook deal, suggest that the firm's veneer of unflinching resolve is giving way to second-guessing. 

Did Goldman back down? Sure. But Goldman's moves are like growing pains. As it stumbles through the post-Dodd-Frank landscape, the company is maturing, even though it is 141 years old. And as any teenager can tell you, growing up isn't always pretty.

Goldman stunned Wall Street this week when it decided to bar U.S. investors from participating in an exclusive investment fund that would pump as much as $1.5 billion into the social-networking site. It was a shocking blow to a deal that less than a week ago looked like a triumph. 

The move was so out of character that it left many outsiders searching for answers. Running afoul of regulators and reaction to the public outcry are oft-mentioned theories. 

For its part, Goldman blamed the media for indirectly marketing the fund, a no-no according to U.S. securities laws. 

Whatever the reason, the Facebook deal is more evidence that Goldman is struggling to remake itself after the financial crisis. It is wrestling with its own DNA of opportunistic and sometimes boundary-pushing deal-making—and some nebulous ideal of what critics claim the firm should be.

Goldman Chairman and Chief Executive  Lloyd Blankfein and other top executives are walking a tightrope. As The Wall Street Journal reported, Goldman's recent decision to include more information including trading positions in its quarterly filings and institute new internal standards for selecting clients didn't go over well with some insiders who felt the firm would lose its competitive advantage.

As if to underscore the point, Goldman's results on Wednesday were lackluster: a 52% decline in profit, 10% drop in revenue and earnings that barely beat consensus estimates. It is the third consecutive quarter Goldman has failed to wow Wall Street, an eternity for a firm that used to be reliable for upside surprises.

Some may argue that the firm's struggles are the result of an investment bank made mortal by the financial crisis. And there is a good debate to be had about whether the firm was ever deserving of the mythic status it enjoyed, especially since going public in 1999.

But there is something bigger happening here. Goldman's effort to remake itself is a struggle for the soul of the firm. As the most polarizing survivor of the crisis, Goldman still enjoys a reputation in corporate boardrooms that allows the firm to capture marquee assignments. But that process now occurs under the glare of skepticism or cynicism, a far cry from the awe or at least ambivalence of the past.

The Facebook deal is the most dramatic example. The old Goldman wins arguably the most sought-after client in Silicon Valley. The new Goldman caves in to criticism and potential conflict with regulators.

It may have been embarrassing to limit the deal to non-U.S. investors, but that's the right move, just as Goldman's decisions to provide more transparency, scale down the use of leverage and risk-taking and remake its bonus structure were. 

Goldman "took the high road" in the Facebook deal, says  Alan Towers, president of Wall Street image consultant Towers Group Inc., by "protecting U.S. clients, the firm and shareholders."

Mr. Towers says he wasn't surprised at the negative reaction to the decision to drop U.S. clients from the Facebook fund. There is a lingering bias against Goldman that it has to balance as it pursues more deals.

"From a reputation management perspective, Goldman's decision is a success," Mr. Towers says. "It's evidence of an evolving culture. Just the kind of behavior many media critics called for. In time, clients will sense they're better off with a more accountable Goldman."

Goldman declined to comment. 

That is ultimately the trick for Goldman. It needs to manage the public's expectations while maintaining its allure as the gold standard of investment banking. Sure, there is an argument that Facebook should actually go public and be subject to reporting requirements. But that is Facebook's decision, not Goldman's. The brokerage only provided a solution.

Critics always will find something to complain about with Goldman. It profits at the expense of clients, critics claim. It hasn't suffered enough or doesn't feel guilty enough about the financial crisis. Its self-imposed reforms don't go far enough.

Sometimes those arguments are right. Sometimes they aren't. 

Yet Goldman hasn't earned the benefit of the doubt. Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc. and Bear Stearns Cos. aren't around anymore to take the heat.

 Write to  David Weidner at david.weidner@dowjones.com 