MUMBAI -- State-owned Power Finance Corp. of India is looking to raise as much as 46.6 billion rupees through the sale of shares starting Tuesday, and it will kick off the government's 400 billion-rupee asset-sale program for the current fiscal, which started April 1.

Power Finance, the lender to state-run power companies, will offer 229.5 million shares in the range of 193 to 203 rupees apiece in a follow-on public offering that closes Friday. The company will offer a discount of 5% to retail investors, a company executive said at a press conference on Monday.

The company's size and performance have won it the so-called navratna status (meaning one of the nine gems), which allows it more autonomy than other state-owned companies.

The offer will sell 172.1 million fresh shares and 57.4 million shares currently held by the government. Eventually, the net issue will amount to 17.37% of the paid-up equity capital of the company.

The company saw its shares fall 1.6% on Monday to 211 rupees each, while the benchmark Sensex closed 0.05% higher at 18,528.96 points.

While the current valuation of Power Finance's shares, at 1.3 times book value, is in line with peers, it has underperformed this year, falling 31% the start of the year. The broader market has fallen 10% year-to-date.

Shares of most infrastructure firms have been hit hard over the past few months owing to fears that rising interest costs will hit loan growth and margins.

Power Finance's profitability in the three months ended March 31 was below the expectations of analysts, though most have a "buy" rating on the firm on account of its overall performance in 2010-2011.

The medium-term price target for the share is 288 rupees taking into account the effect of the equity dilution on the financials of the company, according to a report by R. Sreesankar, an analyst at Tata Securities last month..

The company plans to use the net proceeds of the share sale to increase its capital adequacy and strengthen its balance sheet, said  Satnam Singh, chairman and managing director of the state-run enterprise.

Growth in the loan portfolio had seen capital adequacy ratio shrink by a percentage point to 16% in 2009-2010. The equity infusion will help the company raise the size of its loan book without falling short of the 15% capital adequacy norm for infrastructure finance companies.

In the past year, Power Finance has disbursed 330 billion rupees in loans against sanctions of 750 billion rupees. The company also plans to appoint consultants to explore opportunities in equity funding of power projects, Mr. Singh said, and the viability of lending to nuclear power projects. The company expects to issue guidelines on this soon.

So far, the government has sold shares in three companies through initial public offerings and through follow-on offers in there others to raise a total of 22.4 billion rupees during the last fiscal year. It deferred the follow-on issues of Oil and Natural Gas Corp. and Steel Authority of India.

Apart from ONGC and SAIL, the government has got cabinet approval to sell shares in Hindustan Copper Ltd.