WASHINGTON—The U.S. military expanded its earthquake relief efforts Tuesday in Japan, sending equipment to help firefighting efforts at the stricken Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant and deploying troops to assist humanitarian relief and search-and-rescue efforts.

Pentagon spokesman Col. David Lapan said U.S. Forces Japan "provided two fire trucks to Fukushima, to be operated by Japanese crews," but added that there was no direct U.S. military involvement in the response.

A contingent of U.S. Marines have moved to the Japanese mainland to coordinate military relief efforts, dubbed Operation Tomadachi ("friends") by Japan. At present, 440 Okinawa-based Marines and sailors have deployed in support of the operation, according to the Third Marine Expeditionary Force. 

Another 2,200 Marines and sailors of the 31st Marine Expeditionary Unit are also en route to Japan aboard ships of Amphibious Squadron 11. According to a U.S. military press release, most of the unit is on board the amphibious assault ship USS Essex. Those troops were recalled from a port visit to Kota Kinabalu, Malaysia, after the disaster struck. They are expected off the coast of mainland Japan on or around Wednesday. 

A U.S. Navy update said those ships would take position in the Sea of Japan, on the west coast of Honshu, to avoid "radiological and navigation hazards on the eastern coast of Honshu." 

The U.S. military has established a refueling base at Yamagata Airfield that is supposed to allow U.S. and Japanese helicopters to refuel quickly and remain on hand over disaster-stricken areas. The Westpac Express, a high-speed military ferry, arrived Tuesday at Marine Corps Air Station Iwakuni from Okinawa to deliver equipment for the refueling base. 

Two U.S. Marine KC-130 transport aircraft based at Marine Corps Air Station Futenma also delivered forklifts, equipment and personnel to Yamagata Airfield. 

According to a Marine Corps press release, an additional flight is scheduled to deliver more helicopter refueling equipment Tuesday evening, and additional refueling sites are being scouted in Sendai and Hanamaki. U.S. Navy surveillance aircraft based out of Okinawa have flown missions to survey the debris field at sea. 

A U.S. Navy carrier strike group, led by the aircraft carrier USS Ronald Reagan, is currently operating off the east coast of Honshu. Lt. Anthony Falvo, a Navy spokesman, said the group flew a total of 29 aircraft sorties Tuesday, delivering 17 tons of supplies, including food, water and blankets.

Additional vessels in the strike group include the cruiser USS Chancellorsville, the destroyer USS Preble, and the support ship USNS Bridge, along with several guided-missile destroyers. Lt. Falvo said an additional destroyer, the USS Mustin, was at sea south of the region that took the brunt of the earthquake and tsunami damage.

Previously, the carrier group was forced to make an unexpected detour after detecting low levels of radiation downwind of a damaged Japanese nuclear power plant. 

"We continue to monitor the winds closely, moving our ships and aircraft as necessary to avoid the wind line from the Fukushima Power Plant," said an update issued Tuesday by the Navy's Seventh Fleet. "Aircraft and air crews returning from missions ashore are being monitored carefully for contamination, and are conducting decontamination procedures as necessary when it is detected."

A Navy official said some crew members were being given potassium iodide as a "precautionary measure," but was not able to provide additional details.

According to a Navy statement, the carrier USS George Washington, currently docked at Yokosuka naval base, detected low levels of radioactivity from the Fukushima plant this morning. 

According to the statement, there was "no danger to the public," but the commander of U.S. naval forces in Japan recommended that personnel stationed at Yokosuka limit outdoor activities and secure external ventilation systems. "These measures are strictly precautionary in nature," the statement read. "We do not expect that any U.S. federal radiation exposure limits will be exceeded even if no precautionary measures are taken."

In addition to the ships under the USS Ronald Reagan carrier group, the USS Tortuga, with two heavy-lift MH-53 helicopters aboard, is in Tomakomai, Hokkaido, preparing to embark with about 300 Japan Ground Self Defense Force personnel and 90 vehicles. 

According to a Navy statement, the ship will ferry the troops and vehicles to Ominato, on the island of Honshu, Tuesday night.

U.S. Air Force aircraft are also flying missions in support of the relief effort. Roger Drinnon, a spokesman for Air Mobility Command, said transport aircraft had thus far delivered 107.5 tons of cargo, including 64 tons of search-and-rescue equipment from the U.S. and 43.5 tons of generators and other equipment from a U.S. base in South Korea. Air Mobility Command refueling planes have loaded 29,900 gallons of fuel on U.S. military aircraft flying relief missions over the Pacific. 

The U.S. Agency for International Development has been designated as the lead U.S. government agency for coordinating humanitarian relief efforts, similar to Haiti earthquake relief operations in early 2010. 

Gina Jackson, a USAID spokeswoman, said the agency had deployed a 157-strong Disaster Assistance Response Team that includes 144 civilian search and rescue personnel from Fairfax County, Va., and Los Angeles County, Calif. In addition, experts from the Department of Health and Human Services and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission are attached to the USAID team.