The Yankees are holding their breath that their top young starting pitcher, Phil Hughes, won't be lost for the season due to a rare circulatory condition.

Over the past month, Hughes, who is 24, has been struggling with reduced velocity, but the Yankees hadn't examined him medically until this week.

Tests have returned a possible diagnosis of Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, a rare disorder that occurs when the blood vessels and nerves passing from the chest to the arm become pinched and inflamed.

"You've got to think of it like a car," said Dr. Jonathan Glashow, co-chief of sports medicine at Mount Sinai. "All the tubes and pipes come out of the chest and go into the arm. They pass through this outlet that goes into the arm, and if there's not enough room for all the goodies to go through, some of the goodies get compressed—i.e. blood vessels and nerves."

The condition affects baseball players at a disproportionate rate because of their muscularity and the heavy use of their throwing arms. "Some people have bigger outlets, and some people have smaller outlets," Glashow said. "If you're a muscular person, and the nerves and the muscles get a little bigger with use, sometimes it's just enough to crimp the available space for these structures, and they start to get irritated as more blood flow goes into the throwing arm."

The Yankees on Monday are sending Hughes to a specialist in St. Louis, Dr. Robert Thompson, according to general manager Brian Cashman. If the diagnosis is Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, it would likely require season-ending surgery. "We're hoping it's not the case. I'll hope until we hear otherwise that it's not the case. We want to be certain, and if it is, it needs to be taken care of—and if it isn't, we'll just take it with a sigh of relief and say, 'Well that's good,'" Cashman said.

Several players, including Colorado Rockies pitcher Aaron Cook and Boston Red Sox catcher Jarrod Saltalamacchia, have undergone surgery and returned to the field without problems, although they were both lost for extended periods. 

If the diagnosis is not Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, then Hughes will return to the program of rest and rehabilitation already under way for his dead arm. That itself is a vexing condition—one that has few obvious, easily diagnosed causes.

Dr. Bradford Parsons, an assistant professor at Mount Sinai in the department of Orthopaedics, who is familiar with these types of problems, said the Yankees have little choice but to rest the pitcher and hope his rehab goes well. "If he doesn't have Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, and he doesn't have any other abnormalities on his workup, then that's probably what they'll end up doing—resting him and rehabbing him—and how long that takes depends on how long it takes for his arm to come back," Parsons said.

Either way, Hughes isn't coming back anytime soon—and that will put a strain on an already paper-thin Yankees rotation. The team has so far survived through the surprising contributions from veteran retreads Freddy Garcia and Bartolo Colon. Cashman said there is little quality pitching to be found in the trade market at the moment.

At present, Yankees manager Joe Girardi said his team isn't thinking that far ahead—they're just genuinely nervous for Hughes and what this means for his future in baseball.

"Anytime you hear circulation, circulatory, it kind of scares me," said Girardi, who was teammates with David Cone when he suffered an aneurysm in his pitching arm in 1996.

"Anything that has to do with blood flow always scares me a little bit. I hope that's not what we're dealing with. That's my hope for him.''