Among academics, the word "civilization" has long had a sinister ring to it, carrying associations of elitism and luxury. Worse, it is linked to imperialism, having provided Europeans with the justification for their far-flung conquests in centuries past—and, these days, for endless self-flagellation.

With "In Search of Civilization," John Armstrong, the resident philosopher at the Melbourne Business School in Australia, sets out to restore the reputation of a word that, to him, represents something infinitely precious and life-sustaining, a source of strength and inspiration. The great civilizations, he says, provide "a community of maturity in which across the ages individuals try to help each other cope with the demands of mortality." 

As he makes clear, his purpose is not to provide a history of various civilizations or to update Samuel Huntington's seminal 1996 book on the post-Cold War world, "The Clash of Civilizations," though he cites Huntington's conclusion that today's real conflict is between civilization and barbarism. Mr. Armstrong wishes to convey what the idea means to him personally.

He identifies two basic attitudes toward civilization. One is that of the pessimist, exemplified here by the medieval abbot Bernard of Clairvaux. To Bernard, civilization was a rare and delicate plant, one that could survive only when sheltered behind the thick walls of a monastery. Outside were brutal barons, vulgar merchants and hoggish peasants. Such benighted folk he considered beyond reach.

Mr. Armstrong notes that even though British art historian Kenneth Clark crafted the 1969 television documentary series "Civilisation"—a survey of Europe's greatest artistic achievements and a cultural event in its own right—deep down he shared Bernard's pessimism. Clark once delivered a speech in Washington to rapturous applause, we're told, and then fled to the men's room, where he "sobbed and howled for a quarter of an hour." The historian felt like a fraud for having betrayed great artworks by peddling his thoughts about them to people who lacked the insight to truly appreciate them.

 By John Armstrong  Graywolf, 196 pages, $24

The second, more generous attitude is represented by Suger, the 12th-century abbot of St. Denis who served as regent for Louis VI while the king was away on a crusade. To inspire his parishioners, Suger built a magnificent church in the emerging Gothic style. He had a levelheaded understanding of the frailties of his fellow men, Mr. Armstrong notes, yet he did not despise them. Instead, combining realism and idealism, he sought to raise them, to help them ascend from the material to the spiritual.

Here Mr. Armstrong makes a crucial distinction between the popularizer and the populist. A popularizer like Suger is someone who wishes to share his own enthusiasm and refined judgment with others and does so through charm and encouragement. The populist merely caters to whatever appeals to the crowd, often playing to the crowd's worst instincts.

Mr. Armstrong is firmly on the side of the popularizers. Unlike many intellectuals, who resent any linking of wealth and culture, he sees the two as intimately connected, but they need to be integrated, he says, since wealth by itself does not compel admiration. Thus he looks for "the sweet spot where luxury and spiritual prosperity meet." In no age was this more the case than in the Renaissance, which went back to classical times for the best in literature, sculpture and architecture and confidently built upon it with the riches of a newly mercantile age. "What is striking," Mr. Armstrong finds, "is how well money was spent."

Compare this civilizing project with 19th-century France under Napoleon III, all gold and glitter on the surface but rot and wormholes below. Mr. Armstrong is particularly illuminating on decadence, which he defines as "defeatism before the consequences of defeat have been felt." In the dark cynicism of writers such as Baudelaire or Stendhal Mr. Armstrong sees not so much indolence as a form of fear and despair masquerading as sophistication. It is possible to inherit a great civilization, he implies, without possessing the will to defend its ideals. The bill came due in the 1870 Franco-Prussian War; patriotic German paintings from the time show manly Prussian troopers upsetting "mincingly delicate furniture."

Ideally, one wants a combination of sensitivity and robustness. The Roman statesman and philosopher Cicero is another of Mr. Armstrong's heroes. Like many of his countrymen, Cicero admired Greek philosophy but felt that the Greeks had allowed themselves to become a little too rarified for their own good, hence their later subjection by the Romans. Cicero wanted both culture and military muscle, combining the refinement of the Greeks with the power of Rome.

As for our own day, Mr. Armstrong observes, we enjoy great material prosperity, but the spiritual side of culture has lost a sense of legitimacy and depth. Much of the blame lies with the humanities, where scholars have buried themselves in arcana and lost sight of the larger lessons, such as how different ages can lend inspiration to one another. Instead of being "our treasure house," he says, the humanities have become "bank vaults," latter-day cloisters like Bernard of Clairvaux's.

Mr. Armstrong finds that this blinkered attitude is true even among those whose subject is the Renaissance itself. In Florence he meets a scholar who devotes his days to studying why camels are depicted with crossed legs in some Renaissance versions of "The Adoration of the Magi" and with straight legs in others. But the scholar remains oddly indifferent to what the Renaissance should mean to us today.

Our artists, too, have failed: The author sees Andy Warhol, Damien Hirst, Jeff Koons and their ilk as representatives of a decadent cultural elite that insists on provocation and newness as the only criteria for judging art. "Mockery, irony and archness," Mr. Armstrong says, "is not what we need." What is needed is hope and confidence. The treasures are all there to be rediscovered, if only we would bother.

 Mr. Bering is a writer and critic. 