ROME—An Italian high court struck down a key pillar of a law that postpones criminal trials facing Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi and other top government officials.

The long-awaited ruling on Thursday could revive the billionaire leader's trials and heighten tensions within his already-weakened conservative ruling coalition.

The law, which Parliament passed in March, had forced judges to automatically postpone trials of cabinet ministers up to 18 months if the premier's office deemed the legal proceedings a "legitimate impediment" to their governing duties.

Italy's Constitutional Court upheld the part of the law that says the trials of cabinet members can in principle be put on hold. However, the court ruled that only the judges presiding over the trials in question—and not the government—can decide whether such trials interfere with government affairs.

Mr. Berlusconi "did not comment and has no intention of commenting," his office said in a statement.

A joint statement by two of Mr. Berlusconi's lawyers, Niccolo Ghedini and Piero Longo, praised the ruling for leaving the "framework" of the law intact. However, they criticized the ruling for assuming judges are not biased against Mr. Berlusconi's government.

Mr. Berlusconi has long argued that he is the victim of persecution by left-wing magistrates.

Mr. Longo said the judges presiding over each of the premier's three trials after more than a month to decide whether to postpone the trials further or let them resume. 

The ruling marks the latest chapter in Mr. Berlusconi's longtime battle with Italy's courts. He faces three criminal trials on charges of tax fraud, corruption and embezzlement—charges he has long denied.

Over the years, in the face of criminal charges, Mr. Berlusconi has repeatedly introduced new laws that shield top officials from prosecution only to see the measures stripped away by the Constitutional Court. The tug of war, which has been the subject of long debate in Parliament, has often distracted lawmakers from dealing with other key issues facing the country, from economic measures to an overhaul of Italy's education system.

Last year, Mr. Berlusconi used his strong parliamentary majority to swiftly pass the current law after the Constitutional Court struck down a 2008 law that had given Mr. Berlusconi and other top officials immunity from criminal prosecution.

Today, however, Mr. Berlusconi lacks a strong majority in Parliament. The premier narrowly survived a vote of confidence in the Chamber of Deputies, the lower house of Parliament, by a mere three votes in December.

Since then, Mr. Berlusconi has struggled to lure enough lawmakers, particularly those in a pro-Vatican opposition party, to comfortably offset the defection of dozens of lawmakers allied with Gianfranco Fini, his former ally and the speaker of the Chamber.

Mr. Fini has recently warned that he wouldn't support any overhaul of Italy's judiciary that "retroactively" shields Mr. Berlusconi.

Without the law in place, the premier risks the resumption of three criminal trials. In one, he is charged with corruption for allegedly bribing his former lawyer to give false testimony to prosecutors in the 1990s. Mr. Berlusconi has vigorously denied making any payments to his former lawyer. 

The premier is also on trial for alleged tax fraud for allegedly arranging for his Mediaset SpA TV company to buy film Hollywood rights in the late 1990s at inflated rates. Prosecutors allege the arrangements allowed the company to illegally lower its tax payments. Mr. Berlusconi has repeatedly denied the tax fraud charge. 

In a third trial, Mr. Berlusconi is charged with embezzlement for allegedly shifting funds from the sale of TV rights to offshore accounts under his alleged control. Mr. Berlusconi has denied the embezzlement charge. He also has repeatedly pointed out that he stepped down from any management role in Mediaset before any of the TV sales transactions in question took place. 

 Write to  Stacy Meichtry at stacy.meichtry@wsj.com 