TOKYO—Japanese Foreign Minister Seiji Maehara resigned Sunday over illegal political donations from a foreign national, dealing a blow to Prime Minister Naoto Kan's faltering government and threatening to hinder Japan's efforts to smooth ties with the U.S. and other key diplomatic partners that have become frayed in recent months. 

The sudden resignation of Mr. Maehara, one of the most popular politicians in Japan and one seen as the likeliest candidate to succeed Mr. Kan, came as a shock, even in a country where political instability has persisted. The past four prime ministers lasted only about a year or less, and Mr. Maehara himself held the job less than six months. These rapid changes have raised questions as to whether Japan can tackle the big challenges it faces, such as ballooning public debt, the aging and shrinking of its population, and managing relations with its increasingly powerful neighbor, China. 

Mr. Maehara's departure will further exacerbate the current political turmoil surrounding Mr. Kan, who faces increasing pressure to resign only nine months into the job. Unable to garner cooperation from opposition parties in a divided parliament, the prime minister is struggling to pass budget-related bills for the fiscal year starting in April. Weakening his grip on power further, some members of his own party have threatened to bolt amid internal conflict. Mr. Maehara's scandal will give more ammunition to energized opposition parties as they escalate their attacks on Mr. Kan and add to the logjam in parliament over the coming days. 

Mr. Kan told a committee meeting at the upper house of parliament Monday that Chief Cabinet Secretary Yukio Edano will temporarily succeed Mr. Maehara. 

Mr. Maehara, 48 years old, is known for his pro-American views and his preference for market-oriented economic policies.

In a hurriedly arranged news conference late Sunday, Mr. Maehara admitted he had received political contributions totaling 250,000 yen (about $3,000) from a South Korean national over several years. Receiving political contribution from foreigners is illegal in Japan. Mr. Maehara said he wasn't aware of the contributions from the old family acquaintance, whom he described as a woman who runs a Korean barbecue restaurant in Kyoto, his hometown. Her identity hasn't been disclosed.

"I have come to believe I can't allow my political-fund issue to create problems for Japanese people and obstruct proceedings in parliament," Mr. Maehara said. "It is a fact that I, [the] foreign minister, accepted illegal donations from a foreign national. This could allow people from Japan and other nations to view us with suspicion, which in turn would hurt Japan's national interest. I thought I needed to bring this to closure as soon as possible."

The swift action taken for the modest contribution underscores the contentious political divide in parliament, as well as the strictness of the donations law. In Japan, politicians can be sentenced to a maximum of three years in prison or be required to pay up to 500,000 yen in fines if it is proved they have deliberately breached the foreign-donation law. They also could be banned from running for public office or from voting in elections for a certain period.

Having repeatedly said in the past that short tenures by prime ministers and foreign ministers hurt Japan's diplomatic relations, Mr. Maehara said he was embarrassed that he was leaving the post within just six months. "It is particularly painful that I have to abandon half-way what I really wanted to do: economic diplomacy and deepening the U.S-Japan alliance," he said.

Indeed, Mr. Maehara's resignation is a blow to the U.S.-Japan relations, which have become strained since the Democratic Party of Japan took power in September 2009 over discord about the relocation of a U.S. military base in Okinawa. 

Mr. Maehara, known as one of the most pro-American lawmakers in the ruling DPJ, has been a leading negotiator for the Okinawa issue since the beginning—first as minister in charge of Okinawan affairs and then as foreign minister. 

As he emphasized "economic diplomacy," Mr. Maehara also was among the leading proponents of trade liberalization and free-trade agreements, pushing for the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a rigorous regional trade agreement supported by the U.S. and highly divisive in Japan due to strong opposition from farm lobbies. 

But some blamed Mr. Maehara for fueling Japan's confrontation with two of its powerful neighbors, China and Russia, with his often provocative comments on territorial issues. 

Opposition parties are seizing the opportunity to attack Mr. Kan's ruling party as Mr. Maehara—the DPJ's star lawmaker, known for his outspokenness and his good looks—stumbled on unexpected trouble. 

"He should take responsibility," said Hirofumi Nakasone, a former foreign minister from the Liberal Democratic Party, Japan's largest opposition party, on a political talk show Sunday. 

Yosuke Takagi, a deputy secretary-general of New Komeito, a smaller opposition party whose cooperation is essential for the DPJ to pass legislation, spoke more bluntly. Mr. Maehara "should quit," he said.

Mr. Maehara's resignation also may spotlight the treatment of ethnic Koreans and Chinese in Japan. The donor in question is a South Korean national but is a lifelong resident of Japan.

Hundreds of thousands of Koreans still live in Japan today, a legacy from World War II, and most have retained their South Korean citizenship, thus being treated as foreigners in a land that many of them consider home. 

The donation regulation was formed out of concern that foreigners could gain unwarranted influence over the nation's political decisions or elections.

—Toko Sekiguchi contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Yuka Hayashi at yuka.hayashi@wsj.com and Takashi Nakamichi at takashi.nakamichi@dowjones.com 