The ancient Maya are known for many things: monumental pyramids, a sophisticated writing system and the development of an accurate calendar. The civilization—which was established around 2500 B.C. and stretched from southern Mexico to Honduras—also left behind artworks rich in hieroglyphic symbolism and metaphor. 

The new book "Reading Maya Art," by Andrea Stone and Marc Zender (Thames & Hudson), examines 100 symbols that appear frequently in Maya painting and sculpture. Subjects include babies (sometimes used to express the theme of renewal), the number six (favored in location names, for reasons that remain unclear) and water (often represented by a water lily). 

The book contains hundreds of line drawings, as well as photographs. Here is a look at some of the works, most dating from the Classic period (A.D. 250 to 900), and the stories that they tell. 



 One of the most intriguing headdresses in Maya art is a tall war helmet covered in a mosaic of shell plaques, as seen above (from a stone carving). The helmet, a staple of the Maya military costume for 500 years, was inspired by military gear from the city of Teotihuacan. By adopting trappings like the mosaic helmet, Maya warrior kings aligned themselves with what was then the most powerful political and economic center in Mesoamerica.

 Like humans everywhere, the Maya were concerned with explaining life, aging and the inevitability of death. They saw diseases as semi-personified dark forces manipulated by sorcerers and witches—and they sometimes made ritual sacrifices to ward off illness and other misfortune. One creature called "spider snake macaw wind" was associated with seizures. A drawing from a stucco facade, above left, shows an enigmatic mortal illness known as "turtle-foot death." 

 Two merchant gods try to spark fire on a road, above right, drawn from a book dating to around the 15th century. (The last Maya kingdom was conquered in the 17th century.) The footprints along the bottom identify them as traveling merchants. Footprints were sometimes used to connote time, since the Maya metaphorically conceived of time as a journey; footprints in pairs indicated "arrival."

 The dog, one of two domesticated animals (along with the turkey) kept by the Maya, makes frequent appearances in the art. Dressed in court finery, the dog above (from a painted vase) is inspecting a tribute offering of a large urn and cloth bundle, suggesting that some breeds may have guarded storehouses and households.

 Ground and polished stone mirrors date back to 1500 B.C. in Mesoamerica. Depictions of the Classic-era Maya court often show kings gazing raptly into mirrors, usually made from a mosaic of iron pyrite pasted onto wood, slate or other material. In the scene above, from a painted vase, a lord gazes at a small effigy mirror-bearer.