INDIANAPOLIS—The Jets have dealt with enough tumult and distractions to pack a telenovela, so it seemed somehow fitting that Saturday night's first-round playoff game against the Indianapolis Colts would be decided by kicker Nick Folk, a player whose midseason struggles almost got him cut from the team.

If nothing else, these Jets have shown great resolve, and the same can be said of Mr. Folk, whose 32-yard field goal as time expired lifted the sixth-seeded Jets to a thrilling 17-16 victory at Lucas Oil Stadium and launched them one step closer to their ultimate goal: the Super Bowl.

Quarterback Mark Sanchez, overcoming a slow start and a sore throwing shoulder, engineered the game-winning drive after Adam Vinatieri converted a 50-yard field goal that pushed the sixth-seeded Colts ahead with 57 seconds left. The Jets benefited from a 47-yard kickoff return by Antonio Cromartie and then their offense went to work. 

The key play came on second-and-eight from the Colts' 32-yard line, when Mr. Sanchez connected with Braylon Edwards on an 18-yard reception. Mr. Sanchez spiked the ball with three seconds remaining to set the stage for Mr. Folk.

"Tell you what," said Jets coach Rex Ryan, who was almost breathless, "we've been in some close ones this year. But to come and pull this game out against a great football team, against a great quarterback? It was a Herculean effort by our team."

Next Sunday the Jets will pay a visit to Gillette Stadium for a meeting with the top-seeded New England Patriots in the second round. And in the immediate aftermath of Saturday's win, it was clear that the players already were focusing on New England. The Patriots clobbered the Jets 45-3 in Foxborough on Dec. 6, the low point of the Jets' season.

"I'm not going to lie, I remember what happened," Mr. Edwards said. "But at the end of the day, I know we're better than them."

As for Jets coach Rex Ryan, he refused to talk about the Patriots in his postgame press conference, saying he was going to take "12 hours" to savor Saturday's win. He had painted Colts quarterback Peyton Manning as his nemesis, thanks to Mr. Manning's 5-1 record against defenses led by Mr. Ryan, dating to Mr. Ryan's tenure as the defensive coordinator with the Baltimore Ravens.

The Colts persevered through an injury-plagued season just to make the playoffs, and Mr. Manning was solid, if unspectacular, against the Jets, completing 18 of 26 passes for 225 yards. But Jets cornerback Darrelle Revis effectively shut down wide receiver Reggie Wayne, holding him to one reception for one lonely yard, and the Colts averaged just 3.4 yards per rush against the Jets' stout defensive line. The Colts' lone touchdown came on a 57-yard pass from Mr. Manning to Pierre Garcon in the second quarter. 

Mr. Sanchez bounced back from a rough first half, when he labored with his accuracy and threw an interception on the Colts' goal-line with less than a minute left before halftime. He finished the game 18 of 31 for 189 yards. The Jets' bread-and-butter, as expected, was their ground game. LaDainian Tomlinson had 16 carries for 82 yards and scored a pair of touchdowns, both on one-yard plunges. Shonn Greene rushed for 70 yards on 19 carries.

"I'm just thankful for the men that I coach," Mr. Ryan said. "Thankful for those two backs we got that pounded it in there. Thankful for that coaching staff. Thankful for Nick Folk. And I'm thankful that I finally got to beat Peyton Manning."

 Write to  Scott Cacciola at scott.cacciola@wsj.com 