The term in psychology is polar madness: extended confinement in the extreme temperatures and unfamiliar light cycles near the poles, causing depression and irritability that in some cases spiral into lunacy and suicide. In David Vann's novel "Caribou Island" (Harper, 293 pages, $25.99), Irene, an Alaskan housewife in a town outside Anchorage, is experiencing some of the symptoms. She has developed an obstinate headache—"an animate pain, burrowed inside her"—that doctors can't explain and that scarily mirrors the headache that Irene's mother suffered before she killed herself.

After 30 years and two children, Irene's marriage with her husband, Gary, has reached a breaking point. In Mr. Vann's bluff prose, we're told that Gary "was a champion at regret. Everyday there was something, and that was perhaps what Irene liked least. Their entire lives second-guessed." In a game of relationship chicken, Gary is building a ramshackle cabin on an isolated island where he intends for them to spend the winter. His unstated aim—he is also a passive-aggressive champ—is to make conditions so unbearable that Irene will leave him.

But Irene feels too trapped in her marriage to end it. Her sense of suffocation is intensified by her grimy surroundings (Alaska's natural glories go undescribed by Mr. Vann—they're always blocked by fog) and by the conviction that her daughter, Rhoda, is repeating her mistake. Rhoda is engaged to a pudgy dentist named Jim whose secret ambition is to "have as many women as possible." At one point he leaves Rhoda asleep in bed while he cavorts with his mistress in the living room.

Jim, like Gary, is a small, craven man, and his betrayals seem both pathetic and distressingly recognizable. Mr. Vann's feat is to make all this grubbiness feed Irene's claustrophobia until it explodes in a tremendously disturbing conclusion. The ending of "Caribou Island" is amply foreshadowed, but the minor incidents that build to it are so believably presented that it still has the capacity to shock.

"There arose in our pathway a shrouded human figure, very far larger in its proportions than any dweller among men. And the hue of the skin of the figure was of the perfect whiteness of the snow." This is the cliffhanger ending of Edgar Allan Poe's neglected book "The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket"; the line is a starting point for the nerdy hero of Mat Johnson's antic novel "Pym" (Spiegel & Grau, 322 pages, $24), a professor of African-American literature named Chris Jaynes who is intent on understanding the "pathology and mindset" of white culture.

The quest takes a literal turn when Jaynes unearths a manuscript that indicates the true location of the Antarctic beasts that Poe's Pym glimpsed on his strange voyage ("snow honkies," as Jaynes calls them). The professor puts together an all-black crew led by his cousin Booker—"a civil-rights activist turned deep-sea diver"—and they manage to find the underground creatures, only to become enslaved by them.

The riotous story continues in similarly unruly fashion, somehow involving Little Debbie snack cakes and "painter of light" Thomas Kinkade's doppelgänger. It often seems as if Mr. Johnson is improvising as he goes along, but his satire of what Chris dubs "blackademics" is delightfully on the nose. Chris is a paranoid pedant, detecting racial conspiracies in everything he sees. But as he laments: "My thorough and exhaustive scholarship into the slave narratives of the African Diaspora in no way prepared me to actually become a . . . slave."

That doesn't stop him from subjecting his own slave narrative to scholastic meta-analysis, and the professorial quarreling set alongside the bizarre snowy bondage is very funny. Should they flee the ice creatures or, as Booker passionately advocates, try to effect change from within? "You can't run from Whiteness. You have to stand and engage it. . . . They like ice sculpture: we can learn the medium and then outshine them with our own artistry." Jaynes never learns much about the white pathology and mindset, but Mr. Johnson knows plenty about the character types he skewers.