SEOUL—North Korea's authoritarian regime took a more strident tone against South Korea in its annual New Year's message, always one of its longest statements and a rare routine that gives analysts something to gauge the direction of the reclusive country.



North Korea's annual New Year's message is always structured the same, though it differs in the details. A comparison of key passages:

 Introduction  

2010: Today our service personnel and people greet the New Year 2010 with the pride of being victors, who wrote a new history of great revolutionary upsurge.

2011: Today we are greeting the year 2011, a year filled with hope, a year of new prosperity, after glorifying the stirring first decade of the 21st century as a decade full of great victories.

 First mention of Kim Jong Il 

2010: 3rd paragraph: Kim Jong Il is leading the campaign for the building of a great, prosperous and powerful nation to brilliant victory as he steers the efforts to effect a great revolutionary upsurge on the strength of single-minded unity.

2011: 3rd paragraph: Our service personnel and people, who have written a heroic epic of victory after victory under the energetic leadership of General Kim Jong Il, are full of ambition for a brighter future and confidence in sure victory.

 One sentence description for upcoming year 

2010: New Year 2010 is a year of general offensive, when all-Party and nationwide efforts should be concentrated on improving the people's standard of living on the basis of the laudable victory and achievements of the great revolutionary upsurge.

2011: New Year 2011 is a year of general offensive, when a radical turn should be brought about in the building of a thriving nation by kindling more fiercely the flames of great upsurge in improving the people's standard of living.

 Quote by Kim Jong Il 

2010: Kim Jong Il said: "Our building of the country into an economic giant is aimed, to all intents and purposes, at radically improving the people's standard of living. When the people's living standards are decisively improved, hooray for socialism and singing of Arirang of prosperity can ring out louder across the country and the gate to a prosperous nation can be opened."

2011: Kim Jong Il said: "We should bring earlier the bright future of a thriving nation by making continuous innovations and advance, full of confidence in victory."

 Key statement on top industry for the year 

2010: Light industry and agriculture are the major fronts in the efforts for improving the people's standard of living.

2011: Light industry is the major front in the general offensive of this year.

 Appeal to beauty and art 

2010: The sector of art and literature should produce many masterpieces so ast to give the fullest play to the mental strength of the service personnel and people.

2011: Greater efforts should be made to spruce up the overall looks of the country as appropriate to a thriving nation.

 Goal to take over South Korea 

2010: Last year, we took active and bold measures and made sincere efforts in order to improve the aggravated inter-Korean relations and bring a radical phase in national reunification.

2011: Last year, our nation's movement for the country's reunification made dynamic progress even in the face of the vicious challenges of separatist forces both inside and outside.

 Olive branch to South Korea 

2010: The way for improving the north-south relations should be opened.

2011: Confrontation between north and south should be defused as early as possible.

 Warning to South Korea 

2010: They should refrain from committing acts that may aggravate the confrontation and tension, and take the road of respecting the inter-Korean declarations, promoting north-south dialogue and improving the relations between the two sides.

2011: The south Korean authorities should scrap the anti-reunification policy of confrontation with the fellow countrymen, which is subjected to unanimous denunciation and rejection at homa and abroad, and take the road of respecting and implementing the June 15 Joint Declaration and October 4 Declaration.

 Nuclear disarmament offer 

2010: It is the consistent stand of the DPRK to establish a lasting peace system on the Korean Peninsula and make it nuclear-free through dialogue and negotiations.

2011: The DPRK is consistent in its stand and will to achieve peace in Northeast Asia and denuclearization of the whole of the Korean peninsula.

On Monday, South Korean President Lee Myung-bak used his own New Year's message to reiterate that he won't tolerate North Korea's threats to South Korea, which increased last year with two military attacks that killed 50 South Koreans.

"We are living with the grave reality that our nation is still divided by Cold War rivalries. We cannot let North Korea covet even an inch of our territory," Mr. Lee said. He added, in language he has previously used, that any further North Korean provocations "will be met with stern, strong responses."

Since North Korea's Nov. 23 attack of a South Korea-controlled island, its first on South Korean land since the Korean War of the 1950s, the Seoul government has sent strong signals that it will strike back if provoked again. Over the past week, defense and intelligence officials have said in South Korean media they are detecting signs North Korea may strike again at one of the islands in the inter-Korean maritime border that Pyongyang disputes.

Mr. Lee and the South's military were initially criticized for responding too slowly to the attack on Yeonpyeong Island. In his speech Monday, he compared South Korea's reaction to the Nov. 23 attack to what happened in the U.S. after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attack, noting Washington used that event to re-evaluate its security and intelligence strategies.

"The shelling of Yeonpyeong Island, also served as an opportunity for us to reflect on our security readiness and overhaul our defense posture," Mr. Lee said. "As the safety and security of the Korean people is absolute, there cannot be any delay in establishing security measures."

Mr. Lee began the speech focused on security matters, then shifted to economic policies, reiterating the government's recently-announced goal for 5% GDP growth in 2011.

By contrast, North Korea's message, nearly twice as long as Mr. Lee's, began with economic goals and then shifted to the tension with South Korea. The message kept to a pattern it has long used, looking at the past year's accomplishments, delivering a one-sentence declaration for the new year and then underlining it with a quotation from dictator Kim Jong Il.

This year, Mr. Kim was quoted as saying, "We should bring earlier the bright future of a thriving nation by making continuous innovations and advance, full of confidence in victory."

The North Korean message indirectly referred to its Nov. 23 attack of Yeonpyeong Island. As it has previously, North Korean blamed South Korea's government and "outside forces," a reference to the South's allies the U.S. and Japan, for inciting the attack with "north-targeted war moves."

"The danger of war should be removed and peace safeguarded in the Korean peninsula," the message said. That was stronger language than it used in the 2010 New Year's message, when it said, "The way for improving north-south relations should be opened."

By contrast, the 2010 statement didn't use the word "war" in describing the tension with the South. Instead, it called the South's government "vicious" and urged Seoul to "refrain from committing acts that may aggravate the confrontation and tension."

Both statements outlined a number of steps the South's government should take to avoid trouble with Pyongyang. It urged Seoul to halt weapons purchases and end its military alliance with the U.S. "Collaboration with outside forces leads to war and national ruin," the 2011 message said. "The entire nation should never tolerate the criminal moves of pro-U.S. war hawks who stake their fate on foreign forces and drive the situation to the brink of war in collusion with them."

The message also reiterated the North Korean regime's oft-stated themes of independent development, which it puts into practice by limiting freedoms of its citizens, including their ability to travel and obtain information about the outside world while telling them there is no life better that the one they're leading. 

"There are no party and people in the world as great as ours, which have an ever-victorious history and a highly promising future," it said.

The New Year's statement is printed in every major North Korean newspaper and read on state-run broadcasts. Its state news agency also distributed the entire message Saturday, along with seven separate news stories about it on that day and several more on Sunday.

 Write to  Evan Ramstad at evan.ramstad@wsj.com 