  Nokia Corp.
NOK


-1.34
%




 unveiled two new smartphones Tuesday in an attempt to stem its drop in market share as the struggling handset giant transitions to using software from  Microsoft 
MSFT


0.32
%




Corp.

After losing ground to rival  Apple Inc.
AAPL


0.79
%




 and smartphones that run on  Google Inc.'s Android operating system, Nokia in February decided to overhaul its Symbian operating system—considered outdated and cumbersome next to its competitors—and make smartphones based exclusively on Microsoft software.

While Nokia hinted it would launch a Windows phone as early as this year, the company says its new smartphones won't begin shipping in volume until 2012. That leaves the company stuck supporting its old Symbian software in the meantime, as its rivals continue to race ahead with new models and flashier software.

On Tuesday, the company announced the Nokia E6, aimed at the business market, and the X7 model smartphone, for gamers and other entertainment lovers. The two smartphones will be the first to use the updated version of Symbian—nicknamed Anna—that the company promised when it announced the switch to Microsoft. 

The revamped Symbian software has new icons and features such as improved text input, a faster browser and refreshed Ovi Maps. Nokia said the software will also be available for its other Symbian smartphones such as the Nokia N8 and recently launched E7.

"With these new products and more Symbian devices and user enhancements coming in the near future, we are confident we can keep existing Nokia smartphone customers engaged," said  Jo Harlow, head of Nokia's Smart Devices business, in a statement.

The new devices are the latest sign that  Stephen Elop, Nokia's chief executive, is sticking to his pledge to continuing investing in Symbian, despite its move to Microsoft. 

Last month, the company launched the new Symbian-based Nokia Astound [in the U.S. through T-Mobile USA Inc., which is available through the carrier for $80 with a two-year contract. The E6 and the X7 will be available in the second quarter for €340 and €380 ($490 and $548), respectively.

The company said it still expects to sell around 150 million Symbian handsets in the mid- and lower-tier sectors.

Analysts reacted positively to the new devices and the improved software, adding that during this transition phase the company has to continue supporting Symbian's large installed base and help consumers switch over to its Windows smartphones, or risk becoming irrelevant in the fast-moving smartphone market. 

Earlier this month, Taiwan's  HTC Corp.
HTCXF


0.00
%




, nearly unheard of in the space a few years ago, surpassed Nokia in market capitalization, a bitter pill for the once dominant Finnish manufacturer to swallow.

Still analysts warn that Nokia will continue to lose market share this year particularly to Android, as consumers look for alternatives to Symbian and manufacturers use Android to launch lower-priced smartphones, a sweet spot for Nokia. 

Symbian was the largest smartphone platform globally until the fourth quarter, when it was passed by Android, shipping on one-third of smartphones globally to Symbian's 31%, according to research firm Canalys.

"Android will catch most of those users that are looking for another smartphone," says  Francisco Jeronimo, analyst with IDC. "The risk is whether or not Nokia and Microsoft will be able to get back those users who have moved over."

—Arild Moen contributed to this article.

 Write to  Christopher Lawton at christopher.lawton@wsj.com 