TAIPEI—Powerchip Technology Corp., Taiwan's biggest maker of computer memory chips has been slow to pay some of it recent bills, prompting at least one supplier to halt future shipments.

Rexchip Electronics Corp. said Monday it will suspend shipments of memory chips to Powerchip, which is one of Rexchip's major shareholders.

Powerchip spokesman Eric Tang said the company hasn't settled some of its recent Rexchip bills and "we need to preserve some financial flexibility for operations." 

He said Powerchip recently struck a new syndicated loan with banks, but declined to elaborate on how much it owes Rexchip or other details of the company's financial situation.

Rexchip spokeswoman Sandy Kuo said Powerchip's orders account for one-third of Rexchip's output. She declined to disclose the amount of payments that are overdue and when shipments will resume.

The move highlights Powerchip's financial problems and comes as Taiwan chip makers have been hit hard by falling chip prices and stiff competition from their South Korean counterparts, which have migrated to advanced process technology more quickly, enabling them to cut manufacturing costs more fiercely. Rexchip is 30.6%-owned by Powerchip, while Japan's  Elpida Memory Inc. holds a 51.7% stake. 

"Powerchip is Rexchip's controlling shareholder but Rexchip decided to suspend its shipment. That gives me a feeling that the financial situation of Powerchip is quite bad," Allan Lin, an analyst at Concord Securities, said. 

Analysts say Powerchip, which swung to a net loss in the fourth quarter on falling DRAM prices, will likely remain unprofitable this year. UBS analyst Nicolas Gaudois estimates that Powerchip will likely post a net loss of 16.19 billion New Taiwan dollars (US$556.1 million), compared with an estimated net profit of NT$10.03 billion in 2010. 

News of the halt in shipments sent shares in Powerchip limit down Monday. They closed 6.9% lower at NT$5.40, while Rexchip ended 4.5% lower at NT$19.00.

Analysts say Powerchip, which specializes in dynamic random access memory, or DRAM, chips widely used in computers, may have to sell down some of its non-core assets—such as idle factory sites in northern Taiwan or a 5.2% stake in Zentel Electronics Corp.—to meet its funding needs as chip prices are likely to continue to fall this quarter. 

Powerchip in July had planned to raise up to US$179 million by issuing global depositary receipts, but the plan was rejected by Taiwan's financial regulator citing the company's accumulated losses. The company said in late July it would revive the plan in September or October but it didn't do so. Mr. Tang didn't elaborate on the company's funding plans. 

 Write to  Aries Poon at aries.poon@dowjones.com 