TOKYO—Officials postponed a plan to ramp up efforts to cool nuclear fuel at the stricken Fukushima Daiichi nuclear complex amid concerns that the use of thousands of additional metric tons of water could result in dangerous leaks.

Also Thursday, Trade Minister Banri Kaieda, who oversees Japan's top nuclear regulator, said executives at plant operator  Tokyo Electric Power Co.
9501


0.14
%




 should take additional pay cuts on top of the 50% reductions unveiled earlier this week. At a briefing Thursday, Mr. Kaieda said the decision on the remuneration should take into account "public feelings" toward the company, and implied Chairman  Tsunehisa Katsumata and President  Masataka Shimizu should give up their entire pay to take responsibility for the widespread radiation contamination caused by the troubled plant. 

Mr. Shimizu said the current 50% cut is a "very tough measure" but added, "nothing is decided."

Meanwhile, the company, known as Tepco, said it would step up the use of unmanned equipment and robots to reduce radiation exposure to recovery workers. It projected a substantial reduction in the levels of radiation will take up to nine months.

Tepco officials said they would postpone their plan to cool reactors via the injection of massive amounts of water into the pressure vessel holding the fuel rods, ultimately spilling into and filling the outer containment vessel in each unit. The plan to fill the containment vessels is a departure from the current system of continuously injecting smaller amounts of water that haven't yet fully covered the rods. They didn't say when it might resume.

The trial run saw a more-than-anticipated drop in the temperature and the pressure inside the plant's No. 1 reactor, raising the possibility that air from outside could enter suspected gaps and spark an explosion when oxygen hits the hydrogen inside the reactor. Similar explosions in the first week of the crisis exacerbated damage and radiation at the plant. 

Officials also had lingering concerns about possible leakage in the containment vessel, said Hidehiko Nishiyama, spokesman of the government's Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency. No visible leakage has been found in the containment vessel so far, however. 

Tests are continuing on the No. 1 reactor to cool its pressure vessel, the thick steel cylinder housing nuclear fuel, with 7,800 tons of additional water. 

 Earlier efforts involving less water helped cool the fuel to about 130 degrees Celsius (266 degrees Fahrenheit)—well below the 1,000 degree-plus point at which they could become dangerous—but haven't completely stopped the reactor. 

Tepco believes the fuel, which needs to be submerged in water to avoid overheating, is partially exposed. It now estimates that 55% could be damaged and is releasing radioactive materials into the water, although the damage figure is lower than the previous estimate of 70% damage.

To assist in its broader cooling operations, Tepco said it will next month introduce several unmanned, long-armed pumper trucks normally used for pouring concrete into high-rise buildings. These will inject water into the spent-fuel pools of Reactors Nos. 2 and 3 using an arm extending up to 70 meters (77 yards).

Currently such trucks are manually operated, exposing workers to high levels of radiation from the damaged reactors. By making the trucks operable remotely, "the amount of radiation exposure will be reduced to one-tenth of the current levels," said  Junichi Matsumoto, a Tepco official in charge of nuclear-power development.

Also next month, new robots will join two U.S. robots in a mission to measure radiation levels within and around reactor buildings. The new robots are the unmanned vehicle Quince, developed by the Chiba Institute of Technology and Tohoku University, and the Talon robot made by  QinetiQ Group
QNTQY


1.88
%




 PLC, which is deployed in Afghanistan. 