WASHINGTON -- A Food and Drug Administration employee who is charged with insider trading refinanced his Gaithersburg, Md., home 10 times in six years and took out $350,000 in credit lines against the property, records show.

Property records filed online in Maryland for former FDA chemist  Cheng Yi Liang detail a series of mortgage refinances with eight different banks between 1998 and 2004.

The Securities and Exchange Commission, in a civil complaint filed in late March, said Mr. Liang, 57, used an FDA database to trade in advance of at least 27 FDA announcements involving 19 publicly traded companies. He made as much as $3.6 million between 2006 and 2011, according to the SEC. 

Mr. Liang used a home-equity line of credit to "funnel money into nominee brokerage accounts to engage in the insider trading scheme," according to related allegations filed the same day by the Department of Justice. Mr. Liang and his 25-year-old son, Andrew, are facing criminal charges of securities fraud, wire fraud and related conspiracy charges in U.S. District Court in Greenbelt, Md.

Mr. Liang, his son and their attorneys have declined requests to comment on the charges. The son isn't charged in the SEC's civil complaint.

The refinancing activity adds a new dimension to what is known about a suspect in one of Washington's most prominent insider-trading cases. Mr. Liang works in the division in charge of approving new drugs, the FDA's most visible and sensitive role.

The financing preceded the alleged insider trading, which the SEC said began in 2006. The Department of Justice didn't give details on the home equity line of credit allegedly used by Mr. Liang, and it isn't clear if that credit line is among those disclosed in the Maryland property records. 

Mortgage experts called the activity odd but said there was no obvious explanation for it. The SEC, Department of Justice, the U.S. Attorney in Maryland and Mr. Liang's lawyer declined to comment on the refinancing.

Property owners usually refinance to take advantage of a lower interest rate, lower their monthly payment or to free up cash. Mortgage rates declined during this time, creating refinancing booms, but Mr. Liang's refinancing habits exceed what experts say is routine.

Mr. Liang purchased his home in 1996 for $235,000 and the 2011 tax assessed value is $542,000. According to records in Maryland's online property database, Mr. Liang paid back almost all the loans and still lives in the house.

The loan documents, including deeds of trust and letters of loan satisfaction, show that two $200,000 loans refinanced the same $166,000 loan. The records show that one loan was paid back twice, for unexplained reasons, while one loan remains outstanding.

Four of Mr. Liang's 10 refinances were within 120 days of each other and three others were fewer than 200 days apart. Best industry practices discourage refinancing within 120 days, Mr. Prieston said. Refinancing is a practice where one mortgage loan is paid off by obtaining a new loan under different terms. In the cases of rapid refinancing, the likelihood of misrepresentation in applications presented to lenders is so high, he said, his company won't insure a loan that's been refinanced 120 days prior. 

When refinancing takes place within such a short time, often the previous loan hasn't even been recorded yet. That situation is a potential red flag of mortgage irregularities, according to  Rachel Dollar, a lawyer who specializes in mortgage fraud who examined Mr. Liang's property records at the request of Dow Jones Newswires.

One loan, made April 9, 2003, wasn't recorded until July 31, she noted. By that time, Mr. Liang had already refinanced again, on July 24, records show. The deed of trust shows that instead of paying off the April 9th loan, the second refinance went to pay a March loan. The same was true for two loans in late 2002, and in the same way the second refinance did not go to pay the loan immediately prior, creating two outstanding $200,000 mortgages on the home.

"In recording gaps like that, often times a title company will record a loan and not know about the former mortgage," Ms. Dollar said, because it won't show on the title report yet.

The FBI, the government's financial crimes enforcement network and Freddie Mac have warned lenders about the practice of signing multiple loans on the same property within a short period of time. 

The records in Maryland's online property database show that Mr. Liang also took out three lines of credit, amounting to $350,000 in total, between 2002 and 2005. The first, for $100,000, was closed within 7 months. The second was opened in 2004 and closed in 2007. The third line of credit, opened in 2005 for $150,000, appears to still be open.

The interest rates on the loans Mr. Liang obtained are not present in the property records. Federal Housing Finance Agency data for the months during Mr. Liang's activity generally show declining interest rates over this period. According to the deeds of trust, each refinance, with one exception in 2002, yielded small amounts of cash for Mr. Liang.

A federal judge canceled a preliminary hearing for the Mr. Liang last month amid indications that the parties were discussing a resolution of the case. Cheng Yi Liang's lawyer asked the judge to postpone the hearing "in order to give both the government and defense counsel time to discuss resolution of this matter."

—Brent Kendall contributed to this article.