Tokyo stocks suffered their biggest fall in more than two years Monday after Japan's most powerful earthquake on record struck Friday, leaving a trail of destruction and forcing authorities to cope with a nuclear emergency, estimates of thousands of deaths and billions of dollars in insurance losses.

But several metal and building-materials stocks in Asia edged higher on hopes for reconstruction opportunities in Japan, while coal shares climbed and uranium miners plunged on worries about prospects for nuclear-power projects.

Investors were also looking at the ripple effects of the weekend euro-zone debt accord and the continuing crisis in Libya, particularly the Arab League's support for a no-fly zone over the country.

"We possibly cannot ignore the impact that this quake will have in terms of geographical span and scale—as well as the psychological impact," said Credit Suisse strategist Shun Maruyama in Tokyo.

The Nikkei Stock Average plunged 6.2% to 9,620.49 in Tokyo for its worst one-day percentage loss since December 2008.

The yen, which rose to a four-month high against the U.S. dollar in early trade on hopes for fund repatriation into Japan, fell back sharply amid heavy selling in the Tokyo stock market as well as on the Bank of Japan's offer to inject a record 15 trillion yen ($183 billion) into the money markets, aimed at securing market confidence.

Shares of Tokyo Electric Power Co. led the declines, plummeting 23.6% after an explosion hit the No. 3 nuclear reactor building Monday at the company's Daiichi plant in Fukushima Prefecture, after a similar explosion at the No. 1 reactor over the weekend.

"It was certainly an emotion-charged day on Asian equities, with breaking news circulating seemingly every few minutes, ranging from record liquidity injections from the BOJ to further catastrophes at other nuclear reactors," Chris Weston, an institutional dealer at IG Markets in Melbourne, wrote in a note.

"Trader sentiment—in light of the disaster in Japan and the ongoing uncertainty in Libya—may well remain one of the most significant factors in the near-term," he added.

Insurers also plunged on a selloff in anticipation of claims from the quake, with Dai-ichi Life Insurance Co. falling 18.9% and Tokio Marine Holdings Inc. sliding 12.4%. Several exporters, banks and commodity-linked shares fell 5% or more.

Still, some analysts were tipping Japan stock declines to slow.

Nicholas Smith, director for equity research at MF Global FXA Securities, said while the quake was horrific, "in total, the area affected by the quake and tsunami does not comprise a big enough chunk of Japan's gross domestic product to warrant an over reaction (in stock selling) based on that criteria alone." 

Elsewhere in the region, Australia's S&P/ASX 200 dropped 0.4% and Taiwan's Taiex fell 0.6%. But some other markets edged higher. China's Shanghai Composite added 0.1%, Hong Kong's Hang Seng index gained 0.4% and South Korea's Kospi rose 0.8%, while India's Sensex rose 1.5%.

Dow Jones Industrial Average futures were down 90 points in screen trade.

Trading in Chinese shares was choppy as market participants weighed the implications of the Japanese disaster, while lower-than-expected new yuan loan data for February indicated that Beijing's control on credit is tighter than anticipated. 

The region's steelmakers and thermal coal miners outperformed on hopes that thermal coal would benefit from a shutdown of parts of Japan's nuclear-power network. 

Among steelmakers, Posco soared 8.3% in Seoul and Angang Steel Co. rose 4.8% in Hong Kong and 2.6% in Shenzhen; among other construction-related stocks, Anhui Conch Cement Co. rose 2.2% and Asia Cement Corp. added 2.1% in Taipei. Among coal miners, China Coal Energy Co. rose 1.6% in Hong Kong, while Coal India rose 1.2% in Mumbai.

Uranium companies' shares fell as the problems in Japan stoked concerns about nuclear power's longer-term viability around the world. Shares of uranium miners led the losses in Sydney, with Paladin Energy Ltd. falling 16.5% and Energy Resources of Australia Ltd. dropping 12.2%. 

Refining shares broadly outperformed in the region, receiving a boost from crude oil's recent fall and the closure of a large refining capacity in Japan. S-Oil Corp. soared 12.9% in Seoul, China Petroleum & Chemical Corp. added 2.2% in Hong Kong and Reliance Industries Ltd. climbed 2.6% in Mumbai.

In other regional markets,New Zealand's NZX 50 dropped 0.6% and Philippine shares gave up 0.1%. In afternoon trade, Singapore's Straits Times index shed 0.4%, Indonesian shares rose 0.8% and Thailand's SET added 1.6%.

In foreign-exchange markets, the U.S. dollar rose to 81.83 yen, after touching a four-month low of 80.60 yen earlier in Asia. That compared with 81.83 yen in late New York trade Friday. The dollar/yen pair was helped off lows by news that the Bank of Japan injected 18 trillion yen of funds into the market—15 trillion yen in same-day funds through three separate operations plus 3 trillion yen in repurchase agreements.

The euro was at $1.3920, from $1.3901 in late New York, and at 113.89 yen, from 113.82 yen. Gains for the euro came after European leaders agreed at a summit in Brussels to extend the effective lending capacity of the European Financial Stability Facility, the special vehicle set up last May to help euro-zone countries abandoned by the markets.

However, the leaders stopped short of European Central Bank demands that they let it buy government debt in the secondary markets. The ECB had hoped the EFSF would take off its hands some of the 77.5 billion euros (about $108 billion) in government bonds it has bought over the last 10 months to stop the debt markets of Greece, Ireland and Portugal from seizing up.

Lead Japanese government bond futures surged 0.72 to 139.92 points as stocks in Tokyo fell, while the 10-year cash JGB yield was down 0.045 percentage point at 1.200%.

Oil and commodity markets were being driven largely by Japanese headlines.

April Nymex crude-oil futures were down $2.34 at $98.82 per barrel on Globex. Spot gold rose on a flight-to-safety bid and was at $1,424.20 per troy ounce, up $4.60 from its New York settlement Friday.

 Correction 



Japanese bond prices rose Monday. An earlier version of this story incorrectly attributed the yen's drop in part to selling in the bond market.



 Write to  Rosalind Mathieson at rosalind.mathieson@dowjones.com, Colin Ng at colin.ng@dowjones.com and V. Phani Kumar at phani.kumar@dowjones.com 