I can afford to miss an Impressionist sale at Christie's or a wine auction at Sotheby's. Another will be along shortly. But when I heard they were auctioning dinosaur dung at  I.M. Chait I had to rush right over. And with questions, no less. 

I suppose the first ones would be: Who buys dino dung? What's the market? And what about provenance? Provenance is everything in the auction business. I'm not talking about who was the last person to own it before it transferred to your hands. I mean what kind of creature manufactured it. I'd expect that offal from a tyrannosaurus rex would be more valuable than from some anonymous three-foot dinosaur from the Pleistocene.

"Nobody knows where they're from," admitted  Jake Chait, the company's natural history director as he opened the case to remove the sandy brown specimen. "There's no way to tell."

I could see his point. The artifact looked like, well, dung, and not necessarily dinosaur dung. From everything I could tell it might just as well have been produced by a German shepherd. But what about DNA testing? Can't you test everything for DNA these days? Couldn't you bore a hole into its core, extract a tiny sample, and find brontosaurus molecules in there? 

"It could be from a long-ago creature they may have never found a complete example of," explained  Josh Chait, Jake's older brother and the auction house's director of operations. There's also a third brother, Joey. I came up in the elevator at the Fuller Building, where the Los Angeles—based company is renting space for this Thursday's sale, with Joey. But that's the last I saw of him. I don't know what his role in the company is. 

The operation is owned by their dad and mom, Izzy and  Mary Ann, who specialize in Chinese ceramics. That helped explain why, for example, there might be a giant bat skeleton or a meteorite on the sales floor next to, say, a  Ming Dynasty porcelain bowl. 

The price was right, however. Of the dung. I can't speak to the Chinese ceramics. The piece Josh removed from the case for me to examine had an auction estimate of $400 to $600 and is described in Chait's handsome catalog as "Coprolite—A Fine Complete Specimen."

It was surprisingly heavy, like a rock. And why so affordable? "It's more common than, say, a fossil," Jake explained. "A lot of people who find it don't know what it is."

I could see why. But were I to bid what guarantee did I have it was from the Jurassic and not from November. (Who wouldn't want such a novelty—you could put it on your carpet at a cocktail party and when somebody screamed announce, "I know what you're thinking, but it's 65 million years old.") 

"We have six or seven paleontologists," Jake said. "We vet everything."

"We offer a full money-back guarantee," Josh added.

I don't want anyone to think dinosaur dropping and Ming vases were the only thing on the menu. There were far more amazing objects. For instance, the massive triceratops skull is estimated at a $125,000 to $175,000 selling price, and the tyrannosaurus rex estimated at $250,000 to $300,000. 

"We've never had one before," Jake said of the triceratops. "And this is the largest tyrannosaurus rex skull we've ever had."

The Chaits said that most of their specimens come from private collectors. They were reluctant to name their customers but described typical dinosaur buyers as "well off older males," and said they count 20 to 30 members of the Forbes 400 among their clients.

Part of a giant fossil's allure, Josh explained, is that as opposed to, say, a Matisse that, "unless you know what it is you might walk right by it, a dinosaur skull is an immediate conversation starter."

"And it's art in its own way," Jake added. 

"It's definitely sculptural," Josh observed.

The brothers said that celebrities are especially avid dinosaur collectors—back then  T Rex or stegosaurus consumed the sort of oxygen Lady Gaga or  George Clooney does when he or she walks into a room these days. While they declined to divulge their customers it's well know that actors  Nicolas Cage and  Leonardo DiCaprio got into a bidding war for a 67-million-year-old tyrannosaurus skull, much like the one on sale this Thursday, at a Los Angeles I.M. Chait auction in 2007. Mr. Cage won, walking off with the skull (though he undoubtedly had it shipped) for $276,000.

Having visited the American Museum of Natural History laboratory where specimens such as these are liberated from the rock where they've been loitering all these millennia, and having witnessed the time and effort it takes, I was slightly suspicious that the Chaits examples seemed so complete. For example, the T Rex had better teeth than the average West-Sider.

"Sixty or seventy percent are real," Jake said. 

"We insist the pieces be anatomically and scientifically correct," Josh added. 

I wondered whether the Chaits had a duckbill dinosaur, my favorite growing up, with the possible exception of the brontosaurus. It seemed a gentle giant. In fact, They had one in the next room, next to the meteorites, with a relatively modest auction estimate of $42,000 to $48,000. "We had one last year—15 feet to 20 feet—his name was Cory," Jake said. "Unfortunately, he didn't sell. The market was still in a slump and a lot of our business are big investment brokers."

It was humbling to think that these proud creatures who once ruled the Earth are now prey to the economy, just like the rest of us. "Our business fluctuates with the Dow Jones," Josh said.

— ralph.gardner@wsj.com 