  TD Ameritrade Holding Corp.
AMTD


0.37
%




 said the employment of Chief Operating Officer  David Kelley was terminated on Thursday, according to a regulatory filing. No reason was given.

In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing, the Omaha, Neb., online brokerage said the move is effective as of Jan 28. 

Mr. Kelley joined TD Ameritrade in June 2006 as senior vice president of the company's retail investor group and was appointed operating chief in October 2008, according to the online brokerage's website. Previously, he spent 19 years at Merrill Lynch. 

A TD Ameritrade spokeswoman confirmed Mr. Kelley had left the company. She said the company will be conducting a search for his replacement that includes both internal and external candidates. "We have a deep bench of senior leadership and will be relying on them in the interim," she said. 

A call to Mr. Kelley through his assistant wasn't returned. 

—Brett Philbin

  SunTrust Banks Inc.
STI


0.42
%




 swung to a fourth-quarter profit on sharply lower loan-loss provisions and increased revenue. 

The Atlanta bank reported a profit of $185 million, or 23 cents a share, compared with a year-earlier loss of $248.1 million, or 64 cents a share. It was the third straight quarterly profit. Revenue rose 19% to $2.33 billion. Excluding investment gains and losses, revenue rose 21%. Analysts expected a profit of seven cents a share on revenue of $2.19 billion. 

Loan-loss provisions fell to $512 million from $974 million a year earlier and from $615 million the previous quarter. Net charge-offs, or loans the bank doesn't expect to collect, fell to 2.14% of average loans from 2.83% a year earlier and 2.42% the previous quarter. Nonperforming loans, or those in danger of default, fell to 3.54% of total loans from 4.75% and 3.8%, respectively. 

—Tess Stynes

  Richard Fuld and other former  Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc. directors have asked a judge to again toss out a lawsuit from former employees seeking to hold directors accountable for investing workers' retirement savings in the investment bank's stock. 

In papers filed Thursday with the U.S. District Court in Manhattan, Mr. Fuld, Lehman's former chief executive, and the other directors said the board's appointment of a committee to oversee the employee-retirement programs doesn't make them responsible for that committee's choices or require the directors to share insider knowledge of the company's finances. 

The suit relies on revelations about accounting irregularities, including the bank's use of so-called Repo 105 transactions to shift assets off its balance sheets at financial reporting periods, and Lehman's exposure to subprime mortgages that were highlighted in a court-appointed examiner's report issued after a similar lawsuit was dismissed last year. 

The argument that directors had no duty to inform senior executives on the benefits committee "is merely an attempt by the director-defendants to shift responsibility to others for the huge losses suffered by plan participants," said Mark C. Rifkin, an attorney for the workers.

—Eric Morath

BB&T Corp.'s fourth-quarter profit leapt 12%, topping analysts' estimates, as the bank set aside less to cover credit losses. 

BB&T's profit rose to $208 million, or 30 cents a share, from $185 million, or 27 cents a share, a year earlier. Analysts polled by Thomson Reuters expected a per-share profit of 26 cents.

The Winston-Salem, N.C., bank's credit-loss provision fell to $643 million from $725 million a year earlier and $770 million in the prior quarter. Net interest income rose 0.7%. Noninterest income fell 0.6%. Net charge-offs rose to 2.02% of average loans from 1.83% a year earlier but fell from 3.31% the prior quarter. Nonperforming loans fell to 2.49%, from 2.51% and 2.64%, respectively. 

—Matt Jarzemsky