Nowhere can you take the measure of a man more accurately than at sea. That's not something Richard Henry Dana Jr. knew when he set off from Boston as an ordinary seaman in 1835 on the brig Pilgrim, bound for California via Cape Horn. He wasn't yet a man himself, just a 20-year-old undergraduate with a vision problem that medics of the era thought might be cured by a good, long turn on the ocean blue.

If he left home unfinished, he was a man in full by the time he came back, with sight restored and a keen eye for the merits of men. He'd been hardened and made wise by his experiences in the dim, grim, unpainted, lamplit forecastle. That's where the working slugs who earned their paltry pay in the age of sail gathered to take their rations of salt beef and biscuit in tin pots and to sleep through the roar of breaking seas overhead, or the soft chuckle of wavelets lapping at the bow on blissful nights when the wind was fair and the moon shone silver.

Almost two centuries later, we are all made richer by Dana's classic memoir, "Two Years Before the Mast," which is among the finest books ever written about the immensely popular subject of adventure at sea, and is as relevant and readable today as it was then.

Not that it's a quick or easy read. Dana, son of a poet, made the choice that all who write about the seagoing life must make—whether to do so in the rich, exotic language of the ship and risk losing landlubbers along the way, or to dumb it down so everyone could breeze through. He took the hard way, keeping it real, as we say today. So, will he lose you?

Not likely. "Two Years Before the Mast" was recommended to me by my brother, who lives just off Broadway in Manhattan and hasn't been on a boat for more than a two-hour joyride since he came across the Atlantic on the Queen Mary in 1949, age 7. He has no interest in or knowledge of ships and the sea, wouldn't know a bowline from a blow-hole. Yet he was as spellbound as his sea-dog brother by Dana's daring as the young man free-climbs 80 feet up to the topmasts to get control of a flailing, tattered topsail in a raging sleet storm in the most treacherous waters on Earth—off the tip of South America, 600 miles from Antarctica—up there gloveless on a frozen footrope, hanging by his eyelashes.

But "Two Years Before the Mast" is not just an adventure. Dana takes us to sea, four times across the equator and twice 'round Cape Horn in weather fair and foul, yet more than half the book chronicles meticulously the year-plus he and his mates spent coasting along the California shore, gathering cowhides and horns from the handful of lost souls there before the Gold Rush brought in American hordes. It was a remarkable, forlorn, empty place, California in the 1830s—Monterey, San Diego, San Francisco, San Pedro, Santa Barbara, all tiny enclaves of a few adobe huts manned by idlers who collected hides for a few ships to fill their holds and take back East for the manufacture of shoes, coats and the like.

There were no docks, wharves or other improvements. Seamen landed their pulling boats through the surf, sometimes capsizing comically, then strode ashore to lug hides down from the hills on their heads. They piled them high in the boats and rowed back out to the ship, often two or three miles away, over and over again, then moved on to the next inhospitable anchorage.

Dana spent months doing that and a few months ashore, working with a gang of Hawaiians (Kanakas, he calls them) and others curing and drying hides. He was most impressed by the Hawaiians, great seamen in their own right, who were given nicknames by the Americans. "Of the four who worked at our [curing] house, one was named Mr. Bingham, after the missionary at Oahu, another Hope, after a vessel that he had been in, a third, Tom Davis, the name of his first captain, and a fourth, Pelican, from his fancied resemblance to that bird.

"But by whatever names they might be called they were the most interesting, intelligent and kindhearted people that I ever fell in with," writes Dana, who studied as a child under the poet Ralph Waldo Emerson and went on to a career after Harvard as a lawyer and politician. That's high praise from such a lofty perch.

Indeed, if anything sets apart this lyrical memoir, it's the unerring way Dana measures and assesses his mates, from Chips and Sails, the ship's carpenter and sailmaker, both wise old salts, to poor George Ballmer, the young English sailor who is lost overboard off the Horn, falling from the maintop, never to be seen again. Till that moment he was the life of the crew, says Dana.

"Death is at all times solemn, but never so much as at sea . . . at sea the man is near you, at your side, you hear his voice, and in an instant he is gone, and nothing but a vacancy shows his loss."

Those who have been to sea on boats and small ships know that the moment the horizon drowns the shore behind, they have nothing but their wits and fellow sailors to count on. The sea cares not for any man; rogue waves and sudden lurches, lines that part, railings that give way, handholds that fail, heavy things that break loose, all these and a hundred more perils lurk.

Call it sailor's luck when at some dire moment a hand shoots out, rough as oak, attached to a muscled seaman's arm, and snatches you back from that brink. Then everyone has a laugh, for, says Dana, with the authority of one who has been there and done that:

"Whatever your feelings may be, you must make a joke of everything at sea; and if you were to fall from aloft and be caught in the belly of a sail, and thus be saved from instant death, it would not do to look at all disturbed, or to treat it as a serious matter."

—Mr. Phillips, a keen sailor, was outdoors editor of the Washington Post for 30 years.