LONDON—New data showed continued signs of a weak U.K. recovery Thursday, offering more glum news for a country whose closely watched exercise in aggressive deficit-cutting still has the vast majority of its belt-tightening measures to come.

Growth in the U.K.'s dominant services sector slowed further than expected in February after January's rebound from a snowy December. The services purchasing-managers index, which polls executives on business conditions and outlook, fell to a lower-than-expected 52.6 in February from 54.5 in January, research group Markit and the Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply said. 

Last year, Treasury Chief George Osborne announced £113 billion ($171 billion) of cuts and tax increases over five years, positioning the U.K. as the test case among major economies in the argument for choosing austerity over stimulus to repair a debt-laden economy. So far, only around £9 billion of that tightening has occurred. Much of it—£41 billion of tax increases and spending cuts—begins at the start of the fiscal year on April 5. 

"You'll see a substantial economic headwind that won't fully hit till the second half of this year," said  Vicky Redwood, an economist at Capital Economics. 

Mr. Osborne has argued that the cuts have already shored up investor confidence in Britain's public finances. Since March 2010, the yield from 10-year U.K. government debt that investors demand over U.S. Treasurys has almost halved. 

Gilts have outperformed almost all other major government bonds, having been hit harder during the financial crisis. Recent public finance numbers have been among the most positive pieces of data for the U.K. That also brings borrowing costs down for consumers and businesses, he said. 

Thursday's numbers follow a week of good data. The construction sector grew at its fastest rate in eight months in February. The manufacturing purchasing-managers index is at its highest level since the survey was first carried out 19 years ago. Lackluster services and healthy manufacturing underscore how the U.K. is going through a two-speed recovery, a reversal of the past 20 years of service-driven growth.

But manufacturing accounts for just 11% of U.K. ouput, while the services sector is responsible for around three-quarters. It was a 0.7% fall in services activity that did so much damage amid the surprising 0.6% decline in fourth-quarter gross domestic product.

It is also an early hint of the fiscal squeeze. As they look ahead, employers in a services sector that is powered by domestic demand cut jobs for the fifth month in a row. In manufacturing, which has been boosted by external demand for goods, employment grew at record levels this week.

Elsewhere, retailers have cited a 2.5-percentage-point increase in sales taxes on Jan. 4 as a factor in declining sales. The sort of big-ticket items that consumers see as affected by such a tax increase dropped off after Jan. 4.

Retail analysts say U.K. consumer confidence has been slower to firm than the U.S. because Britons are worrying about the effects of the cuts on their jobs. None of this is good news in a country where consumer spending accounts for some 65% of GDP.

Recently, the government and local authorities have been detailing the cuts. Late Wednesday, some local councils in northwest England voted to cut their budgets by a fifth. Liverpool Council said it will cut £91 million this year, potentially closing libraries, swimming pools and other services.

On Tuesday, the Royal Air Force announced the first of 5,000 job cuts and the closure of two aircraft squadrons. One squadron is at Lossiemouth in the Scottish Highlands, where the base employs around 10% of the local population, with a further 4% in civilian jobs directly related to it.

"Winter bookings have already been horrific, and now these cuts," said Gavin Ellis, who owns the local Knockomie Hotel, around half of whose off-season guests are related to the RAF. 

Still,  Neville Hill, an economist at Credit Suisse, argues that while cuts have yet to happen, their effects have partly been priced in because consumers and employers have already based decisions around them. 

"Typically, what knocks economies off course are unexpected shocks and well-telegraphed fiscal policy is not a shock," he said. 

One such shock economists and politicians fret over is the potential for current Middle Eastern turmoil to send the oil price even higher. 

Chris Huhne, the U.K.'s secretary for energy and climate change, warned Thursday the country is facing the threat of a 1970s-style oil-price shock that could cost the country £45 billion over two years. The calculation was based on the oil price doubling to $160 a barrel this year from $80 last year.

—Ainsley Thomson  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Alistair MacDonald at alistair.macdonald@wsj.com 