ZURICH— UBS AG CEO  Oswald Grübel said he won't accept a bonus for 2010, when the Swiss bank's share price receded 4.4% despite it swinging back to a full-year net profit and halting massive outflows of wealthy client funds. 

In waiving his bonus, Mr. Grübel stands out among other bank CEOs who are signaling they will resume taking multimillion dollar bonuses after two years of foregoing them or donating them to charity. 

Mr. Grübel's waiving of his bonus is also an olive branch to shareholders ahead of what promises to be another tense round of annual meetings this spring because of continuing public anger at banker pay in Switzerland. 

  Credit Suisse Group boss  Brady Dougan, who last year was awarded 70 million Swiss francs ($75.3 million) worth of stock under a bonus plan for 2004 on top of his 19.2 million francs in cash and stock pay for 2009, is one of the sector's best-paid bankers. Credit Suisse, which discloses its bonus pay for 2010 in March, in conjunction with its annual report, paid Mr. Dougan less base salary—1.25 million francs—in 2009 than UBS paid Mr. Grübel. 

"I'm forgoing a bonus because I was not in a position to add value for our shareholders—our share price ended 2010 at nearly the same level as it began the year," Mr. Grübel said in a telephone interview Friday. 

UBS declined to detail what bonus Mr. Grübel would have been awarded for 2010 had he agreed to take one. When Mr. Grübel, who ran Credit Suisse until 2007, joined UBS two years ago, he was awarded options now worth nearly 31.8 million francs to offset his relinquishing Credit Suisse options from the same long-term program which produced such a windfall for Dougan from 2004. 

UBS's rivals show little sign of following suit. In the U.K.,  Stephen Hester, CEO of 83% state-owned Royal Bank of Scotland Group PLC, is expected to receive about 2.5 million pounds ($4.1 million), not including payouts from share-incentive plans that could more than double that, according to a person close to the matter.  Barclays
BCS


0.84
%




 PLC CEO  Robert Diamond Jr. could receive as much as 3.4 million pounds, in addition to payouts from long-term share-related deals, according to details of his contract in public filings. 

Both Mr. Hester and Mr. Diamond waived bonuses in 2009 in an effort to deflect public criticism. In the U.S., embattled Bank of America Corp. CEO  Brian Moynihan's total 2010 pay will rise 67% despite the bank's $2.2 billion loss for the year. 

Compensation is a hot-button issue in Switzerland, even after UBS recovered from a government-led bailout in 2008. Under Mr. Grübel, UBS swung to a net profit of 7.16 billion Swiss francs last year from a net loss of 2.74 billion francs in 2009. 

Now, analysts and investors are skeptical about UBS's ability to meet ambitious targets that include 15 billion francs in annual pretax profit laid out late in 2009 by Mr. Grübel, under pressure from shareholders for clear goals. Mr. Grübel said UBS won't revisit the targets until new rules on bank capital and risk are clarified. 

"We will talk about the targets when we believe the environment surrounding markets and regulatory requirements from a capital and risk perspective are clearer," he said. 

Mr. Grübel said he expects this to be the case in 12 to 18 months. 

Several banks such as Credit Suisse and  HSBC Holdings PLC have trimmed return on equity targets in recent weeks because investment banking profits are expected to be curtailed by far tougher capital rules. RoE is a measure of how much profit a company generates from shareholder funds. 

UBS is still likely to face shareholder ire over its total bonus pool of 4.32 billion francs for 2010. The bank's annual report in March will be scrutinized for how much investment-banking head  Carsten Kengeter—currently UBS's highest paid banker at 13.1 million francs in stock and cash for 2009—earned for 2010. 

The 67-year-old Mr. Grübel signaled little indication he is preparing to step down anytime soon, saying he is "still having fun" in his job. However, he acknowledged that UBS's board is discussing succession planning, and said the bank has suitable candidates in-house to succeed him. 

Turning to charges faced by Credit Suisse banker  Christos Bagios in the U.S., Gruebel said UBS—where Mr. Bagios worked before joining Credit Suisse—isn't involved in the current proceedings. Mr. Bagios is a senior relationship manager for the East Coast of the U.S., but the complaint concerns his actions while working at UBS. 

UBS admitted to defrauding the U.S. through tax evasion schemes and paid a $780 million fine as part of a 2009 government settlement, later handing over data on more than 4,000 clients as part of a U.S.-Swiss deal.

—Sara Schaefer Muñoz contributed to this article.

 Write to  Katharina Bart at katharina.bart@dowjones.com 