KIEV, Ukraine—A member of Col. Moammar Gadhafi's Ukrainian nursing staff provided a rare glimpse into the eccentric leader's inner circle—saying he travels with a retinue of four handpicked Ukrainian nurses and doesn't sleep in the large tent he famously hauls on trips.

Oksana, a 24-year-old nurse who worked for Col. Gadhafi for more than two years, said she was selected after being personally interviewed by Col. Gadhafi when he visited Kiev in 2008. She had registered with a recruiting agency and was called for what she called a "casting."

Oksana said Col. Gadhafi chooses medical staff to work for him and his family. Recalling her face-to-face job interview, she said: "He's a real psychologist."

The comments came during a 20-minute conversation between the nurse and a journalist working for the Ukrainian channel TVi, which was filmed with a hidden camera. The footage, set to be screened Saturday, was viewed Friday by The Wall Street Journal.

Oksana didn't give her last name during the interview, which was filmed on the doorstep of her modest family home in a small village in central Ukraine. 

Oksana said she left her job at the start of this year after becoming pregnant, but stayed in Libya with a partner. She said she decided to fly home this week because of the uncertain situation in Libya but intends to return.

Oksana said the Bedouin tent Col. Gadhafi pitches when he travels aboard is used for work. "He doesn't live or sleep in the tent," she said. "And we don't sleep there with him."

The Libyan strongman's nursing entourage came into view in November when a leaked U.S. diplomatic cable described how he "relies heavily" on one of the nurses, Galyna Kolotnytska, and "cannot travel without" her. The cable, dated September 2009, said Ms. Kolotnytska had been described to diplomats as a "voluptuous blonde" and suggested that she and Col. Gadhafi "have a romantic relationship."

Ms. Kolotnytska returned home from Libya on Sunday and has declined to talk with reporters who have been camped on her doorstep in a small town near Kiev. A journalist who was on her evacuation flight said she referred to her former boss as "Papa."

Of a total of five Ukrainian nurses who work for Col. Gadhafi, two currently remain after the others were evacuated from Tripoli, Oksana said.

Col. Gadhafi and his family treated the nurses well, with some of them working for the Libyan leader for eight years, Oksana said.

More than 3,000 Ukrainian medics work in Libya, according to the embassy in Ukraine, where they are better paid than in Ukraine's cash-strapped, post-Soviet health-care system. Around 400 Ukrainians have been evacuated from the country in the past week.

 Write to  James Marson at j.r.marson@gmail.com 