A majority of Harrisburg City Council members are refusing to meet privately with consultants hired by Pennsylvania officials to draft a recovery plan for the distressed capital city, saying the introductory sessions should be open to the public. 

In a joint statement, four on the seven-member board said they declined to meet Tuesday with the team of consultants because the sessions were private. 

"I believe that it is concerning that the coordinators wish to have meetings outside the view of the public, especially the initial one," Councilwoman  Eugenia Smith said. "Actions like these could lead to suspicion by the public." 

The move illustrates the lack of political unity that has hampered Harrisburg's ability to address its fiscal problems, which threaten to tip the city of 47,000 into bankruptcy. 

The consultants invited council members to meet in groups of two and three, the statement said. Under the so-called Sunshine Act, meetings attended by four council members would constitute a quorum and be subject to transparency requirements, the council members said. 

  Chuck Ardo, spokesman for Mayor  Linda Thompson, blasted the council's refusal to attend what he called a "simple meet and greet." It reflects the council members' commitment to file for bankruptcy and not consider other options, Ardo said. 

"It's a bad omen of things to come in the city of Harrisburg," Mr. Ardo said. "Clearly, they have no intention [of working with the consultants] and it's a sad day for the city." 

Mayor Thompson has opposed bankruptcy, but the council majority successfully hired a law firm to advise members on a possible filing. 

"We're committed to having a process that's open," Councilman Brad Koplinski said in response to Mr. Ardo. "That's the only thing we're committed to." 

The New York law firm hired by council, Cravath, Swaine & Moore LLP, is working free and will present its report by March 31 in public, he said. Mr. Koplinski said he invited the team to attend the council's regular legislative meeting later Tuesday. 

The consultant meetings are intended to be informative and introductory for council members, and public forums will be scheduled as the process gets underway, said Jamie Yates, spokeswoman for Pennsylvania's Department of Community and Economic Development, which oversees the distressed cities program known as Act 47. 

"City council is an important part of this process and we encourage them to become engaged," she said. "Without commitment from all parties, the Act 47 process will struggle to move forward and, ultimately, it is the city of Harrisburg that will suffer." 

Two council members were scheduled to have meetings Tuesday, Ms. Yates said. 

Last month, Pennsylvania placed Harrisburg into its distressed-municipalities program and two weeks ago tapped a team of consultants to draft and implement a recovery plan that must be approved by the mayor and council. 

Novak Consulting Group of Cincinnati is leading the team, which includes  Bob O'Donnell of O'Donnell & Associates LLC, and representatives from the Pennsylvania Economy League and the law firm of Stevens & Lee. 

The city's $288 million debt burden from a problematic incinerator project—the debt is more than four times the city's annual budget—and political dysfunction have brought Harrisburg to the brink of insolvency. It narrowly avoided defaulting on a $3.29 million general obligation debt payment in September. The economic downturn has also weighed on the finances of the city, where nearly one-third of residents live under the poverty level. 