TOKYO—The Tokyo area faced numerous transportation delays Monday as it began its first workday since the devastating quake hit northern Japan on Friday, with the government's chief spokesman urging people to stay home if at all possible to conserve electricity. 

Tokyo Electric Power Co. said it was anticipating a 25% shortfall in what it needs for a normal day. The utility was hit hard by the closure of its Fukushima Daiichi and Fukushima Daini nuclear power plants about 260 kilometers, or 160 miles, north of Tokyo, which were still struggling to shut down safely after a tsunami wave that followed the quake crippled necessary cooling systems. 

"We would like people to make every effort to refrain from electricity use by cancelling unessential and non-urgent trips," Chief Cabinet Secretary Yukio Edano said in an early morning news conference. 

East Japan Railways said that it was cancelling numerous rush-hour trains. A JR spokesman said that the majority of lines were shut and that on average only 20% were running as of early Monday. Tokyo Metro, one of two subway lines, was operating trains with longer gaps than usual. 

But the measures to save on power appeared to be working. In a rare bit of good news, Tokyo Power said early Monday that it was holding off on planned rotating power cuts to parts of its service area, saying that demand was running at lower levels than expected. It added, however that it was still monitoring the situation and was still undecided on the planned schedule of rotating blackout periods. The utility said Sunday that the planned blackouts would—for now—not extend to the central business district area where most financial firms are located. 

The Tokyo Stock Exchange said it was opening as usual. 

In early foreign-exchange trading, the yen rose sharply in anticipation that big Japanese firms will repatriate money from overseas to meet urgent cash needs. The dollar fell to a low of 80.60 yen, the lowest since Nov. 9 and nearing its all-time low of 79.75 yen reached in April 1995. 

 Write to  William Sposato at william.sposato@dowjones.com 