LONDON—A former U.K. Labour lawmaker Friday became the first member of parliament to be jailed for his part in an expenses scandal that disgraced British politics in 2009.

David Chaytor was sentenced to 18 months in prison, having already pleaded guilty to three charges of false accounting last month.

Mr Chaytor, who could have faced as long as seven years in prison, was forced to stand down from his Bury North seat in northern England before his court appearance.

He becomes the highest profile U.K. politician to be sentenced since Conservative minister Jonathan Aitken was jailed for fraud and perjury in 1999.

Sentencing Mr. Chaytor, the judge said the former lawmaker was "a man of positive good character." 

But Mr. Justice Saunders said the expenses scandal had shaken public confidence in parliament and caused widespread anger. 

"Mr Chaytor only bears a small part of the responsibility for that erosion of confidence and public anger, but it was an important part because, as he has accepted, his conduct was dishonest," the judge said. 

Mr. Chaytor, 61, is the one of six lawmakers who have been charged as a result of the expenses scandal, which broke in May 2009 when The Daily Telegraph newspaper started publishing details of years of questionable claims by lawmakers. 

The scandal led hundreds of lawmakers from all parties to repay some expense claims, including former Labour Prime Minister Gordon Brown and his Conservative successor David Cameron. 

However, while many of the claims proved embarrassing, only a few lawmakers were considered to have broken the law. 

Among the other former parliamentarians facing charges are former Labour lawmakers Jim Devine and Eric Morley and the previous Conservative upper house members, Paul White and John Taylor. 

Eric Illsley, re-elected in May as a Labour lawmaker, is also facing criminal charges. 

Mr. Chaytor, a former university lecturer, entered parliament in 1997 and remained a backbench lawmaker throughout the previous Labour government's 13 years in power. 

After first denying the charges, he eventually pleaded guilty to making two sets of false expenses claims for rent on two flats from 2005-6 and 2007-8, totaling some £18,350. He also pleaded guilty for falsely claiming £1,950 in IT support services in May 2006. 

The fallout from the expenses caused lawmakers ended years of self-governance by handing over policing their expenses to a new supervisory body, the Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority. 

However, there is an ongoing battle over the future of the expenses system. Members of parliament have voiced angry complaints over IPSA. Many consider the organization to be inefficient and bureaucratic, keeping lawmakers buried in piles of paperwork instead of communicating with constituents. 

 Write to  Laurence Norman at laurence.norman@dowjones.com 