LONDON— Prudential PLC's net profit more than doubled in 2010, helped by strong sales in Asia, allowing the company to distribute a bigger-than-expected dividend for shareholders. 

The strong performance comes despite last year's failed $35.5 billion bid to buy Asian rival  AIA Group Ltd. Despite that setback, the company said its own Asian business will remain a key growth driver in years to come. 

The U.K.'s largest insurer by market value said 2010 net profit rose to £1.43 billion ($2.31 billion) from £676 million a year earlier. Prudential shares were up 4.4% in afternoon London trading. The shares are up about 12% since the start of the year. 

The company's operating profit rose 24% to £1.94 billion from £1.56 billion in 2009, higher than the £1.73 billion average forecast from 20 analysts. 

Prudential's 2010 insurance sales on an annualized premium equivalent, or APE, basis rose 23% to £3.48 billion, a much stronger pace compared with the 1% rise to £2.84 billion in 2009, during the financial crisis. APE counts 100% of regular premium sales and 10% of the money earned from selling single-premium products. 

Prudential said its capital position remains strong, with a capital surplus at £4.3 billion, up from £3.4 billion at the end of 2009. 

The company declared a dividend of 23.85 pence a share, up 20% from 19.85 pence previously. 

Panmure Gordon analyst  Barrie Cornes said Prudential's results "were very impressive, and were achieved despite the distractions of the failed AIA deal." 

In a briefing, Chief Executive  Tidjane Thiam told reporters that Asia remains the focus of Prudential's ambitious growth plans.

"We have 11 million customers in Asia. We're very proud of that. But we estimate the size of the Asian middle class at 1.9 billion, so we consider that we are only scratching the surface," he said. 

"Penetration is still low and growth is not an issue" he added. "We have a lot of headroom to grow. The main constraint to growth is really capacity to scale up the size of our distribution. So it's actually people, not capital."

In December, Prudential said it expected to double 2009's £465 million life and asset-management pretax operating profit from Asia over the next three years. It said it also aimed to double 2009's £713 million profit from new sales from Asia over the same period, highlighting its strong prospects in the region despite its failure to buy AIA. 

To help meet its financial targets, Prudential has been actively recruiting sales agents. The company had around 340,000 agents in the region at the end of 2010, up 7.5% from a year earlier. 

Last year, insurance sales grew 24% to £1.5 billion in Asia, 28% to £1.16 billion in the U.S., and 13% to £820 million in the U.K. 

In the briefing, Mr. Thiam said the company will focus on organic growth, not acquisitions, and will look into signing more bancassurance deals to distribute its insurance products through banks. 

The failed bid for AIA, which cost Prudential £377 million, led some angry shareholders to call for the resignation of Mr. Thiam and Chairman  Harvey McGrath. 

Those calls appear to have subsided as Prudential announced better results in recent months. "We believe the majority of our shareholders are focused rightly on the performance of the company," Mr. Thiam said. 

  Richard Hunter, head of U.K. equities at Hargreaves Lansdown Stockbrokers, said Prudential was powering ahead in Asia.

"The statement has pleased investors on most fronts, with significant cash generation underpinned by a 20% hike in the dividend. This expression of future confidence in prospects should help to mollify shareholders upset by the distraction of the failed AIA approach last year," Mr. Hunter said. 

  Paul Mumford, a senior investment director at Cavendish Asset Management, which holds a small stake in Prudential, said the results highlighted the advantage Prudential reaps from having a diverse range of activities. 

"Had they been forced to sell off any of these activities to fund the AIA deal, the business would have been unable to ride the global recovery to the same extent, and we would likely have been looking at a worse set of results today on top of having overpaid for AIA," Mr. Mumford said. 

 Write to  Vladimir Guevarra at vladimir.guevarra@dowjones.com 