THE HAGUE—Europol said Wednesday it broke up the largest international ring of pedophiles ever uncovered, a network that was allegedly centered on an Internet child pornography forum with 70,000 members across the globe, including in the U.S., the U.K. and Australia. 

At the center was a website set up in the early 2000s and run out of the Netherlands, authorities said. The site allegedly exploited legal loopholes to protect its owners and members from prosecution. 

Free-speech laws allow people to write what they want, so some websites "use house rules to keep themselves below the threshold of the law," said Rob Wainwright, the director of Europol, in an interview. 

The "threshold" varies by country, Europol officials said, but this pedophile website's rules were set as strictly as possible so it was, on the face of it, illegal nowhere. The website was a forum for discussion around certain themes and prohibited "insults or threats" and "sexual descriptions," authorities said. 

The challenge for law enforcement, Mr. Wainwright said, was to catch pedophiles setting up trades of illegal pictures or stories of abuse.

Law-enforcement professionals described the investigation, which began in 2007, as a significant breakthrough for international police cooperation, which has become increasingly essential to combat international criminal networks operating on the Web. Europol is the alliance of the Europe's police forces.

In 2008, Dutch police seized the server used to operate the website, and its administrator, a Dutchman named  Amir Ish-Hurwitz, now 37 years old. He pleaded guilty on Tuesday in a court in Amsterdam and will be sentenced to between three and five years in prison, according to police.

Between 2008 and 2010, Europol brought in other police forces. One of the first was the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement Agency, which joined the effort in June 2008. 

Investigators at Europol, a Hague-based organization with a staff of 662 and an annual budget of €68.5 million ($95.4 million), decoded the list of IP addresses that had logged on to the website. Using an open-source program shared by authorities internationally, they ended up with a list of some 70,000 members, living all over the world.

Many of the 70,000, it turned out, were protected by free-speech laws. Authorities said they were considering filing charges against 670 of them.

The scale of the operation "broke new ground," said Peter Davies, a U.K. police chief who leads that country's Child Exploitation and Online Protection Centre. "These offenders felt anonymous, but everything they did online was tracked using the digital footprint."

Investigators frequently posed as kids. "Children should be careful because they don't always know who they're talking to online—but predators also don't always know who they're talking to," said Mr. Davies.

Police have arrested 184, mostly for cases of serious sexual molestation. 

The investigation has proceeded fastest in the U.K., where 121 people have been arrested. Some are teachers and bus drivers, others are students and lawyers. One is 84. Another is a woman.

"There is no typical profile," said Cesar Lorenzana, an investigator with the Guardia Civil in Spain, where 17 people have been arrested.

Some were already known to the public, including John McMurdo, an English scoutmaster found guilty of possessing child porn, and Lee Palmer, who abused two young boys. Both have been sentenced to jail terms. Police said 230 child victims had been identified during the investigation, and parents and authorities had been alerted.

It takes only a Google search to learn that there are other pedophile networks. "We know that, but this is the biggest one so far," Mr. Wainwright said. "The investigation is continuing, and there will be a lot more people arrested."

 Write to  John W. Miller at john.miller@dowjones.com 