LONDON—Marks & Spencer Group PLC is facing the specter of rising inflation as it fights for market share in the fiercely competitive U.K. grocery and clothing market, just as the government's austerity cuts start to bite. 

The U.K. high street bellwether has enjoyed a strong third quarter, including the key Christmas period, when same-store sales rose 2.8% despite the impact of the snow. However, food price inflation is on the rise and the major supermarket chains are aggressively cutting prices to attract shoppers who are tightening their belts. 

Speaking to reporters on a conference call Tuesday, Chief Finance Officer  Alan Stewart wouldn't be drawn on predicting the level of inflation, but admitted that external surveys indicated inflation would rise above the 1% to 2% seen in the most recent quarter, and the company would "hope to stay competitive below that." 

Wal-Mart Stores Inc.-owned Asda, the U.K's second-largest supermarket chain, last week pledged to keep prices 10% lower than its competitors while grocery leader Tesco PLC is "blitzing" hundreds of products at "better-than-half-price" levels. 

M&S's prices are more closely aligned to up-market supermarket chain Waitrose than Asda or Tesco, but Waitrose pledges to price match Tesco on many of its products, and M&S has attracted a growing tranche of shoppers with a value priced offering as well. 

M&S was cautious about the future, facing another year of uncertainty as the government austerity measures, budget cuts, public sector job losses and rising taxes all conspire to subdue consumer spending.

Mr. Stewart wouldn't say if the cost of remaining competitive would impact on margins, but merely reiterated the company's guidance of flat margins for 2011. 

M&S also faces rising commodity prices, especially cotton, which is at near 15-year highs, and overseas labor costs, all of which is putting pressure on input prices. 

High street fashion retailer Next PLC has said it expects prices to rise 8% this year because of increasing costs, and while M&S would not put a figure on any price rises, it plans to maintain "opening price points", so that the lower-end products remain cheap. 

In fact, it was some higher end products which helped bump general merchandise same-store sales up 3.8% in the third quarter, along with M&S staples like underwear and shoes. 

Cashmere knitwear sales were up 11% in the 12 weeks to Jan. 1, M&S Chief Executive  Marc Bolland told reporters, after the company introduced more styles to the ranges. 



