If Renault's great affaire d'espionnage unravels, as it appears to be doing, it may become a case study in corporate paranoia, distracted leadership—and the perceived threat of an advancing China.

The China part particularly: The auto world is chuckling that this may be one of the few times China was accused of lifting a competitor's trade secrets when the country didn't actually do it. But there's no solace in that for the auto makers—or in the slow-motion car wreck now taking place at Renault.

As The Wall Street Journal has reported, Renault in January fired three executives, claiming they had sold corporate secrets about the company's key electric-car development program. Renault quickly went public, saying an anonymous informer had helped it unearth an espionage conspiracy. Allusions were made in various circles to possible "Chinese" buyers of the secrets.

The three executives denied wrongdoing and have sued for slander and defamation. China's foreign ministry hit the roof. And Renault stuck by its guns.

Until now. Executives at Renault are acknowledging that, while the case isn't completely closed, they haven't been able to verify the informer's main charges.

"This seems to be the classic case of 'fire, ready, aim,' more worthy of Clouseau than Clausewitz," says  Andrew Brimmer, a partner at  Joele Frank, a crisis-management firm in New York, referring to military theorist von Clausewitz. "Companies, like armies, can experience the 'fog of war,' where decisions are made based on short-term pressures and prejudices. Good corporate stewardship still requires the deliberate weighing of facts before action is taken and disclosure is made."



The general in this particular battle is  Carlos Ghosn, Renault's CEO and a much celebrated auto executive. Mr. Ghosn has a long list of accomplishments to his name, notably turning around Nissan Motor Co., Renault's affiliate in Japan, and firing up sales and innovation across the company.

Mr. Ghosn is a favorite at Davos and other big corporate gatherings and is regularly on the road, splitting his time between Paris, Tokyo and the rest of Renault and Nissan's multimarket operations. His extraordinary travel schedule highlighted his leadership of a global enterprise. And it may now become a topic of scrutiny as executives at Renault wonder whether Mr. Ghosn's nomadic management style left the investigation without parental supervision.

If suspicions quickly fell on China as a culprit in this alleged crime, it's against a backdrop of considerable tension between the world's auto makers and China's own ambitions to dominate global auto manufacturing. The auto companies want to make and sell their product in China, which has become the globe's largest vehicle market. But they also want to protect their innovations, which they believe China is quick to "assimilate" into its own manufacturing.

  General Motors
GM


-0.98
%




 accused China's Chery Automobile Co. of copying the design of its Chevy Spark. Toyota held off rolling out the Prius in China out of concern it would be forced to transfer technology. The complaints are manifold and quickly spill into other industries—wind turbines, rail-line construction and technology of all stripes.

Electric cars are the cutting edge of the auto industry, the next great horizon for car makers. And Renault and Nissan have gone in big. The Nissan Leaf is an all-electric car, not just a hybrid, a distinction Mr. Ghosn is quick to underscore. It's a hedge against climate-related regulation that auto makers believe will fuel the electric-car market for decades. Renault and Nissan are spending €4 billion ($5.6 billion) on their electric-vehicle programs and plan to have capacity to produce 500,000 electric vehicles annually by 2015. "The electric car is at the dawn of the mass market," Mr. Ghosn told the Journal last month.

The Leaf's slogan is: "Innovation for the Planet. Innovation for all." With the past as prologue, it's perhaps not surprising Renault might have feared this was also innovation China wanted its hands on.

Mr. Ghosn has indicated that the information Renault believed was stolen had to do with the cost of its electric cars. "The most interesting information I can have about a competitor is the cost," he said. "For example, for a battery the most important element is the cost per kilowatt. From the cost per kilowatt I may guess what kind of technology you're developing."

The company has said the investigation is now in the hands of law enforcement. It also has said if the three fired executives are cleared, they're welcome to come back to work.

But if that happens, if Renault's anonymous informer turns out to have been wrong, the company is likely to lose on all counts—not just its corporate prestige but the expertise and knowledge it had hoped to protect. The top executive accused in the matter spent three decades with Renault and had been running its development projects, including electric-car development. He's already said he's had it with the company.

Recruiters at all of Renault's competitors – in China, too – have undoubtedly taken note.

 Write to  John Bussey at john.bussey@wsj.com 