Wednesday was the Twelfth Day of Christmas. As tradition here has it, if the festive knick-knacks aren't down by the end of Twelfth Night it's another seven years bad luck. So the chances are that you, like me, spent most of the night before last acting like a medieval monk with a guilty conscience.

Shuffling penitentially on your knees, bending and scraping with dustpan and brush while vicious pine needles perforate your kneecaps...it's almost enough to make you feel like Christmas might, in a twisted way, be the descendent of some sort of primitive religious festival.

Ho ho. Or ho ho ho, as the case may be. For me, it's in the post-Christmas desolation that the real character of the season is to be found. And the penitential pose with the pine needles is only the beginning. 

If Dickens's "A Christmas Carol" had found space for a Ghost of Christmas Just Past, it would have been the most horrible apparition of the lot: bloated with sulphurous sprout gas, greasy of brow and haggard with self-reproach. It would be wearing a gravy-stained jumper with reindeer on it, there would be chocolate smeared round its lips and through teeth still blackened with port wine, it would be boasting that it was giving up alcohol for January.

"We do it every year," the ghost would say with contrived jollity. "Yuh. On the water-wagon for me!" This ghost, laughing a little too loudly, would be all the more terrible for the flicker of awful, self-deluding pride kindling in it at the thought of white-knuckling through the grimmest month of the year with nothing to talk about in company but how it has given up drink.

New Year sees an annual British epidemic of renunciation. It's more than just the gym memberships taken out more in hope than expectation, and the half-hearted New Year's resolutions. More than the fatuous "detox" diets that fill the funny pages. It's more profound than that. It's the "dry January," the unwanted Christmas presents being auctioned online, the awful soul-sickness of the shopper returning from the January sales.

Are other countries like this? I don't think so—not in quite the same way. God knows, it's often enough remarked that Brits are bingers. We get tired of hearing how sophisticated "café culture" and civilized 24-hour drinking doesn't work here because two hours into the 24 everyone's blootered, four hours into the 24 everyone's having a fight and six hours into the 24 we've all been arrested and are being sick on the way to the cells. Sure: nobody binge-drinks like we do. (Russians are different: drinking non-stop isn't a binge; it's an unusually determined suicide attempt.) And nobody binge-eats like we do either, at least not on this side of the Atlantic. 

But what's less attended to is the other side of the cycle. Ours is the only European culture, so far as I know, that has found the need to mint the phrase "tactical vomit." We are addicted to the purge as profoundly as we are addicted to the binge.

That it's happening in our economy only reinforces my point. When Gordon Brown promised to abolish "the old, familiar cycle of boom and bust," that, I suspect, is what did it for him. It's not just that the project was doomed. It's that we liked the old familiar cycle. 

At last, publishers will be able to open the presents that the Grim Reaper left them under the tree in 1940: in 2011, F. Scott Fitzgerald and John Buchan come out of copyright. Pleasure at the prospect of Gatsby and Greenmantle surging into the public domain is tempered, though, by wondering how much coming out of copyright means any more, given the ease of digital piracy.

The theorist Walter Benjamin, author of "The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction," would no doubt have had interesting things to say about what the infinite reproducibility of an ebook does to the "aura" of its original. He comes out of copyright this year too. Heigh-ho.

Our victorious Ashes cricketers have become a YouTube sensation thanks to their eccentric victory dance. They've taken to mimicking lawn-irrigation systems in imitation, terpsichorean scholars tell us, of a short-lived fad from 1980s Australia. Will we long bask in this second coming of "The Sprinkler"?

Knowing that competitive sport is at heart a metaphor for battle, I find myself picturing Hannibal "Lindy Hopping" with his elephants, Achilles and Ajax in a "Funky Chicken" dance-off, and Winston Churchill essaying the "Mashed Potato" as news trickles through of the German surrender. Poignant images, I think, of the futility of war. 

—Next week, Francis X. Rocca in Rome.