Weinstein Co. is betting that a PG-13 version of the "The King's Speech" can help it capitalize on the R-rated film's Oscar win for best picture.

Already, the historical drama—which has taken in $245 million at the box office world-wide to date—is seeing a bump in online ticket sales: Fandango on Monday sold twice as many tickets for the film as it did the Monday preceding the Oscars, according to a spokesman for the film-ticketing site.

Weinstein Co. hopes to extend that further by releasing a more family-friendly version of the film than the original version, the company said. The company, which distributed the film, hasn't said when it will release the new version. 

The version of the film that's currently in theaters features a scene in which Colin Firth's character, King George VI, is encouraged by his speech therapist Lionel Logue, played by Geoffrey Rush, to curse repeatedly to help overcome his stutter on the eve of World War II. The scene will be altered in the PG-13 version. 

The Motion Picture Association of America approved the change, agreeing to waive a rule requiring distributors to withdraw the original version of a film for 90 days before an alternate version is released.

In a statement,  David Glasser, chief operating officer at Weinstein Co., thanked the MPAA for its "speedy and sensitive consideration" of the alternate version of the film and said the company and the filmmakers were discussing the "appropriate next steps."

Weinstein Co. had lobbied unsuccessfully for "The King's Speech" to receive a PG-13 rating last November, arguing that the cursing was part of a therapy technique and that young people could benefit from the film's anti-bullying message.

In the U.K., the British Board of Film Classification revised its initial rating of the film as "15"—meaning it was suitable for moviegoers age 15 and over—to "12A," or suitable for those 12 and older, after similar complaints were raised.

Over the past four years, the average best-picture Oscar winner has seen a 22.2% bump in box-office revenue after it is nominated and an additional 15.3% after its actual win, according to research firm IBISWorld. 

 Write to  Michelle Kung at michelle.kung@wsj.com 