FRANKFURT—The European Central Bank's job got a little harder Thursday, with unemployment data that showed a widening in the gap between the euro zone's haves and have-nots.

Figures released Thursday showed German joblessness for April flirting with a 20-year low, while data due Friday from Spain are expected to paint a worsening unemployment picture. The news will complicate the ECB's plan to continue tightening interest rates, but won't derail it.

German seasonally adjusted unemployment fell by 37,000 in April to under 3 million for the first time in nearly 20 years. The unemployment rate remained at 7.1% in April, matching March's level, which was the lowest rate since such records began in 1999. This portends continued low unemployment, despite an expected influx of new workers from Eastern Europe starting in May, experts reckon. Germany next month must admit workers from the countries that joined the EU in 2004, after seven years of restrictions.

Noting business surveys that show companies' employment intentions staying at a high level, the "unemployment rate may fall further in the coming months," said Ben May, European economist at Capital Economics. 

In start contrast, Spain had the highest unemployment rate in the industrialized world at 20.3% as of the fourth quarter of 2010, and it's set to get worse. Labor Minister Valeriano Gomez said Thursday he expects "bad" first-quarter data, which are due for release Friday morning. 

The blame rests on Spain's labor laws, economists say. These laws empower trade unions and make it more expensive for businesses to add new workers. 

Jose Manuel Gonzalez-Paramo, a Spanish member of the ECB's executive board, recently called the country's labor laws "very rigid and unfair." 

Yet his institution has no direct power over the labor laws of Spain, or any other euro-zone country. Spain's leadership isn't expected to make any significant moves to loosen up the labor market in coming months. 

Despite the pain in Spain—which, like other peripheral euro-zone countries, has an economy that is languishing amid swollen jobless rolls and high debt—the ECB is likely to continue tightening monetary policy. It already increased its main refinancing rate by a quarter of a percentage point for the first time in nearly three years on April 7. It is expected to raise rates at least two more times, and perhaps three, this year. 

The bank's mandate to defend price stability obliges it to move in this direction, it argues. Indeed, price pressures in the single-currency area are on the rise, not least because of higher inflation in Germany, the euro zone's largest economy. German inflation hit its highest level since October 2008 in April, preliminary data from the Federal Statistics Office showed Wednesday. 

The continued strength of the German labor market has increased fears that upward pressure on wages could spawn higher consumer prices.

"The buoyancy of the German labor market data will be reinforcing concerns at the ECB over capacity constraints and the potential for a spillover to wage dynamics," BNP analyst Ken Wattret said in a note. He also said that Germany's unemployment rate is already "well below" the level that economists think is consistent with stable inflation. Indeed, unemployment is expected to fall to below 3 million in unadjusted terms already in May, from its current level of 3.078 million, Federal Labor Agency head Frank-Jürgen Weise said at a news conference Thursday. 

While companies are increasingly worried about labor shortages in Germany, studies show, some relief is in sight. Germany opens up its labor market on May 1 to citizens of Eastern European Union countries. Labor Minister Ursula von der Leyen said Thursday that the opening of borders was "a great chance" for Germany. Researchers from a unit of the Federal Labor Agency estimate that about 100,000 people will immigrate to Germany annually because of the lifting of borders. To what extent, this change will cap upward pressure on wages is unclear. 

The ECB has often reiterated that it must set monetary policy in a way that preserves price stability for the currency zone as a whole and it won't be hindered by problems in individual countries. 

Still, it will come as a relief to the central bank that the Spanish jobs picture probably won't get much worse. Many economists say Spain's slight but steady economic recovery means further losses of temporary jobs are unlikely.

"The labor market is... showing signs of stabilization," UBS analysts said in a recent note. "This could be consistent with consumption data remaining weak but not falling further." 

—Tom Fairless in Frankfurt, Bernd Radowitz in Berlin and Christine Popp in Nuremberg contributed to this article.

 Write to  David Roman at david.roman@dowjones.com 