For a chef, the news could not have been worse. Grant Achatz was just 32 when he was told that he had advanced oral cancer. His tongue would have to be cut out. He would never be able to taste food again. 

A cook accustomed to turning out the same food every day might be able to work under such circumstances, however grim. But Mr. Achatz, a leader in the field of molecular gastronomy, was chef at Alinea in Chicago, one of the top restaurants in the country. Novelty and innovation are the restaurant's raison d'être. (The word alinea refers to the copy editor's symbol for a new paragraph—or new train of thought.)

Mr. Achatz refused the surgery, opting for a brutal course of chemotherapy and radiation in a clinical trial at the University of Chicago. During the treatment, he lost his taste buds entirely. "Food was cardboard and salt was just sand in my mouth, dissolving oddly and with no purpose," he tells us in "Life, on the Line." "Eating was a horrific and painful ordeal to be tolerated three or four times a day. Cooking at Alinea became a gauntlet to run every night: wonderful smells that you can't taste, food you used to love that you can't eat." 

"Life, on the Line" is a memoir written in alternating first-person voices with Nick Kokonas, Mr. Achatz's business partner. The book is not only the story of Mr. Achatz's ordeal with cancer; it is a fascinating chronicle of life in the boot-camp kitchens of great restaurants and of the creation of Alinea in 2005. 

As it happens, I ate the most astonishing meal of my life at Alinea in 2007, the year that Mr. Achatz learned of his cancer. The 24-course dinner, called The Grand Tour, lasted a dizzying five hours. His intricate, jewel-like creations, so delicate that they're plated with tweezers, came to the table on prongs, pins and antennae or were hung from small metal trapezes. They were brightly colored, edible works of art.

Mr. Achatz himself—slender with scraggly red hair, a thin, intelligent face sporting a goatee—has worked in professional kitchens since he was child, starting at his family's diner in Michigan, where he was, he says, "chief egg cracker." By the age of 14 he was cooking on the line after school. When his father offered to buy him a car for his 16th birthday, he added that his son would have to assemble it himself. Incredibly, Mr. Achatz did, choosing a red 1970 Pontiac GTO that took him two years to put together, piece by piece.

 By Grant Achatz and Nick Kokonas  Gotham, 390 pages, $27.50

After graduating from the Culinary Institute of America, Mr. Achatz was thrilled to get a job at Charlie Trotter, Chicago's No. 1 restaurant at the time. He looked forward to "one-on-one time and mentoring" with the chef. Instead he found himself working 16-hour shifts that involved scrubbing Dumpsters and cleaning the hoods of the stoves with toxic gas. He never saw Mr. Trotter cook. When he gave notice after several weeks, the chef told him that he couldn't provide a reference. "If you don't work here for a year," he said, "you haven't worked here for a day."

The French Laundry in Napa Valley, where Mr. Achatz worked next, was also tough, but it suited him. He worshipped Thomas Keller, the chef, who made him his protégé. "It felt like I had been taken under his wing, like I was building the GTO all over again." Mr. Achatz took an almost masochist pleasure in the long hours, with days starting at 5 a.m. "You're tired, why don't you go home and sleep then?" was a running insult that cooks would jab at co-workers. "I wanted to burn my forearms on the oven door and dig myself out of a giant black hole of [meal-order] tickets every night at seven," Mr. Achatz writes. "I wanted to feel the adrenaline. I wanted to be great."

Mr. Achatz credits his time at The French Laundry with giving him the willpower to get through his grueling cancer treatments and put in long days at Alinea at the same time. "I had never experienced the discipline, the dedication, the intensity, the tenacity and the drive that both the chefs and all of the cooks possessed [at The French Laundry]. . . . It became part of who I am." 

When Mr. Keller sent him for a visit to El Bulli in Spain, the revolutionary techniques of chef Ferran Adrià—with its foams, sprayed-on sauces and "deconstructed" cocktails—turned Mr. Achatz's head. He felt that, after four years, he had learned all he could in Mr. Keller's kitchen; he wanted to try something new. At Trio, a restaurant in a Chicago surburb, he came up with such creations as a "Truffle Explosion," ravioli that yielded a burst of liquid black truffle when you bit down, and a shrimp cocktail that you spritzed into your mouth. Mr. Kokonas, a former derivatives trader, was a regular at Trio, and eventually he and Mr. Achatz decided to open Alinea together. Mr. Kokonas, who put up most of the money, comes through in "Life, on the Line" as a generous and sympathetic patron, providing not only funds but emotional support.

When Mr. Achatz first learned of his cancer in 2007, he drove straight from the doctor's office to the restaurant, where he worked through the day like a zombie. Mr. Kokonas, hearing the news, arrived at Alinea in the middle of service (the staff was plating 1,870 dishes for a total of 98 customers). Mr. Achatz stopped what he was doing and made him dinner. It was not the usual Alinea fare—no liquid croquettes or aromatic spritzers—but a traditional French meal: seared duck breast with morels and peas. It was so good that Mr. Kokonas said they should open a French bistro.

"Where's the challenge in that?" Mr. Achatz replied. But it was the germ of an idea. His taste buds having recovered, he will soon open another restaurant in Chicago. This one, called Next, will "explore the great cuisines of the world." It will begin with French food but shift to Thai for three months in June and to others thereafter.

 Ms. Hodgson, a former restaurant critic for the New York Observer, is the author of the memoir "It Seemed Like a Good Idea at the Time." 