Entrepreneur  Bruce Verstandig divides his time these days between his diamond wholesale business and his sex-toy website. But as a college student in the late '70s, he drove a cab. And he was a helluvah cabbie. He kept his car spick-and-span. As soon as the passenger popped in the back and announced her destination, he'd ask what route she preferred. And he'd always ask if she wanted music: "Classical, jazz or pop?" The payoff was a reliably nice tip—15%. "That was a great tip in those days," he says. "No one gave 20%."

Can you blame Mr. Verstandig, then, for being annoyed with the city's taxi credit-card readers? Since some of them were adjusted up this spring, the default tipping options on all the devices now give riders the choice of a 20%, 25% or 30% gratuity. "It's obnoxious!" Mr. Verstandig says. 

Yes, offering a 20%, 25% or 30% option is like asking whether the service was awesome, super-awesome, or super-fantastic-platinum-with-kittens-awesome. And naturally, this is a New York special. Most urban fleets offer digital card readers, but the default options are usually far more modest. VeriFone, which provides card readers to fleets in many big cities, says the typical defaults are 15%, 18% or 20%. Fleets in Denver, L.A. and Washington, D.C., offer 15%, 20% and 25% options. 

It's hard to say who's behind the maneuver. The New York Taxi Workers Alliance, the closest thing our city has to a cab drivers union, says no one consulted it on the matter. The companies that provide the card readers make vague allusions to focus groups and the city's Taxi and Limousine Commission, but the commission's spokesman swears it ain't so: "Our regulations are absolutely silent on this." 

Passengers can override the default setting and enter their own tip, so it's not a huge issue. And some say the job is so difficult, why begrudge the hard-working driver? But you have to wonder who thought 25% is a sane, middle-ground tip for NYC cabbies. It might make sense if our drivers were renowned for their flawless service, but the truth is that while many of our cabbies do fantastic work, they are world-renowned for being terrifying. 

In a recent poll, Hotels.com asked travelers to name the best and worst cities for taxi service. Las Vegas, where the chatty cab drivers remind you of your cool, louche uncle who pulled quarters out of your ear, came out on top. New York? It placed near the bottom, just above Detroit. Travelers consistently cited our cabbies as being the absolute worst in categories such as friendliness and driving quality.  Anne Mason, a retailer from Danville, Va., who was in New York for business this week, says she takes cabs all over the country, and the drivers here really stand out. They get mad when she asks them to roll up the window. They get mad when she asks for change. "They are not friendly," she says. "There's just something weird about your taxi drivers."

Yes, our drivers tend to be difficult. And this creates a terrible tipping dilemma for the neurotic New Yorker. As the destination nears, one scans the meter and begins the mad, desperate calculation. First comes to the guilt: "He drove all the way out to Brooklyn, and he probably won't get a fare back, and he's losing 5% because I'm paying with my credit card, and he's only making $110 a day working a 12-hour shift even though he was probably a Nobel Prize-winning physicist back in his homeland. I better tip him a million dollars!"

Then comes the resentment: "He never said hello. He slapped himself on the forehead when I gave my destination. He talked on his phone the whole time. He ran over three cats and a baby. And jeeze, it's not like I asked him to immigrate to the U.S. just to drive me to Cobble Hill on a Wednesday night. Three bucks is good enough."

People really do tip better for good service, even in cabs. Sanders Partee, CEO of Taxi Magic, a national vendor of taxi-fleet software, says there are huge variations between drivers when it comes to tip income. Even within the same cab fleet, top drivers maintain a tipping percentage more than twice as high as the lowest performers.

Here in New York, tips average 18% to 19% on credit-card payments, which ranks us among the most generous tippers in the nation. Still, veteran NYC cabbies, who make about 25% of their income (about $30 a day) from tips, say that despite the sky-high default options, tipping isn't as good as it used to be. They blame the economy. But if they're right about the downward slide, there may be another factor at work: Drivers and riders just aren't talking. 

Blame the cellphones, the card readers and the awful, squawking taxi TV—there's just not much communication these days. "And a lot of times tips are dependent on talking up the passenger," says  Bhairavi Desai, president of the Taxi Workers Alliance. Yes, it's hard enough to get a driver's attention when he's on the phone. But lately, it seems like some cabbies outright ignore requests from the back seat. Not so, says Jean Getant, a driver from Haiti, who neatly explained the situation: "I assume they are talking on their phone. I never think they are talking to me." 

—Ms. Kadet, who writes the "Tough Customer" column for SmartMoney magazine, can be reached at anne.kadet@dowjones.com 