NEW DELHI – An Indian ministerial panel which was to discuss raising fuel prices Wednesday has postponed its meeting, further delaying the oil ministry's attempts to bring retail fuel prices in line with crude prices and help trim revenue losses at state-run oil marketing companies. 

Shares of oil marketing companies, which were trading higher before the news that the panel deferred the crucial meeting, fell sharply. Indian Oil Corp. closed down 0.3% at 343.75 rupees, Bharat Petroleum Corp. slipped 0.4% to 652.20 rupees and Hindustan Petroleum Corp. finished flat at 387.85 rupees in a steady Mumbai market. 

The government had put on hold plans to raise fuel prices due to elections in five provinces. The last phase of polling ends Tuesday. 

The panel's meeting has been deferred to May 17 or May 18, Oil Minister S. Jaiopal Reddy said Tuesday on the sidelines of a conference in New Delhi. "The empowered group of ministers was to meet tomorrow evening. Now it has been postponed to accommodate some ministers," he said. 

An oil ministry official said the ministers are still occupied with post-election work and aren't available for the meeting. 

Indian Oil, Bharat Petroleum and Hindustan Petroleum sell some fuels at discounted prices to help the government keep a lid on inflation. They are partly compensated through a cash subsidy and discounts on crude oil purchases from state-run explorers. 

Separately, another senior oil ministry official said that the ministry has recommended raising diesel prices by more than 3 rupees to 4 rupees a liter and increasing cooking gas prices. 

The official said that state-run oil marketing companies may suffer revenue losses of as much as 2 trillion rupees at current crude price levels this fiscal year that began April 1 if fuel prices aren't raised. 

"A diesel price rise should be substantial as diesel accounts for 60% of total revenue losses [of state oil companies]," he added. 

The Indian government last raised prices of diesel and cooking gas in June last year, when it also lifted state control over gasoline prices. The state-run fuel retailers last raised gasoline prices in January this year. 

The price of the Indian basket of crude has risen to $121.90 a barrel as of April 28 from an average of $73.54 a barrel in June last year. 

According to government data, state oil retailers are losing 16.17 rupees a liter on diesel sales, 28.28 rupees a liter on kerosene and 329.73 rupees per cooking gas cylinder. The retailers' daily revenue losses on discounted sales is 4.95 billion rupees. 

The companies are losing 8.50 rupee a liter on gasoline sales, Goldman Sachs analyst Nilesh Banerjee said in a note last week. 

The government has been unable to raise fuel prices due to persistently high inflation, which accelerated to 8.98% from a year earlier in March compared with 8.31% in February, due to costlier food and manufactured products. 

"You have to bite the bullet," the second ministry official said. "Oil companies are bleeding. They're unable to book profits." 

 Write to  Rakesh Sharma at rakesh.sharma@dowjones.com 