LONDON—HSBC Holdings PLC more than doubled its profit in 2010, mostly the result of lower bad-loan charges, but the bank reported a jump in costs and said new capital rules would reduce its return on equity.

The bank's 2010 net profit was US$13.2 billion, up from US$5.83 billion a year earlier. Loan-impairment charges fell to US$14 billion from US$26.5 billion, the lowest in four years, the bank said.

Costs also jumped at the London bank, with a key cost-measuring ratio rising to 55.2% in 2010 from 52% in 2009. HSBC said this was due in part to items like a U.K. tax on bonuses, as well as hiring in places like Asia and Latin America as the bank expanded its business there.

The bank also lowered the target range for its return on equity—a metric that is watched by investors and analysts—to 12% to 15%, down from 15% to 18%, the result of new rules that require banks to hold more capital.

In London, HSBC's shares fell 4.7%, to 678 pence (US$10.93).

New Chief Executive Officer  Stuart Gulliver, who succeeded  Michael Geoghegan on Jan. 1, said the 2010 results reflected "a well-balanced and diversified business."

But Mr. Gulliver added that the cost ratio is "unacceptable to me" and that HSBC needs to "re-engineer the business to remove inefficiencies."

The bank was able to increase its dividend to 36 U.S. cents a share for the full year from 34 cents in 2009. It said it plans to pay nine cents a share for each of the first three quarters of 2011. 

"There is not enough clarity on how they plan to reduce costs," said  Ronit Ghose, a Citigroup bank analyst.

The increase in profit comes as the bank digs out from losses it suffered from its foray into U.S. subprime lending, a business it is now exiting. Bad-loan charges in its U.S. division fell by nearly half, to US$8.3 billion in 2010 from US$15.7 billion in 2009.

Mr. Gulliver said the impairment charges still are conservative, reflecting the risk that high unemployment in the U.S. could weigh on loan performance in the U.S. portfolio as it winds down. 

Impairment charges also fell in the bank's Middle East division, to US$627 million compared with US$1.3 billion in 2009, when many loans were made to businesses in Dubai. 

HSBC, like its global peers, has been pushing back against proposed higher liquidity requirements, which the bank sees as "overly conservative," Chairman  Douglas Flint said Monday. Mr. Flint also said the bank doesn't oppose a new U.K. levy on banks, "but it constitutes an additional cost of basing a growing multinational bank in the U.K."

HSBC has faced speculation over whether it will move its headquarters back to Hong Kong, the bank's original home, after executives suggested they would consider leaving if regulations in the U.K. became too onerous. Executives say they have no current plans to move.

The bank, which derived 5% of its 2010 profit from the Middle East, said it would remain committed to the region, despite the recent turmoil there. 

The bank on Monday also disclosed that Mr. Gulliver received a 2010 bonus valued at £5.2 million (US$8.4 million) in deferred shares, down from the £9 million all-share bonus he received in 2009. The chairman, Mr. Flint, said the lower bonus for Mr. Gulliver reflected the shift in his position last year, when his role was expanded from head of the investment-banking arm to also include HSBC's private bank. 

Separately, HSBC said  Vincent Cheng will retire as an executive director in May, marking the end of a decades-long career at the lender for the Hong Kong banker. 

In his 33 years at HSBC, Mr. Cheng rose through the ranks of the firm to become the first Chinese person to become chairman of Hongkong & Shanghai Banking Corp., the lender's Asian unit, in 2005. Before heading the Asian operations, Mr. Cheng was chief executive of Hang Seng Bank Ltd., a Hong Kong-based HSBC unit, starting in 1998. 

Under Mr. Cheng's leadership, HSBC invested heavily in China, and was among the first foreign banks to locally incorporate its operations in the nation in April 2007. HSBC has about 100 branches across 23 cities in China. Local incorporation is a prerequisite for foreign lenders to take part in all local-currency businesses.

HSBC said in a statement that Mr. Cheng, 62 years old, will retain an advisory role to the group chief executive on regional matters. 

Hang Seng Bank, which is 62%-owned by HSBC, said its net profit rose 14% in 2010, boosted by strong loan growth, higher fee income and trading gains. Its net profit totaled 14.92 billion Hong Kong dollars (US$1.92 billion), up from HK$13.14 billion in 2009.

—Chester Yung contributed to this article.

 Write to  Margot Patrick at margot.patrick@dowjones.com 