HELSINKI—Finland agreed on Friday to back the €78 billion ($111.1 billion) bailout for debt-mired Portugal but only if Lisbon sells state-owned assets and starts negotiations with private investors to ensure they keep their funds in the country.

The decision was announced by the Grand Committee, a parliamentary panel on European Union matters whose decisions are binding. The committee—which approved the bailout in a 15-5 vote with five abstentions—also said Finland wouldn't take part in further bailouts unless the country receiving the aid puts up collateral. 

"This is Finland's decision and it is not negotiable," committee chairman Erkki Tuomioja told a news conference. 

Portugal said last week it has arranged a three-year, €78 billion bailout program with the European Union and the International Monetary Fund to help its ailing economy. But the deal has to be supported unanimously by all euro-zone governments. 

European finance ministers will meet in Brussels on Monday and are set to discuss the finer details of Portugal's bailout plan, with each country offering proposals and certain conditions, before rubber-stamping the deal.

Finland is the only euro-zone country that needs parliamentary approval for further loan guarantees to the European Financial Stability Facility. It has already supported bailouts for Greece and Ireland. 

Finland is also one of six euro-zone members that have a triple-A credit rating, and whose guarantees are therefore crucial to ensuring that the EFSF can borrow cheaply on international bond markets. The emergency fund then lends that borrowed money to countries in need. 

Mr. Tuomioja said the international financial system needs reforms and pledged Finland would be "very active" in promoting a tax on financial transactions, a proposal supported by some countries as way of paying back taxpayers for propping up banks during the economic crisis. 

Approval for Portugal's bailout was threatened after a surge in support for the nationalist, anti-bailout True Finns party in the country's April 17 election. On Thursday, the True Finns pulled out of government formation talks saying the party couldn't be part of a government that backs bailouts.

Finland's two largest parties, meanwhile, had agreed on their position on the bailout, making the outcome of Friday's vote predictable.

The EU welcomed the Finnish vote. European Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs  Olli Rehn described it as a "responsible decision" which would strengthen Europe.

"It ... will contribute to safeguard financial stability in Europe and in Finland," Mr. Rehn told reporters in Brussels. "With regard to the Finnish proposals, we consider them constructive and we'll study them in detail with the view of discussion ... next Monday and Tuesday."

Though Finland's blessing for the bailout eases Portugal's immediate concerns, the Portuguese are bracing for at least two years of recession.

Portugal's National Statistics Institute said Friday the country has already slipped into a double-dip recession, with the economy contracting 0.7% in the first quarter of this year largely due to lower private and public spending as tax increases and cuts to pay and welfare bite.

—The Associated Press contributed to this article.