The National Football League descended Friday into turmoil as negotiations between owners and players broke off, setting up a potentially lengthy court battle that could have serious consequences for both the league and the sports business in general. 

After spending seven-plus hours negotiating in Washington, D.C., in a 17th day of mediation, leaders of the NFL and the players union said late Friday afternoon that talks had stalled and blamed the other side for the meltdown. 

Shortly thereafter the union filed paperwork to decertify and 10 players, including stars  Tom Brady and  Peyton Manning, filed an antitrust lawsuit against the league. The suit seeks to prevent the owners from locking out the players. But the league locked out players as of midnight Saturday. 

"Significant differences remain," said  DeMaurice Smith, the union's executive director.

Take a look back at some of the disputes that have upset play in major-league sports. 

"We worked hard," said NFL Commissioner  Roger Goodell, who dismissed the players' litigation. "Ultimately this is going to be negotiated."

The league said on Saturday that it was "taking the difficult but necessary step of exercising its right under federal labor law to impose a lockout of the union," and called on the union to return to negotiations immediately.

It also called the union decertification a "sham" and said the players' court action is "built on the indisputably false premise that the [players union] has stopped being a union and will merely delay the process of reaching an agreement."

On Saturday, the NFL beefed up its legal team, hiring  David Boies, best-known for representing Al Gore after the 2000 presidential election, and Paul Clement, the former solicitor general of the U.S. Jeffrey Kessler, a longtime lawyer for the players union and a sports-labor expert, is leading the NFLPA's legal efforts.

The onset of litigation sends a business that has long prided itself on stability into a rare period of uncertainty at a time of record popularity and revenues.

The logjam leaves up in the air the future of the NFL, a $9.3 billion-a-year juggernaut. A work stoppage would cost both sides hundreds of millions of dollars and could cause the cancellation of games later this year for the first time since 1987.

Decertifying as a union allows the players to sue the NFL on antitrust grounds. Such litigation is not allowed during collective bargaining. 

The players' suit was filed in Minnesota before U.S. District Judge  David Doty, who presides over the legal issues between the union representing 1,700 players and the 32 team owners.

For the union, heading to court moves the disagreement to what has been a friendly venue. After a lengthy lawsuit two decades ago, Judge Doty granted the players free agency. That ruling ultimately led to the current collective bargaining agreement and nearly two decades of labor peace. The players have won more victories in Judge Doty's courtroom than they have lost.

  John Mara, co-owner of the New York Giants, said going to court was the union's strategy all along. "The union's position on core economic issues has not changed one iota," Mr. Mara said. "Their objective was to go to litigation." 

However, the strategy isn't without risks. Litigation could lead to a lengthy work stoppage. If that happens, the players will have to do something they have never done before—hold firm and endure more than just a few weeks of missed paychecks.

Sports labor veterans say that will be the ultimate test for the union and its leader Mr. Smith, who has been on the job less than two years and has no previous experience in labor fights. 

NFL players are different than other professional athletes because their careers are decidedly shorter, just 3.5 years on average. Missing a season, or even half a season, means giving up a significant portion of the amount of money they will earn.

What became clear late Friday is that the two sides are far apart not only in their proposals but in their interpretation of the proposals. 

  Jeff Pash, the league's lead negotiator, said owners had offered to keep player pay at 2009 levels and raise it by $20 million per club over the next four years. The NFL season would remain at 16 games for the next two years, but then could expand to 18 games. Off-season and preseason workouts would be cut. Retirement and health-care benefits would improve and contracts could be guaranteed beyond one year. 

  Jim Quinn, a lead negotiator for the union, said the owners' proposal would have rolled back player pay to 2007 levels and amounted to a giveback of up to $8 billion over the course of the proposed 10-year deal. In addition, he said a flat salary cap would be imposed at $130 million, as the league would move away from basing player compensation on the percentage of revenues. 

 Write to  Matthew Futterman at matthew.futterman@wsj.com 