Federal air-safety officials are looking into why the lone air-traffic controller on duty at Washington's Reagan National Airport early Wednesday repeatedly failed to respond to pilots of two approaching aircraft, forcing both jetliners to land without clearance.

The veteran controller later acknowledged he may have been dozing, according to people familiar with the matter, just before and after midnight when the incoming jetliners were preparing to land. 

Pilots of an American Airlines jet on final approach tried in vain to contact the tower. A few minutes later, a United Airlines jet, en route from Chicago, experienced the same problem, according to federal air-safety officials.

Both jets landed safely without establishing communications with the tower. But the unusual incident is bound to revive debate over controller and supervisory staffing levels at some of the nation's airports, and whether some controllers working particularly late or early shifts may be prone to fatigue.

The incident, which involved a supervisor who isn't a member of the controllers' union, prompted an immediate and sharp response from Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood. 

Mr. LaHood, whose agency oversees the Federal Aviation Administration, issued a statement late Wednesday saying he had "directed the FAA to place two air traffic controllers at Ronald Reagan Washington National airport's control tower on the midnight shift."

Historically the FAA chief is in charge of making public statements reacting to controller mistakes. But this time, it was Mr. LaHood, his boss, who took charge and ordered immediate changes. "It is not acceptable to have just one controller in the tower managing air traffic in this critical air space," the Secretary's statement said, adding that FAA Administrator Randy Babbitt has been asked "to study staffing levels at other airports around the country."

A spokesman for the National Transportation Safety Board said the agency was collecting information about the incidents and determining how to proceed.

The safety board hasn't opened a formal investigation, according to spokesman Peter Knudson, but officials are trying to determine precisely what happened and "if they see significant safety issues" that warrant a more detailed look.

The FAA, which runs the nation's traffic-control system, said both planes "landed after failing to establish communications with the air traffic control tower." The pilots remained in contact with controllers at another facility, according to the FAA's statement, and the agency "is looking into staffing issues and whether existing procedures were followed appropriately." FAA spokeswoman Laura Brown declined to go beyond the agency's statement.

The crew of the first plane, operated by the  AMR Corp. unit, broke off its approach, circled the field and informed an FAA controller at a nearby facility about the unusual situation. A few minutes later, at around 12:10 a.m. Wednesday, the American plane touched down in good weather, with the pilots repeatedly broadcasting their position by radio as if they were landing at a small, private airport without a tower or assigned controllers.

Within a few more minutes, the second plane, operated by the unit of  United Continental Holdings Inc.,
UAL


0.64
%




 followed the same precautions, touched down safely and also relied on airline ground personnel to help it reach the proper gate.

Tower controllers are responsible for issuing takeoff and landing instructions, and commercial pilots are trained to wait for such clearances under nearly all circumstances. But controllers also give instructions to help pilots taxi around airports, particularly to avoid potential collisions with other aircraft or equipment on the ground. 

Preliminary reports indicated that an employee at a regional FAA radar facility about 40 miles away—which been in contact with the planes just before handing them off to the tower's radio frequency—tried but failed several times to raise the Reagan National airport controller by telephone.

Pilots of a third aircraft, which landed at Reagan National closer to 12:30 a.m., were able to talk to the tower and received the normal clearance before touchdown, according to people familiar with the sequence of events. 

When it comes to aviation hazards stemming from fatigue, sleepy pilots have garnered most of the public, regulatory and congressional attention in recent years. The FAA is in the process of writing stricter rules limiting their work hours and consecutive time on duty. 

Air-safety experts have raised concerns about potentially significant dangers posed by sleepy or inattentive controllers, particularly during early-morning shifts with relatively few landings or takeoffs, when the tendency to doze may be greatest.



 Write to  Andy Pasztor at andy.pasztor@wsj.com 