BRASILIA -- At the outset of a three-country tour of Latin America, President Barack Obama heaped huge praise on Brazil's remarkable economic rise, but received a tongue lashing in return from Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff, who criticized the U.S. loose monetary policy for contributing to "acute" global imbalances by artificially weakening the U.S. dollar.

A joint appearance by the two leaders in Brazil's futuristic presidential palace was perhaps most remarkable for the subject that barely came up: The near simultaneous launching of U.S.-backed military engagements in Libya. Near the end of his remarks, Mr. Obama said the United Nations coalition, led by France and the U.K., was ready to "act with urgency." More details weren't available from the president, since Brazil did not allow reporters to ask questions.

So, as French jets took to the air over Libya, Mr. Obama spoke mainly on economic cooperation with Brazil, joking once about his disappointment that Chicago lost the 2016 Olympics to Rio de Janeiro. Later, Mr. Obama gave more extensive statements on Libya to U.S. reporters travelling with him.

Indeed, Mr. Obama's Latin American trip, which also includes Chile and El Salvador, is certain to be overshadowed the escalating hostilities. The visit is meant to reestablish the U.S. presence as an economic partner as Brazil and other resource rich Latin nations forge closer ties with China. But even before departing, Mr. Obama was criticized for leaving the U.S. amid international turmoil and pressing domestic budget debates.

Mr. Obama's main message was one of respect for Brazil, a country that has long craved international credibility, and now appears on the verge of achieving it as its economy surges into the ranks of the world's 10 biggest."Put simply, the United States doesn't simply recognize Brazil's rise. We support it enthusiastically," he said. "Brazil's extraordinary rise has captured the attention of the world."

Brazil, which holds a temporary seat on the U.N. security council, abstained from voting on whether to enforce a Lybian no fly-zone.

And Ms. Rousseff used blunt language to describe U.S. monetary policy, known as quantitative easing, blaming it for causing "distortions in currency markets," she said, and "pushing countries toward protectionist and defensive measures." Brazil, for example, now has one of the world's most overvalued currencies, making its industries less competitive in global markets. 

The statement appeared to be a set back for U.S. officials who have sought to convince Brazil that loose U.S. monetary policy will ultimately benefit the world if it helps jumpstart U.S. growth. U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner, also along for the trip, has sought to persuade Brazil that the chief global monetary problem is China, not the U.S., where the Yuan is artificially weak. Brazil is also a critic of Chinese currency policy.

Ms. Rousseff also pointed out that negotiating closer trade ties with the U.S. is difficult since the U.S. restricts imports of a range of important Brazilian exports in order to protect U.S. industries – restrictions that are political unlikely to be changed.

"We seek more fairness and balanced trade relations," she said "For us it's fundamental that we should break away from the barriers that have arisen against our products, like ethanol, beef, cotton, orange juice, airplanes, and so on and so forth."

Mr. Obama lauded the economic opportunities presented by Brazil's fast-growing economy and the increasing role the country aspires to play on the world stage. He said the country's upcoming hosting of soccer's 2014 World Cup of soccer and the 2016 Olympic Games provide a platform for joint investment in massive new public works projects like stadiums and airports. 

With massive new oil finds, Brazil may soon become an important supplier of petroleum as the U.S. hopes to rely less on the Middle East. "Brazil wants to be a major supplier," said Mr. Obama, and "the United States wants to be a major customer."

In a nod to Brazil's global ambitions, Mr. Obama said Brazil's growing economic might gives it the right to greater influence in multilateral forums such as the United Nations Security Council, where Brazil aspires to gain a permanent seat. Though he did not explicitly back Brazil's bid, as he did India's when he visited there last year, Brazilian officials said they were encouraged by his recognition of their efforts. 

The U.S., Mr. Obama said, "will continue our efforts to make sure the new realities of the 21st century are reflected in international institutions, including the United Nations."

While the tricky economic issues were not resolved, President Barack Obama reached a number of low-level agreements with his Brazilian counterpart on Saturday

Mr. Obama hailed the completion of an open skies agreement, which will allow more direct flights between the countries, and an Agreement for Trade and Economic Cooperation, which gives the nations a framework for hashing out troubling trade and economic issues.. 

Mr. Obama is scheduled to spend Sunday in Rio de Janeiro, where he will make an address to the Brazilian people, before traveling on to Chile and El Salvador.

 Write to  Tom Murphy at tom.murphy@dowjones.com 