WASHINGTON—President Barack Obama will nominate White House lawyer Donald Verrilli as solicitor general, filling a vacancy left by Elena Kagan when she became a Supreme Court justice last year, the White House said Monday.

The solicitor general oversees the government's litigation at the Supreme Court. Since Ms. Kagan's departure, the post has been temporarily held by Neal Katyal.

Mr. Verrilli is credited with helping to draft the administration's policy on state secrets during a stint at the Justice Department. In private practice, he represented Hollywood studios and the Recording Industry Association of America in copyright infringement cases. 

Mr. Katyal was a top candidate to get the nomination, but some administration officials feared Republicans in the Senate would try to block him. 

Mr. Katyal helped lead the legal team that won a landmark Supreme Court ruling in 2006 against the Bush administration's plan to hold military-commission trials for detainees at the Guantanamo Bay prison. His work on behalf of Guantanamo detainees has been criticized by some national-security hawks. 

Some conservative activists led by Liz Cheney, daughter of former Vice President Dick Cheney, ran ads calling lawyers who represented Guantanamo prisoners "al Qaeda" lawyers. Some top former Bush administration officials came to the lawyers' defense, citing legal traditions on defending unpopular plaintiffs and the need to clarify constitutional disputes. 

In choosing Mr. Verrilli, the administration is likely to win a friendlier reception on Capitol Hill, where Republicans increased their numbers in the Senate in the November elections. Before joining the administration, Mr. Verrilli was a lawyer at Jenner & Block LLP, representing big media companies.

The White House said Mr. Verrilli has participated in more than 100 cases before the U.S. Supreme Court and argued 12. He also served as a clerk for the late Justice William Brennan after graduating from Yale University and Columbia Law School. 

He led the winning side in the Supreme Court's 2005 ruling that found operators of peer-to-peer file-sharing websites could be sued for copyright infringement that occurs on their sites. The ruling killed sites such as Grokster, which was named in the lawsuit, while other file-sharing sites have sprung up since.

"It's been the honor of a lifetime to serve as acting solicitor general," said Neal Katyal, who Mr. Obama passed over for a permanent appointment. He called Mr. Verrilli "an outstanding choice."

Mr. Katyal, a Georgetown law professor, is expected to return to teaching and private practice after his successor is confirmed. He will have a number of important cases to argue before then, including a defense of the Affordable Care Act when a federal appeals court in Richmond, Va., hears a challenge to the health care overhaul.

 -- Jess Bravin contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Evan Perez at evan.perez@wsj.com 