WASHINGTON—An Alabama nuclear plant that recently shut down after losing power during a severe storm has been cited for an equipment failure of "high safety significance" by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. 

The equipment failure at the Browns Ferry plant occurred last year, and the public was never endangered, the nuclear agency said Tuesday. Still, the agency said it would step up inspections and oversight at the Athens, Ala., facility.

Nuclear safety faces increased scrutiny in light of the accident at Japan's Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant, where critical safety systems failed to keep reactors cool following a March 11 earthquake and tsunami.

"Significant problems involving key safety systems warrant more extensive NRC inspection and oversight" at Browns Ferry, said Victor McCree, the agency's administrator for the Southeast region, in a statement. The NRC graded the failure "red," the highest such rating for inspection findings. 

The Browns Ferry plant has been shut down since severe storms knocked out power transmission lines in northern Alabama on April 27. At the time, officials said safety systems operated as needed when the plant lost power. 

The NRC said the equipment problem involved the failure of a valve that is part of a system counted on to cool one of the three reactors at the Browns Ferry site in the event of an accident. On Oct. 23 of last year, the valve failed to open while operators were refueling the Unit 1 reactor.

The Tennessee Valley Authority, which operates the plant, later found that the last time the valve had definitively worked properly was on March 12, 2009, when the cooling system was placed in service, the NRC said. 

The NRC said with the system not working, the reactor core could have been damaged "had an accident involving a series of unlikely events occurred." A damaged reactor core can lead to the release of dangerous radiation.

The TVA, a U.S. government-owned corporation, said it was disappointed by the NRC's move.

TVA's chief nuclear officer, Preston Swafford, said in a written statement: "TVA found the problem and fixed it." The valve "has worked properly during tests, and it worked properly again last week when the plant really counted on it after the severe weather that recently hit Alabama," he said.

Mr. Swafford said the NRC indicated Tuesday that the violation wouldn't affect Browns Ferry's return to service after repairs to tornado-damaged power lines are completed.

The NRC said the increased oversight at Browns Ferry would include an additional inspection that would evaluate issues beyond the scope of its normal inspections, including safety culture and other issues.

 Write to  Ryan Tracy at ryan.tracy@dowjones.com 





