PORT AU PRINCE, Haiti—Haitians will choose either an eccentric pop star or a former first lady to be their next president Sunday in a vote where tensions are running high following the return to the country Friday of controversial former President Jean Bertrand Aristide.

The former priest, twice elected Haiti's leader and twice deposed, ended a seven-year exile in South Africa and was greeted in Haiti Friday with a delirious welcome from hundreds of supporters.

"We are home," said Mr. Aristide, flanked by his wife, Mildred, his two daughters and actor Danny Glover, a longtime supporter.

The firebrand politician is a very divisive figure in Haiti, hated by many in the middle and upper classes but adored by many poor, some of whom see in Mr. Aristide as a potential savior who can help the country recover from last year's horrific earthquake, which killed an estimated 230,000.

"I'm very happy to see him," said Ricard Joseph, a 49-year-old metalworker who walked three hours for a chance to meet the former president. "We are hoping for change."

But some Haitians—even supporters—feared that Mr. Aristide's return could bring more turmoil to this tragedy-stricken country. "He should have come back after the election," said Michelin Sejour, 52, the mother of nine children. "This is bound to cause trouble."

Mr. Aristide's arrival came just two days before Sunday's vote pitting Mirlande Manigat, a 70-year-old grandmother and law professor, against Michel "Sweet Micky" Martelly, a 50-year-old pop star.

Both candidates came out ahead from a November first-round vote that ended in chaos when followers of Mr. Martelly rioted after government electoral authorities eliminated him from advancing to a run-off vote. A commission from the Organization of American States, which had monitored the vote, later found evidence of fraud. Diplomatic pressure then forced Haiti's electoral authorities to eliminate the official party candidate, Jude Célestin, in favor of Mr. Martelly for the second round.

If Sunday's vote leads to more tumult, some Haitians worry that Mr. Aristide might try to take advantage of the chaos and call for a new vote with himself as a candidate. "Some people are afraid of that, and some people want exactly that," says Robert Fatton, a Haiti expert at the University of Virginia.

To avoid a repeat of last November's chaotic vote, Haiti's electoral authority has replaced voting booth coordinators and has trained new ones. There will be 23,000 security officers in place at more than 11,000 voting booths around the country, according to Haitian officials. Still, observers are concerned.

"There will be irregularities," said Colin Granderson, head of the international OAS-led observer mission. "I asked if buses had been organized for camp refugees and nothing had been done; lists of registered voters are still missing."

Mr. Granderson also criticized both candidates for instilling a climate of violence. "Manigat and Martelly have said they'll take to the streets the day after the elections to proclaim their victory," he said. "It's irresponsible."

The stakes are high for Haiti, one of the world's poorest countries. The winner of the poll will have a large say in how billions of dollars donated by the international community are spent to rebuild the nation, whose capital was decimated by the quake. Little progress has been made since, and hundreds of thousands of Haitians are still living in fetid tent cities that have sprung up on the ruins of the city.

Both candidates come from traditional elite families, and advocate similar conservative policies, including restoring Haiti's army. But there the similarities end.

Mr. Martelly is a lewd singer of carnival songs and universally known as "Sweet Micky." Haitians say Mr. Martelly has never been a fan of Mr. Aristide. "He was an anti-Aristide person, who is identified with the military," says Mr. Fatton. He has written songs that were critical of Mr. Aristide's political movement, Lavalas. 

The straight-laced Mrs. Manigat is considered part of Haiti's political establishment. Her husband, Leslie, a history professor, was briefly elected president in 1988, and overthrown by the military six months later. Mrs. Manigat has been critical of the international charities that largely run Haiti's social services. She has championed changes in Haiti's constitution that would ease legal limits to the role Haitians living abroad can play in the country's economy and politics.

Under the handling of international electoral advisers, Mr. Martelly has changed his image from that of a gyrating carnival singer to a polished would-be statesman who has promised poor Haitians that he'll get reconstruction off the ground. He is seen as particularly popular among the young.

Benita Guerrier, who works as a cook in a private house, said she was voting for Mr. Martelly. "Martelly is real. You feel him in your heart." She said she'll vote for him because "he's a good father who takes care of his children."

Former Martelly supporter, Gabiel Moise, a 33-year-old social worker, is organizing students to support Mrs. Manigat. "The world needs to know Haiti's youth is for Manigat. She is serious. She is one of them."