Bangalore – In a strange paradox of the private equity world, investors want to fund food-processing firms but their appetite remains unsatisfied. 

Most of the large food-processing companies already have capital, and aren't really looking for institutional capital. So, private equity firms now have widened the net to include commodity-processing companies that source and sell food grains.

Food-processing companies are an obvious investment choice for private equity firms in a country with the second largest population in the world. After the 2008-2009 slump, investors wanted to put their money in domestic consumption demand-driven sectors, particularly those which wouldn't be hit by a fall in purchasing power.

Private equity investors tend to like food companies. They have a fast growth trajectory, and the business is steady once a brand name is established. Despite this interest and favorable macroeconomic factors, in 2010, only three food-processing firms raised funds, including Cremica Agro Foods. Most of the large food-processing firms have listed or raised capital already, and valuations are high for companies that have a differentiated offering.

"There is a lot of interest in the food businesses, but not many investable companies are available as they are often cash-positive and don't need institutional capital," said  Deepesh Garg, director, o3 Capital Advisors Pvt. Ltd, a Mumbai-based investment bank. So, investors have been driven to look at commoditized plays such as rice and sugar as there is a lack of opportunity in the value-added play in food companies, said  Sunil Jain, vice-president of investment bank MAPE Advisory Group.

In 2010, there were 10 investments in commodity firms. Last week, Standard Chartered Private Equity invested 1.1 billion rupees for an undisclosed stake in Delhi-based Bush Foods Overseas Pvt. Ltd, a rice-processing company. Bush Foods, which has brands like Neesa, Indian Star and Himalayan Crown, is an exporter of basmati rice to more than 34 nations.

International Finance Corp. plans to invest $30 million through a mix of equity and debt in Dunar Foods, which procures processes and supplies basmati rice, according to a recent report in VCCircle.

Investors say a well-differentiated offering and long-term commitment to quality is what they are looking for when it comes to backing a food-processing firm. 

The investment in Bush Foods is a part of Standard Chartered Private Equity's "thesis of backing agri- and consumer-based businesses that offer a well-diversified play between the global and domestic consumption story," said  Rahul Raisurana, managing director of the firm. 

His firm is scouting for similar companies to invest in. But it's not that easy to find the next deal.

Bangalore-based Zephyr Peacock India has been trying to invest in the sector for the last four years without any success. The firm, which invests in the range of $5 million to $15 million, has broadened its reach to include procurement, packaging and logistics, said  Mukul Gulati, managing director at Zephyr.

He expects demand for processed food to increase as the pace of life gets busier. 

"The business is slated to grow," Mr. Gulati said. "With the growth of organized retail, demand for processed or packaged food will also go up. We have not come across a single interesting opportunity."

But there are other doors that are opening.

With global brands such as  Wal-Mart Stores Inc.
WMT


-0.28
%




 coming into the country and the large footprint of existing Indian retailers, there is huge interest in backing their national and regional vendors, said  Mohit Agarwal, an associate with investment bank Equirus Capital Pvt. Ltd.

But there still are few traditional food-processing companies that are looking for cash. Jam and beverage maker Mapro FoodsPvt. Ltd said it is in the process of appointing an investment banker to scout for investors. 

"There are some private equity funds that have approached us, directly, but we are not enthused with their proposals," said  Mayur Vora, managing director, Mapro Foods. He declined to disclose the names of the funds