STAEFA, Switzerland— Valentin Chapero has no eye for the stunning alpine peaks that dominate the view from  Sonova Holding AG
SOON


-0.37
%




's board-room windows. The chief executive of the world's largest hearing-aid maker runs an application on his mobile phone to discover the names of the mountains. 

His lack of familiarity with the territory may be due to the fact that he's not one of the locals, who love to praise the beauty of this lake-side town, a 30-minute train ride from Zurich. The Spanish-born CEO, who moved to Germany at age 6 with his family and arrived here in 2002, laughingly calls himself "a secondo," meaning second-generation foreigners.

But Mr. Chapero, 54, who holds a doctorate in physics and has spent his professional career in the telecommunication and audiology divisions of companies such as  Siemens AG and Nixdorf Computer AG, defends his imperviousness to the beauty around him. "Everybody thinks seeing is much more important than hearing," Mr. Chapero says. "But that's not true. Hearing is more important as it connects people with people, while seeing is what connects people with objects."

Certainly, demand for hearing aids held up at a time when competitors in the medical technology and pharmaceutical sectors were hit hard by the economic crisis and forced to cut jobs and restructure. Sonova continued to grow and generated enough cash to hunt for takeover targets.

In fiscal 2009/10, Sonova's revenue rose by about 20% to a record 1.5 billion Swiss francs ($1.6 billion), extending its share of the global hearing-aid market to roughly 26% and marching ahead of competitors such as  William Demant Holding
WDH


0.19
%




 A/S of Denmark and Siemens's hearing-aid division. Net profit remained stable at around 223 million francs, despite hefty takeover costs linked to the $489 million acquisition of hearing-implant maker Advanced Bionics Corp. 

While some of the growth came from acquisitions, the company's organic growth topped 10%. This was a result of its product mix—its devices are priced across a broad spectrum—and the fact that it is less dependent on insurance reimbursements than many other medical device makers, says Mr. Chapero. More than 60% of Sonova's sales come from consumers, who pay out of their own pockets. 

Even during the worst phase of the economic crisis in 2008, the company's sales rose by more than 12%, surprising investors, who had avoided the stock on fears consumers would delay buying hearing aids. Mr. Chapero says investors mistakenly equated Sonova with dental-implant makers, such as Switzerland-based  Nobel Biocare AG, which suffered heavily during the crisis as consumers put off dental surgery. 

Such worries resulted in Sonova's stock falling some 67% from April 2008 peak of 128.8 francs to a low of 42 francs in November of that year, before investors realized neither lower reimbursements nor buying delays were hampering the company's ability to grow. Sonova's operating profit margins have remained stable around 25% over the past three years and the stock is back at pre-crisis levels. It closed at 126.9 francs on Friday, down 0.5%.

"Even though a significant part of our revenue comes through consumer spending, it is a different product category than other products that you can postpone," Mr. Chapero says. "This is because the purchase of hearing aids is delayed in the first place. The average waiting time from the moment a person has a serious hearing problem to the moment the person will buy a hearing aid is 10 years." By the time a customer decides to take the plunge, he or she is thoroughly convinced he needs it. 

Mr. Chapero says even his mother, who is now 74 and who has had a hearing problem for about four years, doesn't want to buy acoustic equipment yet. "She probably won't accept a hearing aid until she is about 80," he says. Her resistance is typical, Mr. Chapero says, as hearing problems, unlike vision impairments, are considered embarrassing.

Sonova is fully aware of this psychological resistance and is therefore stressing the service part of its business. "In fact, no one is interested in buying a hearing aid. What people want is better hearing," Mr. Chapero says. "So our industry, although we are device makers, is driven by service. And it's because of this that we see huge opportunities."

The hearing-aid market, Mr. Chapero says, is forecast to grow by between 4% to 7% over the next few years as the world's population ages. He is convinced Sonova can continue to outpace the market, by focusing on service; he says it takes 10-15 hours of service before a client buys a hearing aid. New product launches of high-quality equipment should also help Sonova stay abreast of its peers, he says.

And as the baby-boom generation ages, growth is set to pick up further. "The oldest baby boomers are now 65," Mr. Chapero says. "The average age of our instrument wearer is 70-72." Within the next five years, the bulk of the baby boomers will reach the age "when they are supposed to get a hearing aid." This means that even if the economic environment remains depressed and further austerity measures lead to lower reimbursement levels, Sonova is set to see an influx of up to 30% more consumers than normal over the next few years, he says. 

But despite the strong fundamentals, Mr. Chapero is reluctant to shout too loudly about Sonova's prospects, as the company is still smarting from a product recall at its implant unit Advanced Bionics. The U.S.-based firm, which had similar problems before Sonova bought it, stopped implanting devices last November after two patients suffered severe pain. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration is investigating the case.

"We are on a learning curve," Mr. Chapero says. "It is true that Advanced Bionics had problems, which we knew when we acquired the company. But when we found out about the problem, we assumed a zero-tolerance attitude." As part of a shake-up of the implant business, Sonova has initiated job cuts at the unit and has appointed  Hansjuerg Emch, a former executive at Swiss medical device maker  Synthes Inc., to its management board to oversee the implant business. 

"The problem has thrown us back one year, cost us one year," Mr. Chapero says, declining to detail the costs involved. Analysts expect Sonova's net profit to be hit by about 40 million to 45 million francs, a figure Mr. Chapero neither confirms nor denies. "But the problem has helped us to be even more hands-on in terms of managing Advanced Bionics," Mr. Chapero says. Advanced Bionics should soon relaunch the implant, he says: "If everything goes reasonably well, sometime between April and autumn, depending on the jurisdiction, we should come back, in a staggered way, to the markets." 

Since the product recall, no similar cases have been found, Mr. Chapero says, adding that no lawsuits have been filed as a result of the problem. But he warned that Sonova's business outlook depends on when regulators give it the green light to start selling the implants again. Fears are that if the U.S. government finds more faults, Sonova might be forced to write down the value of Advance Bionics, which it hasn't done yet, and incur more revamp costs. 

But such risks are "the nature of the beast," Mr. Chapero says, and he is willing to learn from mistakes. He cites a failed attempt several years ago to launch a luxury hearing aid called Verve. Despite using a George Clooney-lookalike to advertise the device, in an attempt to mimic Nestlé SA's success with Nespresso, the project bombed because retailers considered it too expensive to stock.

"We have learned a lot from [these mistakes]," Mr. Chapero says. 

Further acquisitions are off the table for the time being, as Sonova's strong hearing-aid business and fledgling implant division mean it already "has all the elements to grow," Mr. Chapero says. Instead, he points to January's launch of a small, ceramic-based hearing aid. The device uses cutting-edge technology but comes without the luxury marketing puff of the failed Verve project. The high-tech materials used help to fix the device behind the ear more securely and fully protect it from water and sweat. It is so small, around the size of two peas, that it disappears behind the ear. This may attract people who need to hear better but have been reluctant to wear a hearing aid. Mr. Chapero says it could help many hearing-impaired people reconnect with society. "Hearing is your social sense. It's about your love life, your family, it's about how you communicate," he says.

 Write to  Goran Mijuk at goran.mijuk@dowjones.com 