Tending bar for thirsty fans at Foley's Pub on 33rd Street, Yankees general manager Brian Cashman doesn't look like a man who wants out of his job. He laughs gamely when some patrons ask if he can get them "a pitcher," and not the kind filled with beer. He smiles and bobs his head in tune when some rascals play Red Sox theme song Sweet Caroline on the jukebox. He wears a blonde, spiked-hair wig and, according to the waitresses, is a heckuva natural bartender.

But at the beginning of his "shift" as guest bartender for charity, there was Mr. Cashman, putting out the latest media fire and answering questions about whether he is unhappy in his job, and whether he wants out of New York. 

Somewhere between rappelling down the side of a Stamford office building and bartending for charity, Mr. Cashman himself has become the story. Rather than handicap whether the Red Sox or the Yankees are better on paper (for the record, even the Yankee GM thinks it's the Red Sox and their stellar pitching staff) fans and media have turned to watching the man in the middle.

"It seems like if I answer questions lately, it plays a lot louder," Mr. Cashman said. "Maybe the questions are more difficult, or the people involved in the Q&A's are higher profile. But I'm a little surprised this winter—it seems louder. Maybe I'm different. Maybe it's me. I don't know."

 Mr. Cashman has never been afraid to speak his mind, but he served notice that this would be a different kind of offseason during contract negotiations with Derek Jeter, when he responded to some rumblings out of the Jeter camp with surprisingly pointed words of his own.

Then a few weeks ago, Mr. Cashman spoke out again regarding the signing of reliever Rafael Soriano, publicly disagreeing with the move. Then days later, Mr. Cashman was a little too honest at a private fan breakfast, expressing his belief that Mr. Jeter will move to center field some day; the comments were made public, and a media firestorm ensued. 

Conspiracy theorists speculate that by publicly disagreeing with his superiors, Mr. Cashman may be setting the stage for leaving the team when his contract expires at the end of this season.

That seems far-fetched. Regardless, all the talk ratcheted up to such a degree that on Friday, media-averse Yankee owner Hal Steinbrenner felt he had to step in, giving a rare interview to the New York Post in which he threw his full support behind Mr. Cashman and called the back-and-forth so much "drummed-up drama." 

All are now moving in lockstep: Mr. Cashman says he wants to be back when his contract expires after this season, and the owners say they want him to return (while probably preferring he wouldn't talk so much about Mr. Jeter's potential future positions).

When Mr. Cashman dissented on Mr. Soriano, he reportedly told Hal Steinbrenner he would be making his views public, and Mr. Steinbrenner gave his blessing. The general manager said that he made those remarks to maintain his credibility in the world of agents, fellow GMs and media. 

Directness and candor are necessary media strategies in New York, Mr. Cashman argued while surrounded by cameras and gawking patrons at the sports bar Wednesday. 

"It's hard not be pretty direct and forthright in a very difficult, demanding market. There's the ability to spin to some degree, and the ability not to run for cover and have to answer a question," Mr. Cashman said. 

Was Mr. Cashman's dissent a case of the GM flexing his muscles? Probably. Mr. Cashman wants total baseball control of this team, and when moves are made that contradict his publically announced strategies, he wants the world to know why. 

That he felt comfortable doing so, that Mr. Steinbrenner allegedly signed off on it and that Mr. Steinbrenner then leapt to Mr. Cashman's defense when the GM was in hot water days later, speaks volumes. Mr. Steinbrenner also vouches that he was fully behind Mr. Cashman when the GM raised the volume during contract negotiations with Mr. Jeter.

It also lends credibility to Mr. Cashman's assertions that he doesn't want to leave New York. 

"I'm fine. Every company has disagreements, agreements to disagree. The Yankees are the best sports franchise in the world," Mr. Cashman said.

There is some context here: Mr. Cashman is no stranger to organizational power struggles, once having a notorious fight with management in 2005 when he demanded, and received, full control of baseball decisions. Those memories, of fights between Cashman's New York baseball operations team and the so-called Tampa faction, hang over these proceedings. 

But the past few years of Hal Steinbrenner's leadership have been largely quiet, and it seems like the Yankee owner likes it that way. If Mr. Cashman really was on thin ice, then it seems unlikely that Mr. Steinbrenner would make the unconventional move of leaving his bunker to bail out the GM. 

There are two possibilities here: Either Mr. Steinbrenner is telling the truth—he did bless Cashman's comments and he wants the GM to return—or he isn't, and as a smart businessman, he simply wants this controversy to go away. 

Either way, it reinforces that the Hal Steinbrenner era will be very different from the decades of George Steinbrenner. Mr. Steinbrenner's comments show that, unlike his father, he will not let an employee publically wither on the vine in order to send a message. He will step in and try to keep his franchise quietly moving forward when possible. 

To Mr. Cashman, it's little surprise that he has become the story. He hasn't had the best offseason, and he knows it. 

"I'm certainly having my fair share of pressure and mudslinging coming my way. That comes with the job. I understand it. I failed in closing out Cliff Lee, and so I have to deal with the fallout from that....I have to wait for my next turn to come around," Mr. Cashman said. 

With that, Mr. Cashman waded through the assembled media and hopped back behind the bar, serving fans who wanted beers poured by the most newsworthy man on the Yankees. 

 Write to  Daniel Barbarisi at Daniel.Barbarisi@wsj.com 