I like to attend society balls once in a while for the same reason I try to drive out to the Hamptons every couple of years on sweltering summer weekends in bumper-to-bumper traffic: just so I know what I'm not missing. While I can appreciate the magic of these events—especially if the cause is worthy, the décor glorious, you're surrounded by friends and you're really rich—such parties can be surprisingly monotonous if either you or the event fail to meet those specifications. 

There are few occasions in life that so make you long to be elsewhere as the average charity gala where the no doubt hard-working and well-intentioned benefit organizers are asked to take a bow, and the triumphs upon which the guest of honor's first billion dollars were built are enumerated at great length. Worst of all is if the evening includes a live auction, your tablemates competing furiously to outbid each other for meals at four-star restaurants, tennis lessons with  Roger Federer and the use of private islands while your paddle remains glued to the table.

I'm pleased to report that none of these things happened at the Save Venice Ball Tuesday night at the Plaza. I'm not sure why, except that it's hard to take yourself too seriously if everybody is wearing Carnival masks and costumes and nobody knows who you are. Also, there was the cause. Venice, with its history, art, beauty and permanent need of rescue, has a way of outshining even the most resplendent socialite, and focusing everybody on the task at hand.

If La Serenissima, as Venice is known, had any competition it was mostly from the two buff, half-naked male tritons wielding staffs and standing guard on pedestals over the festivities. So what if their costumes weren't historically accurate. "I dressed them," Save Venice Chairman  Matthew White said. "My partner produces Broadway shows. These are leftover costumes from 'The Little Mermaid.'"

Save Venice is perhaps best known for its loving restoration of more than 400 works of art and architecture. Indeed, applause went up at our table when an image of one of Veronese's restored "Ester" paintings in the Church of San Sebastiano flashed on screens at the front of the Grand Ballroom—the evening's proceeds making possible a phase of the church's restoration. The reason for the applause, I discovered, was that the lady to my right, in a bepearled court gown based on those of women in Veronese's works (the dress's wire hoops kept brushing against my leg all night), was  Mary E. Frank, a Florida-based art historian who is actively involved in the project.

"I brought all these people over from Miami," she explained. "We raised over $50,000."

Ms. Frank's husband Howard, the chief operating officer of the Carnival Corporation, remained in Miami, where the two live. "Carnival builds ships outside of Venice in Marghera," Ms. Frank explained. "We travel to Italy every time there's a new ship being inaugurated. It's a great family vacation."

Even though I've never taken an ocean-going cruise and always wanted to (not that I was angling for a "sconto," or discount, as they say in Italy), I couldn't help but note that one of the more jarring sights in Venice these days is the boat hotels passing  Piazza San Marco—so massive that they dwarf the churches, campaniles and other masterpieces of Venetian architecture that Ms. Frank and her Save Venice companions are striving so nobly to preserve.

She'd obviously heard the argument before and pointed to a study by Venice In Peril, the British equivalent of Save Venice. "It examined all the different sources of tourism," she explained. "They came to the conclusion it was the least of the evils." She meant cruise ship traffic. "They stay on" in Venice, she said of passengers. "They spend time in the city; they spend money—unlike the day trippers."

Seated on my other side was  Michael LaPlaca, a graphic designer and innkeeper who spends half the year in Umbria, where he owns a bed and breakfast. Mr. LaPlaca told a moving tale of his first visit to Venice as a callow and frightened 23-year-old. On the vaporetto to the Lido, the only place where he could find a room, he passed a palazzo on the Grand Canal where beautiful people in tuxedos and ball gowns stepped off gondolas and onto a dock illuminated by torches, before vanishing inside.

It became Mr. LaPlaca's dream to attend such parties. And he's achieved his goal, having done design work for Save Venice pro bono for the last 17 years and attending five of its galas in just such Grand Canal palaces; Save Venice holds its party in Venice on alternating years. However, he may have made his biggest splash during a recent Carnival when he and his Italian greyhound Rocco appeared in matching cerulean vests. The designer happened to be wearing his under his tux Tuesday night.

Unfortunately, photographers and tourists made such a fuss that Rocco "got sick from all the flashbulbs," his master reported. But like  San Rocco, the pooch's namesake, who may be best known for being nursed back to health by a wound-licking dog after he came down with the plague, Mr. LaPlaca happily reported that his Rocco has recovered completely from his run-in with the paparazzi. "He's fine," Mr. LaPlaca stated as the music started and the dance floor quickly filled.

— ralph.gardner@wsj.com 