DUBAI—Oman's government made another bid to tamp down protests by announcing the second cabinet reshuffle in a week, though some demonstrators said they'll continue to press for deeper reforms.

The cabinet reshuffle is the latest concession made by the authorities, following the introduction of welfare payments to the unemployed, increased salaries, higher state payments for students and the sacking of six cabinet members.

So far one person has died in more than a week of low-level protests aimed at raising the minimum wage, eradicating government corruption and giving more powers to Oman's Majlis al-Shoura, a partly elected body that at present has a purely advisory role. 

The government also took a tough line toward recent incidents in Sohar, a port city in the north, where protesters last week torched a supermarket and blocked highways. 

"The public prosecution... affirms that it will initiate investigations against those who incited and carried out such acts to present them to justice and achieve the public and private deterrence," said a statement published on Oman's state news agency on Saturday.

While the demonstrations were inspired by the wave of popular revolts that has toppled the leaders of Tunisia and Egypt, protesters in Oman have consistently said they don't want to oust Sultan Qaboos bin Said Al Said, who has ruled since 1970.

The Sultan on Saturday said he had replaced the minister of the royal office, the minister of the diwan of the royal court and the secretary-general of royal court affairs—three senior positions in the Arabian Peninsula monarchy. Last week, he sacked the ministers of education, commerce and industry, and civil service. 

"Today the people have been very happy and were praising Sultan Qaboos because he gave them what they want," said Hasher, a student who has been involved in the Sohar protests, and who didn't want his full name used. "But there are some people who won't go home because they want more change."

Some protesters have said they want to see further cabinet changes, including the departure of the economy and finance minister, Ahmad Mekki, as well as other reforms. 

Before the reshuffle was announced, hundreds of protesters gathered at the Sohar roundabout on Friday to pay respects to the man who died in protests, according to local news reports and an eyewitness.

Demonstrations have calmed in recent days following the supermarket attack and the government's announcement it would pay the unemployed 150 Oman rials ($380) a month. 

Protesters insist they won't quit until the minimum wage is raised to 500 rials a month after last month's increase of 40% to 200 rials.

Meanwhile, up to 300 people are reported to have staged a sit in outside the Majlis al-Shoura in the capital, Muscat, demanding the body be given greater powers. 

Oman, which sits at the mouth of the world's most important oil thoroughfare, the Strait of Hormuz, has a population of about three million and is the poorest member of the Gulf Cooperation Council. The other member states are Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar and Bahrain.