 Birdland  315 W. 44th St., (212) 581-3080  Through Saturday 

F. Scott Fitzgerald (no relation to Ella) might have described David Murray as the Benjamin Button of jazz. Much of the saxophonist's earliest music was his most avant-garde and "futuristic," and thus seemed a direct extension of the music made by Albert Ayler and John Coltrane at the outer extremes of Free Jazz. As he matured, Mr. Murray didn't exactly evolve backward, but he has gradually traveled through much of the jazz timeline: bebop, the swing era, ballads, soul jazz. The David Murray Big Band, appearing this week at Birdland, addresses yet another corner of the jazz canon. This 15-piece orchestra doesn't sound like anyone else's, much like Mr. Murray's duos, trios, quartets and octets produce distinctive sounds. Having progressed laterally from completely far out to completely far in (as in his ballads with strings), Mr. Murray's orchestral music is an experience that is both unique and overwhelming.

The music of Albert Ayler was a logical place for Mr. Murray to start for another reason. The late saxophone guru showed that you can't take anything for granted—he insisted on reinventing all the rules of music from the ground up: intonation, time, harmony (such as it was), everything. Mr. Murray has fleshed out that notion for considerably longer than Ayler was able to do. In a sense, Mr. Murray has re-created nearly every kind of jazz that ever was.

The Murray Big Band utilizes many of the same concepts as other large format ensembles: theme and variations, the balance between music that's been pre-composed and that which is improvised, as well as between a single soloist and the whole band (or specific sections thereof). But Mr. Murray and his sidemen use these ideas in such a way that makes it seem like no one has ever thought of them before: When, for instance, trumpeter Omar Kabir plays a solo during the opening selection, "Black Nat," and Mr. Murray gradually cues the reeds to come in and play a background figure behind him, it sounds like a whole new kind of counterpoint—one that I can't ever recall having previously heard. When he plays Billy Strayhorn's "Chelsea Bridge," which he's been doing at least since his 1988 album "The Hill," it's the same notes and fundamentally the same song, yet somehow it's a whole new "Chelsea Bridge."

Between 1978 and 1980, Mr. Murray recorded four albums of unaccompanied saxophone solos (and his study of Coleman Hawkins's "Picasso"), and, perhaps from this experience, makes a point of using the whole of the horn. He has famously found new registers up on top where the finger keys have no control and the notes depend almost entirely on embouchure; lately I've also noticed more additional notes way down at the bottom, below the low B flat where the horn is supposed to end. If he were a pianist, he'd be playing some giant mutant keyboard, 10 feet long with about 196 keys.

"Black Nat" is a key composition on Mr. Murray's latest album, "David Murray Cuban Ensemble Plays Nat King Cole en Espanol," the title of which is the only thing that's ungainly about it. He's delved into traditional pop and world music before (notably on his series of albums with the Gwo Ka Masters of Guadeloupe), but here he combines both with a vengeance. Whimsy, a unique element in the music of an avant-garde firebrand, is not a new addition in his music, but this is his most concentrated dose of it yet.

The standard argument justifying today's artistic climate of cut-and-paste and other forms of rehash (like sampling) would seem to be that all the great beats and grooves have already been laid down. But David Murray continually proves that the wheel needs to be reinvented every now and then.

 The Oak Room (at the Algonquin Hotel)  59 W. 44th St., (212) 840-6800  Through Feb. 12 

Talk about kicking it old school: Steve Ross may be the last of the heavy-duty traditional cabaret pianist-singers, extending the legacy of Bobby Short and Leslie "Hutch" Hutchinson. His latest show is called "Romance and Rhythm," yet "Romance and Raillery" might be a more accurate—if more awkward—title, since the all-important contrast here is between the sentimental ("These Foolish Things") and the comic ("And Her Mother Came Too"). Though his selections range from Fats Waller to Jacques Brel to Stephen Sondheim, the best reason to see Steve Ross is for what he does with Noël Coward. As he proved last October at the Mabel Mercer Foundation's Cabaret Convention, he is easily Coward's finest living interpreter, and he continues to uphold the title with an expertly enacted "Bar on the Piccolo Marina" and a ace Coward waltz medley. Surely no other cabarateur is entitled to perform, as Mr. Ross does, in a green velvet smoking jacket once owned by the Master himself.



 Rose Hall  Broadway at 60th Street, (212) 258-9595  Through Sunday 

The star pianist gets a chance to flex his big-band muscles in a meeting with the Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra, addressing a program of Corea classics going back to the beginning of his career, with "Tones For Joan's Bones" and "Crystal Silence." Possibly he and the band will make use of some of the excellent orchestrations he played with the Sydney Symphony and vibraphonist Gary Burton on the 2007 album "New Crystal Silence." The concert is the centerpiece of a busy weekend at Rose Hall: In the Allen Room, Jane Monheit and the marvelous Mary Stallings pay tribute to Sarah Vaughan. And at Dizzy's, pianist Marcus Roberts (an honorary Marsalis if ever there was one) brings his latest trio, with drummer Jason Marsalis (a real one) and bassist Rodney Jordan. Hot tickets all.

 Jazz Standard  116 E. 27th St., (212) 576-2232)  Through Sunday 

The great jazz debates of the 1980s essentially pitted the "neoconservatives" against the "outer spacemen." Drummer "Tain" Watts and bassist Robert Hurst, working with the various Marsalises, were on the conservative side of the argument, while saxophonist and theorist Steve Coleman captained the opposing team, leading the charge into the future and into Brooklyn (back when Brooklyn was the new Brooklyn). Now that the members of the rival factions have more than kissed and made up, they're making beautiful music together under Mr. Watts's leadership. The trio's opening show on Tuesday included a medium-tempo piece ("Gold Days"), something closer to a ballad ("August Moon") and a funk beat ("Uh Oh"), all of which allowed Mr. Coleman to start with abstract shreds of seemingly unconnected notes and bursts of sound, which he gradually and ingeniously wove into flowing melodies. Who would have thought it? Maybe these rival clans were more alike than they were different after all.

 (Le) Poisson Rouge  158 Bleecker St., (212) 228-4854  Friday 

No less than David Murray playing Nat King Cole, William Parker playing Curtis Mayfield makes perfect sense when you think about it for a moment. Conceived by the downtown bassist shortly after the R&B composer's death in 1999, this concept presentation – only now being released as an album ("I Plan to Stay a Believer") shows that soul music is surprisingly compatible with free jazz. "Freddie's Dead" treats that 1972 theme from "Superfly" as a protest song, with sideline commentary from Amiri Baraka, building to cacophonous squeals that certainly sound like somebody is pissed off about something. Conversely, "People Get Ready" elegantly juxtaposes alto vocalist Leena Conquest with alto saxophonist Sabir Mateen and the full gospel choir that the song (which inspired Bob Marley's "One Love") deserves. They give new meaning to the instruction clearly delineated in Psalms 98 to "make a joyful noise unto The Lord."