DAVOS, Switzerland—Top trade negotiators from the U.S. and the European Union said that emerging economies like China, India and Brazil must make large concessions to reach a global trade deal.

Trade ministers from the U.S., the EU, China, Japan, Brazil, India and Australia were meeting informally here on Friday night to inject new life into talks that began nearly 10 years ago in Doha, Qatar. More than 20 trade ministers will meet Saturday for further talks.

The pressure on the fast-growing nations reflects their growing clout in world economic affairs and the expectation among rich countries that this new stature demands greater responsibility.

EU Trade Commissioner Karel De Gucht, who hosted the informal meeting, said at its closing that the seven participating trade ministers agreed to aim for a final global trade deal by July. 

Governments nearly reached a deal in 2008 that would have seen developed nations cut their farm subsidies and industrial import tariffs in return for developing nations lowering their tariffs on industrial goods. But lingering disagreements between the U.S., China and India stymied a final deal, and negotiators have since made little progress.

In a speech Friday at the World Economic Forum in Davos, British Prime Minister David Cameron said, "If we don't get the deal done this year it is hard to see how the Doha process can have any further credibility."

U.S. Trade Representative Ron Kirk said in an interview the "timing is ripe for us to make the hard decisions that are going to have to be made to the Doha Round to a conclusion."

"The world understands that exporting and trade is a great way to stimulate their economies," he added.

Mr. Kirk said India, China and Brazil have grown significantly since the inception of trade talks a decade ago and it was time for them to take "commensurate responsibility." 

He added that some of the highest tariffs were imposed on exports from the poorest economies by those countries he described as "the advanced developing economies." 

Those tariffs, Mr. Kirk suggested, should be lowered and the advanced developing nations should also consider concessions on other trade points, such as trade in services.

He added, "We have to have a very balanced and ambitious package that's not currently on the table."

In an interview, Mr. De Gucht said a new deal should include limits on the industrial subsidies China gives to its exporters. 

The issue is a major source of anxiety for Western companies, which say a mix of cheap credit provided by state-owned banks, tax breaks and outright grants give Chinese companies an unfair advantage in global markets.

"This is one of the points that we are going to make very strongly, that we need rules for subsidization," he said.

If the Doha deal doesn't happen this year, it may never get done, warns a new report co-written by Peter Sutherland, the first director of the World Trade Organization.

"Trade negotiators of major powers need to lead from the front," Mr. Sutherland, now a nonexecutive chairman at Goldman Sachs, said in an interview. "Heads of government have to do more than simply repeat the rhetoric; they have to finger the issues themselves."

—John W. Miller contributed to this article.

 Write to  Matthew Dalton at Matthew.Dalton@dowjones.com and Stephen Fidler at stephen.fidler@wsj.com 