TOKYO—The shift of  Sony Corp.'s manufacturing out of Japan to China has whittled the company's yen exposure to the dollar down to "virtually zero," but the electronics maker could be vulnerable to a strengthening Chinese yuan in the future, the company's corporate treasurer said. 

This move has "greatly changed Sony's currency landscape" over the past few years,  Hiroshi Kurihara told The Wall Street Journal during an interview Thursday. 

While the company used to track the dollar's moves against the yen rate obsessively, he said "now we don't really care." 

"On a net basis, our U.S. dollar exposure is becoming virtually zero," said Mr. Kurihara, who is in charge of Sony Global Treasury Services, a unit that handles nearly all of Sony's hedging in about 35 different currencies. 

Historically, Sony manufactured many goods such as television sets and PlayStation game consoles in Japan and then sold some of those products in the U.S. This meant that Sony would incur its costs in yen while generating its revenue in dollars, leaving itself vulnerable to changes in the dollar-yen rate. 

Sony has moved some production abroad in recent years, either at its own facilities in China or by using China-based contract manufacturers. Those costs are incurred in dollars, allowing the company to balance its dollar sales and costs. 

For major Japanese exporters such as Sony, which generates more than 70% of its sales outside of Japan, the growing use of China as a manufacturing base has resulted in easing one of the company's major nonbusiness risks: a strong yen. When the yen rises against other currencies, it can drag on a Japanese company's bottom line because it eats into overseas profit brought back to Japan. 

So when the yen surged to a 15-year high against the dollar late last year—and it continues to hover near those levels—there was a great deal of handwringing about how this might deal a devastating blow to Japanese exporters. But most companies have managed to avoid damaging losses by handling currency exposures better. 

The dollar stood at 82.24 yen on Thursday morning in New York. 

For the current fiscal year to March, Sony has said each one-yen fall in the U.S. dollar's average rate shaves two billion yen ($24.4 million) off the company's full-year operating profit. Mr. Kurihara said that figure will be even less next fiscal year. By comparison, the same currency swing cost Sony eight billion yen in operating profit in the fiscal year ended in March 2002. 

Sony currently expects to post a group net profit of 70 billion yen for the current fiscal year after reporting a loss of 40.8 billion yen a year earlier largely because of restructuring costs. 

Signaling better growth prospects outside of Japan, Sony is also bringing a smaller percentage of its overseas profit back to Japan. Mr. Kurihara said Sony tends to leave dollar-based and euro-based overseas profits in those markets, because it might need to retain some money in those currencies for future acquisitions or other expenses. 

For rapidly growing countries such as Brazil, India and China, Sony is choosing not to repatriate profits from those markets, because they will likely need money in those currencies to pay for future strategic investments. 

As a result, Mr. Kurihara said Sony now repatriates about 20% to 30% of its annual overseas profit back into yen, compared with about 50% five years ago. 

Tokyo-based Sony said it hedges its currency exposure on a monthly or three-month rolling basis with basic forward contracts. Most of its overseas sales subsidiaries incur costs in either yen (for most Asian countries), dollars (for Latin America and Russia) or euros (for European countries). 

The subsidiaries will, however, receive revenue in their local currency. 

Sony said the goal of its hedging isn't to earn money from speculating in foreign-exchange markets. The only goal is to reduce the fluctuations on profits from currency swings. 

"There is enough risk in our own business that we don't need to assume more risk by going into currencies," said Mr. Kurihara, who reports to Sony Chief Financial Officer  Masaru Kato. 

Sony's biggest currency exposure now is with the euro. A one-yen drop in the European currency's average foreign-exchange rate for the full year results in a loss of seven billion yen in operating profit for the current year ending in March. The same move dealt a 5.5-billion-yen blow to Sony's operating profit in the fiscal year ended in March 2002. 

Mr. Kurihara said part of the problem is that Sony has sold or closed many factories in Europe, greatly reducing its costs in the euro. What's more, contract manufacturers with factories in the region also want to be paid in dollars, because they buy supplies and materials in dollars as well. 

In China, Sony is likely to benefit for now if the yuan appreciates against global currencies as China loosens its currency controls, Mr. Kurihara said. Sony has a long position in the yuan because the company's sales far outweigh its costs since contract manufacturers accept payment in dollars. 

Sony doesn't disclose its sales in China. 

Mr. Kurihara said he expects Sony's contract manufacturers and Chinese suppliers to turn to the yuan for settlement in the future. This would reverse Sony's current cost structure in China and leave it exposed to yuan appreciation. 

He doesn't expect the change to happen overnight, saying it will take at least five years for the entire supply chain in China to move to settlement in yuan, also known as the renminbi. If that happens, he said, "that would be a problem for Sony." 

"In 10 years, the renminbi may be our biggest exposure," Mr. Kurihara said. "It's still far away. It will probably take more than five years, but less than 10." 

 Write to  Daisuke Wakabayashi at Daisuke.Wakabayashi@wsj.com 