MUMBAI --India's Tata Steel Ltd. is in the midst of mandating banks for a planned 15 billion rupees ($332.14 million) perpetual bond sale, people familiar with the matter said, making it the first such deal by a non-finance company in India. 

The deal will help the world's seventh largest steelmaker by sales raise long-term funds without taking on the repayment risks associated with debt, and avoiding the risk of tapping volatile stock markets.

The deal is the latest in a string of refinancing exercises by the Tata Group firm, beginning with a GBP3.5 billion refinance deal in September 2010, and including a $766 million share sale in January. 

The firm - a part of the salt-to-steel Tata group - is also in talks for a dollar-denominated perpetual bond, two of the sources said.

A Tata Steel spokesperson said that he wasn't aware of any bond sale plans.

The planned bond sale will help the steel maker refinance its existing debt, besides financing its expansion plans. Tata Steel is expanding the capacity of its Jamshedpur plant to 10 million metric tons a year from 6.8 million tons. The company, which has plants in Singapore, Thailand, the U.K., South Africa and the Netherlands, also plans to build two more factories in India.

The planned deal also highlights the increasing maturity of Indian firms, and their willingness to use hybrid instruments to raise funds without running the risk of turning to turbulent local stock markets.  Essar Energy, for example, sold a $500 million dollar convertible bond earlier this year. Bankers expect more such quasi-equity deals over the coming months.

The interest in hybrid structures comes as Indian stocks have been under pressure this year, the benchmark Sensex is down 10.32% so far. Surging prices at home, global political instability, and recurrent corruption scandals in India have dampened investor interest, leading to a dip in equity market issuances thus far this year.

Dealogic data shows an 80% decline in equity-capital markets deals in the year to March 11, from the previous year, highlighting the weak primary market sentiment. Several firms including L&T Finance Ltd. and Indian Oil Corp. Ltd. have deferred share sales, while Micromax Informatics Ltd has cut the size of a planned share sale by 30%.



 Write to  Bijou George at bijou.george@dowjones.com 