Steve Lavin strode out to midcourt, sweating, shouting, overcome by the moment. A sellout Madison Square Garden crowd was on its feet, and the St. John's coach was fanning the frenzy, waving his arms like an overgrown cheerleader during a second-half timeout.

For Mr. Lavin, this was the signature moment of his first season in New York. But for St. John's and its fans, it was more than that. This was years in the making. Painful, humbling, embarrassing years in the making.

By defeating No. 3 Duke on Sunday afternoon, 93-78, the Red Storm declared in emphatic fashion its return to relevance. For casual fans in the New York area, they are a team to watch again. For elite opponents, they are a team to worry about again.

Not since 2000 had St. John's defeated a team ranked No. 3 or higher. They beat the same opponent, upsetting then-No. 2 Duke in their second season under former coach Mike Jarvis.

But that was a one-point win. This was a thrashing from start to finish, a stunner in every respect. With a national television audience watching, it served as a two-hour infomercial on the Red Storm revival.

"This was our time," Mr. Lavin said. "This was our moment to have another breakthrough."

There have been others this season. A win over Georgetown on Jan. 3. A win over Notre Dame on Jan. 16.

 But none carried as much weight as beating Duke, the defending national champion.

After losing five of their previous six games, all against ranked opponents, St. John's greatly helped its chances of making the NCAA Tournament for the first time since 2002.

When the final buzzer sounded, senior guard Dwight Hardy, who led St. John's with 26 points, launched the ball toward the Garden ceiling. A couple dozen students rushed the court, though dozens more were held back—forcefully at times—by a wall of Garden security staff.

"I guess you could say we shocked the world," Mr. Hardy said. Well, no, not really. But they probably shocked just about everyone watching.

Far better teams than St. John's have been humbled by Duke, which won 19 of its previous 20 games this season and 37 of 39 dating to last season.

 The Blue Devils hadn't trailed by more than 11 points in any game this year. St. John's led by 21 at halftime.

Duke led the nation in 3-point shooting coming to the game, having made 40.1% of their shots from behind the arc. They made just 5 of 26 (19.2%) 3-point shots Sunday.

"We did not show up to compete until the middle of the second half, and that's extremely disappointing," Duke coach Mike Krzyzewski said, fidgeting with his championship ring after the game. "But we may not have beaten them anyway, because they played really well."

The biggest reason for optimism around St. John's this year has little to do with the team that took the floor Sunday. It's about the future.

 The recruiting class that will come in next season, Mr. Lavin's first with St. John's, is among the top-ranked in the nation.

The 10 seniors on this team were recruited by former coach Norm Roberts. Soon, they'll be gone, too, their memory overshadowed by what promises to be a new era. But for the moment, they are the ones resurrecting the program.

They took a dreadful game at Georgetown on Wednesday, a 77-52 loss, and turned it into a moment of self-reflection. "We talked a lot amongst ourselves and said we have to make a change," forward Justin Burrell said. Two grueling, physical practices followed.

"If you look around our team, we all have fat lips, scratched eyes, a couple ankles swollen," he said. "We were back there at practice fighting, and that's what we did today."

It wasn't much of a fight, though. Duke never came within single digits of the Red Storm in the second half. And during a timeout with 11:55 left, Mr. Lavin stoked the crowd.

"You're caught up in the moment of the game and wanted St. John's fans to come to the party," he said. "At that moment, it was just wanting to jumper-cable the crowd."

There was no need for that, though. For the first time in a long time, St. John's brought the noise on its own.

 Write to  Brian Costa at Brian.Costa@wsj.com 