A lot of people think Donald Trump's presidential bid is a cheap stunt, that he has no way of beating Barack Obama. They are so, so wrong. Despite all the foolishness about the president's birth certificate and the perception that Mr. Trump's political inexperience automatically disqualifies him for the job, two things work in his favor. 

One, the American people understand that our dithering economy will not revive until the housing market is fixed. And who better to fix it than the world's most famous real-estate developer? And second, NBC is prepared to invest enormous resources to ensure Mr. Trump's triumph, as it will lay the groundwork for the most lucrative, popular show in the history of television: "Celebrity Oval-Office Apprentice." 

The show's format is obvious. Each week competing teams will pitch their blueprints for America's future to the president-elect. These will break down on strict gender lines: say, Newt Gingrich, Mitt Romney and Gary Busey versus Sarah Palin, Michelle Bachmann and LaToya Jackson. Or Mike Huckabee, Haley Barbour and Meat Loaf versus…Sarah Palin, Michelle Bachmann and LaToya Jackson. 

One week the contestants will present their deficit-slashing plans to an expert panel consisting of Warren Buffett, Bill Gates and Star Jones. The next week they will take on Roe v. Wade. Then they might be asked to come up with a slogan for Mr. Trump's immigration program, or to devise a sexier name for the Internal Revenue Service. Something like Pay-Trump-Half. Finally, two contestants will remain. The winner gets to head the Federal Reserve. The loser gets to run the Treasury Department.

Donald Trump is a take-no-prisoners guy, so this thing could get nasty.

"I have to level with you, Newt: Nobody likes your ideas about revising the tax code, and nobody likes your hair," he would tell the former speaker, whom he would have defeated in the New Hampshire primary one year earlier. "We can fix the tax code, I think, I hope. I'm not sure we can move forward with that hair. By the way, can anyone understand anything Haley Barbour is saying?"

Women wouldn't get off any easier, though.

"Everybody hates Romney's health-care pitch," he'd tell the three female contestants. "Buffett ran the numbers, and Mitt left 12 zeros off the end. But your ideas are no better. Star really hates them. Having people fly to Anchorage for kidney transplants might save a few bucks here and there, but it sounds a lot like pork, Sarah. And frankly, Janet, what's up with that look? That face lift is scary."

"I'm LaToya," Ms. Jackson would correct him. "Janet's on 'Dancing With the Fallen Stars.' You know, the one hosted by Barack." 

The great thing about "Celebrity Oval-Office Apprentice" is the populist element, the very real possibility that someone like Gary Busey or the drummer from Deep Purple or even Sheila E. might beat out Mike Huckabee for the job of chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts. 

"I wish you'd leave the bass fiddle at home, Mike," the Donald would explain to Mr. Huckabee. "It's hokey, it's corny, it's lame. The United States of America is a first-class operation, like the Taj. The American people are gonna nix the hick from the sticks."

And then there is Gary Busey.

"I like your idea about going totally ballistic on artists who use taxpayer money to produce offensive art," the Donald would say. "Pawlenty here would probably try to reason with them. Christie would simply cut their funding. But I have a feeling you'd get down and dirty and kick some butt."

"Consider it kicked," would be Mr. Busey's response. "And if Buffett keeps challenging your numbers, I'll kick his butt, too."

Finally, Meat Loaf.

"Meat Loaf, great job, love your enthusiasm. I'll find something for you over at NASA. But your suggestion that we replace 'The Star-Spangled Banner' with 'Bat out of Hell'? Gee, I don't know. With all due respect, I don't think a guy like you could tell M1 from M&M's. Meat Loaf, you're fired."