After exhaustive seasons of Hollywood awards and European fashion, you can't blame some social New Yorkers for feeling like they haven't been the center of the universe for the last couple of months. The momentum started to shift on Thursday with the Frick Collection's annual Young Fellows Ball, which unofficially kicked off the spring benefit season.

This year's theme was Bal de Chinoiserie, which gave the event planners an excuse to play with plenty of excessive Asian party favors. The highlights included fresh cherry blossom threes, Shanghai-inspired red lacquer bar furniture, and beef lollipops that were part of a carefully crafted Asiatic-flavored hors d'oeuvres menu. Even the Judith Lieber bags—the company sponsored the evening along with Rachel Roy and Baccarat—were Beijing-friendly. "Mine is a pagoda," boasted Sloan Overstorm, one of the night's chairs. "I'm pretty sure it's one of a kind." 

Many attendees wore looks loaned to them by Ms. Roy, though she insisted her collection had not been influenced by Asian culture. "This is all kind of ironic," Ms. Roy said. "My resort line might have a little 'Shanghai Surprise' feel to it. But think more Sean Penn and less Madonna."

Still, some guests took the theme literally, thus becoming instant photo bait. Allison Ecung and Forbes Marsh became one of the most outstanding duos of the evening in matching custom-made black Chinese silk get-ups. 

"I'm wearing half Chinatown, half Givenchy," said Mr. Marsh. 

Another outstanding accessory was Angelo Lambrou's fascinating Que chapeau. "Thanks to Canal Street I found a hat that fits my small head," Mr. Lambrou said. 

"I must admit I haven't been as creative tonight," conceded jewelry designer Blair Husain, from the sidelines. 

As the night and DJ Anton wore on, guests gathered in the music room for a dim sum station that offered steamed chicken buns and spring rolls. Gillian and Sylvester Miniter decided to depart for a late 10 p.m. dinner and skip the fried buffet. But more intriguingly, another female guest went straight for the scarlet chopsticks. "I'm not here for the dumplings," she explained as she stuck the utensils into her hair. "I'm here to find some exotic men."

—Valentine Uhovski