Let's play a game.

Let's say Major League Baseball decided to contract the Yankees and the Mets and form one franchise for the New York market—and let's say you're the general manager. Let's also say that, to compile a 25-man roster for this new team, you could draft players from either team, and you began by drafting the starting rotation.

The first pick would be a no-brainer: the Yankees' CC Sabathia. Cy Young Award winner, four-time All-Star selection, one of the game's best left-handed pitchers. Done. From there, you likely would pluck Mike Pelfrey and R.A. Dickey from the Mets and Phil Hughes and A.J. Burnett from the Yankees (though one could argue that the Mets' Jon Niese might squeeze his way on the staff, especially since Burnett appears poised for a particularly squirrelly season). In truth, the choices would be relatively easy.

And that's the point of the game. The choices would be easy because the other options are rather unappealing. This is New York, the town of Whitey Ford and Tom Seaver and Ron Guidry and Doc Gooden; the notion that either the Yankees or the Mets should have trouble filling out a rotation seems a sacrilege.

Yet both teams enter the 2011 season with starting staffs so unreliable that Dickey—a knuckleballer coming off his only season of full-fledged competence in his eight-year career—is one of the safest bets for success.

"Every year we try to plug the holes and figure it out, and this year, it happens to be in the back of the rotation," Yankees general manager Brian Cashman said. "It's the way the cookie crumbled this winter."

Each rotation, really, is defined by the ace who isn't in it. For the Yankees, that ace is Cliff Lee, who as a free agent spurned them to join the Philadelphia Phillies for fewer years and less total money than the Yanks offered. The Yankees' failure to sign Lee left them without the sort of rotation depth that carried them to the four World Series they won from 1996 to 2000, and it forced them to audition three keg-shaped veterans: 34-year-old Freddy Garcia, 37-year-old Bartolo Colon, and now 36-year-old Kevin Millwood.

They eventually settled on Garcia, who has been hammered for nine earned runs in 13 2/3 spring-training innings, as their No. 5 starter.

"Cliff Lee would have been an instant, credible, secure position," Cashman said earlier this month, before manager Joe Girardi told reporters that Garcia would start and the team would use Colon in a long-relief role. "No matter what way we go, it won't be that."

Only a fine preseason performance by Ivan Nova prevented the Yankees from having to keep both Colon (who hasn't appeared in a major-league game since 2009) and Garcia in the rotation. (The Yankees signed Millwood last week to a minor-league contract, just so they could have the man who last season led the American League with 16 losses at the ready.)

 But Nova, 24, has just 10 games of big-league experience, and while the 1.80 earned-run average he posted in his first 20 innings this spring was encouraging, it doesn't mean he's destined to be the next Roger Clemens. Or even the next Joba Chamberlain.

Actually, Joba Chamberlain hasn't turned out to be the next Joba Chamberlain, either. If he had, he'd be starting for the Yankees. But the organization couldn't decide how best to use him, implementing the "Joba Rules" to limit how often he pitched. So now he's a reliever—and one of the more convenient names to drop during a discussion about what players the Yankees should trade to get themselves another starter.

"It's throwing stuff at the wall and seeing what sticks," sports economist J.C. Bradbury said. "It's often a good strategy for teams to say, especially when there's a high variance of performance: 'If we can't go out and get some sure things for our rotation, let's throw four guys in there. Because they're pitchers, they're fungible. We can use them in the bullpen and elsewhere. Let's see how it works out.'"

The Mets, in the wake of Johan Santana's shoulder surgery in September, adopted a more extreme version of the same approach. Of course, they had their reasons.

Santana is in the midst of a lengthy rehabilitation, and there's a good chance that he won't pitch this season, even though the Mets respond to any suggestion that he won't be back by stomping their feet and saying, "Will too! Will too!"

 His absence set off a chain reaction: Pelfrey became the de facto No. 1 starter, Dickey the No. 2, Niese the No. 3, and the new regime of GM Sandy Alderson and manager Terry Collins held what was pretty much an open tryout for the last two spots.

At one point this spring, Collins had listed 10 names in a vertical column on a white marker board in his office. PELFREY, DICKEY and NIESE were atop the list, and each of the seven names below represented a pitcher whom the Mets considered a viable candidate for the fourth or fifth starter's spot. Among them were the team's two low-risk, oft-injured acquisitions, Chris Young and Chris Capuano; the beleaguered and since-released Oliver Perez; and journeyman John Paul "Boof" Bonser, whose only distinguishing characteristic was the "BONSER" tattoo that was etched across his tailbone like a human vanity plate. (Why "BONSER" and not "BOOF"? Some questions are better left unanswered…and unasked.)

In the end, Young and Capuano earned the last two places in the Mets' rotation. "The veterans know how to get themselves ready,'" Collins said. "They're not intimidated by Opening Day. They're not intimidated by anything in the beginning. Now, can they maintain it?" 

That is indeed a good question where Young and Capuano are concerned; between them, they have started only 45 games over the past three years.

But that's the fun of a new baseball season: A pitcher long ago written off, such as Young or Colon, might rediscover excellence. A young arm, such as Nova or Mets prospect Jenrry Mejia, might blossom before everyone's eyes.

 Then you're in Port St. Lucie one morning, and you see Oliver Perez—owed $12 million this year, his place on the Mets' roster hanging in the balance—risking an elbow injury by throwing sidearm during a game of catch. No one tells him to stop. His name was still on that board in Collins's office. And reality returns.

 Write to  Mike Sielski at mike.sielski@wsj.com 