DETROIT—Ford Motor Co. set the Detroit auto show abuzz on its opening day Monday, as the company disclosed plans to hire 7,000 workers in the U.S. this year.

The jobs news, and the return of an upbeat tone at the North American International Auto Show, are an illustration of the dramatic shift in fortunes for the U.S. auto industry, and especially those of hometown manufacturers Ford, General Motors Co. and Chrysler Group LLC.

After the show's previous two editions—downbeat affairs overshadowed by the bankruptcy filings and government bailouts of Chrysler and GM—this year's event has seen a revival of some of the glitz and glamour of the past. More than two dozen new models were unveiled Monday, including electric vehicles, high-performance sports cars and big and small family sedans. 

GM presented a new Buick compact amid a cloud of fake smoke while Chevrolet deployed live performers to launch its Sonic subcompact. A Ford unveiling included a shower of thousands of blue-and-white paper butterflies falling from the rafters.

Other unveilings turned into standing-room-only events, a change from last year's sparser attendance. Chrysler unveiled a redesigned version of its Chrysler 300 sedan, and Toyota Motor Corp. showed off two new variations on its Prius hybrid. Ford said it will bring out a compact minivan in the U.S. that can be offered as a gas-electric hybrid, an all-electric battery-powered vehicle or a standard gasoline-powered model.

"There's definitely a sense of momentum and recovery this year," said  Rebecca Lindland, a director at IHS Automotive, a forecasting firm. "We're seeing some really positive indications for the industry. The show is getting some fun back."

Ford said about 4,000 of its new jobs will be hourly factory positions, including 1,800 at the company's plant in Louisville, Ky., which is preparing to launch the next-generation Ford Escape sport-utility vehicle late in the year. Ford also will add 750 salaried engineering jobs in product development and manufacturing.

Next year, Ford expects to add at least 2,500 more new manufacturing positions. The company had about 41,000 hourly employees and 20,000 salaried employees in the U.S. as of year-end 2010.

GM, meantime, highlighted its economic turnaround. Chief Executive  Daniel Akerson told reporters the company had a solid fourth quarter and finished 2010 with more than $20 billion in liquidity. GM said in October it had liquidity of $24 billion following a series of debt-reduction moves.

It's a far cry from GM's situation two years ago when it came dangerously close to running out of cash before filing for bankruptcy. 

"There is an aura around GM that it is back," Mr. Akerson said. "We were improving a year ago, but now it's kind of like, 'You've found your feet.'"

Mr. Akerson said GM expects to hire more U.S. factory workers in 2011 if annual auto sales hit a 13 million to 13.5 million selling rate as GM has forecast.

The plans are the latest sign the industry is starting to restore jobs after slashing tens of thousands during the recession. 

Last week, Chrysler said it plans to upgrade a car plant in Brampton, Ontario, with the idea of adding a third shift, which would add about 900 jobs. In December, GM and Chrysler each said they are looking to hire 1,000 engineers in Michigan this year. GM is also adding a shift at a plant in Orion, Mich., and Chrysler now aims to run two shifts at a Sterling Heights, Mich., factory that had previously been slated to close. Toyota is hiring 2,000 to staff up a plant in Tupelo, Miss.

"Certainly the story in Detroit is a totally different story than what we saw in 2010," said Chrysler Chief Executive  Sergio Marchionne. "A year ago, the questions I was getting were whether we'd still be here in a year."

Ford's hiring plans reflect the company's rising profit and rosier economic outlook. Ford is expected to report that 2010 was one of the most profitable years in the company's 107-year history. Ford Chief Executive  Alan Mulally said Monday the company expects U.S. sales to be between 12.5 million and 13.5 million vehicles in 2011, up from 11.6 million in 2010. 

Ford is recruiting salaried engineers specializing in batteries, system controls, software and energy storage to work on electric vehicles in Detroit and eight other cities: Boston; Chicago; Cincinnati; Columbus, Ohio; Milwaukee; Raleigh and Durham, N.C.; and San Jose, Calif.

Ford officials didn't estimate how many of the U.S. jobs would be taken by those already on layoff from the auto maker or how many would be for contractors.

At the auto show, Ford unveiled its new C-Max minivan in three versions: a gas-powered-engine model already on sale in Europe, a gas-electric hybrid version of the five-passenger van using a lighter, smaller lithium-ion rechargeable battery; and the company's first plug-in hybrid, the Energi. The C-Max models are more compact than traditional minivans.

Last week, Mr. Mulally unveiled a fully electric version of Ford's Focus at the Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas. The all-electric Focus, a compact sedan, could compete with Nissan Motor Co.'s new Leaf, which also runs solely on battery-electric power. The new Focus will hit the North American market late this year and come to Europe in 2012 amid increased government regulation and rising gas prices.

But Ford's commitment to the endeavor is unclear as company officials have yet to detail how many of these electrified vehicles they intend to build in the coming years. Both GM and Nissan have said they expect sales in the tens of thousands, including producing as many as 60,000 Chevrolet Volts next year.

 Write to  Matthew Dolan at matthew.dolan@wsj.com and Neal E. Boudette at neal.boudette@wsj.com 