NEW DELHI—In most parts of India, national-census takers use a pen and paper to make their tallies. 

In the island territories of Andaman and Nicobar, where surveyors are barred by law from interacting with indigenous tribes, they need boats, video cameras, coconuts and good throwing arms.

Counting India's population of roughly 1.2 billion across 1.2 million square miles—a task that must be completed by Sunday—is one of the world's most challenging census exercises. Much of India is rural rather than urban. Its landscape includes the Himalayan Mountains and an island with one lighthouse keeper.

India also has indigenous tribes living in forests and on islands that are off-limits, even to other Indians, so as to protect their dwindling members from exposure to germs or exploitation for tourism.

Then there are security issues: The widespread Maoist insurgency prevents census takers from reaching some violence-soaked areas. And census workers must persuade nomadic shepherds to stay put temporarily.

But perhaps the toughest task is counting the Sentinelese, who live on North Sentinel, which is part of the Andaman & Nicobar archipelago, a chain of more than 500 islands in the Bay of Bengal between India and Thailand with about 356,000 people. Some of these islands once served as a British penal colony—which left the Andamans with the epithet "black water"—and were also briefly occupied by the Japanese during World War II. 

This indigenous community is often described as "the most isolated tribe" in the world. Indian law intends to keep them that way.

"Even an aircraft cannot fly over that area so you can imagine the ban," said V. Abrahum, director of census operations for Andaman and Nicobar in Port Blair, the administrative center for the archipelago.

In 2001, the last time the census took place, the expedition counted 31 people in the first effort and 39 people on their second try. At that time, the census takers tried to communicate with the islanders using the language of another Andaman tribe, but to no avail.

This time, due to Supreme Court orders to further limit contact with the indigenous tribes who lived isolated in the archipelago until the British arrival in the late 1700s, Mr. Abrahum said the team was keeping its distance. A written brief provided by the Andaman census official called it "a tough but fascinating exercise down the corridor of time." 

Mr. Abrahum said the census takers set forth overnight in a speedboat from Port Blair, heading to the island about 60 miles east. But the Indian government classifies the Sentinelese as "hostile," so they make sure not to get too close.

"Somebody tried to fly nearby and these people shot with the arrows," said Mr. Abrahum ahead of the first survey operation, which was carried out last month.

Once near the island, census takers rowed closer to the islands on smaller boats bearing gifts—coconuts, fruits and sometimes cloth—but avoided landing on North Sentinel. From a distance, they tossed the coconuts and other offerings into the aquamarine waters toward the white-sand beaches, hoping to coax the Sentinelese out of the thick forest. In the meantime, video cameramen on the boat taped the scene. 

Mr. Abrahum said the videos will be kept under tight security until they are sent back to the New Delhi census office because some of the people may be in a "natural state," he said, and to prevent a resurgence of attempts by some to promote tribal tourism. A December amendment to the area's 1956 tribal regulations made "unauthorized entry" into reserved areas for taking photographs or making videos of people there punishable with three years imprisonment.

Adrienne Oneto, a U.S. census official who deals with outreach, said there wasn't anything quite like India's situation in the U.S. where large numbers of people responded to last year's census by mail-in form She pointed out the U.S. has its own island and hunter-gatherer populations, including the Inuit of Alaska who must be reached before embarking on their spring hunting expeditions. 

But, she added, "There is no part of the population that we are not allowed to come into contact with." 