The New York Times's long-awaited online paywall was to be erected earlier this afternoon. In theory, this means you won't be able to read the Times online without paying a subscription fee of $195 to $455 a year.

But like America's southern border, the Times's wall is porous. "Visitors get 20 free articles . . . each calendar month on NYTimes.com," the site explains. "In addition," notes Mashable.com, "non-subscribers will have access to articles found through search (limited to five per day from major search engines), blogs and social networks like Facebook and Twitter, even if they have exceeded their 20-article reading limit."

Mashable adds: "The Times confirmed a report that it had dropped its case against @freeNYTimes, a Twitter feed designed to help readers circumvent the forthcoming paywall." The Times says it objected to the site's use of its logo, which has been removed.

The Nieman Journalism Lab reports that the paywall "can be defeated through four lines of Javascript," and a "Canadian coder" has made available a tool to do just that--one that is so simple, "it barely even qualifies as a hack."

 TheStreet.com reports that its readers voted the plan the week's "dumbest thing on Wall Street," although the Times's offices are actually on Eighth Avenue. But Times publisher Pinch Sulzberger says he's untroubled:

Just as illegal immigrants take jobs Americans won't do, Times paywall-jumpers take articles Americans won't read. And like immigration reformers, the Times has an amnesty plan, as The Wall Street Journal reports (link for WSJ.com subscribers only):

Lincoln and the Times expect some 100,000 subscribers to sign up for the nine-month freebie, whose retail value is approximately $150 a subscriber, or $15 million in total. (Disclosure: This columnist received the Lincoln invitation by email, immediately signed up for it, and is getting irritated that redundant solicitations for the offer keep showing up when we visit the Times website.)

If the Times's new paywall is too easily breached, perhaps that is because the paper's executives overlearned the lesson of their last attempt at charging for online access. TimesSelect, which began Sept. 19, 2005, charged $49.95 a year for access to the Times's opinion columnists, while leaving news stories, editorials and outside op-ed pieces free.

The TimesSelect barrier was as impenetrable as the Berlin Wall. There was no monthly ration of free columns, no exemption for search-engine or Twitter links (did Twitter even exist then?), no Lincolnesque amnesty program. The Times even forbade its syndication customers from posting columns online unless they also required payment to read them.

Like the Berlin Wall, this had the effect of keeping the Times's columnists inside. The result was a Golden Age of online journalism, as bloggers and others ignored Paul Krugman's vicious rants, Maureen Dowd's bitter fluff, Thomas Friedman's maladroit metaphors and so forth.

We would gladly have shelled out $49.95 per annum to maintain this state of affairs--but perversely, that would have exposed us to the material we'd be trying to avoid, and lots more people would have had to make the same sacrifice of money and reading pleasure to make TimesSelect a viable business proposition. Little wonder, then, that TimesSelect ended Sept. 19, 2007, with a "letter to readers" from NYTimes.com's senior vice president and general manager, Vivian Schiller, who was destined for bigger things.

Perhaps not coincidentally, the Times has been clearing out its stable of op-ed columnists in advance of the paywall's erection. The prolix Frank Rich was the first to go, signing off two weeks ago with this confession: "Believe it or not, an opinion writer can sometimes get sick of his own voice." Not only do we believe it, we get chills just trying to imagine the depth of the torment.

Last week Bob Herbert followed Rich out the door. He explained to the Times that his column's "rigid 800-word limit" no longer suited him, "so I am leaving The New York Times and the rewards and rigors of daily journalism with the intent of writing more expansively and more aggressively about the injustices visited on working people, the poor and the many others in our society who find themselves on the wrong side of power."

Writing "more expansively" is the wrong move. Brevity is the soul of wit. Try Twitter instead.

Still, this is a start. If the Times can induce Krugman, Dowd and Friedman to quit too, $195 a year for a subscription may start to sound like an attractive offer.

  We Went to a Riot, and a Peaceful Protest Broke Out   From the Associated Press, an example how left-wing media bias turns Orwellian:

Unless the demonstrators and the violators are on opposite sides, as has often been the case in Arab countries of late, "a peaceful demonstration . . . disrupted by violence" is long-winded and deceptive way of saying "a violent demonstration."

  Closet Case   "Staffers with Vice President Joe Biden confined an Orlando Sentinel reporter in a closet [last] week to keep him from mingling with high-powered guests gathered for a Dem fundraiser," the Drudge Report reports:

Maybe the Obama administration wouldn't be so abusive if reporters didn't approach it with such a compliant attitude. But we guess instead of blaming the victim, we should offer our sympathy to Powers, who has suffered the greatest indignity at the hands of a president since that time Robert Reich was locked in the cabinet.

  Union Chutzpah   "The Florida House delivered a major blow to public employee unions Friday, approving a bill that would ban automatic dues deduction from a government paycheck and require members to sign off on the use of their dues for political purposes," the Orlando Sentinel reports. Union bosses and Democrats are predictably outraged:

The chutzpah of these people is amazing. They are the ones coercively collecting money from "hardworking men and women" to use for their own purposes, and they expect people to believe that stripping them of the power to do so is an attack on their victims.

  Why Aren't We Kicking Assad?   With America engaged in a kinetic military action in Libya and the Arab rebellion having reached Syria, the question naturally arises: Why no KMA in Syria? After all, Bashar al-Assad, like Moammar Gadhafi, is a vicious dictator and a de facto enemy of the U.S., and he's an ally of Iran's dangerous theocratic regime to boot.

Here's Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's answer, reported by The Wall Street Journal:

This is the wrong answer. To suggest that Assad is either a reformer or a humanitarian, even by comparison with Gadhafi, is either monstrous or naive. The salient difference militating in favor of intervention in Libya is that the rebels actually hold substantial territory in the country. Thus the KMA offers help to a homegrown rebellion rather than impose regime change from without, as a similar intervention in Syria at this time would do.

  It's the Eponymy, Stupid   "A man accused of attacking his in-laws with a samurai sword while chasing them through a Hemet neighborhood may face attempted murder charges, according to police," reports Los Angeles's KTLA-TV:

That's hilarious! He has in-laws even though his name is Singleton.

  Out on a Limb   "Rand Paul Has Grabbed Headlines, but His Impact on National Debt Remains to Be Seen"--headline, Lexington (Ky.) Herald-Leader, March 27

 Life Imitates the Onion 

  Didn't We Try That in 2008?   "Randomly Selected Leaders May Make Politics More Efficient"--headline, Discovery.com, March 25

  Bottoms Up!   "Chris Wallace Takes a Shot at White House on Behalf of 'Fox News Sunday' "--headline, DailyCaller.com, March 27

  One Guy Was Carrying a FROSTY = HITLER Sign   "More Protesters Shot as Syria Protests Snowball"--headline, Miami Herald, March 26

  With DNC in Mind, City Bans Carrying Urine, Feces   "Dogs See Carpet as Canvas"--headline, Free Lance-Star (Fredericksburg, Va.), March 25

  Nobody Tell Teresa   "Kerry Keeps It Cool With Beau"--headline, Sun (London), March 25

  It Took That Long to Cure His Amnesia   "30 Years Later, Orland Park Chief Recalls Taking a Bullet for Reagan"--headline, Chicago Tribune, March 27

 The Lonely Lives of Scientists 

 The Lonely Lives of the Elite Eight 

  Don't Do It! Just Think About All You Have to Li--Oh, Look! A Squirrel!   "Squirrels Really Aren't Trying to Commit Suicide"--headline, Victoria (British Columbia) Advocate, March 24

  It's a Cookbook   "Jackson man served aboard a wooden minesweeper in WWII"--subheadline, Worthington (Minn.) Daily Globe, March 24

  Try a Little Tenderizer   "Hammer Stuns Shanks to Defend World Pursuit Crown"--headline, Competitor.com, March 25

 Questions Nobody Is Asking 

 Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  Look Out Below!   "Hawks Drop Big One in 2-1 Setback"--headline, Chicago Tribune, March 27

 Too Much Information 

  Help Wanted   "Spammers Sought After Botnet Takedown"--headline, BBC website, March 25

  Breaking News From 1775   "Franklin Dances, Sings at 69th Birthday Party"--headline, Associated Press, March 26

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  The Secret of Perpetual Motion   Dan Chapman of the Atlanta Journal-Constitution thinks high gas prices are a good thing. We have to admit we were skeptical at first, but the guy's got science to prove it:

With a U.S. population of 311 million, all it would take would be a gas tax of $28,272 a gallon, and no one would ever die. As an added benefit, between the revenue from the new tax and the $311 trillion annual health-care cost savings, the budget would be balanced in no time!

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Ed Lasky, Michele Schiesser, Damaris Johnson, John Bobek, Ed Grinberg, Marion Dreyfus, Philip Ellison, David Hallstrom, Dave Ceely, Gregg Geil, Taylor Dinerman, Hillel Markowitz, Cathy Koch, Dan Goldstein, T. Young, Ethel Fenig, Edward Tannen, Janet Riordan, Lew Olowski, John Sanders, William Larson, Michael Segal, Monty Krieger, Bart Borkosky, Marc Segan, Richard Bensten, Elizabeth Haynes, Sarah Childress, James Ronan, Bret Popper, Merv Benson, David Cincotta, Clifford Crouch, Peter Iorio, Zack Russ and Danny Brown. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)