While New York has gone through huge transformations over the past two decades, Staten Island may have changed more than any other borough.

Its population has grown 24% during that time frame, the fastest growth rate in the city, said a report by research institute Center for an Urban Future. 

Staten Island was once the whitest of the boroughs, and that's changing, too. Minorities make up 32% of the half million people now living there, up from just 20% two decades ago.

Along with growth have come problems. Rising home costs may be making it difficult for first-time home buyers to find houses. Traffic and commute times have also gotten worse.

"It's already too packed," said Steve Sabatini, 24 years old, working the bar at Pier 76 restaurant and bar. "Drive on Victory Boulevard and you'll be in traffic for 20 minutes going from one light to another.

Other changes bode well for the borough. The number of college graduates—currently 91,000—has nearly doubled over the past 20 years.

"By virtue of its significant population growth, it has led to big changes in jobs, college education, employment and traffic on the bridges," said Jonathan Bowles, one of the authors of the report. "It is a profoundly different place from two decades ago."

The starkest change on Staten Island may be its racial makeup. Hispanics now make up 18% of its population, up from just 8% in 1990. Overall, 20% of the borough's population is foreign-born, up from 12% in 1990. 

"I think it just adds to the culture of Staten Island," said Jason Maniscalco, 26, from Tottenville, Staten Island. 

More residents also brought a wave of new home construction. The number of new homes shot up by 26% during the past two decades. But like the rest of the city, the housing market has since cooled off. 

Climbing home costs has also put a dent in the wallets of Staten Islanders. Almost half of residents are paying 35% of their income on housing. In 1990, only 30% of people were spending that percentage on their homes. 

Those high housing costs might be driving some families away, the report said. Despite the population growth, the number of kids under the age of five fell during the last decade. 

"In 1990, this was clearly the borough where young families can go and pretty easily buy your first home," Mr. Bowles said. Now "it's much more difficult to afford that home on Staten Island."

—Pervaiz Shallwani contributed to this article.

 Write to  Joseph De Avila at joseph.deavila@wsj.com 