BANI WALID, Libya—Almost every street, public building and hillside in this town nestled in a rugged valley southeast of the capital Tripoli has a billboard pledging allegiance to Col. Moammar Gadhafi.

"Bani Walid is your shield, sword and arm," reads one. The only sign of the brief anti-Gadhafi protests in February is the faint outlines of graffiti on some storefronts that have now been painted over.

But behind a seemingly unflinching facade of support for Col. Gadhafi, a high stakes struggle is under way within Libya's largest tribe, Warfalla. Its clan leaders are debating whether to definitively back the government or to throw the tribe's lot behind rebels in Misrata and Benghazi farther east, who have many Warfalla members in their ranks.

The town is the seat of the Warfallas, and its strategic location at a crossroads between the capital and areas to the east, west and south has made it vital for a government battling a rebellion on multiple fronts.

Almost 1.5 million out of about seven million Libyans are believed to hail from Warfalla.

So far, the Warfallas have been divided, with one prominent member, Mahmoud Jibril, heading the Benghazi-based transitional government, and Mansour Khalaf, the tribe's paramount leader, voicing support for Col. Gadhafi. 

The tribe's decision may ultimately seal Col. Gadhafi's fate and help chart the course of a nation consumed by a war that has deepened the rift between east and west and fanned old animosities. Kinship, tribal codes of honor including an old treaty with Col. Gadhafi's own tribe, rivalries and ghosts of the past weigh on Warfalla. 

The tribe paid a heavy price in the 1990s when some of its members led a failed coup attempt against Col. Gadhafi.

Libya's tribal structure is complex and layered, which is something Col. Gadhafi has exploited in the past to pit tribes against one another to exercise control. 

He appears to be resorting to the same strategy now in the face of the most serious challenge to his 42-year rule. 

George Joffe, a Cambridge University professor who has researched the Warfalla, predicts that if coalition airstrikes and sanctions fail to dislodge Col. Gadhafi, "it will be tensions between the tribes that decide whether he survives."

Now both Col. Gadhafi in Tripoli and the rebel leadership in Benghazi are courting tribes to further their agendas.

The government scheduled a tribal congress Thursday in the town of Azizya south of Tripoli "to convince the rebels to lay down their arms and benefit from the amnesty and pardon," said Khalid Kaim, a senior government spokesman. The meeting was delayed, the government said, due to a desire to broaden its attendance. 

The government has been trying to rally tribes to fight rebels in Misrata and succeeded in assembling tribal leaders from the so-called eastern belt of Tripoli for a Monday meeting in the pro-regime town of Zlitin near Misrata, which has been taking part in the siege of Misrata by Col. Gadhafi's forces. 

On the opposition side, chiefs and representatives of 61 tribes met in Benghazi in April with Bernard-Henri Levy, a French philosopher and staunch advocate of Western intervention in Libya, to affirm their unity and confront "the dictator [Col. Gadhafi] who is trying to play Libya's tribes against each other; dividing the country to better rule," read a statement posted on the website of French periodical La Regle du Jeu. 

The periodical also posted scanned pages bearing the signatures of the gathered tribal elders, who included a Benghazi-based leader of one Warfalla's almost 55 clans. 

The significance of such an act is likely to be limited given that Libya's tribal heft remains in the center and west in areas still under Col. Gadhafi's control where most tribes continue to uphold the "document of honor" they signed with the regime in the past. 

The dilemma facing Libya's tribal leaders, who like their counterparts across the Arab world are consummate survivalists and pragmatists, is embodied by maneuvers by Mr. Khalaf, a U.S.-educated nuclear physicist.

"We care about Libya and the unity of Libya, that's what matters to us more than anything else," said Mr. Khalaf, during an interview in Bani Walid last week.

Speaking beside six security officers who are members of his tribe and zealous Gadhafi backers, Mr. Khalaf said he was under "a lot of pressure" to avert bloodshed within his tribe, given the political divisions at hand.

"If you go there it will become a historic feud," he said, when asked if he would supply tribesmen to fight rebels in Misrata. "We are cautious; we are not involved in the war," he added in a hushed tone but then quickly raised his voice so that his minders could hear him explaining that if Col. Gadhafi asked Bani Walid to supply fighters then "we are ready." 

"Isn't that so, men?" he said, addressing his minders. "Yes, yes," they responded in unison.

Mr. Khalaf employed the same brand of tribal diplomacy when dozens of people came out to demonstrate in Bani Walid against the government at the start of the uprising in Libya in mid-February. 

He said he told parents to convince their children to go back home to avoid confrontation.

Mahmoud Warfalli, who heads a dissident faction of the tribe, said Mr. Khalaf also ordered Gadhafi loyalists to abandon the streets as part of the bargain.

Mr. Warfalli, who left Tripoli more than two months ago and is now in the Qatari capital Doha, appealed to Mr. Khalaf on the Al-Jazeera channel last week to denounce Col. Gadhafi.

"I respect him but I want him to take action," said Mr. Warfalli in a subsequent telephone interview referring to Mr. Khalaf. "Sometimes neutrality is negative," he added.

One other major factor might explain Mr. Khalaf's recalcitrance. 

In 1993 military officers from both the Warfalla and Col. Gadhafi's own tribe tried to assassinate the Libyan leader during a visit to Bani Walid. Hundreds of Warfalla members were imprisoned and then Col. Gadhafi pressured the tribe's leaders to execute the alleged conspirators. The tribal elders resisted for years until they were executed by the government itself in 1997.

Warfalla members were also ostracized as traitors by most other Libyan tribes whose leaders in some instances penned pledges of allegiance to Col. Gadhafi with their blood.

—Richard Boudreaux in Tripoli and David Gauthier-Villars in Paris contributed to this article.