 Wall Street Journal: It seems that the protests going on in Uganda often don't happen unless someone like you is leading them, that they are without steam unless you're there. 

 Kizza Besigye. Well, leadership, whether political or in other areas, is critical because people need some rallying point. I think they find me such a rallying point mainly because of my political involvement over the past ten years. More and more people are saying, 'Yes, what's he's saying and been fighting for is the correct thing.' But they can rally around any other person, really. It's not me that is the driver. I think the driver is the issues themselves. I'm just maybe a vehicle they are using. But if I was not there they would get another vehicle and drive it.

 WSJ: The Ugandan government has called for dialogue with some of the opposition parties. Are you willing to participate? 

 KB: I have not heard of any calls for dialogue.

 WSJ: So no one from [President] Museveni's circle has reached out to you? 

 KB: No.

 WSJ: Would you be open to those kinds of discussions if they did reach out to you? 

 KB: We are interested in discussion, but it depends on what discussion. We would be keen to engage in a dialogue that is properly structured, which has the appropriate components on the table. And I don't think those components are limited to political parties. There should be a credible moderator for such a discussion. It cannot be a discussion chaired by and moderated by Museveni. There has to be a clear agenda. It has to be clear what the outcome of such a dialogue would mean. The principle of dialogue, without doubt, we embrace it. But there has to be talks about how to conduct it and how to implement whatever emerges from that dialogue.

 WSJ: What are your hoped for resolutions from these protests? 

 KB: Once [the protesters'] popular demand crystallizes and becomes sufficiently strong, the government will be forced to undertake genuine discussions. And if they don't, I think the protests can themselves become of such magnitude that [the ruling party's] hold on government functions would become tenuous.

 WSJ: Is that outcome likely, in your view? 

 KB. I think so. What has been hindering popular discontent from turning into popular action is fear. Intimidation. [Now,] every time there is action, you find more people are getting energized. Those that are thrown into prison are coming out even more energized. People are losing their fear and asserting themselves more. These protests can reach a situation where government becomes dysfunctional. That would be unfortunate to get to that extent because it makes transition more messy.

 WSJ: You want what kind of transition? 

 KB. There must be a transition, at some stage.

 WSJ: Starting with the ouster of President Museveni? 

 KB: No, transition does not have to start with an ouster or anything. It means that we agree on fundamental reforms that would engender a new dispensation. How the transition is managed is something that can be negotiated. There must be a transition from this rule by terror to a rule by the will of the people. 

 WSJ: Would a transition like that include you in a government position if Museveni is still president? 

 KB: I would not like to speculate on the dynamics of the transition. And it shouldn't focus on individuals.

 WSJ: T his transition you're talking about is quite different from what you've spoken about in previous weeks and months about these protests growing into Mid-East style revolutions. 

 KB: It depends on if the government becomes agreeable to negotiating the transition. We would never have come to this if before the last election there was a credible negotiation that would translate into reforms. If we agreed on it today, and said ok this is the kind of electoral process that will help us have a credible government afterwards, there would be no problem. But once it's not there and people are protesting, the protests can come to a situation where that [solution] is no longer teneable. And the government can no longer negotiate. In which case it must simply collapse. That creates a more messy situation than when you have a government to negotiate with. But that is not depnendent on us, that is dependent on the regime.

 WSJ: Are you personally going to join the protests on Monday? 

 KB: I think so. I have not heard anything to suggest to me that I shouldn't. This is not something I am driving. It's not my thing to drive. I've been away for two weeks and walk-to-work protests have been continuing. I would not be happy with the situation whereby it is dependent on me to continue. No.

 WSJ: Are you personally or members of the opposition getting support from international bodies or governments? 

 KB: Not that I've heard of.

 WSJ: You're not receiving funds from abroad? 

 KB: No. What funds are needed in what we are doing? To walk does it need any funds? There's no money really. And that's the beauty of having something driven by ordinary people themselves. That's why it's indeed difficult to stop.

 WSJ: Do you think the military is going to crack because of these protests and the way the military has handled them, often brutally? 

 KB: At some point internal contradictions are inevitable to arise. Because the people they are brutalizing are their relatives, are their brothers and sisters. These military and policemen are poorly paid, except for a few who are living opulently.

 WSJ: You yourself might be accused of living opulently. 

 KB: Yes but I don't do so at the expense of any other person. I don't do so from the public purse. I live well, but I do so on my own and nobody can begrudge me. 