TOKYO—Japan is embroiled in a contentious new debate over who should pay Tokyo Electric Power Co.'s growing liabilities from its nuclear accident—a bill estimated to be tens of billions of dollars.

The argument pits numerous stakeholders against each other, including executives at the utility hoping to reduce the company's liability, bankers and investors wanting to protect their balance sheets, and politicians worried about reactions from voters who may be hit with higher tax and electricity rates. Some policy makers want the country's 11 power companies to shoulder a big part of the burden as the cost of maintaining a nuclear-power industry. That proposal, when floated, pushed utility stocks down.

"Tepco right now is very unpopular among the Japanese people," said Akihisa Nagashima, a lawmaker with the ruling Democratic Party of Japan. "The big problem is it is too big to fail." 

He said letting the company go under isn't a viable option, given its role as a regional monopoly supplying power to a huge swath of the Japanese economic center, including all of the Tokyo metropolitan area. 

As a first step, the government will unveil as soon as next week the initial draft outlining a plan for disbursing compensation for people displaced from homes and farmers affected by radiation-related sales cuts. Many such victims seek immediate cash payments. 

The plan, according to the Japanese media, will feature the establishment of a new organization that will prop up the finances of Tepco with loans and issuance of preferred shares, to be covered with public funds, bank loans and insurance premiums contributed from other power companies. Tepco will reportedly raise money by selling down its huge portfolio of assets, mostly real-estate and stockholdings.

The cost of the continuing disaster at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant is growing daily, with the final price tag far from clear. The electric-utility company is likely to face demands to pay trillions of yen in compensation to victims. Beyond that, the cost of decommissioning the reactors could hit $6 billion, analysts say.

Tepco has huge assets. Tepco supplies one-third of Japan's electricity demand, and earned ¥134 billion—about $1.6 billion—in net income on revenue of $60 billion in the year ended March 31, 2010. Its total assets were valued at about $162 billion at the end of that year. 

But analysts believe its liabilities will far exceed its assets after accounting for the compensation and other costs of dealing with the crisis. As Tepco Chairman  Tsunehisa Katsumata told a news conference in March: "No matter how much money we have, it will not be enough."

Policy makers and analysts say taxpayers will inevitably be asked to chip in. But that move is seen as limited, because of the existing public anger against Tepco and the government over the worst nuclear accident since Chernobyl. In addition, the government's debts are already outsize—at 200% of the economy, the largest among advanced economies—and its ability to spend more is limited. Standard & Poor's rating agency said last week it was considering downgrading Japan's sovereign debt, in part because of possible added obligations to cover Tepco's costs.

"Given what happened and the current social environment, there is no way Tepco will be exempt from its responsibility," chief cabinet spokesman Yukio Edano has said. 

The utility company last week unveiled a raft of cost-cutting steps, including a 50% cut in compensation for several top executives and the cancellation of the hiring 1,100 new graduates for the spring of 2012. Such plans will save the company ¥54 billion.

Some lawmakers, such as Yosuke Isozaki of the main opposition Liberal Democratic Party of Japan, are calling for a drastic restructuring program similar to the one used for Japan Airlines Co. last year. In that case, shareholders lost their investments as the company was delisted from the stock exchange. Bond holders and lenders also took substantial losses. 

"Tepco must be effectively nationalized and placed under government control," said Mr. Isozaki in an interview. The LDP was previously known for its close ties to the power industry. "It must sell everything it can to pay the compensation. Its equity must be wiped out and executives must all step down." 

The effects would reverberate through Japan's economy. Tepco bonds, with a total outstanding value of ¥5 trillion, are the most widely held bondin Japan, after the Japanese government bonds. "It's very hard to find bond investors who don't own Tepco in their portfolios," said  Hiroki Shibata, a Standard & Poor's analyst.

Its shares, formerly a blue chip, are held among domestic and overseas institutional investors, as well as 600,000 individuals. The shares already have lost 80% of their value. The Nihon Keizai Shimbun business newspaper reported Monday that a dozen life insurers and banks would, combined, book nearly $5 billion of charges for the fiscal year ended March 31 on losses in Tepco shareholdings. 

Japan's major banks, having lent a total of 2 trillion yen to Tepco in March to give the company enough operating funds, are pushing the government to absorb the bulk of the costs. Masayuki Oku, chairman of Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group, the biggest lender to Tepco, recently said at a media conference that the government was "legally responsible" for keeping Tepco on a sound footing. 

Meanwhile, some lawmakers are sympathetic to easing the burden on Tepco, often because they represent districts that have received government subsidies for hosting nuclear power plants. Others, including  Masashi Fujiwara of the ruling DPJ, draw support from unions representing electric power workers. 

"There is no way a single private company can afford compensation totaling several trillions of yen," Mr. Fujiwara wrote in his blog. "We need to remember the biggest culprits for the latest disaster were the once-in-a-thousand-year earthquake and tsunami."

 Write to  Yuka Hayashi at yuka.hayashi@wsj.com 