(See Correction & Amplification below .)

WASHINGTON—President Barack Obama's revamped economic team is made up mostly of veterans of President Bill Clinton's administration, which could help the White House navigate a politically divided Washington as it tries to speed up economic growth.

Veteran policy maker Gene Sperling will direct the White House's National Economic Council, moving from his post as a senior adviser to Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner. Mr. Sperling led the council, which coordinates economic policy across government agencies, from 1997 to 2000 under Mr. Clinton.

Jason Furman, one of two deputy directors of the economic council, will become principal deputy.

Mr. Obama is bringing back together a team known during the Clinton years as "Gene the Machine and the Twirling Sperlings'' for their camaraderie and frenetic work habits. In addition to Mr. Furman, the group included three other aides now at the National Economic Council.

Mr. Obama on Friday named another Clinton-era official, Katharine G. Abraham, to the White House's Council of Economic Advisers. Ms. Abraham had been commissioner of the Bureau of Labor Statistics in the Clinton administration.

Heather Higginbottom, a longtime Senate staff member who ran domestic policy for Mr. Obama's 2008 campaign, will become deputy budget director.

An economic team once personified by prominent economists—Lawrence Summers at the NEC, Peter Orszag at the Office of Management and Budget and Christina Romer at the Council of Economic Advisers—will now lean toward the deal makers of Bill Clinton's second term.

Of Mr. Obama's four principal economic advisers, three will be lawyers: Messers. Geithner, Sperling and budget director Jacob Lew, who also worked for Mr. Clinton. Only Council of Economic Advisers Chairman Austan Goolsbee, a University of Chicago economist and longtime Obama confidant, is a nonlawyer with no Clinton connections.

Mr. Sperling carries the reputation of a workaholic who tends toward the disheveled.

James Carville, who managed Mr. Clinton's 1992 presidential bid, recalled bringing Mr. Sperling to the governor's mansion in Arkansas for his first meeting with the candidate. In the car, the new economic-policy staffer nervously fretted and played with a fountain pen until it ruptured, soaking him with ink.

"That guy used to pull two or three all-nighters in a row," Mr. Carville said.

In 1999, when W Magazine named Mr. Sperling the most eligible bachelor in Washington, White House press secretary Joe Lockhart stepped to the podium to the music of "The Dating Game": "Please welcome our first briefer today—he loves tennis, rapid GDP growth and romantic midnight walks on West Executive Drive."

National Security Adviser Sandy Berger chimed in, "You'd be an eligible bachelor if you worked until midnight every night, too."

Mr. Sperling has earned respect from Republicans and Democrats. He spent months designing a small-business lending program that Mr. Obama trumpeted in his 2010 State of the Union address and secured after a partisan brawl. 

He also worked on the controversial plan to assess a special tax on large banks, but that plan fizzled after receiving a cold shoulder from Congress.

It was his role securing the tax-cut extension package last month that won Mr. Sperling the NEC job, according to people familiar with the search to succeed Mr. Summers.

According to Senate Republican aides negotiating the tax package, Mr. Sperling grew increasingly concerned that White House officials were signaling a willingness to compromise on extending Bush-era tax cuts for wealthy families before the administration had won concessions on any of its demands from the GOP. Mr. Sperling denied any divisions on the matter.

For much of last year, Mr. Sperling had been pushing a temporary cut in the Social Security payroll tax but had gotten little traction. Liberal Democrats worried that the plan would drain Social Security revenues and embolden Republican attacks on the system.

But the tax-cut negotiations gave Mr. Sperling a new opportunity to pursue his idea, according to a senior Republican Senate tax aide who helped negotiate the package. 

Messers. Sperling and Furman arrived at the tax-cut negotiations with a ledger of demands, the aide said, topped by the payroll-tax holiday and the president's proposal to allow businesses to immediately write plant and equipment investments off their taxes in 2011.

Mr. Sperling won them both, along with a slew of smaller tax cuts.

"I give him credit for having his cards in the deck and making the opportunity to play them," the aide said.

"The thing I felt good about the lame duck was, we were very well prepared for something positive on jobs to happen," Mr. Sperling said Friday.

 Write to  Jonathan Weisman at jonathan.weisman@wsj.com and Damian Paletta at damian.paletta@wsj.com 

 Correction & Amplification 

Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner's postgraduate education was at Johns Hopkins University's School of Advanced International Studies. This article incorrectly says he is a lawyer.