WASHINGTON—Obama administration officials declined to answer questions Tuesday about whether they would need to ask Congress for more money to fund the military efforts in Libya, according to a congressional aide who attended a briefing at the Capitol.

In the briefing by representatives from the Pentagon, Treasury and White House for aides of Congressional leaders, the administration officials also declined to say how many of the Tomahawk missiles used to bomb Libyan targets belonged to the U.S., according to the aide. Each Tomahawk, made by Raytheon Co., cost about $1 million.

Some lawmakers have been concerned about whether the Obama administration knows who will be in charge should Col. Moammar Gadhafi be forced out of power—a stated goal of U.S. policy, though not a goal of the military action. 

A representative from Libya offered the staffers assurances about the opposition leadership, portraying them as including lawyers, doctors and intellectuals. The Libyan, whom the aide who attended the briefing described as an ambassador, said the 31-member opposition council had declared it supports a constitutional democratic state with the full participation of all Libyans.

On the military front, the administration officials didn't give a timeline for transferring to another command, either the North Atlantic Treaty Organization or another entity, but said there were successful discussions in Brussels about transferring command to NATO, according to the aide.

The U.S. involvement in Libya has exposed splits among Democrats and Republicans in Congress, reflecting how different streams of political thought are colliding, putting tea partiers on the same side as peaceniks and hawks in line with humanitarians.

Sens. John McCain (R., Ariz.) and Lindsey Graham (R., S.C.) pushed President Barack Obama to take action in Libya for weeks before he did so. 

But since the U.S. and its allies justified the decision to begin bombing bomb targets in Libya last week as a step toward protecting civilians, House Speaker John Boehner (R., Ohio) has complained that Mr. Obama hasn't clearly laid out his mission.

Rep. Ron Paul (R., Texas), a libertarian with an impassioned following, argues that the Libyan intervention is an unwise overreach whose cost the U.S. can ill afford. 

Some tea party activists make a similar case, as does Sen. Richard Lugar (R., Ind.), the top Republican on the Foreign Relations Committee.

Democrats are equally divided. The party has a history of favoring intervention for humanitarian reasons. Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D., Nev.) and Sen. John Kerry (D., Mass.), chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, have signaled their support for strong action in Libya. So has Rep. Ed Markey (D., Mass.)

Track the latest events in Libya.

But the party also has a strong antiwar faction, whose strength has grown since the Iraq War. Rep. Jerrold Nadler (D., N.Y.) challenged Mr. Obama's right to intervene without congressional approval, putting him on the same side as Mr. Paul, with whom he rarely agrees.

A reluctance to overreach also appears to be the issue that gives Rep. Candice Miller (R., Mich.), who leads a House Homeland Security subcommittee, something in common with Rep. Dennis Kucinich (D., Ohio). The Progressive Caucus hasn't come out with a position because its members aren't in alignment, according to a spokesman for Rep. Raul Grijalva (D., Ariz.), a co-chair of the caucus. The Republican Study Committee, which represents conservatives, also hasn't declared a position. Its members' concerns "run the gamut from authorization and objectives to strategy and costs," according to a spokesman for Rep. Jim Jordan (R., Ohio), a chairman of the group.

Ms. Miller on Monday said Mr. Obama should call Congress back to vote on Libyan engagement, asking "in what other internal conflicts might President Obama decide to engage American armed forces?" On Tuesday, Mr. Kucinich was busy seeking support for a measure to cut off funding for military operations in Libya, a policy that also may appeal to tea party conservatives who believe that cutting the deficit should be the top U.S. priority.

"People in the tea party I've talked to are concerned about America overcommitting itself militarily and they're concerned about where we are going to get the money to fight these wars," Mr. Kucinich said in an interview.

The result is messaging that is short on content and at times tries to have it both ways. House Speaker Boehner said over the weekend that the U.S. has a moral obligation to stand with those seeking freedom, but that the Obama administration must better define its mission and strategy. Sen. Mitch McConnell (R., Ky.) has simply chosen to remain silent—a rare move for a lawmaker who regularly attacks Mr. Obama.

If the intervention ends quickly, the criticism may die down; if it drags out or worsens, the critics will likely become more vocal. But for now, neither party is speaking with a single voice.

 Write to  Siobhan Hughes at siobhan.hughes@dowjones.com and Naftali Bendavid at naftali.bendavid@wsj.com 