PORT AU PRINCE, Haiti—Haiti's controversial former president Jean Bertrand Aristide, saying his country needed him, ended seven years of exile in South Africa Thursday and said he was returning to Haiti, just days before a crucial presidential election.

The return of the ex-priest, twice elected president and twice overthrown, is likely to further raise tensions in a country already jittery about holding a presidential vote on Sunday months after the first-round vote ended in chaos and violence.

Mr. Aristide left Johannesburg late on Thursday in a jet provided by the South African government, according to Ira Kurzban, Mr. Aristide's longtime lawyer. The South African government did not delay the trip despite a personal appeal by U.S. President Barack Obama to his South African counterpart Jacob Zuma.

Before leaving, Mr. Aristide told a news conference he was wanted back in Haiti. "The great day has arrived! The day to say goodbye before returning home," Mr. Aristide was quoted as saying by the Associated Press. The AP said Mr. Aristide spoke in Zulu, a language he studied in South Africa.

Mr. Aristide's lawyer, Mr. Kurzban, said by telephone from South Africa that his client had no intention of returning to politics. "He wants to help reconstruct the country," he said, referring to the devastating earthquake last year that killed an estimated 230,000 people.

Mr. Obama had called Mr. Zuma to ask him to delay the return of Mr. Aristide to Haiti, saying it could destabilize the country so close to elections, according to U.S. officials. Mr. Zuma's office could not be reached for comment.

"The United States, along with others in the international community, has deep concerns that President Aristide's return to Haiti in the closing days of the election could be destabilizing," U.S. National Security Council spokesman  Tommy Vietor said.

Mr. Aristide is the second of Haiti's former rulers to return home in recent months. In January, former dictator Jean Claude "Baby Doc" Duvalier, quietly returned to Haiti after 25 years in exile in France. Mr. Duvalier is nominally under house arrest, and faces charges of human rights abuses and embezzlement.

Mr. Aristide, loved by the poor but despised and feared by many in Haiti's tiny upper and middle classes, is still a deeply divisive figure whose presence could electrify supports and enrage opponents.

"Aristide's popularity here is still very much alive," said  Pierre Lesperance, a leading Haitian human rights activist.

Both leading candidates in the Sunday run-off had publicly asked the former president to delay his return until after the election.

Haitians will go to the polls to choose between Mirlande Manigat, a 70-year old grandmother and law professor who is disputing the election with Michel "Sweet Micky" Martelly, a 50-year old pop star in the final round of an electoral process whose first round, in November, was marred by disorganized and claims of rampant fraud.

The stakes are high for Haiti, the poorest country in the Americas, and one of the poorest in the world. The winner of the poll will have a large say in how billions of dollars donated by the international community are spent to rebuild the nation.

Little progress has been made since the quake, and hundreds of thousands of Haitians are still living in fetid tent cities that have sprung up on the ruins of the city. Electoral chaos, as happened in November, could hold up desperately needed reconstruction funds.

Earlier this year, the Haitian government issued Mr. Aristide a new diplomatic passport, clearing the way for his return.

The former liberation theology priest came to power in 1991, in Haiti's first the first democratic elections since the fall of the three-decade long Duvalier dictatorship in 1986.

His fiery rhetoric and populist policies alienated many in the country's small elite, and Mr. Aristide was ousted only seven months later by a violent military coup. He went into exile for three years as Haiti suffered the imposition of sanctions by the international community. He returned in 1994, thanks to a largely peaceful U.S. military intervention, to serve out the rest of his term.

Mr. Aristide was re-elected in 2000, only to be ousted yet again in 2004, this time by a motley collection of former police and soldiers from Haiti's army which he had disbanded shortly after his return to power in 1994.