In one particularly chilling scene in Art Spiegelman's graphic novel "Maus," a concentration-camp survivor talks about how, 50 years after the Holocaust, humanity seems to be bent on making the same mistakes all over again; maybe, he muses, it will take another, bigger tragedy to make us learn our lesson. In 1949, decades before "Maus" was published, Kurt Weill, a German Jewish composer who had managed to escape from Hitler, collaborated with playwight Maxwell Anderson to write "Lost in the Stars," which used the vehicle of musical theater to alert the world of the possibility of a potential new holocaust—officially known as Apartheid—that was taking root in South Africa.

"Lost in the Stars" is being produced at City Center Encores! this weekend—one of three current large-scale presentations of Weill's works in the city where he lived during the second half of his career. On Feb. 25, the Harlem Opera Theater will present a sort of encore to Encores! with an hour of highlights from "Lost in the Stars" on the same bill as George Gershwin's one-act opera "Blue Monday." Then, from March 3-5, the Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra will offer a series of jazz treatments of Weill songs starring the celebrated Weill interpreter Ute Lemper. 

The first of the Weill events this season was a concert production, last week, of the first musical by Weill and Anderson, 1938's "Knickerbocker Holiday," presented by the Collegiate Chorale. Because it's about Peter Stuyvesant and the original settlers of what later became New York, and because its two most famous numbers are "September Song" and "It Never Was You," it seemed that the show itself would be sentimental and patriotic. Quite the contrary: "Knickerbocker" is a raucous politcal cartoon, with the Dutch colonists depicted as wise-cracking Katzenjammer kids in what is essentially an extended vaudeville sketch. Leads Victor Garber and Kelli O'Hara were excellent, but it's hard to imagine "Knickerbocker" ever being revived in a traditional sense.

Not so for "Lost in the Stars." "I hope our production shows that this work is a viable vehicle," said Rob Berman, Encores! musical director.

 Although its inherent theme is certainly epic—an illustration of man's inhumanity to man—the show itself is actually surprisingly intimate. Based on Alan Paton's novel "Cry, The Beloved Country," the show depicts the journey of a preacher from a small village who travels to Johannesburg in search of his son, who has become ensnared in crime. "The story unfolds in a very straight line," Mr. Berman pointed out. "There's no subplot or secondary characters." He added that the orchestrations are comparably translucent. "Weill wrote for an orchestra of only 12 pieces, which was very small at the time. It's more like chamber music, and the musicians are very exposed."

Weill (1900-50) and Anderson rushed "Lost in the Stars" to the stage: The book was published in New York in 1948, just as Apartheid was taking hold in South Africa. Remarkably, the musical made it to Broadway a year later. "Can you imagine," asked Mr. Berman, "if a Jonathan Franzen novel that came out in 2010 made it to Broadway as a musical in 2011?"

Weill avoided any direct imitation of Zulu music, but nevertheless there is a distinctly African undercurrent to the score, along with echoes of formal European and German music and Broadway-style show tunes. "There's definitely African rhythms in the choral singing," noted Mr. Berman. The very use of this kind of chorus was inspired by Zulu traditions. As Mr. Berman pointed out, the first idea that Weill had was to write the entire score as choral music—and indeed, the vocal ensemble is onstage throughout, functioning as both a Zulu "Isicathamiya" choir and a Greek chorus.

Eventually, the collaborators decided to include some songs for specific characters, some of which were recycled from an aborted project of five years earlier titled "Ulysses Africanus." One of these was the title song itself, which had been recorded by Walter Houston in 1944 and sung by Frank Sinatra on the radio in 1946. 

"The score is actually two scores," said Mr. Berman. "The chorale pieces, which are dark and serious, full of rough jagged edges; and the character songs, which are more popular and tuneful, but no less innovative." 

"Stay Well," "The Little Grey House," and the incredibly moving "Thousands of Miles" are all superior popular songs that deserve to be more widely done by jazz and pop artists. 

Weill died six months after the show opened, and Anderson wrote only one more musical. Anderson's philosophical lyrics are excellent here, evoking, in a non-pedantic way, heavy topics—specifically the idea that mankind has been abandoned by God, a theme that has cropped up in the work of contemporary playwrights such as Tony Kushner. Anderson's allusion to God holding the stars like "grains of sand" also finds an echo in Bob Dylan's "Every Grain of Sand." But God, Weill and Anderson are saying, is not to be blamed. "The fault," as Shakespeare oberserves in "Julius Caesar," "is not in our stars, but in ourselves."