The small group of Knicks who survived the Carmelo Anthony trade remember the day of the deal the same way: They were sitting in their homes at 10:30 on the night of February 21 when they saw the news crawl across the bottom of their television screens.

 Landry Fields exhaled. Toney Douglas yelled "Whoa!" before spending the next few hours fielding calls from friends. 

"I was sleeping on my couch, saw it and I thought I was dreaming," Bill Walker said. Shawne Williams described it for the group of players as "letting the air out of the balloon." 

Carmelo Anthony was in New York, and so were they. 

The Knicks gave up four key pieces to get Anthony and Chauncey Billups, among others—point guard Raymond Felton, forwards Wilson Chandler and Danilo Gallinari and center Timofey Mozgov.

 The result is a small army of holdovers in charge of plugging any and all holes the trade created. The 13-player trade resulted in seven new acquisitions on the current roster.

Fields, Douglas, Walker, Williams and Ronny Turiaf are the holdovers who emerged from the trade not only still on the team, but in the rotation. 

"We try to tell [Douglas], we try to tell Landry, we try to tell Shawne, 'Don't worry about me and Amar'e. Let us feed off of you guys. Let us read you guys," Anthony said this week. "'You guys play your game because that's the only way we're going to be successful.'"

This week, Knicks coach Mike D'Antoni said that despite the influx of new players, he's more likely to go with "his guys" because of their familiarity with the system.

 He said there will be an adjustment period for the old guard—specifically players like the rookie Fields, but that they are important cogs in this new-look Knicks machine.

Fields is averaging 7.8 points per game in the five games since the trade, only slightly down from his 9.9 average. Fields is different from many of the other survivors in that his name was routinely dangled in trade talks for Anthony. He said he tried his best not to think about it until a trade looked inevitable. 

In the first four games with Anthony, Williams hadn't eclipsed eight points until a 16-point breakout against the Hornets on Wednesday, hitting four of his six 3-point attempts. Williams said he was thrilled that he had an identical role as before the trade: knock down open threes.

"We know Melo and Amar'e are going to score, we have to do the little things...for us to be successful," Walker said. "And we know they'll create plays for guys like me and Shawne because they'll be doubled and we'll be open for threes." 

Douglas, a 24-year-old point guard, said he's taken it upon himself to acclimate some of the new players to the system. He should know, he's played with 33 different Knicks, so many that "it feels like I've played on a few different teams" despite playing his entire career in New York. 

Now that the trade drama is done, Walker said, "It's a huge relief for us. We're already in a stressful environment as it is. That was just adding more. Now we can go get it done."

This week, as Fields was leaving practice he yelled in Anthony's direction the lyrics to a new song he'd created called "Fields and Melo", a playful riff onthe "Stat and Melo" song that was created to celebrate Anthony and Stoudemire's pairing. 

In reality, these Knicks don't need a song, they are just happy to still be here. 

 Write to  Kevin Clark at kevin.clark@wsj.com 