A majority of Ohio University students believe too large a portion of their general fees is subsidizing the school's athletic teams, according to a new survey. 

Conducted by a nonprofit think tank called the Center for College Affordability and Productivity, the survey is the latest salvo in an escalating battle over the skyrocketing costs of higher education. And increasingly, athletic costs are becoming a center of that battle.

Like tuition, general fees have been rising sharply in recent years at universities across the nation. Broadly used to fund extracurricular activities, general fees typically exceed $1,500 a year at public universities, with a portion of that revenue often flowing to athletic teams.

Research has suggested that a large percentage of students either don't know that athletic teams benefit from general fees or don't agree with it. At Ohio University, general funds flow to seven entities other than athletics. And in the survey—completed by about 5% of the student body—participants ranked athletic teams as the least important of the eight beneficiaries of general fees. 

Yet of those eight beneficiaries—which also include the student recreation center—athletic teams are the top recipient, receiving 48% of general fee revenue. At Ohio University, general fees amount to nearly $1,600 per school year.

Unlike its much larger counterpart, Ohio State University, OU isn't an athletic powerhouse. So it might not be surprising that a student poll would reflect some ambivalence about sports. But often, less-successful college sports teams rely more heavily on student financial support, because of drawing relatively little revenue from broadcast rights and sales of tickets and merchandise to the general public.

For athletic teams, revenue from general fees represents a tiny source of revenue, and in exchange for it students often receive free admission to college sporting events. 

But the survey found that Ohio University students don't take tremendous advantage of that perk. The median number of sporting events attended by Ohio University students was two per year. The mean number was higher—5.8. But even at that rate, the cost per student per event was $130, the survey found, based on the percentage of general fees that flow to the athletic department.

In a report accompanying the survey, the center said the cost of college athletics "threatens to crowd out other higher education activities, including the core mission of teaching and research."

In response, student-body president Jesse Neader, a senior communications major, questioned the validity of the survey, arguing that it reflected the views of too small a percentage of students. 

And a top administrator described the athletic department as a crucial factor in attracting prospective students and retaining the support of alumni. Athletic teams create "enhanced opportunities for fund raising for academic and co-curricular programs," said Becky Watts, chief of staff for Roderick McDavis, Ohio University president.

A spokesman for the NCAA called the study "flawed" and argued that "overall spending on athletics on campus makes up only about 5% of an entire university budget and has stayed fairly steady around that rate over the past several years." 

 Write to  Kevin Helliker at kevin.helliker@wsj.com 