A U.K. Parliament committee has said the U.S.-led coalition's military efforts in Afghanistan aren't working and the U.S. and Britain have failed to gain essential leverage in Pakistan, in a report that criticizes Prime Minister David Cameron's justification for continued U.K. involvement in the war.

After the U.S., Britain contributes the most troops and money in Afghanistan, with around 10,000 troops stationed there. 

The Foreign Affairs Committee concludes in a report to be released Wednesday that security in Afghanistan remains precarious despite tactical gains in some provinces that may obscure challenges elsewhere in the country.

Coalition arguments that negotiations with the Taliban can take place only after military victory are flawed because the prerequisites for a victory don't currently exist, the report says. It concludes that the U.S. should push harder for negotiations with the Taliban, with the U.K. exerting whatever influence it has with Washington to make it happen. 

"We question the fundamental assumption that success in Afghanistan can be 'bought' through a strategy of 'clear, hold and build,' " said Richard Ottaway, the committee's chairman, of the coalition's surge strategy. 

Mr. Ottaway said the U.K. and U.S. have little leverage over Pakistan, where the continued existence of insurgent havens make it "extremely difficult" for the counterinsurgency campaign to succeed. The international committee has also failed to bolster the influence of the Afghan state or improve its governance, a key aim of their efforts. 

Britain's core foreign-policy justification for continued presence in Afghanistan—that it is necessary in the interests of U.K. national security—may have been achieved some time ago, given the apparently limited strength of al Qaeda in Afghanistan, the report argues. 

The committee's conclusions are unlikely to directly change British policy in Afghanistan, let alone U.S. policy. But it will add to continued negative sentiment in Europe and the U.S about the surge strategy. 

In a news conference with Afghan President Hamid Karzai on Tuesday, Mr. Cameron said he remained cautiously optimistic over progress in Afghanistan. British military chiefs say that in recent months, the surge has succeeded in halting the momentum of the insurgency. 

Some Western officials also say it is the Taliban that is showing little desire to talk, not the coalition. 

U.K. Foreign Secretary William Hague said the situation in Afghanistan has "in some cases" moved on from the evidence given to the committee.

The report comes a day after the Royal Air Force became the first of the U.K.'s armed services to set out details of its plans to cut 5,000 jobs starting in September, as part of a wider trimming of Britain's military budget. That will include the disbanding of two squadrons of Tornado jets and the closure of a base in England and one in Scotland.

 Write to  Alistair MacDonald at alistair.macdonald@wsj.com 