The Stanford Graduate School of Business opened its $345 million campus at the end of April.



The Knight Management Center, named for its chief supporting donor,  Phil Knight, was built on 12.5 acres and includes eight buildings at the heart of Stanford University's campus. 

Mr. Knight, who co-founded Nike Inc. and graduated from the business school in 1962, donated $105 million for the project. The rest of the money came from donations from more than 200 alumni.

The school broke ground on the project three years ago, after about seven years of planning.

The new campus was designed to reflect Stanford's revamped curriculum, which emphasizes small groups and seminars, rather than the large lecture halls that marked the old campus, said the school's dean,  Garth Saloner.

"Our new curriculum required a much different composition of spaces and classrooms than our old one," he said.

The new center includes 360,000 square feet of building space, 70 small classrooms, 600 auditorium seats, 18 large classrooms and 190 faculty offices. Before, Stanford's business school had only 28 small classrooms and 11 large classrooms. 

Portland, Ore.-based Boora Architects designed the center to have solar panels generate more than a tenth of the site's electricity needs and to have more than nine-tenths of the interior workspaces receive daylight.

—Joe Light



Former Federal Reserve Bank of Boston chief  Cathy E. Minehan will take the helm at the Simmons College School of Management as the all-women's school tries to build closer ties to the business world.

After investing heavily in its academic programs, "we need to give the school of management a much bigger platform and much broader market exposure," Simmons President  Helen Drinan said.

Ms. Drinan said the school intentionally chose a leader who was more ingrained in business circles than in academic ones.

Ms. Minehan worked at the Fed for 39 years and more recently served on the Massachusetts Governor's Council of Economic Advisors. She heads the board at Massachusetts General Hospital and is a director at medical-technology company  Becton Dickinson
BDX


-0.35
%




 & Co. and MassMutual Life Insurance Co.

"It is vitally important that our students get connected into places of power. [Ms. Minehan] is a real-world link to all of that," Ms. Drinan said. Ms. Minehan will succeed interim Dean  Deborah Marlino, a marketing professor at the school, on Aug. 1. 

—Melissa Korn



UCLA Anderson School of Management received its largest cash donation last week, with a $25 million gift from its namesakes, John E. and Marion Anderson.

The Andersons also gave the school its second-largest gift, $15 million, in 1987, and have donated nearly $42 million in total to the school. Mr. Anderson received his bachelor's degree in business administration from the institution in 1940. 

This latest donation will be used for student financial aid, curricular support and to help attract top-flight faculty, said Dean  Judy Olian. There are no restrictions on how it is allocated, with spending priorities "really at the discretion of the dean."

Ms. Olian said the gift comes at an important time, as traditional state funds are drying up. With tuition continuing to increase, "the burden is on us to try to fulfill the promise of public access. It gets harder to support that mission without that kind of philanthropic support." 

—Melissa Korn