LONDON—In a new report, U.K. lawmakers raised serious doubts about whether the oil industry was prepared to tackle a North Sea oil spill similar to the Deepwater Horizon disaster, but stopped short of recommending a moratorium on drilling akin to that imposed in the U.S. 

Instead, the U.K. Parliament's Energy and Climate Change Committee called on the government and regulators to compel oil companies to improve their spill-response plans, raise the liability limit for spill costs and install extra fail-safe equipment on rigs.

While the committee didn't directly investigate the causes of the Deepwater Horizon explosion, it was critical of  BP PLC executive  Mark Bly's report on the tragedy, particularly his conclusion that the design of the Macondo well played no part in the rupture. "We urge the government not to rely extensively on the Bly Report, given the controversy surrounding the responsibility for the incident and the design of the Macondo well," it said.

BP said it hadn't seen the report yet and couldn't comment. 

Major changes to drilling regulations could have a significant impact on the U.K. because its main deep-water area, west of the Shetland Islands, is thought to be home to the bulk of the country's undeveloped oil and gas resources. For this reason, "a moratorium on deep-water drilling off the west coast of Shetland would undermine the U.K.'s energy security and isn't necessary," said Tim Yeo, the Conservative member of Parliament who is chairman of the committee, in a statement accompanying the report. 

The majority of U.K. wells drilled in the North Sea have been in shallow areas, but as resources have dwindled there companies have pushed into deeper and more hostile waters in search of new fields. BP,  Chevron Corp.
CVX


1.00
%




 and France's  Total SA
TOT


2.00
%




 have been searching for oil and gas west of Shetland in water depths of between about 600 and 1,600 meters2,000 feet and 5,250 feet.

The Deepwater Horizon was drilling in about 1,500 meters 5,000 feet of water when it exploded in April, killing 11 men and spilling almost five million barrels of oil into the Gulf of Mexico. 



U.K. lawmakers criticized oil companies' readiness for a similar incident in the North Sea. "The offshore oil and gas industry is responding to disasters, rather than anticipating worst-case scenarios and planning for high-consequence, low-probability events," the committee report said.

In particular, existing oil-spill plans for the area west of Shetland were inadequate, the panel said. "There are serious doubts about the ability of oil spill response equipment to function in the harsh environment of the open Atlantic in the West of Shetland," it said. "We recommend that the government ensures that any capping, containment and cleanup systems are designed to take full account of the harsh and challenging environment."

Current industry provisions for the cost of any cleanup are also lacking, it said. Given the high price tab for the Gulf of Mexico spill, the cap of $250 million set out under the Offshore Pollution Liability Association is too low and the rules as to what kinds of damage are covered by this fund are too vague, it said.

The committee's third big recommendation was that an extra precaution be added to the piece of equipment that was the last line of defense against the accident that destroyed the Deepwater Horizon—the blowout preventer. A set of blind shear rams, two large pieces of metal within the blowout preventer that were supposed to close the drill pipe on the Deepwater Horizon, failed to operate, allowing oil and gas to flow freely from the well head and into the Gulf of Mexico for three months.

"Blowout preventers on the U.K. continental shelf should have two [sets of] blind shear rams," the committee said. There was only one set of blind shear rams, the current industry standard, in the blowout preventer on the Macondo well in the Gulf.

The committee rejected moves from the European Commission to regulate drilling in U.K. waters. It also said there was no need for the U.K. to follow the U.S. in a fundamental overhaul of its regulatory regime. 

 Write to  James Herron at james.herron@dowjones.com 