Japan's Nikkei 225 dropped 10.2% this week as investors, fearful of the economic impact of the crisis in Japan, moved their money elsewhere. It might be time to move some of it back, albeit selectively.

There isn't a historical precedent for Japan's predicament. The best comparison may be the Kobe earthquake of Jan. 17, 1995. Back then, industrial production took a big hit, dropping 2.6% in January, while the Nikkei dropped 8% during the first five postquake trading sessions. While it rallied 5.4% the next week, the Nikkei dropped 25% from prequake levels through its bottom on July 3. 

This time, the trading has followed a similar pattern, but with more drastic swings. The Nikkei dropped 16.3% following the quake and then rallied more than 5% on Wednesday, before turning down again on Thursday and then snapping back on Friday. 

Still, there is evidence to suggest the selloff won't be as prolonged this time. In 1995, Japanese stocks were among the world' priciest. They traded at a price/earnings ratio of about 40 based on a 10-year earnings average. Today they trade at a multiple of about 14.5, the cheapest they have been since the 1960s, according to  Citigroup.
C


1.54
%




 

What's more, Japan's Topix index of more than 1,500 stocks trades at a price-to-cash-flow ratio of 5.5 times earnings, as low as it has been in all but six months of the last 50 years, according to  Charles Dumas, chief economist at Lombard Street Research. 

"I think we have reached the bottom," says  Richard Cookson, global chief investment officer at Citi Private Bank. 

Of course, with the nuclear crisis still so unpredictable, the safest move is to avoid Japan until conditions improve. There simply is no way of gauging how dire the situation will get. 

The risk of waiting is that the bargains get snapped up before you jump back in. "To buy something cheap, you have to embrace the uncertainty," says Chris Blum, chief investment officer for behavioral finance at J.P. Morgan Asset Management. "When you see panic-driven markets you should take advantage."

The sectors that performed best during the months following the Kobe quake were those involved in rebuilding the nation: construction, and makers of glass, stone and metal products, for instance. The top performers included  Osaka Steel (up 32.8%), engineering concern Kinen Corp. (22.9%), machinery outfit  Oiles Corp. (21.6%) and construction company PlanaHome Corp. (20.6%). 

Those sorts of companies are the likeliest to outperform again, according to a recent report from Japanese investment bank Nomura Holdings Inc. 

The sectors to be avoided include anything related to consumer demand. After the Kobe quake, freight, travel, leisure and financial companies suffered the most. This time the list also could include telecommunications companies, Nomura says, while auto-parts producers could sustain a 5% hit to profits if production is halted for a week.

The simplest way to invest in the rebuilding of Japan is via mutual funds. This is one of the rare moments when actively managed funds seem like better bets than passive index and exchange-traded funds. The average Japan fund has lost 6.1% this year, better than the 7.4% loss in the iShares MSCI Japan Index ETF, in large part because active funds have managers who can tilt easily into better-performing sectors and out of trouble spots. 

Morningstar's top picks include the Matthews Japan fund, which has dropped 6.7% this year but has been less volatile over the long-term than the category average.

Broad-based international funds are another way to play Japan. Money manager International Value Advisers LLC, for instance, has 13.8% allocated to Japan in its IVA Worldwide fund and a 28% allocation in the IVA International fund, and recently added to those positions, manager  Charles de Vaulx says. 

Other managers buying Japan include  David Herro, manager of the Oakmark International fund, and  Matthew McLennan's First Eagle Global and First Eagle and First Eagle Overseas fund. Both funds have been adding to positions in Japanese stocks. 

"One has to be discriminating," Mr. de Vaulx says. On a stock-by-stock basis, "there are values to be had." 