RIO DE JANEIRO—Following numerous media reports that  Roger Agnelli, chief executive of Brazilian miner  Vale SA, is about to leave his post under heavy government pressure, market attention has turned to his likely successor.

Vale, the world's largest iron ore producer and exporter, was privatized in 1997 but is run largely as a joint venture between the private sector and the state, which enjoys a majority stake in the controlling shareholders' group. 

Although the government doesn't have the supermajority necessary to quickly oust Agnelli, whose resignation hasn't been confirmed, it is widely expected to succeed in replacing him with an executive who might more closely align Vale's investment programs to state industrial policies. 

Mr. Agnelli's office had no comment, while Vale's media office in Rio de Janeiro also declined to comment Monday. Previ, a group of state-controlled pension funds that is a major shareholder in Vale's controlling shareholder group, Valepar SA, declined to comment as well. 

The executive's expected departure, after at least two years of conflicts with government over Vale's business strategy, follows a meeting Friday between Finance Minister  Guido Mantega, who couldn't be reached for comment, and two of Vale's controlling shareholders,  Lazaro Brandao, chairman of Banco Bradesco, and  Ricardo Flores, the chairman of Previ, the pension fund of state-owned bank  Banco do Brasil.
BDORY


0.20
%






The meeting was said to make official the government's desire to change the leadership at the mining company, local media group O Globo reported. Banco Bradesco's press office wouldn't comment on the matter.

Given the extent of the political pressure on Mr. Agnelli to step aside, few industry analysts expect him to remain on the job. So market attention has quickly turned to the most likely candidates to succeed Agnelli. 

The focus is on two existing Vale executives: base metals executive director  Tito Botelho Martins, who is also the head of Vale's Canadian nickel and copper operation Vale Inco; and  Jose Carlos Martins, executive director of markets, sales and strategy, who for many years has headed up the company's iron ore sales. 

The substitution process could take some time, possibly until April 19, which is the next scheduled date for the Vale shareholders' meeting, analysts noted. However, a meeting could also take place March 31, according to local newswire Agencia Estado. 

"An internal search for replacing the CEO role has reportedly been gaining momentum," Barclays Capital analysts said Monday. 

"Vale would never announce Agnelli's departure without naming the new successor, as this would cause unnecessary volatility in the shares," said one São Paulo-based analyst. "The 'gringo' investors are very scared of all this political noise. It will be better for the market if the new president is someone from within the company." 

Vale shed 0.87% on São Paulo's Bovespa stock exchange Monday, marginally more than the fall in the Ibovespa index, to 46.47 Brazilian reais ($27.99). The stock has fallen 6.31% so far this month.

  Tito Martins arrived in Rio de Janeiro over the weekend for talks with Agnelli, Estado reported Monday. Neither Tito Martins nor Jose Carlos Martins were available for comment. 

  Rafael Cortez, an economist at Tendencias Consultoria, described the government pressure as illegitimate. "The government wishes to strengthen industrial policy on iron ore. The idea is that Vale would not only focus on exporting the raw ore, but also build an industrial chain to enhance the segment domestically," he said. 