Investors aren't expecting the Bank of England to start raising interest rates until the final quarter of this year. They shouldn't be so complacent. 

Members of the Bank's Monetary Policy Committee are starting to worry they're losing credibility about their willingness to maintain price stability, particularly as the public's inflation expectations start to ratchet higher. 

Little wonder. 

For the past five years, U.K. consumer price inflation has consistently overshot the Bank's official 2% year on year target. What's more, it has been at or above 3% since the start of 2010 and is expected to hit 4% over the coming months. Nor has the MPC done itself any favors by systematically underestimating inflation trends. As recently as last February, it was forecasting the  CPI to dip to 1% by the end of 2010. Inflation came in at 3.3% in November, the most recent month for which there is data.

It's not far fetched to imagine a majority of the nine member committee casting their votes towards one or even two quarter point increases from the current 0.5% rate over the coming months.

  Andrew Sentance has already voted for a quarter-point rate rise at every monthly MPC meeting since last June. He's been alone, but recently, a few of his colleagues have seemed to tilt in his direction. 

  Paul Fisher, who is also the Bank's executive director of markets, acknowledged in a recent interview that it was necessary to wean the British public off these emergency low rates. "I don't think a change of 25 or even 50 basis points is going to trigger a recession," he said. 

Around the same time, Deputy Governor  Charlie Bean made a point of warning that he was watching inflation expectations "like a hawk." Unless that particular hawk has cataracts and double glaucoma, it won't have failed to notice the latest YouGov/Citi survey showed an increase in year-ahead inflation expectations to 3.5% from 3.3% and to 3.8% from 3.5% for 5-10 year expectations.

The Bank's chief economist,  Spencer Dale, has also publicly worried that the MPC might be seen to be soft on inflation. It's worth remembering he was the sole dissenter against the final increase in the Bank's quantitative easing program in November 2009. 

If the hawks win out, investors are likely to feel a jolt. The futures market isn't discounting any serious risk of tightening until the second half of the year and even then is fully pricing in a 25 basis point rise only in October.

But it would be ironic if an increase or two spooked the market into thinking the Bank was about to start an aggressive tightening cycle. That's because even if the MPC decides to edge rates up a bit over the coming months it isn't likely to quicken the ultimate pace of policy "normalization" by much.

The value of any near term rate rises would be purely symbolic, a PR exercise aimed at those who worry the Bank's commitment to its 2% target is losing credibility, while also helping to keep inflation expectations in check. But even a 50 basis point increase would have negligible impact on the U.K.'s inflationary path.

And that's just as well, because by and large the MPC doesn't really think it has an inflation problem. Most committee members remain convinced the U.K. economy has substantial overcapacity left over from the Great Recession—though they're willing to debate quite how much headroom there is. 

The MPC is also worried about the degree to which the coalition government's fiscal retrenchment will prove a drag on the British consumer. For all the noise about public-sector austerity last year, a recent survey showed that fewer than half of U.K. households have started to trim their spending, to work longer hours or to look for new jobs in anticipation. This year, the impact of tax rises and spending cuts will really start to bite and those households will be forced to react.

But maybe the biggest disincentive for the MPC to take inflation seriously is that there's no real pressure on it to do so. A high inflation rate suits the government as it helps to trim its deficit in real terms. 

Meanwhile, the U.K.'s sovereign debt market has all but ignored domestic factors over recent years as, instead, it's closely tracked U.S. Treasury bonds. 

Inflation also happens to be a relatively painless way to erode the massive debt load the Bank allowed the private sector to build up during its first decade of independence, which it was given in 1997. Painless, that is, except for savers who are expected to bear the brunt of the costs of economic adjustment and most of the risks of Bank policy mistakes.

  Adam Posen and  David Miles, the MPC's two highest profile doves, have made the strongest case for ignoring inflation. Policymakers are bound to get it wrong, they argue. But deflation is such a terrible risk for an economy as overindebted as the U.K.'s that, given the MPC will get it wrong, it's worth getting it wrong with too much rather than too little inflation. Indeed, Mr. Posen has taken to voting for yet more quantitative easing during recent months. And, crucially, the Bank's governor,  Mervyn King, seems to have been siding with the doves.

However they vote, the minutes of the MPC's meetings over the coming months will make for some very interesting reading.

 Write to  Alen Mattich at alen.mattich@dowjones.com 