After a day in Manila's freewheeling urban chaos of traffic jams and poverty stacked up against pockets of modern development , even experienced visitors can find themselves pining for an evening of air-conditioned security in the hotel bar or one of the city's Western-style malls. 

If you choose this secure route, you will be missing out. The key to enjoying Manila is to embrace the chaos, stay open minded and have a sense of adventure. The people are hospitable to a fault. Taxis are laughably cheap. The food and drink offerings are incredibly varied and reasonably priced. 

Start your evening overlooking Manila Bay at the Diamond Hotel, a five-star venue on Roxas Boulevard near the U.S. Embassy . The wide expanse of Manila Bay has been the setting for major events in the country's history, from the 1898 sea battle during the Spanish-American War to the 1942 invasion by Japanese forces. Today, it offers a tranquil antidote to the teeming and crowded city. The real jewel at the Diamond is the Sky Lounge on the 27th floor. Grab one of the comfortable window tables and, if the weather cooperates, wind down with a view of the sunset. (On a clear evening you might even spot the WWII bastion, Corregidor Island in the distance.) There's a large selection of cocktails and snacks here — from oysters and pizzas, including an excellent duck and arugula pizza with feta cheese, to mini-burgers made of Wagyu beef or Black Angus steak. 

Don't eat too much though, as dinner awaits. Take a 10-minute taxi ride to the very heart of Manila to Rizal Park, one of the city's few green expanses. The park is home to the Rizal Memorial, a large stone monument honoring the Philippines national hero, Dr. Jose Rizal, who was executed for his part in an 1896 uprising against the country's Spanish rulers. 

At the western end of the park, you'll find the Harbor View, a bustling, open-air restaurant built on a wooden jetty that juts out into Manila Bay. Since it opened 25 years ago, the Harbor View has become a Manila institution offering a stunning view of the city in the distance. Near the entrance, nearly a dozen large glass tanks hold a variety of fish, prawns and lobsters. Take your pick from the live seafood, cooked to your preference, or order straight from the extensive menu. House specialties include steamed lapu-lapu—the local name for red grouper—in black bean sauce, grilled prawns in lemon butter sauce, succulent lobster, fresh live crabs, and shrimp sinigang—a pungent sour soup. Wash this seafood bounty down with a cold San Miguel beer, or if you prefer something non-alcoholic, try the sweet and sour green mango shake. While you dine and drink, waiters wheel the dessert cart up and down the aisle. The pandan crepe with mango and ice cream is hard to resist. You'll be even happier when you get your bill. The prices at Harbor View are a steal. 

To liven up the evening, flag a taxi and take a 10-minute ride to the Malate area of Manila, known for its lively nightlife and bustling streets lined with restaurants, karaoke bars, nightclubs and local cafes. Café Havana on Adriatico Street, created by one of Manila's best-known restaurateurs, the late Larry J. Cruz, has been popular for at least a decade and features live salsa and Latin American music performed by Filipino bands. The crowd, especially on weekends, is a good mix of locals and foreigners ready to party. Upstairs, the Hemingway Bar has a selection of cigars that enhances the Cuban experience. 

Alternatively, a more relaxing time can be had at the Wensha Spa, a short ride down Roxas Boulevard. For a little more than $15 you can get a full body massage, a foot massage, or pay a little extra for specialty body scrubs. Patrons can stay for up to six hours and use the dry sauna, hot and cold Jacuzzi, lockers, towels, robes and toiletries. The price also includes a basic all-you-can-eat buffet with shabu-shabu dining where you cook at your own table. 

Wensha is open 24 hours a day, and can get quite crowded at peak times. For a more low-key spa experience, the SM Kenko Sauna is right across the street inside the Networld Hotel. This Japanese-owned and operated spa is open from 11:00 AM to 2:00AM.

To push things back up a notch, take a 15-minute taxi ride to the Republiq night club inside the Newport Mall at Resorts World Manila –a giant casino, high-end shopping and entertainment complex that opened in 2010, directly across from the new Ninoy Aquino Airport Terminal 3. In just a few months, Republiq has quickly become the hottest club in Manila. The ultra- plush 4,000-square-meter facility is currently open on Wednesdays, Fridays and Saturdays from 10pm-5am and attracts throngs of both local and foreign club goers. The DJs spin a variety of music from house and electro to the latest dance tunes. Entrance fee is $15, which includes two drinks. 

It's easy to lose track of time in Republiq and you're very likely to stumble out i the very early hours of the morning with a bit of an appetite. 

Your final stop should be back in Malate at the Shawarma Snack Center. Try the superb mixed grill, hummus or motabal. As you satisfy your late-night cravings and puff on your flavored hookah while watching the characters walk by on the busy lane outside, you'll no doubt agree that Manila has way more to offer than malls and traffic jams. 