With gas prices above $4 a gallon in much of the country, Democrats and Republicans are squaring off over whether to cut tax credits for oil companies enjoying a banner profit year.

Senate Democrats plan to grill the CEOs of  Exxon Mobil Corp.
XOM


-0.42
%




,  Chevron Corp.
CVX


-1.37
%




,  ConocoPhillips
COP


-1.86
%




 and the U.S. units of  BP PLC and Royal Dutch Shell PLC about the taxes they pay at a Finance Committee hearing on Thursday. 

Republicans, who have criticized the Obama administration for not acting faster to approve more offshore drilling, won passage of a House bill Wednesday that would require decisions to be made about offshore-drilling permits within 60 days.

The vote took place hours after the Obama administration approved a proposal by Shell to drill five new exploratory deepwater oil wells in the Gulf of Mexico, the second such approval for the gulf since the lifting of a federal moratorium on deepwater drilling last October. 

Oil and gasoline futures prices tumbled Wednesday on concerns that American motorists are cutting back their driving. Gasoline prices have surged in recent months on concerns about Middle East supplies and rising consumption in China and other fast-growing economies. 

But a one-day price drop isn't likely to ease the pressure on lawmakers and the administration to take action. Senate Democrats see popular discontent over oil prices and anxiety over the federal deficit as giving them an opportunity to put a wide array of energy tax breaks–including those for oil and ethanol producers–in play. Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) promised this week that increased revenue from the elimination of tax breaks would be used for deficit reduction.

For now, the oil industry appears to enjoy solid support from Republicans and Democrats from oil-rich states, diminishing chances that its credits will be scaled back. A spokesman for House Speaker John Boehner (R., Ohio.) said Wednesday that proposals by Mr. Baucus and other Democrats amount to "tax hikes [that] will raise gas prices, destroy jobs in this country and increase our dependence on foreign oil."

The finance panel's chairman, Sen. Max Baucus (D., Mont.) recently released the outline of a plan to cut tax breaks affecting the country's five biggest oil companies and to impose new levies on operators in the Gulf of Mexico, while protecting allowances for smaller operators. 

The plan would eliminate less than the $4 billion a year in oil-industry tax breaks President Barack Obama targeted in his 2012 budget. Mr. Baucus has said that with energy prices rising and large oil and gas companies announcing billions of dollars in first quarter profits, the government should end large oil companies' eligibility for various tax breaks. 

The oil industry has sought to counter attacks by blasting certain credits that benefit other industries, while signaling it could accept some limits on its own credits. "We ought to be consistent; we've got large subsidies for some forms of energy and not others," Chevron CEO  John Watson said in an interview Wednesday.

At least one oil industry leader is signaling openness to compromise on taxes. In an interview with National Journal published Monday, the president of Royal Dutch Shell's U.S. unit,  Marvin Odum, suggested he would be open to tying certain tax breaks to the price of oil and natural gas. 

"As you look at any sort of new taxes, I think indexing to price is something to consider," Mr. Odum was quoted as saying. A spokesman for Shell declined to elaborate. 

Spokesmen for the American Petroleum Institute reiterated the group's opposition to the Democrats' proposals, and released a letter—co-signed by the presidents of the API and the AFL-CIO's Building and Construction Trades Department—warning that the proposals being considered could jeopardize jobs.

Separately, the ethanol industry's main trade group, and its most reliable champions in the Senate, are endorsing legislation to reduce a credit for refiners who blend ethanol into gasoline. 

The ethanol industry says its product saves motorists money when blended into gasoline. But the industry's main trade groups have endorsed legislation introduced this month by Sen. Charles Grassley (R., Iowa) and lawmakers from other corn-rich states to sharply reduce over the next two years the 45-cent-per-gallon tax credit that goes to refiners that blend ethanol with gasoline. Backed by livestock producers, food manufacturers and environmentalists, another group of senators is pushing a bill to eliminate the credit altogether. 

 Write to  Stephen Power at stephen.power@wsj.com and Guy Chazan at guy.chazan@wsj.com 