Every culinary culture has its comfort food, but only southwestern France has something on the order of cassoulet, the rich white-bean mélange, which manages to put other classics of the genre to shame. 

Done just right—which is to say, without a shortcut—cassoulet could take you days to prepare, and include everything from homemade duck confit and individually cooked sausages to three solid hours of closely monitored baking time. However, you can usually do pretty well, at least in France, by finding the right restaurant or gourmet deli, which can approximate, if not precisely recreate, the ideal version prepared by your mythical French grandmother.

The southwest corner of France has numerous cassoulet traditions, which express themselves most fully in the dish's legendary birthplace near the Aude River in Languedoc. Castelnaudary, a market town midway between Toulouse and Carcassonne, is considered France's cassoulet capital, and local variations tend to emphasize duck confit as a primary ingredient. Toulouse, the vibrant regional capital, is famous for its sausages, and cassoulet here often features a wider range of pork products, as well as tomatoes. Carcassonne, one of Europe's best-preserved fortified towns, once included partridge in its cassoulet, but these days most versions use duck instead. 

There may be no fixed rules, but there are fierce preferences. As Europe settles in for its final weeks of winter, we asked a range of experts for advice on how to satisfy the season's last mounting cassoulet craving.

 Serves four  

2 cloves  100 grams onions  200 grams white haricot beans (pre-soaked)  300 grams Toulouse sausage (or pork sausage)  2 preserved duck thighs  150 grams shoulder of lamb cut into small cubes  100 grams pork rind cut into small cubes  150 grams pork ribs cut into small cubes

½ pig's head  1 bouquet garni  2 carottes  1 celery (leaves and stalks)

1 bunch of flat parsley

Brown the shoulder of lamb, pork ribs and pork rind. Set aside. Fry the finely diced onions, and then return the meat to the pan. Add the stock and cook for about 15 minutes.

Fry the Toulouse sausages in hot fat. Fill a large casserole with 2 litres of water (do not add salt), put in the white haricot beans together with the cloves and the carrot. Bring to the boil and simmer to cook.

When the white haricots are half-cooked, remove and add to the meat in stock and season. Continue simmering until the stock has been reduced to three-quarters. (The beans should be tender but not crushed).

Put the contents into a traditional ceramic cassole (or any ovenproof casserole), add the preserved duck thighs and the sausages. Cover with the breadcrumbs and put in the oven to brown. Serve hot.

"For me, the secret is to keep in the moisture," says Toulouse-born chef Pascal Aussignac, whose London restaurants—including the Michelin-starred Club Gascon near Smithfield Market—often feature ingredients and menus from France's southwest. He recommends using fresh tomatoes, rather than canned, to add moisture to the beans and meats as they cook. And he emphasizes the importance of homemade duck confit, which his restaurants cook for up to nine hours at 85 degree Celsius to achieve the right flavor and texture. 

Although home cooks may not have the time to make their own duck confit, they can get desired results by using "Tarbais" beans, a specialty of the Pyrenees region, which are sturdier than navy beans but smaller than dried lima beans.

"It's very important to get these beans," Mr. Aussignac says. "They are large, white and quite expensive," but "they keep their shape when you stew them." He says that, in a pinch, you can substitute Argentine white kidney beans. Tarbais is also the bean of choice at Fauchon, Paris's luxury food emporium, which sells prepared cassoulet in jars and cans.

"Actually, I don't use the Tarbais bean," says Carcassonne Michelin-starred chef Jérôme Ryon, whose La Barbacane restaurant is located inside the walls of the fortified town, in the elegant Hôtel de la Cité. He prefers, instead, a particular white bean from Castelnaudary called "la mogette." Mr. Ryon's recipe for cassoulet, served at the hotel's brasserie Chez Saskia, uses pork, lamb and duck, which are all cooked separately, then blended together with the beans using a special stock made from a pig's head. Even if you don't have a pig's head on hand, you can try out a version of Mr. Ryon's recipe, above, at home.

The process of separate cooking is key, says Stéphanie Duboisse, of Toulouse's Maison Samaran, one of the region's premier charcuterie and fois gras specialists, with a prominent stand at the Marché Victor Hugo, the city's largest covered market, where Samaran's prized prepared cassoulet is sold in cans and jars. Ms. Duboisse recommends cooking an array of vegetables in duck fat, and using a range of separately cooked meats, including pork shank and couenne, or French-style pork rind. She also recommends using bread crumbs in a few different stages of cooking, which not only helps the crust form, but "makes the cassoulet creamier in the mouth."

For many cassoulet lovers, the perfect crust is what sets apart a fresh cassoulet from the canned varieties. "The tradition is that you have to break the crust seven times before the end of cooking," says Fauchon's executive chef, Jean-Pierre Clément. Each time you break it, it must form again, thereby increasing the density and flavor.

Like the addition of tomato to the sauce, which many cassoulet cooks forgo, some chefs also look down on using breadcrumbs to help create a crust. "We do not add anything to the crust," says Luc Thibault, owner of Chez Emile, a restaurant in the heart of Toulouse. "Just the baking process," which relies on the browning properties of the various fats that rise to the top. Chez Emile gets its sausages from Maison Garcia, another of Toulouse's premier charcuteries, and, in turn, Maison Garcia sells Chez Emile's cassoulet at the Victor Hugo market. 

Whether you make your cassoulet from scratch or complete the final baking stage in your kitchen, another key ingredient is the so-called "cassole," or conical baking dish, still made in the traditional way near Castelnaudary. The wide-mouth earthenware form helps cook the various components evenly. 

Cassoulet can make a meal, but it can be hard to make a meal around it. "Cassoulet is rather filling," says Mr. Ryon, who describes it as "almost a one-dish meal." "I would suggest a mesclun salad and a light dessert, like a fresh fruit salad," he says. Wine can be another problem in a cassoulet meal, which requires wines to have body, but doesn't always reward depth. "You don't need to have a big wine, like a Bordeaux," says Club Gascon's Mr. Aussignac. "You need to have wine linked to land." Like many other locals, he recommends a full-bodied red from Madiran, in the Pyrenees area that produces Tarbais beans, where wine is made with tannic-rich Tannat grapes. 

Philippe Chaumont, director of Chai Vincent, a Toulouse wine shop, includes a Madiran in his list of recommended wines for an ideal cassoulet meal. He emphasizes local wines, but opens up his choices to include reds from the Dordogne and the Rhône. A special favorite is Domaine de Fondrèche Cuvée Nadal, from the Côtes du Ventoux, near Avignon. Made from Syrah, Grenache and Mourvèdre grapes, the wine has "spicy and ripe" flavors that play well off the richness of cassoulet. Fondrèche wines may be an import from outside France's cassoulet heartland, but Mr. Chaumont says the estate is home to "one of France's most talented winemakers." Like many people in and around Toulouse, Mr. Chaumont says he likes to make cassoulet from scratch a few times a year—"especially if we have a big reunion with lots of people." He compares a good homemade cassoulet, which the French almost invariably serve to several people at once, to another local obsession—rugby. Both, he says, "represent conviviality."

Cassoulet can require the skills of a trained chef, but it has yet to break the haute-cuisine barrier. Like Mr. Ryon, Mr. Aussignac doesn't serve his cassoulet in his Michelin-starred restaurant, but saves it for his related London bistro and deli, Comptoir Gascon. Although it is generally a winter dish in France, in the U.K., he says, he sells cassoulet throughout the year. "English people love beans." 