There is something ineffably cheerful about retro picture books, whether they actually come from the past—the mid-20th century, say—or whether they are new books in a retro style. A child leafing through the matte pages of Salvatore Rubbino's "A Walk in London" (Candlewick, 32 pages, $16.99) might mistake it for a book from her mother's girlhood collection, for example, yet it is vintage 2011. In it we follow a woman and her young daughter as they tour the sights of Britain's capital city, from Buckingham Palace to the Tower of London. Mr. Rubbino's style is pleasantly mod—a combination of blocky colors and fine lines—but a closer look reveals its contemporaneousness. The smiling faces of passersby are unobtrusively diverse: a man getting off a double-decker bus chats on a cellphone; Covent Garden abounds not with flower sellers but with musicians and acrobats. "I put some money in the hat of someone standing upside down!" the young girl tells us excitedly. Tiny paragraphs tucked into the text contain more detail about the oddities and attractions of the great city, and near the end two pages fold out to show a busy panorama of the Thames River.

The retro feel of "This is Washington, D.C." (Universe, 64 pages, $17.95), meanwhile, derives from the fact that it was first published in 1969, one of Miroslav Sasek's idiosyncratic travel books for children. It features illustrations expressive of the patriotic dynamism of the moon-landing era and a text that captures its Czech author's obvious affection. Taking us around the American capital, Mr. Sasek dilates agreeably on everything from G-men to the Smithsonian Castle. Of Thomas Jefferson, he explains: "He was a philosopher of democracy, and many of his then- radical ideas have since become the common property of mankind." Of the city's sometimes confusing street names, he dryly remarks: "It's all very logical, really, and a chess champion would probably get the hang of the system at once." Plenty has changed in Washington in the past 40 years—you won't see hippies in Georgetown today, though Mr. Sasek did—so the text is discreetly marked with asterisks directing young readers to a page of updated facts.

Few present-day illustrators convey energy with more goofy retro zeal than Bob Staake, and he puts his skill to full use in "Cars Galore" (Candlewick, 32 pages, $15.99), a madcap paean to the improbable possibilities of the automobile. The combination of Mr. Staake's off-kilter drawings and Peter Stein's zippy, faintly Seussian rhymes is likely to please a certain subset of young, vehicle-loving (and probably male) readers. On each page we see black roads winding and crisscrossing and running parallel to one another, each traversed by a ridiculous variety of machines: "Black car, green car, / nice car, mean car. / Near car, far car. / Whoa! Bizarre car!" we read. "Cars off-roading, / jumping, thumping! / Gears all grinding! / Pistons pumping!" This high-octane excursion is probably best taken well before bedtime, to give all involved time to cool their engines before the lights go out.

Lastly, for more traditional retro enjoyment, four of Paul Galdone's popular versions of classic folk tales are now reissued in pretty hardback editions: "The Three Little Pigs," "The Little Red Hen," "Three Little Kittens" and "The Three Bears" (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 40 pages, $8.99 each). Mr. Galdone, a Hungarian-American writer and illustrator who died in 1986, had a knack for communicating humor through the eyes of his characters, whether he was drawing an overconfident wolf ogling a clever pig or a mouse in raptures at the scent of freshly baked cake. 