The population of Silicon Valley and San Francisco grew modestly over the last year, in a sign that the region is attracting some new residents as a technology-industry revival takes hold.

But the growth comes with caveats. The population increase locally has largely been fueled by births and foreign immigration—and not through domestic migration, according to data from California's Department of Finance, which released new county-by-county population and migration figures last month. That means more people are still leaving for other states nationwide than coming in.

That is something of a red flag, say economists. Migration figures and population data are closely watched here because of how those affect the local work force. Executives of Silicon Valley tech companies and local leaders are fond of saying that the Bay Area's most important asset is its people, and they would like to see the talent base constantly renewed.

Overall, the population of San Francisco, San Mateo and Santa Clara counties grew by 0.94% to just over 3.5 million people in the 12 months ended July 1 from a year earlier, according to the state Department of Finance data. That was slightly ahead of California's overall population growth of 0.91% to more than 38.8 million people over the same period.

Yet domestic migration was negative, as people left San Mateo, Santa Clara and San Francisco counties for other states or other parts of California, driven away by factors such as high housing costs, say economists. 

In Santa Clara County—the biggest of the three counties by population--nearly 7,000 people left for other parts of California or other states in the 12 months ended last July, according to the state data. That was offset by more than 9,700 foreign immigrants moving in during the same period. There were also some 15,700 more births than deaths in the county over the period, which boosted the county's population increase, according to the state data.

In one shift, foreign immigration into the three Bay Area counties was up slightly in 2010 to 18,839 from 18,255 a year earlier. While the increase was small, it countered the falling rate of foreign immigration in years past, when would-be immigrants had stayed away due to the recession. 

Ted Egan, chief economist for the city and county of San Francisco, says many of the numbers should be taken as positive indicators. In San Francisco in particular, he says the domestic migration numbers have long been chronically negative as more people have typically left the city for other U.S. locations. But in 2008 and 2009, this reversed itself, with a gain in domestic migration in 2008 and only a small decline last year, according to his analysis of Census data. 

"Things are relatively better here than other parts of the state," Mr. Egan says. "So people from more troubled areas are more likely to move here, and people who already live here are less likely to leave for places that have a worse economy."

 Write to  Pui-Wing Tam at pui-wing.tam@wsj.com 