LONDON—The U.K.'s financial sector cut more jobs in the last three months of 2010 than at any time in the past 17 years, a survey showed Monday, putting into question the government's hopes that the economic recovery will stay on track despite its austerity plans.

The survey—by the Confederation of British Industry, an employers' group, and PricewaterhouseCoopers—also showed that financial-services companies expect to continue cutting jobs between January and March.

That will add to strains on the economic plans of Prime Minister David Cameron's coalition government. The government has pinned its hopes on the private sector to keep hiring staff, to counterbalance the thousands of public-sector job losses that form part of the deficit-cutting program.

The number of people employed in the financial-services sector has "fallen significantly," said  John Cridland, the CBI's director-general designate.

The CBI estimated that 30,000 jobs were lost in financial services in the fourth quarter. That is based on a survey balance of -48, the lowest since March 1993, just after a recession. The balance is the difference between the percentage of companies reporting a rise and those reporting a fall.

The group expects about 15,000 further job cuts in the sector in the first three months of this year, taking employment levels to about 970,000—the lowest since official data began to be collected in 1996.

The latest quarterly CBI and PwC survey was otherwise broadly upbeat. Banks reported a sharp drop in bad debt in the fourth quarter, and business volumes in financial services as a whole increased again, with further expansion penciled in for the first three months of 2011.

The business volumes balance was at +27 in the fourth quarter, little changed from +28 in the third, and is expected to remain in positive territory—albeit somewhat lower—at +15 in the first quarter of this year.

Furthermore, banks in particular were at their most confident in five years, based on expectations that the economy will continue to grow and thanks to a more predictable environment in terms of politics and regulation.

But the poll was carried out in late November and early December, meaning respondents were unaware of a surprise contraction in services-sector activity in December, the first in a year and half.

The purchasing-managers index for the wider services sector, published earlier this month, fell to 49.7 from 53.0 in December, indicating a minor contraction in activity.

The financial-services sector, which includes banks, insurance companies, asset managers and securities traders among others, accounts for about a third of the U.K. economy, according to the latest available figures from 2006.

 Write to  Alex Brittain at Alex.Brittain@dowjones.com 