BUDAPEST—Differences among European Union countries on whether to test the safety of nuclear plants in the case of an airplane crash surfaced Tuesday, just days before the EU is expected to make public new safety criteria under "stress tests" imposed after the Japanese nuclear crisis. 

Günther Oettinger, European commissioner for energy, said EU members had reached no consensus on whether to include airplane crash criteria in the criteria. "The question is open," Mr. Oettinger said on the sidelines of a an energy summit with energy representatives of the 27 EU governments. 

The EU in late March agreed to impose stress tests on the continent's 143 nuclear plants to ensure safety. EU member countries agreed to check reactors' resistance to natural catastrophes in the wake of the recent radiation scare in Japan. But discussions are now getting trickier as governments have to decide the details of new rules. 

At issue is whether to include a requirement to ensure that nuclear plants could withstand an airplane crash along the lines of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. The new rules come amid a burgeoning debate throughout the continent on the place of nuclear energy, which had been seen before Japan as on the cusp of a revival because of its advantages in climate mitigation. 

Nuclear politics continued to shadow public debates throughout the continent Tuesday. French President Nicholas Sarkozy strongly defended the technology at a visit to a nuclear site in Normandy, calling a moratorium on the fuel an "incomprehensible position." Meanwhile, the German League for Nature and Environment, an environmental group, called on Germany to drop atomic power by 2014. 

The EU is juggling the need to need to establish a credible system for ensuring safety, even as some member countries publicly rue new requirements that could force plant closures. The rules are voluntary, as there is no authority in the EU that could force a country to undertake them. The EU is expected to release the rules May 12. 

A proposal by the Western European Nuclear Regulators Association that has served as a starting point for the EU criteria includes no test for plane crashes. The association includes France, the U.K. and Germany, which all have nuclear plants. 

The plane-crash criterion is supported by Austria, which has no nuclear power and has traditionally opposed it. But some nuclear champions in the EU fear such a requirement could force some nuclear plants out of business. 

A meeting of national nuclear regulators next week is expected to resolve the issue, Mr. Oettinger said. 

Mr. Oettinger said regulators are also undecided on who would screen the national reports compiled after the stress tests by each national authority. While there is a general agreement that some international body will check the reports, there is no deal yet on how this will work, he said. The rule is designed to ensure that oversight is sufficiently independent of nuclear industry interests after the Japanese regulatory system came in for criticism following Fukushima. 

One option would be that two countries swap their reports and have a cross analysis; another one would be to put together a pool of experts from three or four countries to look at another country's report. 

—Bernd Radowitz in Berlin and Adam Mitchell in Paris contributed to this article.

 Write to  Alessandro Torello at alessandro.torello@dowjones.com 