Venezuela's new National Assembly will be seated Wednesday, but recent moves by President Hugo Chávez have rendered the legislative body practically powerless and set the stage for months of confrontation between the populist president and an embittered opposition.

After September elections gave the opposition big gains in congress, Mr. Chávez and his allies in the lame duck legislature passed a series of laws that, among other things, gave the president the power to rule by decree for the next 18 months, bypassing the congress.

The tug-of-war between the new, defanged assembly and Mr. Chávez will shape Venezuelan politics for the coming year and guide how both sides approach 2012 national elections. Mr. Chávez, a former army officer who has been in power for 11 years, is seeking another four-year term. 

Incoming opposition lawmakers have said that since much of the assembly's constitutional powers have been stripped, lawmakers will also try to make their case in the streets. They have called on Venezuelans to protest what they call the hijacking of the government.

"The changes [to laws] have been made to silence us and leave us with very little ability to function," said opposition assemblyman Hermes Garcia. "If we don't have a voice, we will get a voice. The people have to be in the streets protesting. The Venezuelan people must."

The recent moves by Mr. Chávez, while falling short of those in dictatorships such as Cuba or North Korea, highlight how Venezuela has lost its status as a full democracy in the eyes of most analysts.

"It's very, very hard to talk about a democracy when you have elected officials [in a legislature] that can't exercise their authority," said Michael Shifter, president for policy at the Inter-American Dialogue, a regional non-profit based in Washington D.C.

Among the new Venezuelan laws that serve to strengthen Hugo Chávez's authority:

Anti-Chávez candidates won the popular vote in September's poll, but gerrymandering limited them to 67 seats in the 165 member body. Still, that was enough to deprive the ruling United Socialist Party of Venezuela of the two-thirds majority to rubber-stamp the president's socialist agenda.

Mr. Chávez's supporters say the president needed emergency powers to deal with recent deadly floods. Critics say the overall package of laws passed by the lame-duck assembly leaves little doubt that the intention is to consolidate power.

The new legislature was due to vote on approving new members of the Supreme Court to replace those who retire. 

But since those votes require a two-thirds majority, and would have meant haggling with the opposition, the outgoing pro-Chávez legislature approved a new raft of candidates, all pro-Chávez.

The assembly's internal rules were also rewritten, potentially limiting the legislators to as few as four meetings a month and restricting speeches to 15 minutes. The rules say debates are to be aired only on government-run channels, effectively allowing the Chávez government to gag opposition members. Rules now also bar lawmakers from switching parties, a move that would prevent members of Mr. Chávez's own party from defecting.

The outgoing assembly enacted a flurry of measures that stripped universities of autonomy from government meddling, give increased government control over the Internet and television, and forbid local nongovernmental organizations from accepting foreign funds. It reclassified banks as public utilities, making it easier for them to be nationalized, and transferred some powers from local and state governments to socialist citizen committees—part of a broader overall effort to circumnavigate institutions altogether and govern directly.

The university law and the seizure of farmland in western Venezuela sparked protests in December by students and farm workers.

"It's like the government is going to decide everything, what classes I can take, where I go, what major I choose," said Ariadne Doctors, a 21-year-old university student who was among the protesters of the higher-education law in December. Students groups are organizing another round of protests this month, she said.

The Law for Social Responsibility in Radio, Television and Electronic Media bans the broadcasting of anything that may "foment anxiety in the public or disturb public order," which international organizations say could clamp down on free speech.

Teodoro Petkoff, a former presidential candidate and current editor of opposition newspaper Tal Cual, has said the law targets the last remaining opposition channel, Globovision, and the kind of scathing commentary he delivers against the Chávez administration.

"This constant submitting of all sorts of laws cut down on the freedom of expression," he said.

Analysts say Mr. Chávez may be betting that his power grab will simply demoralize the opposition. But they say recent elections gave the opposition momentum ahead of next year's vote. 

Venezuela's economy—which shrank in 2009 and 2010—remains a problem for the free-spending populist, as does high inflation and crime.

"There are reasons for the opposition to be pessimistic, but I would still argue that they are still in a better position now than they were before" the election, said Kevin Casas-Zamora, a former vice president of Costa Rica and senior fellow at the Brookings Institute, a Washington, D.C.-based think tank.

 Write to  David Luhnow at david.luhnow@wsj.com 