In the 1960s I often stayed at the Beverly Hills home of the movie star Rosalind Russell and her husband, producer Frederick Brisson. On sunny mornings at the patio breakfast table, amid the smell of coffee and the scent of bougainvillea, we would work our way through the stack of newspapers and "trades"—the Hollywood Reporter and Variety.

Stories of interest about movies or show business, or mentions of friends (or enemies), were already marked in red ink by Mr. Brisson's secretary. Hedda Hopper's gossip column in the Los Angeles Times and Louella Parsons's competing column in the Los Angeles Examiner were invariably circled, checked, arrowed or marked with exclamation points. The golden age of Hollywood studios and stars was doing a slow dissolve, but serious attention was still paid to these columns by thousands of film-industry Los Angelinos with career fish to fry. Millions of Americans who had no personal stake in the movie business read the columns in syndication.

"Hedda Hopper's Hollywood: Celebrity Gossip and American Conservatism" by Jennifer Frost brought me back to those breakfasts with the Brissons almost 50 years ago. It also gave me indigestion.

Ms. Frost covers the biographical outlines of Miss Hopper's life efficiently; it's the second part of the book's subtitle that gives the game away. The author, whose previous book was "An Interracial Movement of the Poor: Community Organizing and the New Left of the 1960s," is most interested in tearing down Miss Hopper because of her proudly conservative views.

But first let's get to the facts of Hedda Hopper's life. Born Elda Furry in 1885, she grew up with strict Quaker parents in a middle-class family of seven children in Altoona, Pa. She was pretty, smart, outgoing and strong-willed. She could hardly wait to get out of town. In her teens, she ran away to join a vaudeville troupe. She became a chorus girl and used the last name Curry because she thought "Elda Furry" made her sound like a "small blonde animal." She eventually landed as an actress on the stage in Manhattan.

She married De Wolf Hopper, a well-known stage star, in 1913, when she was 28 and he was 55. De Wolf already had four ex-wives. The couple had a son, Bill (later a successful TV actor), and were divorced in 1922 when the boy was 7. By then she was using the name Hedda Hopper and had made several trips to work in Hollywood. She settled there, a single mother, in the 1920s. 

She did well as an actress, making 140 movies and often commanding a salary of $1,000 a week, but she was never successful enough to insulate her career from the ups and downs of the economy. She cast about for another, more reliable, line of work. Well-known in Hollywood circles, she had the inside skinny on who was doing what to whom and so decided to write a gossip column, even if that meant competing with her friend Louella Parsons.

Cissy Patterson, the owner of the Washington Herald, hired Hopper in 1935 to write a "letter from Hollywood." Three years later the column was picked by the Los Angeles Times and syndicated. Soon she had millions of fans.

Louella Parsons was not among them. The conventional wisdom—that she hated Hedda Hopper—was accurate. I worked for Miss Parsons (as I still think of her) two days a week in 1962-63 at her home on North Maple Drive in Beverly Hills. One morning she flew in from her bedroom down the hall clutching a crumpled Hedda Hopper column from the morning's Times. She was so mad that she could barely speak. She had been beaten on some story or other. All Miss Parsons could say, as she threw the ball of paper into the fireplace, was "that bitch, that bitch."

 By Jennifer Frost  New York University, 281 pages, $35

Others in Hollywood disliked Hedda Hopper because she was a political and moral conservative with libertarian leanings; an anticommunist who didn't like FDR or the welfare state or left-wing actors like Charlie Chaplin. She loathed Chaplin for his politics and his womanizing, or more accurately his girlizing, since he preferred romancing teenagers. She was not shy about weaving her moral and political views into her columns. She was hated for it by the Hollywood left. Jennifer Frost apparently feels a similar animus. The author's curled-lip book dedication tells you what Ms. Frost thinks of her subject: "For my Mother Ann B. Frost, who—thank goodness—was nothing like Hedda Hopper either personally or politically."

If you love rich prose and good story-telling and you are looking for a well-crafted narrative about the culture of Hollywood and its influence on politics, this book is not for you. Reading it is like trying to eat rice pudding at the old Brown Derby the day the cook forgot the raisins, the sugar and the cinnamon. 

Ms. Frost, a self-described "women's historian," brings the intellectual habits of the faculty lounge to her work, searching for evidence of racism, sexism and red-baiting under every pebble, however tiny. She was supported in these efforts by university grant money.

I liked Louella Parsons and when I got to know Hedda Hopper, I liked her as well. They were both tough, funny, colorful and ambitious women who took the gifts that God gave them and created value for themselves in the difficult, masculine and very different world of 20th-century journalism. They did it themselves. No grant money.

—Mr. Carlson is the former director  of the Voice of America.