LONDON—Bank of England policy maker  Charles Bean said Thursday that inflation may prove more persistent next year than the bank is forecasting but that doesn't necessarily strengthen the case for an early rate increase. 

The Bank of England's forecasts anticipate inflation will remain at roughly double its 2% annual target throughout 2011 and fall back to target in 2012 as temporary factors pushing prices higher, such as increasing commodity prices and a rise in a U.K. sales tax, recede. 

But in a speech at the Association of British Insurers in London, Mr. Bean, deputy governor for monetary policy, said how quickly inflation returns to target will depend on whether companies push up prices to recover lost profit margins and whether workers demand higher wages to compensate for a loss of purchasing power. 

He added there is a risk that the turmoil in the Middle East will result in a spike in oil prices. 

"My own judgment is that, if anything, inflation may prove a little more persistent next year than presently embodied in our forecasts," Mr. Bean said, according to a text of his remarks. 

Mr. Bean is often tipped as the next policy maker likely to join a growing band of hawks on the rate-setting Monetary Policy Committee. A majority of the nine-man committee, Mr. Bean included, voted to keep rates on hold at a record low of 0.5% in February, but there are now three policy makers advocating an increase in the benchmark interest rate, compared with two in January. 

"Bean appears to be the middle-ground member most likely to join the hawks," RBS economists said Thursday. 

However, Mr. Bean added that above-target inflation in 2012 doesn't necessarily mean that the bank's benchmark interest rate should rise faster than the rate implied by signals from financial markets that underpin the bank's projections. 

"The risk of inflation staying above target in the medium term needs to be weighed against the downside risk to growth and the prospect of a persistent margin of unused resources in the economy," Mr. Bean said. 

"Allowing inflation to come back gradually towards the target would allow the margin of spare capacity to close more rapidly, and would be in line with our remit that tells us that temporary deviations of inflation from the target are permissible if they help to avoid excessive volatility in output." 

The bank's Monetary Policy Committee meets March 9 and 10 to make its next rate decision. 

Investors are pricing in a slim chance of an increase this month, although most think the first rate rise will come in May or June, according to overnight lending rates that track the bank's benchmark rate. 

 Write to  Jason Douglas at jason.douglas@dowjones.com 