NEW YORK—After falling sharply in after-hours and premarket trade, shares of  St. Joe Co.
JOE


0.00
%




 ended higher Tuesday after the real-estate development company late Monday said the Securities and Exchange Commission is conducting an informal inquiry into its policies and practices concerning impairment of investment in real-estate assets.

St. Joe's revelation comes months after hedge-fund manager  David Einhorn of Greenlight Capital questioned the company's real-estate accounting, claiming its holdings of Florida land are worth nowhere near where St. Joe says they are. 

In a filing Monday, St. Joe said the SEC's notification of the inquiry doesn't indicate any allegations of wrongdoing and isn't an indicator of federal securities law violations. The company said it intends to fully cooperate with the SEC. 

A St. Joe spokesman said late Monday the filing was voluntary and company wanted to maintain transparency in its disclosures. He declined to comment further on the inquiry. 

In 4 p.m. New York Stock Exchange composite trading, St. Joe's shares rose 11 cents, or 0.5%, to $23.21. The stock is down about 20% over the past 12 months. 

Mr. Einhorn disclosed he is shorting the stock of St. Joe, or betting against it, and delivered a 139-slide presentation about the company at an investment conference, portraying St. Joe as a company with poor leadership and overvalued land. Within two days, St. Joe shares plunged nearly 20%. 

In a statement Monday evening, a Greenlight spokesman said, "St. Joe's valuation practices remain open to question, as it is hard to understand how the company invested hundreds of millions of dollars during the real estate bubble and haven't seen fit to take a material write-down." 

But in a note Tuesday, Keefe, Bruyette & Woods said St. Joe has been discussing and outlining its impairment policy since the investor presentation raised questions surrounding its practices. The firm said it believes St. Joe and its independent auditor, KPMG, adhered to generally accepted accounting principles and that the issue should be resolved successfully.

Keefe, Bruyette & Woods added that the weakness in the shares presents a buying opportunity.

Also Monday, global asset-management firm  BlackRock Inc.
BLK


-0.44
%




 disclosed it has nearly doubled its stake in St. Joe. According to an SEC filing, investment funds controlled by BlackRock held 11.7 million shares of St. Joe, or 12.59% of the company, up from 6.3 million shares nearly a year ago. 

—Steven Russolillo, Dawn Wotapka and Liz Moyer contributed to this article. 