Today, wine tours are big business, as vineyards, regional trade bodies, tour operators and travel agents increasingly see them as an important component in generating revenue and marketing noise. It's all a far cry from when I started adventuring along the wine route. 

Back then, as a curious undergraduate, I attempted my first wine tour up Portugal's Douro Valley, where, backpack slung over my shoulder and girlfriend in tow, we set off—only to be invariably met by poor food, extreme heat and unreliable trains. Thankfully, the wine was delicious. 

Nowadays, the Douro is peppered with luxury hotels replete with infinity pools, spas and restaurants, which, I'm told, offer a wider variety than the menus I encountered, which were built around a stable of meat, rice and fries. The Yeatman, recently opened by Taylor, Fladgate & Yeatman, which owns Taylor's port, is a case in point, offering exceptional views from its position in Vila Nova de Gaia overlooking Oporto. Further up the river at Quinta da Romaneira, one can take a swim above the vineyards in luxurious splendor. 

The encroachment of high-end luxury into the world's vineyards isn't uncommon; we now have golf hotels in Bordeaux (Golf du Médoc Hotel & Spa); Frank Gehry-designed hotels in Rioja (Starwood's Marqués de Riscal hotel) and renovated Dutch colonial mansions in South Africa's Constantia Valley (Steenberg Hotel). 

Semeli, Greece  Vintage: 2009  Price: About £13 or €15

Greece isn't a country one immediately associates with wine making, even though there is evidence of vine cultivation stretching back to the late Neolithic age. At first glance, one could be forgiven for thinking it is too hot and dry. But altitude, sea breezes and indigenous grapes have all contributed to a lively wine scene, which in modern times really started to take off around the mid-1980s. This particular white wine has won many awards for its fresh, zippy character. Produced from grapes grown at around 650 meters above sea level, it sits in the glass with a luminous yellow, green hue. The nose is lemony with a flowery scent, but the overall character of the wine is marked by its tingling acidity and lively, long finish. 

There are also a swathe of travel companies offering a range of holidays from wine and opera to wine and golf, and even wine and sailing. For more than 20 years, Arblaster & Clarke has offered a range of wine tours of regions as far afield as Australia and South Africa, often in the company of an expert guide. They have the advantage of neatly packaging everything together and gaining entry into wineries and estates, such as one of Bordeaux's first growths, that would otherwise not be possible. 

But like too much wine, too much luxury or organization can sometimes be a little too much, and as the summer wears on, I hanker after a more personal approach involving a car, a map and a battered suitcase, throwing the best laid plans out of the window and simply just exploring. 

France is a great country to get started. Both Bordeaux and Burgundy have driving routes that cut through some of the country's most scenic and illustrious vineyards. 

In Burgundy, the Côte d'Or is a thin, 30-mile strip of land that begins at Chenôve, just south of Dijon, and ends in the villages beyond Santenay. Running through the middle is the N74, or the route des Grands Cru, which passes through 24 of the area's 33 grand cru wine regions, taking in such names as Chambertin, Clos de Vougeot and Romanée-Conti. 

Late autumn, when the leaves have turned a honeyed, soft ocher, is the best time to go. A good tip is to leave the main road for one of its tributaries; at certain elevated points, where the lanes meander up the side of the slope, one gets the sensation of floating amid the vines. The villages one stumbles across are peppered with numerous cellars offering their wine for degustation—they are well worth a stop as you never know what discoveries you might make.

Bordeaux has a similar route— the D2—a road that runs through the Left Bank commune of the Médoc, sweeping through some of the most famous appellations in the world, such as Margaux, Saint-Julien, Pauillac and Saint-Estèphe. Reservations are crucial in Bordeaux, so it is best to telephone or write in advance to the chateaux you would like to visit. 

Completing the triumvirate is Champagne, where both Epernay and Reims have a number of houses, such as Mumm, Pommery and Canard-Duchêne, that welcome visitors with or without appointments. In Epernay, one can leave the car behind and stroll down the avenue de Champagne where Moët & Chandon has more than 25 kilometers of chalk cellars dating back to 1743. Most houses offer the casual visitor a guided tour of the cellars followed by a glass of something bubbly. 