After Osama bin Laden was killed, there were reports that he had used his wife--to be exact, one of his wives--as a human shield. The White House eventually said this was false, but one imagined the al Qaeda honcho doing his best Henny Youngman impression and telling the audience of Navy SEALs: "Take my wife. Please." (As an aside, imagine the comic riches that Youngman might have produced had he only practiced polygamy.)

As it turns out, the SEALs didn't take Mrs. bin Laden, née Amal Ahmed Abdul Fatah, though they did shoot her in the leg, Agence France-Presse reports. She is now in Pakistani "protective custody," along with two other bin Laden widows. 

The U.S. would like to interview Mrs. bin Laden, along with the other Mrs. bin Laden and the other other Mrs. bin Laden. (Blame monogamy for that awkward locution--there's no plural for "Mrs.") But the Pakistanis do not seem eager to let this happen, as AFP suggests:

A Time report notes that the terrorist and the youngest Mrs. bin Laden were apart for a time:

To quote Henny Youngman again: "I take my wife everywhere, but she keeps finding her way back."

"With the benefit of hindsight," Time notes, "it seems that U.S. counterterrorism experts spent years trying to decipher the name and the whereabouts of bin Laden's elusive courier, when keeping tabs on his comely young wife might have led them to him sooner."

But here's the kicker:

It may be that Pakistan's "protective custody" is meant to protect the custodian, not the custodee.

  Freedom of Information for Me, but Not for Thee   This column has no strong opinion on the question of whether the government should release photos of Osama bin Laden's dead body. We're with Peggy Noonan in finding President Obama's "we don't spike the football" comment obnoxious and wrongheaded, but we can well imagine that legitimate reasons of taste or national security militate against the release.

The Atlantic reports that Associated Press has filed a Freedom of Information Act request for the photos. "This information is important for the historical record," Michael Oreskes, the AP's senior managing editor, tells the magazine:

Oreskes is trying to have it both ways, isn't he? Like the government, he is willing in principle to withhold the photos from the public. He faults the government only for withholding them from journalists. "We'll decide," he says. But what gives the AP that right? Who elected Michael Oreskes?

To be sure, part of the job of a journalist is to decide when not to publish information, and this sometimes entails making judgments about what is in the public interest. In this case, however, the AP is demanding specific information on the ground that the public has a right to know it. If the public really has a right to see the photos, the AP has no more business withholding them than the government does.

  Reliable Sources   The other day the Washington Post carried a story titled "Bin Laden Raid Fits Into Obama's 'Big Things' Message." It included the following passage:

Washington Times columnist Tony Blankley has an acute analysis;

Come to think of it, "We don't spike the football" has a boastful quality to it as well.

  Try Not to Think of a Waterboard--II   Administration officials and sympathizers have continued to fire back against the argument that the Osama bin Laden raid vindicates the Bush administration's use of enhanced interrogation techniques, including waterboarding. As we noted Friday, the counterarguments have been notably weak, and that continues to be the case. 

Tom Donilon, President Obama's national security adviser, was interviewed by Chris Wallace on "Fox News Sunday." Wallace asked him: "Why is shooting an unarmed man in the face legal and proper while enhanced interrogation, including waterboarding of a detainee under very strict controls and limits--why is that over the line?"

Donlon tried to evade the question by giving a long justification for the shooting of bin Laden, but Wallace pressed the matter:

Writing in The Daily, the usually sensible Judith Miller offers this bit of sophistry:

This analogy is completely empty. Not only are bin Laden's means (murdering civilians en masse) not comparable to America's (frightening mass murderers in ways that pose no actual threat of physical harm), but the ends are not comparable either. The objective of an al Qaeda attack is not to save civilians.

The atrociously poor quality of the arguments against enhanced interrogation are all the more reason to think the bin Laden raid vindicates it.

  If You Can Read This, Thank a Teacher?   "According to a new report, 47 percent of Detroiters are 'functionally illiterate,' " Detroit's WWJ-AM reported last week:

We were reminded of this by a report from CNSNews.com:

Another thing Detroit and Afghanistan have in common is they both have a lot of American-built schools.

  Out on a Limb   "Armed Robber Will Hurt Someone, Cops Fear"--headline, Dayton Daily News, May 9

  'We Need to Shut Up and Move On'   "Shut Up and Skate: New Women's Roller Derby Team Is Recruiting"--headline, Patch.com (Alameda, Calif.), May 9

  At This Point, It Would Seem to Be Redundant   "Why Kill bin Laden?"--headline, Rich Lowry syndicated column, May 10

  The Two We Have Are So Good, Let's Get Another!   "Poll: Americans Want a Third Political Party"--headline, USA Today website, May 10

  What Happens in Vegas, Stays in Vegas   "In Nevada, an Abundance of Feminine Riches"--headline, Roll Call, May 10

  The Lonely Lives of Astronomers   "Big Asteroid's Approach in November Excites Astronomers"--headline, Space.com, May 9

  The Lonely Lives of Intellectuals   "Why Don't We Love Our Intellectuals?"--headline Observer (London), May 8

  The Lonely Lives of Police   "May 9, Evanston: Police Search for Man With a Gun, and More . . ."--headline, Chicago Tribune website, May 10

  Hey, Kids! What Time Is It?   "Time to Reopen the Interrogation Debate"--headline, Washington Post website, May 9

 Questions Nobody Is Asking 

 Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking 

 News of the Tautological 

  Breaking News From 2009   "Attorney General Vows to Close Guantanamo"--headline, Reuters, May 9

 News You Can Use 

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  Matchmaker, Matchmaker, Make Me a Match   How, you may be wondering, did Osama bin Laden meet women? A man so infamous couldn't exactly go trolling the bars of Jalalabad or Peshawar, and the gals on JDate probably weren't his type. ABC News reports that he was set up on a blind date:

Though apparently she wasn't much of a cook. In the bin Laden house, they prayed after they ate. (Hat tip: Rodney Dangerfield.)

New York's Daily News reports that among the personal effects found in bin Laden's house was a stash of Avena, known as "the herbal 'Viagra.' " Does that mean Osama had trouble performing his marital duties? Not necessarily. In addition to its purported aphrodisiac qualities, an unnamed New York Avena peddler tells the paper, "It's good for depression, stress and bed wetting."

Maybe Radley Balko should try some.

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Michele Schiesser, Wright Truesdell, Thomas Brown, Tom Wilson, Kyle Kyllan, Lewis Chilton, Chris Scibelli, Hillel Markowitz, Ethel Fenig, Nick Kasoff, Scott Siegel, Bruce Goldman, Ed Grinberg, John Williamson, Peter Huntsman, Zack Russ, David Hallstrom, Robert Kay, Tom Jackson, Russ Evansen, John Bobek, Abe Beyda, Joe Perez, Mark Kellner, Leonard Peirce and Bob Walsh. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)