 New York 

One by one,the little girls were escorted into a room at Ripley-Grier Studios, an audition and rehearsal space just over the border from the theater district. Stephen Kopel, casting director for "The People in the Picture," a Broadway musical scheduled to open in April, made the introductions: "This is Eddie. He's going to play for you."

"Where would you like me to start?" Eddie Rabin asked kindly, looking at each aspirant's sheet music. "What's the tempo?"

"Can you sing it a little louder and maybe face the table, don't face me," he suggested to one would-be star who was among the half-dozen young performers to croon "Castle on a Cloud" from "Les Miserables." "I'll play it again in maybe a different key."

"Do I look familiar to you?" he asked Alexa Niziak, a fetching 9-year-old with blond braids. "I think I've played for you before." 

Really, Mr. Rabin has played for everybody. Lucie Arnaz, Kristin Chenoweth, Tovah Feldshuh, Heather Headley, Donna Murphy (star of "The People in the Picture"), Alice Ripley—and that's just for starters. He's one of the most sought-after audition pianists in the business, sometimes working as many as seven sessions a week—some lasting as long as nine hours—for theater, movie and cruise-ship casting directors. And he somehow manages to pull a rich sound out of the beat-up Steinway uprights and bland Yamahas that are so frequently his portion.

Mr. Rabin was hunched over the 88s during the selection process for the Broadway shows "Aida," "Big River," "The Drowsy Chaperone," "Hairspray," "Jersey Boys," "The Lion King," "Next to Normal," "The Scottsboro Boys," "Spring Awakening" and "Wicked," as well as the recent revivals of "Hair" and "South Pacific," and the films "Across the Universe," "Camp" and "Rent" (for which he also played the stage auditions).

Unlike many other audition pianists, "Eddie can follow the singers wherever they go," said James Nadeau, casting director at Stiletto Entertainment, whose clients include the cruise line Holland America. "If they skip an entire bar or speed up and jump to another page of the song, he is right there with them. He can also play anything these singers put in front of him as if he has played it his entire life." 

Mr. Rabin, a compact man in his 60s, can familiarize himself with 32 bars in less time than it takes a singer to clear her throat. "But," he said, "the more you play auditions the less you have to sight-read, because at this point I know 85% to 90% of the songs people bring me."

Some of those songs he'd be very happy to forget. A partial list includes "Alone" by Heart ("Casting directors dislike it even more than I do"); "Corner of the Sky" from the musical "Pippin" ("I've been playing it since 1973"); "Fortune Favors the Brave" from Elton John's "Aida" ("Almost no one hits the high notes accurately"); and pretty much anything by Andrew Lloyd Webber ("I've had to do a lot from 'Cats' lately, and I wince.")

Mr. Rabin's opinion doesn't mean much to performers, who are, in any case, happy to blame him if the audition doesn't go well. "Sometimes," he said, "I'll get a look or they'll swipe the music from my hand when they leave, and I'll think 'that's not a very satisfied customer.'"

Let Mr. Rabin take this opportunity to tell such aggrieved customers that he is not a mind reader. "You'd be surprised," he said, "at the number of people who haven't given any thought to where they want to start the song. Do they want an introduction? Do they just want their opening note? And then they don't warn me if there's a tempo switch or a key change in the middle of the song or if they want me to repeat the chorus."

The Brooklyn-born Mr. Rabin was admitted at 16½ to Juilliard, where Emanuel Ax, Misha Dichter and Joseph Kalichstein were his classmates and where, he said, he was derailed by a brutal teacher. "I'd always been the promising guy. But at Juilliard I was a small fish in a big pond." 

Back in New York after a few years knocking around Paris and London, Mr. Rabin played in the orchestra pit for the 1971 Broadway musical "Oh, Calcutta" and was part of the house band at the club Catch a Rising Star, where he accompanied rocker Pat Benatar. Then, through a colleague, he began playing for auditions at the Public Theater. When, in 1980, Linda Ronstadt auditioned for the role of Mabel in "The Pirates of Penzance," Mr. Rabin played the piano for her in Joe Papp's office, Mr. Rabin recalled. Yes, she got the part.

The original Catch closed in the early '90s, and Mr. Rabin began cold-calling casting agents to line up steady work as an audition accompanist. (The average hourly rate for such work is $60.) Playing piano for rehearsals and for "how to audition" classes provides additional revenue streams.

Despite Mr. Rabin's training and experience, it's not always as easy as do-re-mi. If he's hired to play call-backs, he has to learn that show's music "and it's like being back in school," he said. "The new school of Broadway musical has fiendishly difficult arrangements. I have to really be on my toes because the composer could well be in the room."

The continued demand for Mr. Rabin's services may be as much about striking the right tone as playing the right notes. "We want to create an environment where an actor can excel, and Eddie helps make that happen," said Tiffany Little Canfield, a casting director at Telsey + Company. "He has a real knowledge of Motown, R&B and jazz, so he can make a performance seem more authentic. He's not grouchy to the performers, like some accompanists, and he doesn't try to impress a show's musical director by embellishing a piece and overshadowing the person who's auditioning."

And he's not one to speak out of turn. "Performers I know might see me in the hallway, but I would never reveal what was said about them in the audition studio," Mr. Rabin said. "And I would never give a performer direction unless it's just me and one casting director in the room. Then I might say, 'Hey, listen, this is a pop song. You need to undo your careful diction because it makes you sound like a student.'"

After almost 30 years in the business, he can tell within three bars if a performer has what it takes. "I'm sometimes tempted to say, 'Kid, you haven't got it,'" Mr. Rabin admitted. "But it's not my place. And I figure they'll find out for themselves in a few years." 

 Ms. Kaufman writes about culture and the arts for the Journal. 