  IStar Financial Inc. has raised nearly $3 billion in new financing that clears the way for the commercial property financier to pay off nearly all of its secured debt obligations and steer clear of financial peril. 

The New-York based real-estate investment trust said it sealed a $2.95 billion credit agreement that will allow it to retire all of its 2011 and 2012 secured credit facilities totaling $2.65 billion. 

The company still faces hurdles. It must repay about $600 million in unsecured debt throughout the year. IStar also faces refinancing risk toward the end of 2012 when $780 million in convertible debt matures.

But the success of the private placement, arranged by  J.P. Morgan Chase & Co.
JPM


0.26
%




, gives some much-needed breathing room to the company that was considered a bankruptcy risk as recently as early in 2009. The company's portfolio of commercial real estate debt was hit hard by the downturn but has been recovering some of its value as some markets have rebounded.

"With the refinancing behind us, we believe [iStar] is well-positioned to maximize value within our existing portfolio and make investments where we see attractive" returns, said Jason Fooks, a spokesman for the company, in an email. 

Mr. Fooks said the company planned to pay off the unsecured debt by selling assets and cash generated from loan repayments from borrowers. About $100 million becomes due in two weeks, $300 million comes due in June and $200 million must be repaid in September.

IStar had been under the gun to get the capital to refinance $2.2 billion in debt maturing in June. That debt includes $1.7 billion in notes issued as part of a 2009 restructuring that kept iStar alive.

IStar has been struggling to avoid default on its own obligations as a number of its borrowers defaulted amid a brutal commercial real estate downturn and credit crunch. For much of that time, Wall Street stacked the odds against the commercial-property lender and owner sending its stock below $1 in February 2009.

IStar's shares were trading at $9, off 0.66%, in 4 p.m. trading on the New York Stock Exchange.

IStar was hurt particularly by its decision in 2007 to purchase the commercial real-estate portfolio of Fremont General Corp., a failing lender that was undone by the subprime-mort gage crisis.

Investors started to have a change of heart on iStar's stock last year as rising commercial real estate values restored confidence that the company, led by Jay Sugarman, would stage a turnaround. The market was also encouraged by the company's success at selling assets at higher-than-expected prices over the past 12 months. 

The rosier market outlook fueled iStar's shares which rose 200% in 2010. The stock is one of the best performing among REITs this year, rising 15% since the beginning of January.

"The closing and funding of the...bank refinancing transaction is a major milestone for the company," said Michael Kim, and analyst at CRT Capital Group LLC. 