MUMBAI -- An Indian central bank panel Wednesday recommended creating a separate category of non-banking finance company, or NBFC, for microlenders as well as capping operating margins and interest rates charged by them.

The panel, headed by Y.H. Malegam, Director on the Reserve Bank of India's central board, was constituted by the RBI late last year to suggest long-term and structural changes in the functioning of microfinance institutions, or MFIs.

The sector was coming under pressure for allegedly charging small borrowers high interest rates and, in some cases, being overly aggressive in collections.

"Credit to the microfinance sector is an important plank in the scheme for financial inclusion. A fair and adequate regulation of NBFCs will encourage the growth of this sector, while adequately protecting the interests of the borrowers," the panel said in its report.

It recommended capping interest rates charged on individual loans by microlenders at 24% and defined a fixed operating margin.

For MFIs with a loan book above 1 billion rupees, the panel recommended a cap of 10% on average margins, but allowed margins of 12% for those with a smaller book.

While recognising the need to protect borrowers with these suggestions, the panel also highlighted the need for a healthy recovery system to ensure that borrowers continue to access to micro credit.

Microfinance institutions, mostly operating in the southern state of Andhra Pradesh, are facing severe repayment problems after the provincial government took steps to regulate lending practices.

The panel said that 90% of the total loans of the new category should consist of unsecured loans to small borrowers for short terms, with repayment schedules more frequent than banks. The assets don't include cash and bank balances and money market instruments, it added.

"Bank lending to NBFCs which qualify as NBFC-MFIs will be entitled to priority lending status," the panel suggested.

MFIs borrow from banks and offer small loans of about $100 each to borrowers without collateral. Repayments are usually on a weekly basis.

The report follows a temporary central bank relaxation to banks announced earlier in the day, allowing them to restructure loans to microlenders in an attempt to give lenders temporary flexibility in providing credit support to the cash-strapped institutions.

"It has been decided that the special regulatory asset classification benefit could be extended to restructured MFI accounts, which are standard at the time of restructuring, even if they are not fully secured," the central bank notification said.

Banks can restructure the unsecured loans of MFIs without classifying them as sub-standard or bad, according to the notification. The relaxation will let restructure loans to microlenders up to March 31, 2011. Under RBI rules, banks have to keep aside a larger portion of cash against bad loans.

The news sent shares of SKS Microfinance Ltd., the only listed MFI in India, to jump 6.1% to hit a day's high of 690.60 rupees.

Banks can restructure the microlender loans up to March 31 and all banks that are financing MFIs should come together and decide the next course of action, the RBI said.

"It is a very positive move, which will enable MFIs to carry out work unabated, at least outside Andhra Pradesh," Vijay Mahajan, president of representative body, Microfinance Institutions Network, told Dow Jones Newswires.

A deadlock between MFIs and the Andhra Pradesh government continues, he said.

He expects about 50 billion rupees ($1.1 billion) to 80 billion rupees worth of microfinance loans to come up for restructuring.

 Write to  Nupur Acharya at nupur.acharya@dowjones.com and Bijou George at bijou.george@dowjones.com 