WASHINGTON—Hog farmers are overusing antibiotics on their herds and that may be creating antibiotic-resistant bacteria that pose a threat to human health, Edward Knipling, head of the U.S. Department of Agriculture's research branch, said Wednesday.

Data collected by the USDA and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention show there is a problem that could be exposing Americans to bacteria like Escherichia coli and Campylobacter that have become resistant to antibiotics, Mr. Knipling told a panel of House lawmakers. E. coli causes infectious gastroenteritis and Campylobacter is a bacterial food-borne illness.

The Food and Drug Administration warned hog, cattle and chicken producers last year in a draft guidance letter to stop the widespread practice of feeding antibiotics to livestock, which is commonly done to accelerate animal growth. The document did not mandate the farmers change their behavior, though. Mr. Knipling focused on hogs in his remarks before a House Appropriations subcommittee, but the FDA has warned antibiotic overuse is also a problem on the cattle and chicken operations.

Mr. Knipling said that the government's antibiotic monitoring program has already produced significant results and now the USDA is proposing to conduct new research into ways it can help wean hog farmers off use of the drugs. 

The National Pork Producers council supports antibiotic use by farmers as a necessary livestock production tool. A spokesman said Wednesday that there is "no scientific, peer-reviewed study showing a definitive link" between antibiotic use in livestock and antibiotic resistant bacteria that sicken humans.

The group says antibiotics are necessary to keep sickness from spreading through hog-raising operations. "Antibiotics have been used to treat and prevent disease or promote growth in animals for more than 50 years," according to a statement on the group's website.

The USDA is asking for $10.65 million in its fiscal 2012 budget to increase food-safety research and the department wants some of that money to go towards developing "alternatives to antibiotics used in animals."

USDA researchers want to look at alternative methods of disease prevention, such as giving hogs feed supplements such as probiotics, live microorganisms believed to provide health benefits.

 Write to  Bill Tomson at bill.tomson@dowjones.com 