I've always had a soft spot for Gioacchino Rossini's overtures. Their slow introductions and sprightly melodies invariably lead to a big crescendo passage, in which Rossini repeats a motif several times, adding instruments—and volume—with each repetition. His "William Tell" overture, however, is in a class of its own. The longest and most architecturally ambitious Rossini overture, its four distinct and dramatically contrasting sections correspond to the four movements of a symphony. It was a splendid way to end a successful career. For though Rossini died in 1868 at age 76, "Guillaume Tell" (its original French title), for which the overture was written, proved to be his last opera—the 38th he composed in the 19 years between 1810 and 1829.

Scholars have suggested that Rossini stopped creating operas at age 37 because the pressure of writing so rapidly had exhausted him physically and mentally. Moreover, rich and famous, he no longer needed to work. 

While Rossini's previous operas usually perpetuated the formalities of the Baroque era, "Guillaume Tell" was different. In setting a libretto based on Friedrich Schiller's drama about Switzerland's 14th-century freedom-fighter, Rossini eschewed elaborate vocal ornamentation for expansive melodiousness. Rossini venerated Beethoven, and to a great degree the "Tell" overture is his response to Beethoven's "Pastoral Symphony" (1808). With its forest scenes, storms and closing hymn to liberty, "Tell" captures the impassioned Romantic spirit. 

Rossini composed "Guillaume Tell" for the Paris Opéra, which then boasted the largest, best-trained orchestra in Europe. Hence the instrumentation of "Tell" is the richest and most colorful of Rossini's oeuvre. And the most subtle. The subtlety begins with the poetic introduction, scored for five solo cellos That the Opéra orchestra had five cellos able to play this beautifully exposed passage like chamber music was itself noteworthy in Rossini's day, when many opera orchestras considered just playing in tune and together a daunting challenge.

Out of the silence, a single cello rises plaintively from a low E along an arpeggiated figure through an E-minor chord to a sustained high B, 2½ octaves higher, while the four other solo cellos lend warmth and harmony in E-minor. Gradually the first cello leads us toward the brighter atmosphere of E-major, suggesting an Alpine dawn.

The poignant melody continues over the other cellos' sustained chords, while the double basses add pizzicato beats to lend weight and subtle rhythmic emphasis. As the melody reaches a climax, the mood is suddenly interrupted by the soft, threatening roll of the timpani on a low E. The melody resumes, while the lines of the first three solo cellos delicately weave around one another, until the section ends with the solo cello soaring birdlike to a sustained high E over concluding pizzicato chords. 

To keep the pace moving, Rossini has those final plucked chords overlap a new, rustling motif by the violas and second violins, answered with three detached chords for piccolo, flute and two oboes. The tempo quickens as the breeze stiffens and raindrops begin to fall. The strings tremble, answered by three more woodwind raindrops as we head into the most famous of Rossini's orchestral storms. The lower strings grow more agitated, the woodwind raindrops become more frequent, and Rossini suggests the randomness of falling rain by syncopating these drops off the driving beat of the pizzicato double basses. Most tellingly, the harmony darkens, drawing us back to moody E-minor.

With a mighty descending gesture of massed violins and woodwinds the storm unleashes its fury over rolling timpani, pounding bass drum and fortissimo brass chords. This descending motif, like a windswept downpour, is answered by an equally powerful rising motif in the double basses, bassoons and trombones, suggesting wind-lashed whitecaps on Lake Lucerne, where the opera takes place.

Driven by roaring trombones, the tempest reaches its tremendous climax, with cymbals crashing amid a screaming twirling motif for the violins, flute and piccolo. Then it subsides, until nothing is left but scattered raindrops as the thunder of the timpani dies away beneath a descending line of clarinets, bassoons, violas and cellos. 

Now the flute raindrops turn into a birdlike motif for solo flute leading into a beautiful pastorale section in the brighter key of G-major. To suggest the sparkling Swiss meadows in the calm following the storm, Rossini evokes both the Italian Baroque tradition of shepherd songs in 3/8 time and the traditional Swiss herdsman's melody known as the "Ranz des Vaches," with a lovely melody for the rustic, double-reed lyricism of the English horn in alternation with the flute. Supported by soft harmonies, the turning, trilling English horn melody evolves into a duet, as the flute line becomes a birdlike countermelody of rapid notes, accented with soft triangle strokes suggesting dewdrops glinting in the sun. 

As in the previous movements, the last note of this magical episode—in G-major—overlaps the first note of the ensuing episode, a startling E-major fanfare for two unison trumpets. A pair of hunting horns joins in with a countermelody, soon joined by a second pair of horns and finally the timpani. And after holding a sonorous B-major chord, the orchestra sets off on the most famous use of galloping anapestic meter in classical music. Two clarinets, two bassoons, two horns, timpani and the strings present the first phrase—marked pianissimo. The full orchestra repeats it, still pianissimo. Then the full orchestra lets rip for the next phrases, marked fortissimo, with cymbals crashing. 

For all its rambunctious energy, Rossini's music is full of subtle details here, especially in the contrasting middle section in C-sharp minor—pianissimo again—dominated by a rushing line of wordless patter for the first violins with soft woodwind and string accompaniment. 

The gallop returns for the last time, in the home key of E-major, the excitement building again to the thrilling release of the coda. Here the violins, flute and piccolo, playing near the top of their range, are answered by a weighty gesture by the trombones, bassoons, cellos and basses. The harmonic progression builds further tension by briefly leaving the home key—the topmost line rising stepwise, the base line descending—until we're suddenly, exhilaratingly home again. When one's hair can rise no further, a final statement of the gallop theme brings us to the closing phrases of the work, with a rocking-horse series of E-major and B-major chords, a last powerful descent of those noble trombones, and a rousing tutti flourish to crown the ending in triumph.

Long before this masterly tone poem was harnessed to radio and television's "The Lone Ranger" series in the 1930s, '40s and '50s, and to tacky commercials in the decades that followed, it was an extremely popular concert piece. And after more than 180 years, nothing can tarnish its brazen majesty.

—Mr. Scherer writes about music and the fine arts for the Journal.