MUMBAI—India's central bank raised its key interest rates, suggesting policy makers have been caught off-guard by the recent surge in inflation, which has been driven mainly by food prices.

The Reserve Bank of India raised its borrowing rate, or reverse repurchase rate, a quarter point to 5.5%, and the lending rate, or repurchase rate, by the same amount to 6.5%.

India's inflation-fighting efforts are being closely watched, as emerging countries from China to Brazil try to stem rising prices amid surging growth.

India is the world's fastest-growing major economy after China, but inflation, spurred by rising food prices, has made investors cautious. The local equity market is underperforming Asian peers so far this year, with foreign funds pulling out $754 million so far in 2011. 

Many Asian central banks have raised rates in past months, but the RBI has been among the most aggressive, raising rates six times in 2010. Many expect the bank to go even further this year, possibly crimping gross domestic product growth estimated at 8.75% in the year ending March 31. 

Despite an urgency to fight inflation, the central bank said Tuesday's move was "to be moderate enough not to disrupt growth."

Governor Duvvuri Subbarao said the central bank had debated a one-half percentage-point increase. "It's not as if it was a straightforward decision," he said. "It was not an unambiguous judgment call."

Deputy Governor Subir Gokarn said the increased frequency of rate-setting meetings—once every six weeks from once a quarter—gives the bank room to space out rate increases. 

But analysts said the bank would have to raise rates more aggressively in coming months because inflationary pressures have become entrenched.

"Today's policy rate implies that the way forward is likely to be a very uphill task," said  Jay Shankar, chief economist at Religare Capital Markets, describing Tuesday's move as "shooting a shark with water cannons."

"We may even have an interpolicy rate hike and a very aggressive tightening on March 17," the central bank's next scheduled review, he added.

HSBC, in a note, said that an additional percentage point of rate increases are needed to tame inflation, and that the next increase could come as soon as March. 

All 10 economists in a Dow Jones Newswires poll after Tuesday's decision said they expected another interest-rate increase of at least a quarter point by March. One expected a half-point increase. Most are calling another three-quarters to one-point rise by December.

The central bank also raised its inflation estimate for the end of March to 7%, from 5.5% previously. The bank remains confident about economic growth, expecting an "upward bias" to its previous growth estimate of 8.5% in the fiscal year ending March 31.

"Inflation is clearly the dominant concern. Even as the rate itself remains uncomfortably high, the reversal in the direction of inflation is striking," the central bank said in its policy review, referring to the rise in December after inflation showed some moderation between August and November.

The rate decision was in line with a Dow Jones Newswires poll of 16 economists, all of whom expected the 0.25 percentage-point increase in the repo rate. Fifteen correctly called the reverse repo rate rise, while one had predicted a bigger move. 

  The Big RBI Question: .25 or .50?  

The Bombay Stock Exchange's benchmark Sensitive Index gained on the decision, rising as high as 19340.99. But it closed down 181.83 points, or 1%, at 18969.45. 

The rupee came off the day's high to end lower after the decision, as yield-seekers hoping for a larger rate move were disappointed. The dollar was at 45.71 rupees in late trade, from 45.69 rupees Monday. 

Government bonds rose, with the most-traded 8.08% 2022 bond ending higher at 99.12 rupees from 98.8 rupees before the decision, indicating that a larger increase had been priced in. 

Finance Minister Pranab Mukherjee described the RBI decision as "in line with the government thinking." The RBI governor "has taken appropriate steps to give a signal to control inflation, and not to affect the growth process," he said. 

However, the Confederation of Indian Industry said in a statement that it is concerned the bank is setting the stage for "a series of rate hikes that will have a negative impact on the investment momentum going forward." 

"The RBI needs to take aggressive measures to ensure the availability of funds for sustaining growth," the trade group said. 

Not only could higher lending rates deter borrowing, they could exacerbate a liquidity shortage among Indian banks. The RBI didn't cut banks' cash-reserve ratio or statutory liquidity ratio Tuesday. But it did extend to April 8 some moves allowing banks to seek up to 1% of their deposits in additional liquidity support, from Jan. 28. It also extended its twin liquidity-injection measures until April 8. 

The RBI also asked banks to slow loan growth—which has been outpacing deposit growth by a wide margin—and said it will "engage" banks that show an abnormal incremental loan-to-deposit ratio. 

"It is important that credit growth moderates to conform broadly to the indicative projections. This will prevent any further buildup of demand-side pressures," the RBI said. 

Nonfood credit grew 24.4% on-year in December, outpacing the RBI's estimate of 20% for the fiscal year. 

"Clearly, there is a wedge between deposit growth and credit growth....We have told them [the banks] that they must increase deposits and restrain their credit," Governor Subbarao said. 

Tuesday's rate rise comes as the government faces growing criticism from opposition lawmakers and popular protests about price rises. Food prices hit a six-month high after unseasonal rains damaged crops. 

The government ascribes part of the rise in inflation to increased income levels in rural areas, thanks to work-guarantee programs. 

Seeking to keep a lid on prices, the government said earlier this month it will buy more edible oils and pulses, and review the import and export of all essential commodities on a regular basis. But policy makers say longer-term administrative measures such as revamping the public distribution system are needed to free up supplies. 

The RBI chief said any fiscal slippage by the government will make inflation management harder. 

"It is not that the RBI is helpless. Combating inflation is the shared responsibility of the government and the RBI, especially inflation of the dynamics that we are seeing today," Mr. Subbarao said. 

Global commodity prices have soared an average of 10% since November 2009 and crude oil prices are hovering around the $100/barrel mark. 

"It is important to emphasize that the role of monetary policy in the current inflationary situation is confined to containment and prevention of food and energy prices from spilling over into generalized inflation and anchoring inflation expectations," the RBI said. 

According to the United Nations food price index, world food prices hit an all-time high in December, passing the previous peak from June 2008. 

 Write to  Subhadip Sircar at subhadip.sircar@dowjones.com 