MEXICO CITY---The Bank of Mexico left its overnight lending target unchanged Friday citing moderating inflationary pressures, though it highlighted a wider array of potential risks to prices and growth than in previous statements. 

Mexico's central bank left the key interest rate at 4.5%, where it has been since July 2009. None of the 16 economists polled this week by Dow Jones Newswires had expected a change. 

"The behavior of inflation at the start of 2011 has been according to what the Bank of Mexico forecast," the country's central bankers said in a monetary policy statement, citing among several factors a favorable exchange rate, moderate cost pressures, as well as slower increases to prices set by local governments. 

But the Bank of Mexico on Friday pointed to a number of risks to prices in the horizon, including the latest developments in the Middle East and North Africa. The central bank said the unrest in the region can threaten the global economic recovery and inflation "in practically all countries." 

"There also exists a risk that said geopolitical conflicts could prompt adjustments to portfolios and capital flows that could create pressure for the exchange rate," central bankers warned. 

Mexico's peso saw a sharp correction about two weeks ago when clashes between pro- and anti-government forces in Libya rattled markets around the world, though the currency recovered in the past few days. 

The central bank also cited a cold snap last month that destroyed crops in northern Mexico's agricultural hub of Sinaloa as a risk to domestic prices, in addition to rising global commodity prices that the central bank has previously mentioned. 

Mexico's official inflation target is 3%, plus or minus one percentage point. Central bankers have reiterated in recent statements that they expect the CPI to end the year within that range, albeit likely above 3%.

 After the first two weeks of February, the annual consumer price index stood at 3.63%, down from 3.78% at the end of January, while the closely watched core index was 3.28%. The CPI ended last year at 4.40%. 

Thanks to tame inflation, the Bank of Mexico is part of an increasingly small group of central banks to maintain loose monetary policy since the 2009 economic crisis ended. Most private economists don't expect a rate increase until the end of 2011 or early 2012. 

On Wednesday, Brazil's central bank raised its benchmark Selic rate by 50 basis points to 11.75%. A week ago, Colombia's central bank increased its key rate unexpectedly, by 25 basis points, to 3.25%. 



-Write to    Paul Kiernan  at paul.kiernan@dowjones.com 