ALBANY—Gov. Andrew Cuomo's call for fiscal austerity has yet to be embraced by some state lawmakers, who have introduced bills this week that would expand efforts to enroll Medicaid recipients, prevent the state from reducing the health benefits of retired public servants, and create new state councils on food policy, housing, and other matters.

In his inaugural address on Saturday, Mr. Cuomo called for a retrenchment of state government, saying Albany needed to "correct" decades of "billions of dollars in overspending." He's expected to revisit the theme in his State of the State speech Wednesday. 

Lawmakers returning to Albany for a new session have proposed a battery of bills—many of which are the same from past years—that would add to state costs, particularly in the area of health care. 

One introduced by Sen. Ruben Diaz Sr., would establish a Medicaid outreach and enrollment program run by the Department of Health. The purpose, according to the bill memo, is to increase the number of beneficiaries eligible for Medicaid but not enrolled in the system. The effort would be made through "mailings, advertisements, public service announcements, literature dissemination and community outreach."

Mr. Diaz, a Democrat who represents poor, minority neighborhoods in the Bronx, said he was sympathetic to Mr. Cuomo's concerns about Medicaid spending, but said he couldn't abandon other priorities. "Cuomo might be right in what he's saying, but you can't deny services to people who need services," said Mr. Diaz. "New York is supposed to provide services to people in need. That's my job to make sure of it."

Neil Breslin, a Senate Democrat, submitted a bill this week that would effectively prevent state and other public employers from diminishing health benefits of all retired public employees and their dependents, or the taxpayer contributions that pay for them. The bill applies to public authorities as well. 

"The law already provides such protection to school-district retirees. It is unfair to deny the same to all other public retirees," states the bill memo.

Assemblyman Richard Gottfried, a Democrat from Manhattan and chairman of the health committee, introduced a measure that would allow hospitals and outpatients centers to bill Medicaid for the costs of providing translating services to patients with "limited English proficiency." Regulations already mandate those services. 

Another bill introduced in the Assembly would require health-insurance companies to cover "medical nutrition therapy," which entails counseling and screening services.

Lawmakers also want to form new state councils on food policy, affordable housing, intellectual-property asset management, and genetics. They also proposed a transit council for disabled riders.

Among other proposals introduced this week: a measure that would "require correctional facilities to distribute condoms to inmates on a regular schedule without the request of an inmate." 

Another bill would "amend the definition of a newspaper." As it stands, state law doesn't recognize newspapers that lack paid circulations. The bill would expand the definition to allow county clerks to designate more papers for publications of legal notices.

 Write to  Jacob Gershman at jacob.gershman@wsj.com 