Stan Kenton's orchestra captured the world's imagination in the late 1940s, just as other swing bands were fading. For the next three decades, he would be the most popular bandleader who played what was, essentially, art music. Unlike Count Basie's band, Kenton's didn't play primarily for dancers. Unlike Woody Herman's, it didn't have an entertaining, singing showman up front. Unlike Duke Ellington's, it didn't have a repertoire of well-known, original popular songs to bring in crowds. Yet Kenton was a master of marketing: He packaged and sold the concepts of newness and modernity to a pop-music audience. 

At first his experiments ran parallel to the beboppers, who were likewise introducing a more sophisticated harmonic system into jazz. Along with Dizzy Gillespie, Kenton introduced Afro-Cuban polyrhythms to North America. And where Ellington famously disdained categories, Kenton reveled in creating terms like "artistry in rhythm" and "progressive jazz." His music was at once futuristic, masculine and highly romantic, and his fanatical followers were the jazz equivalent of Trekkies.

Onstage, though, Kenton seemed far from a wild-eyed avant-gardist; his manner was buttoned down and conservative. He never appeared in less than a suit and tie and conducted himself like a combination of college professor and church leader. Early in Michael Sparke's "This Is an Orchestra!," a study of the man and his band published last year, the author quotes arranger Charlie Shirley, who calls Kenton "one of the straightest men I've ever met. Dedicated, clean, sober." Certainly bebop legend Art Pepper—a star of several Kenton orchestras who wrote a powerful memoir of his years as a junkie—perceived a world of difference between himself and his employer.

 Love Affair  By Leslie Kenton  St. Martin's, 373 pages, $27.99

 Stan Kenton: This Is an Orchestra!  By Michael Sparke  North Texas, 346 pages, $24.95 

Yet "Love Affair"—a harrowing and intimate memoir by Kenton's daughter, Leslie—now reveals that he and Pepper were more alike than anyone realized. Mr. Sparke mentions that Kenton abused alcohol in later life; Ms. Kenton depicts her father as a lifelong alcoholic and such a troubled soul that you wonder at times how he could hold himself together well enough to keep his band going. Most shockingly, Ms. Kenton asserts that their own relationship was, for a time, incestuous.

Ms. Kenton's book is a fall-and-rise "recovery" memoir in the tradition of Lillian Roth's "I'll Cry Tomorrow" (1954). She worshipped her father in spite of his apparent shortcomings, and they bonded over a shared love of art and music. The tone she takes toward her father is one of forgiveness rather than accusation, and often the book reads like the tale of a taboo liaison (it's worth noting that she titled it "Love Affair," not "Daddy Dearest"). But keep in mind she was only 11 when, she says, he first forced himself on her, and only 13 when they broke the physical "affair" off.

Ms Kenton maintains that she and her father never stopped caring about each other, and she even seems to shield him from blame, claiming he suffered from dissociative identity disorder and portraying him as dominated by his controlling mother. Because Kenton had divorced Leslie's mother, her grandmother played an outsize role in her life as well. At one point, Ms. Kenton charges, her grandmother sent her off to a sanitarium without reason. On another occasion, she pushed her 10-year-old granddaughter to play "dress up" with a pair of creepy cross-dressers backstage at a theater in New York. 

Fans of the bandleader, who have long been known for being insular and cultish, will be scandalized by the suggestion that his family life could be so sordid. In particular, they'll be horrified by the idea of Kenton as a victim rather than the one in control. Yet such revelations won't change the quality of the man's music, and in some ways Ms. Kenton's account is the most sympathetic and human portrait of the bandleader yet to be published. 

During his lifetime, Kenton was among the most extensively chronicled musicians around: Every time he played a one-nighter in Peoria or hired a new trombonist, the music press took note. Yet in the 30 years since his death, surprisingly little serious, objective writing about him has been published. Michael Sparke's book, the first general history of the Kenton Orchestra, is the best evaluation yet of Kenton's 40-year musical development, and it serves to balance the hothouse intimacy of his daughter's portrait. 

Over the decades, Kenton employed thousands of jazz's greatest soloists, as well as a dazzling array of composer- arrangers. Mr. Sparke has interviewed many of them, and his fast-paced narrative chronicles the many editions of the band that Kenton developed over the years. These included the original "Artistry" band of the mid-'40s; the bebop- influenced "Progressive Jazz" group after that; the classically influenced "Innovations" orchestra of 1950-52; the amazingly swinging "New Concepts" group of the mid-'50s (perhaps his best from a jazz point of view); and his "mellophonium" band of 1961-63.

As the names of these bands indicate, there was a self- consciousness to Kenton's musical experiments, motivated by a lifelong goal of fusing his roots in swing bands with his love for 20th-century classical music. Throughout his career, Kenton pursued a Quixote-like quest for a kind of undefinable art music that, in his own eyes, he never achieved (although the symphony-sized "Neophonic" orchestra of the mid-'60s probably came closest). Ironically, most of his musicians and arrangers wanted to create hard-swinging, hard-blowing pure jazz ensembles. As Mr. Sparke tells it, seemingly every time Kenton turns his back, his guys were trying to make the band sound like Woody Herman. The public turned out to be the necessary mediator, appreciating both the swinging and the artsy sides of Kenton.

Mr. Sparke is himself a diehard Kentonian who previously compiled two book-length discographies and has written dozens of liner notes. So one might have expected "This Is an Orchestra!" to read like the work of a worshipful fan. But Mr. Sparke isn't afraid to state a negative opinion, and he observes Kenton's oeuvre with a comparatively unbiased eye and ear. As he puts it: Kenton "experienced more triumphant achievements and more humiliating failures than most people would encounter in half a dozen lifetimes." 

Mr. Sparke naturally does not incorporate any of Ms. Kenton's allegations, and thus the portraits of the man in these two books could not be more different. A definitive Kenton biography is still needed, to place both his private and professional lives together on the same page. Otherwise, Kenton might end up in that demimonde of musical icons whose artistry is hopelessly overshadowed by the unsavory details of their personal behavior.

—Mr. Friedwald is the author of "A Biographical Guide to the Great Jazz and Pop Singers."