BEIJING—China said inflation remained high last month, fueling further doubt about the government's ability to tackle what officials have called their main economic priority this year.

The consumer-price index in the world's second-largest economy rose 4.9% in February from the same month last year, the National Bureau of Statistics said early Friday in Beijing. Last month's rise was in line with the 4.9% rise in January, and was just slightly higher than economists' expectations.

China's February economic data are distorted by the timing of its Lunar New Year holiday, which fell earlier in the month this year than in 2010. The holiday, China's biggest of the year, alters spending patterns, especially for food, limiting the ability of economists to extrapolate longer-term trends.



Despite the 4.9% rise being largely as expected, inflation pressure remains intense, BNP Paribas economist Isaac Meng said. "Consumer sentiment has been weakening in last few quarters due to high inflation," he said. 

"The implication is that tightening pressure is still on, and before inflation is tamed, consumers will continue to be pressed."

China's leaders have pledged to tame consumer prices, and expressed confidence in their ability to do so. Inflation—albeit at rates much higher than the current pace—has historically been a trigger of public unrest in China. In his speech Saturday to start the annual session of National People's Congress, China's legislature, Premier Wen Jiabao said the government would "make it our top priority in macroeconomic control to keep overall price levels stable." Mr. Wen said the government hopes to cap CPI growth for the full year around 4%.

Beijing's success or failure in that effort could have global ramifications. The government faces a delicate balance, wanting to cool prices without clamping down so hard that they strangle economic growth in China, which has driven global growth in recent years.

So far, the government has raised interest rates three times since October and steadily ratcheted up the share of deposits banks must hold in reserve, rather than lend. But benchmark lending rates are still only slightly above the rate of inflation, and deposits rates are well below it.

Inflation is dogging many of the world's emerging economies, in part because they have drawn large inflows of capital from the developed world, where interest rates remain low. But economists say much of the blame for China's inflation woes comes from an explosion of credit as China's state-run banks heeded a government call to juice up the economy amid the global recession. The total value of outstanding loans in China has risen by more than half in the last two years.

China's producer price index, a measure of pipeline inflation pressures, rose 7.2% from a year earlier, up from January's 6.6% rise and higher than expectations for a 7% rise.

 Write to  Jason Dean at jason.dean@wsj.com 