 American International Group agreed to sell its Taiwan unit to a dark-horse bidder, a consortium dominated by Ruentex Group, for $2.16 billion in its second attempt to exit the market and recoup money it owes the U.S. government.  

 U.S. Treasury Secretary Geithner stressed the yuan and intellectual-property issues ahead of Chinese President Hu's visit to Washington next week.  

 The Export-Import Bank of the U.S. is taking on China's export machine, in a deal in Pakistan designed as a model for developed nations to challenge China in markets around the world.  

 Japan's government was lambasted by the head of a powerful business lobby for lacking a fiscal strategy in dealing with the nation's demographic time bomb.  

 IndiGo is ordering 180 Airbus A320 jets with a list price of $15.6 billion. Airbus says the Indian carrier's order is a record in terms of number of planes.  

 EADS said it still sees clouds on its horizon, but the commercial aircraft manufacturer signaled it was more upbeat about prospects than it was a year ago.  

 Shiseido is bringing in younger management, naming its corporate executive officer as the new president of the Japanese cosmetics company.  

 A U.S. appeals court heard the sequel to one of the Web's most storied legal quarrels: whether Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg stole the idea for the influential social-networking site.  

 Myspace cut 500 of its more than 1,000 employees, part of a last-ditch attempt to steady the stumbling social-media site.  

 Investors piled into U.S. stocks amid optimism following a successful Portuguese debt auction and strong U.S. import price data. Asian markets got a lift from resource and financial shares.  

 The euro rose above $1.31 following better-than-expected results from the sale of Portuguese debt but strategists warned that the rise could prove fleeting.  

 Tsingtao looks set to become the first Hong Kong-listed Chinese company to rely solely on its mainland accounting firm to prepare its financial statements.  

 Thailand increased its benchmark policy rate by a quarter of a percentage point to 2.25%, as expected, and warned about faster inflation.  

 Japan's current-account surplus shrank for the first time in three months in November.  

 Germany's economy grew 3.6% in 2010, its strongest rate since reunification, propelled by exports and rising investment.  

 U.S. Defense Secretary Gates headed for Tokyo, where he is expected to push for Japan's more active involvement in regional defense. Also, despite China's move to test a stealth fighter, Gates called his China visit a success.  

 The Australian government's handling of floods across Queensland came under greater scrutiny as muddy waters began swamping the major city of Brisbane.  

 A spate of insurgent attacks in Kabul in the past month have shattered the relative calm that Afghanistan's capital had been enjoying since the summer.  

 Potential Republican presidential candidates in the U.S., pressed to address the Arizona rampage, are bringing up themes such as a need to strengthen the family.  

 Bangladesh said it will probe Grameen Bank for possible misappropriation of aid funds, after a documentary film alleged the microfinance provider illegally diverted funds in the 1990s.  