By Henry Adams (1889-91)

Although now old and, for modern tastes, very long, this history is a classic in the ironic style. In his vivid opening chapter, Adams describes a sprawling new country too big for its small population and its own good—in a dangerous world of powerful European empires with North American claims. The five million Americans of 1800 were burdened, rather than empowered, by their vast continent of towering forests, tall mountains, immense swamps and miserable roads. Beyond telling a story of two presidents who mismanaged foreign policy into the conflict with the British that we call the War of 1812, Adams narrates how a people met the challenges of a continent by overcoming the liabilities of their weak early republic.

By Steven Watts (1987)

Written in a cultural and psychological vein, "The Republic Reborn" illuminates the first generational crisis in American history. By the second decade of the 19th century, the heroic generation that made and won the Revolution was passing from the stage. Their sons became obsessed with their own shortcomings. Preoccupied with making money, they seemed incapable of their fathers' self-sacrificing patriotism. Humiliated by British trade restrictions and by the vapid moralizing of Jefferson's diplomacy, the new generation of leaders longed to prove their worth by smiting the British Empire. Despite the nation's utter unpreparedness, these "War Hawks" plunged ahead, convinced that war would compel sacrifices that would purify a nation wallowing in greed. Sadly, the war produced more profiteering than purification.

By Donald R. Hickey (1989)

Most Americans know little about this war, save for a few patriotic icons: the national anthem written about the British bombardment of a Baltimore fort; the naval victories of the USS Constitution (Old Ironsides); the dastardly British burning of the White House; and the revenge taken at New Orleans by Andrew Jackson and his Tennessee riflemen. That selective memory casts the war as a heroic defense of the homeland from British invaders. Donald R. Hickey shows that this "forgotten conflict," as his subtitle has it, began as an American invasion of Canada—which went badly from beginning to end. Canadians, take heart, for Hickey knows that you won the war. But he also knows that you lost the peace treaty, which gave the U.S. a free hand to conquer Canada's Indian allies and protectors. That conquest enabled the Americans to dominate the continent.

By Linda Colley (2002)

'Captives' is not directly about the War of 1812, but it helps explain why the British would fight to control their own sailors, who were prone to flee for better-paying work on American merchant ships. As Linda Colley shows, Britain was chronically short of the manpower needed to sustain the huge navy that controlled the sea-lanes of international commerce and that was essential to the operation of this small country's global empire. Sorely sensitive to the loss of any of their people, the British liked to imagine themselves as rescuers of subjects who had been kidnapped by foreigners. Thinking defensively, they built an empire while imagining themselves as victims. In the process the British created their national identity—as the special people of a small, beleaguered island—which compelled them to see their kin, the Americans, as a distinct people barbarized by their savage continent.

Edited by Donald E. Graves (1993)

Superbly edited by a leading Canadian military historian, this journal introduces readers to the good company of a British officer, Lt. John Le Couteur, a humane and gregarious man caught up in the miseries of war. In September 1813, he took a message to an American army camp. Upon meeting his foes, Le Couteur marveled: "Strange indeed did it appear to me to find so many names, 'familiar household words,' as enemies—the very names of Officers in our own army. How uncomfortably like a civil war." He bantered with an American officer just returned from shooting birds: "Much pleasanter Sport, isn't it, than shooting one's own kindred and language." But a month later, an atrocity by American troops led him to denounce them as deserving no mercy in battle: "The rascals, they are worse than Frenchmen." So said the British officer with a French name.

—Mr. Taylor is the author of "The Civil War of 1812: American Citizens, British Subjects, Irish Rebels, & Indian Allies" (Alfred A. Knopf, 2010).