 STATS: A 7,453-square-foot, six-bedroom, 6½-bath home asking $9 million, or $1,206 a square foot. In January the asking price was lowered from $10 million. Property taxes in 2010 were $13,296.

 DETAILS: Owners say this Federal-style home was built in 1810 for Nathaniel Ingraham, who served with John Paul Jones aboard the Bonhomme Richard in the Revolutionary War. It faces directly out at Charleston Harbor and Fort Sumter, where the first shots of the Civil War were fired 150 years ago this April. The house features 12-foot ceilings, the original heart-pine floors and an original cedar ceiling in the sitting room. There is a saltwater pool.

2 Water St., Charleston, S.C.

 SELLERS: Meredith and John Dunnan. Mr. Dunnan is a contemporary artist and gallery owner; Mrs. Dunnan is an interior designer. 

 THE NEIGHBORHOOD: Head to the nearby shops on King Street to get a Jason Wu dress at RTW and have lunch at Blossom (we hear good things about the shrimp and grits). 

 WHAT WE PAID: The Dunnans paid $2 million for the house in 2000 and say that they have put another $7 million into it. "The asking price is what we put into it," says Mr. Dunnan, who says that 40 workers spent two years redoing the electrical and plumbing, opening up old fireplaces, stripping off 30 coats of paint in some areas and repairing the 1810 moldings. In 2007 the couple added a garage, sauna, laundry room and porch.

 WHAT DREW US TO THE HOUSE ORIGINALLY: "It's rare to find a house on High Battery," says Mr. Dunnan, explaining that most other homes on this historic promenade (known as The Battery or High Battery) have been made into apartments. For Mrs. Dunnan it was the views: "You feel like you're on a cruise ship."

 WHY WE'RE SELLING: "We're spending more time at our country house at Yeamans Hall Club," says Mr. Dunnan, whose great-grandfather was one of the founders of Yeamans Hall, a 900-acre private club.

 WHAT WE'LL MISS: "The view and that we can entertain 25 people on our piazza or 400 in the house and garden," says Mr. Dunnan. 

 WHAT WE WON'T: Mrs. Dunnan says she won't miss the verticality, though there is an elevator.

 OTHERS SAY: "The price is on the high side," says  Casey Murphey, an agent with Daniel Ravenel Sotheby's International Realty. She says it's a unique property because of its history, location and view, though some buyers might want to enclose or screen-in the side porch and make it part of the kitchen. 

 I BET: Listing agent  Helen Geer, president of William Means Real Estate, predicts the house will sell this spring for its asking price.

 —Post your guess as to what the house will sell for—and when—in the comments section. Listings will be followed for six months. 

 Write to Sarah Tilton at Sarah.Tilton@wsj.com

