 Al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden was unarmed but was resisting when U.S. forces stormed a lair in Pakistan and shot him, White House Press Secretary Jay Carney said. He wouldn't describe how bin Laden resisted but said it doesn't take a gun for someone to resist. 

John Brennan, the White House's top counterterrorism official, has said U.S. forces were willing to take bin Laden alive but figured such chances were remote.

Carney, releasing other new details about the almost 40-minute operation, said one of bin Laden's several wives did rush U.S. forces and was shot in the leg, but not killed. The White House had previously said his wife was killed.

 Pakistan said it had "concerns and reservations" about Washington's decision to attack and kill bin Laden deep inside Pakistan without seeking their permission or giving forewarning. 

The 1,000-word statement marked a change in tone from a shorter missive put out Monday, the day after a helicopter-borne U.S. military team under the direction of the Central Intelligence Agency raided a house in Abbottabad where bin Laden had been living and killed him. 

 Bin Laden went to great lengths to shield his home here from intruding eyes, offering some indication of how the world's most-wanted fugitive managed to hide in a city of 500,000 people. 

 Across the Muslim world, the killing of bin Laden has unleashed a swirl of conspiracy theories, with many Pakistanis, Afghans and Arabs refusing to believe U.S. assurances that al Qaeda's founder is actually dead. 

 India wants the U.S. to attach tougher conditions to the aid it provides Pakistan and to minimize Pakistan's role in the future of Afghanistan as the U.S. winds down its presence there, an Indian official said. 

 When Afghanistan's Taliban—bin Laden's host and protector—finally issued a statement two days after his death, all it said was that there was no credible evidence from those close to bin Laden to prove he was dead. Conspicuously absent was praise for the Saudi fugitive, and condemnation of the U.S. 



 Income inequality is increasing in most industrialized countries as a result of globalization and technological progress that requires greater skills from workers, according to a new paper from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. 

Separately, the Paris-based think tank said consumer prices in developed economies rose in March at the fastest pace since October 2008, driven by energy and food inflation. 



 Factory-gate prices in the euro zone posted their sharpest annual gain for two-and-a-half years in March, putting more pressure on the European Central Bank to tighten monetary policy further. 



 Differences among European Union countries on whether to test the safety of nuclear plants in the case of an airplane crash surfaced, just days before the European Union is expected to make public new safety criteria under EU "stress tests" imposed after the Japanese nuclear crisis.  



 The U.K.'s financial regulator is quietly pressuring some European financial institutions to restructure their London operations in ways that would subject them to greater oversight by the regulator, according to people familiar with the matter. 



Large parts of the U.K. economy showed signs of flagging in April, an early indication that the economy may struggle to grow in the second quarter. 



 British police said they arrested five men near a nuclear plant in northwest England under terrorism laws and were searching four addresses in East London as part of the case.  

The arrests were made at 4:32 p.m. BST on Monday after police officers from Britain's Civil Nuclear Constabulary conducted a routine stop check on a vehicle close to the Sellafield nuclear power plant in West Cumbria, the police said in a statement. 



Romania's president said his country will host missile interceptors as part of a planned U.S. shield over Europe. 



 A regulatory rule to prevent abuse of initial public offerings has been delayed, even as Wall Street gears up for a new round of IPOs of Internet companies.  



 As President Barack Obama pushes to raise income taxes on high earners, opponents are seizing on data that indicates these U.S. households already pay a large and growing share of taxes, even compared with high-tax European countries.  



Canada's Conservative party won a long-elusive majority in federal parliamentary elections Monday, securing another term for Prime Minister Stephen Harper and elevating the left-leaning New Democratic Party ahead of the more-established Liberal party for the first time to second place.



India's central bank raised its lending rate by 0.50 percentage point and announced a new monetary policy framework, escalating its fight against inflation even as it lowered its forecast for this year's economic growth. 



 Expectations of surplus grain in Russia and India are driving speculation that the two producers might resume exports, as global wheat prices soar. 



Two prominent Beijing economists are urging the China's government to let the yuan float freely as a way to limit the country's immense foreign-exchange reserves, fight inflation and spur the remaking of the country's growth model.



 North Korea was behind a cyberattack that crippled one of South Korea's major commercial banks last month, prosecutors said, in a high-profile case that has fueled concerns about corporate online security in the South.  

 Bahrain plans to try in a national security court nearly 50 doctors and nurses who treated antigovernment protesters during months of unrest, broadening the ruling Al-Khalifa family's crackdown on Shiite opposition supporters.  



 Leaders of the feuding Palestinian factions ironed out the final details of an agreement to form a unified government, but the deal faces significant hurdles, and looks set to sharpen conflict with Israel. 

Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas, whose Fatah movement runs the West Bank, and Khaled Meshal, the political director of Hamas, which runs the Gaza Strip, are due to sign the agreement at a ceremony in Cairo on Wednesday.



Australia's central bank left interest rates on hold, but it also signaled a policy tightening isn't far off as inflation looks set to rise further.



A tornado twisted through part of New Zealand's largest city of Auckland, reportedly killing and injuring shoppers at a shopping mall and adding to woes in the Pacific Island nation.