BIRDS POINT, Mo.—The Army Corps of Engineers blew a nearly two-mile gap in a levee here Monday night to ease record flooding where the Ohio River spills into the Mississippi, activating a decades-old flood plan that had been contested all the way to the U.S Supreme Court.

Just after 10 p.m. local time, a rapidly moving series of fireballs ripped across the tree line accompanied by a series of loud explosions along the sodden levee, triggering torrents of water over prime farmland while easing pressure on levees protecting nearby towns.

The Corps has said sending water through the Birds Point-New Madrid Floodway for only the second time since 1937 would act as a relief valve, handling about a quarter of the Mississippi River's flow and lowering by three feet the water levels at Cairo, Ill., at the confluence of the Ohio and Mississippi, and other towns.

The plan, approved in the 1920s but used only once since, was designed to dispatch water over some 130,000 acres of prime Missouri farmland, eventually flowing 35 miles before returning to the Mississippi at New Madrid, Mo.

See the latest data from flood gauges throughout the Midwest and South.

On Sunday, Justice Samuel Alito of the U.S. Supreme Court rejected a request by Missouri to stop the Corps from blowing the hole in the levee at Birds Point, Mo.

With a matter of some hours, two smaller blasts at the southern end of the floodway were to follow to let water back out.

Bob Byrne, whose family has been farming in the area for 100 years, said he hopes the water moves through in time to get in a soybean planting this year. He said he would go ahead with a crop even though the land would be without protection of a levee. "We're farmers," he said. "We're used to gambling."

Heavy rains continued in southern Missouri on Monday, further increasing pressure on levees. Before the storm, the river had been expected to crest in a few days at 60.5 feet, six inches below a 61-foot-level that had been the trigger point for activating the floodway in the Corps' operating plan. Monday evening, the Ohio River gauge at Cairo read 61.44 feet, nearly two feet higher than the record of 59.51 feet set in 1937.

Officials in several other states prepared for flooding Monday as heavy rains and thunderstorms pushed up the Mississippi and local rivers to dangerous levels.

County officials in Mississippi, Arkansas and Tennessee along the Mississippi River also were girding for potential flooding, while authorities in Indiana and southern Illinois warned of possible flash floods. Tennessee could see major flooding along the Mississippi in at least five counties, said Jeremy Heidt, spokesman for the Tennessee Emergency Management Agency. 

Efforts in recent days to strengthen levees and make them higher have helped, but fresh predictions are that the Mississippi could overflow even the highest levees.

In Tennessee's Shelby County, home to Memphis, residents near rising rivers and creeks evacuated to shelters. One shelter at Hope Presbyterian Church was full Monday with nearly 200 people. In northwest Mississippi, the rising Mississippi River has forced nine casinos to close in low-lying Tunica County, where they sit on river barges. 

"That can kill a community like ours," said Randy Stewart, chief of Tunica's emergency-management division. "It's our number-one revenue source." 

A foot of rain has fallen since Saturday afternoon in parts of Arkansas, causing local flooding, concerns about levees and one death. With more rain expected through Tuesday, officials' biggest worry was the White River, which was 10 feet above its flood level on Monday morning, said Davis Bell, public-information officer in Prairie County. 

The unusually wet spring across the Midwest also is delaying the planting season, with many fields in states such as Illinois and Indiana too muddy for tractors to navigate. The U.S. Agriculture Department said Monday corn farmers had planted just 13% of their intended acreage by Sunday compared with 66% on the same date last year. 

—Jennifer Levitz, Russell Gold, and Cameron McWhirter contributed to this article.

 Write to  Joe Barrett at joseph.barrett@wsj.com and Ilan Brat at ilan.brat@wsj.com 