All the evidence currently available indicates that the gunman responsible for Saturday's tragedy in Tucson, Ariz., was driven solely by internal demons. That fact hasn't stopped commentators, overwhelmingly on the left, from suggesting that today's "heated political rhetoric" is at least partly to blame. 

Pundits have frequently cited Sarah Palin's "crosshairs map," which uses the riflery image to mark the congressional districts of vulnerable Democrats, as inspiration for the killer. But there is a total lack of evidence that the shooter ever saw that map or that "being in the crosshairs," which has been a common political metaphor for decades, has suddenly taken on a sinister meaning. And yet the New York Times's Paul Krugman writes in his latest column (titled "Climate of Hate"): "It's true that the shooter in Arizona appears to have been mentally troubled. But that doesn't mean that his act can or should be treated as an isolated event, having nothing to do with the national climate."

Really? Has the nation's political climate actually gotten worse in the last two years, when Democrats controlled both houses of Congress and the White House? Of course not. 

Human beings have a natural tendency to edit memories, tending to cut out the unpleasant ones. We prefer to remember the sunny days, not the stormy ones. (Hence the constant refrain of "Today's blizzard is the worst—ever.") That's just as true of politics as anything else. 

The truth is that American political rhetoric has always been vigorous and often vituperative. Over 60 years ago Harry Truman offered his famous admonition to get out of the kitchen if you can't stand the heat. Lyndon Johnson, in the sad later years of his presidency, was regularly hanged in effigy (as was Sarah Palin in the 2008 presidential campaign, by the way.) "Hey, hey, LBJ! How many kids have you killed today?" was shouted by demonstrators wherever he went. Johnson complained about the press that, "If I walked on water, the headline the next day would be 'President Can't Swim.'"

Franklin Roosevelt was regularly accused of trying to establish a dictatorship and fascism in the United States. (Though to be sure, the word "fascism" carried far less sinister connotations in the 1930s, before the Nazi atrocities of World War II.) Eleanor Roosevelt's concern for blacks and FDR's willingness to appoint Jews to high office were the targets of a widely circulated racist and anti-Semitic doggerel.

Before modern political times, the level of insult was far higher still. John Adams called Alexander Hamilton "the bastard brat of a Scotch peddler." In the early years of the republic, newspapers made no pretense at being even-handed. Many were funded by politicians and parties to unashamedly advance their interests.

Even George Washington, twice unanimously elected to the presidency, found himself slandered in the press. The Philadelphia Aurora, the leading Jeffersonian paper, referred to him sarcastically as "Saint Washington," accused him of overdrawing his salary, and compared him to Nero and "a common pickpocket." By the end of his second term, Washington, like Johnson 160 years later, was desperately tired of being "buffeted in the public prints by a set of infamous scribblers." 

Thomas Jefferson in his term was regularly accused of fathering children by his slave Sarah Hemmings, often described in the papers as "dusky Sally." (Recent DNA evidence, in fact, gives considerable credence to the accusation. But in Jefferson's day, there was no evidence beyond gossip.)

Andrew Jackson was regularly called "King Andrew" and accused of seeking to establish a monarchy. He blamed the death of his beloved wife, Rachel, shortly after he was elected, on scandalmongers in the press who had accused her of bigamy. He described her in her epitaph as, "A being so gentle and so virtuous, slander might wound but could not dishonor." And he never forgave the insult.

Abraham Lincoln, in an 1863 political cartoon, was depicted as a monkey handing the Emancipation Proclamation to a minstrel-show stereotype of a black man.

The evidence that any of this rhetoric has resulted in political violence is slim at best. In Europe, fringe political groups such as the "Black Hand"—whose murder of the Archduke Ferdinand set off World War I—often employed assassination as a political tool. In Japan in the days leading up to World War II, assassinations happened so often they became nearly a standard means for affecting government policy.

But in the U.S., assassination has almost always been the work of a lone, and usually lonely, gunman—albeit one often obsessed by politics in one way or another. Charles Guiteau, who shot President James A. Garfield, did so because he had been denied a diplomatic post in Europe for which he had no qualifications whatever. Leon Czolgosz, who shot William McKinley, had recently been attracted to anarchism. But other than a brief conversation with Emma Goldman he had no direct contact with the leftist fringe of American politics. Only the assassination of Lincoln was the work of a conspiracy, and a very inept one at that.

In a democracy of 308 million people there will, inevitably, be both rhetoric that is outside the bounds of polite society and a few individuals who, while perhaps not insane by legal definition, are at least as pathetic as they are evil.

To use a tragedy such as the one in Tucson on Saturday as a means of attacking one's political opponents, to accuse them of at least accidental complicity in it, is itself well outside the bounds of proper political rhetoric and even of common decency. It also denies historical reality.

  Mr. Gordon is the author of "An Empire of Wealth: The Epic History of American Economic Power" (HarperCollins, 2004).  