ZURICH—The Swiss government plans to hold a roundtable talk with key representatives of Switzerland's banking, machinery and tourism industry Friday to discuss the strength of the Swiss franc, which is hurting the economy.

The meeting reflects the urgency and unease felt by Switzerland's business elite, which fears a rising franc risks making the country increasingly uncompetitive. Since the outbreak of the economic crisis, the franc has gained more than 10% against the world's major currencies. 

Swiss Economics Minister Johann Schneider-Ammann late last year asked the State Secretariat of Economic Affairs to set up a meeting that would bring together the heads of the country's key unions and business associations as well as representatives of the Swiss banking, tourism and pharmaceutical industry, a government spokesman said Sunday. 

Meetings that include business and workers associations such as think tank Economiesuisse or workers unions such as the Swiss federation of trade unions take place regularly and are aimed at simplifying communication between the interest groups. 

The setup of the planned meeting is broader, including parties such as the Swiss Bankers Association and tourist organization Schweiz Tourismus, which are affected by the strong franc, the government spokesman said. 

"The plan is to hold a roundtable talk and analyze the situation regarding the strong Swiss franc," said  Christophe Hans, spokesman for the Swiss Federal Department of Economic Affairs. "No one should expect a catalogue of measures from the meeting." 

The meeting is set to be held Friday,  Daniel Lampart, director of the Swiss federation of trade unions, said. "We want to discuss the situation and talk about potential solutions," he said. "I would be surprised if measures will be announced as soon as next week. But something has to be done because many companies are suffering." 

Mr. Lampart said potential measures could include special exchange rates for particularly hard hit exporters. Other solutions, which he described as less likely, could include steps to stop Swiss banks from engaging in speculative currency trading or pegging the Swiss franc to the euro. 

A spokeswoman for Schweiz Tourismus said the organization is unlikely to press for specific measures to be undertaken but would highlight the difficulties for the industry, which generates 3% to 4% of Swiss gross domestic product. Schweiz Tourismus is concerned that the strong Swiss franc will hurt the country's hotel and restaurant industry. 

Unease about the strong Swiss franc has been growing over the past few weeks.

  Swatch Group AG
SWGAY


1.53
%




 Chief Executive  Nick Hayek warned that a strong Swiss franc would hurt the country's export industry, while  Stefan Borgas, CEO of Swiss chemicals maker  Lonza Group AG
LONN


0.94
%




, said a continually rising franc is a fundamental challenge for the country. 

The Swiss franc has been under extreme upward pressure over the past few months and reached fresh record levels against the euro and the dollar around the new year as steady safe-haven flows and a lack of market liquidity drove the franc higher. 

Renewed pressure came in early January after the Swiss National Bank confirmed it stopped accepting Irish government bonds for repurchasing transactions and clarified that government bonds from Portugal have never been eligible to finance such deals. 

Since the outbreak of the financial crisis, the Swiss franc has been steadily strengthening. The euro, for example, has lost around 17% against the currency since December 2009. Currently, the euro trades around 1.2498 francs. The dollar, meanwhile, lost about 10% against the franc during the period. It currently trades at 0.9675 francs. 

The Swiss National Bank last year repeatedly intervened in currency markets to soften the Swiss franc. But as a result of these interventions, the bank was left with losses and an inflated balance sheet. While partially drawing criticism for the moves, the bank is now believed to abstain from further interventions as deflationary risks have receded over the past few weeks. 

Switzerland's economy is expected to grow about 2.5% in 2010. Due to the strong Swiss franc, gross domestic product growth is expected to slow to around 1.5% this year, while inflation is set to remain modest. 

Given the euro zone's sovereign debt problems, upward pressure on the franc is likely to persist and public calls for action could rise. But the Swiss central bank is unlikely to act under political pressure and consider moves such as a euro peg, economists say. A spokesman for the central bank couldn't be immediately reached for comment. 

Economists say fresh steps are possible, as the Swiss National Bank's mandate includes to act in "in accordance with the interests of the country as a whole. Its primary goal is to ensure price stability, while taking due account of economic developments." 

Mr. Hans said the economics minister will discuss the franc with the Swiss Federal Council later in January. He declined to say whether measures would be taken or announced at this meeting. He stressed, however, that the Swiss National Bank sets the monetary policy of the country independently. 

 Write to  Goran Mijuk at goran.mijuk@dowjones.com 