The apparent failure of West African leaders to dislodge Ivory Coast leader Laurent Gbagbo from power has exposed deep differences in the region and dimmed hopes that the nation's disputed election will be resolved through dialogue.

Representatives of the Economic Community of West African States, or Ecowas, arrived Monday on a second visit to tell Mr. Gbagbo he must step down, ostensibly under threat of military intervention. 

A statement by Ecowas on Tuesday suggested a breakthrough was imminent, but a Western diplomat who was briefed on the talks said no progress had been made.

The statement said that both sides in the dispute "agreed to negotiate a peaceful end to the crisis without any preconditions," and that Mr. Gbagbo had pledged to immediately lift his military's blockade around the Golf Hotel, where rival Alassane Ouattara has been staying, protected by 800 United Nations peacekeepers.

But the blockade remained in place Tuesday evening. "It was a complete failure," the Western diplomat said. "When you come in with an ultimatum and the best thing [Mr. Gbagbo] does is agree to lift a hotel blockade, and he doesn't do that, that ain't progress."

The diplomat said the delegation—Presidents Pedro Pires of Cape Verde, Boni Yayi of Benin, Ernest Bai Koroma of Sierra Leone and Raila Odinga, the prime minister of Kenya—was divided over the use of force, which was meant to be the delegation's key bargaining tool.

Before the leaders arrived, Ecowas grappled with what role the threat of military intervention should have in the standoff.

Defense chiefs of the Ecowas countries met last week to discuss the makeup of a military force, and on Tuesday the regional bloc agreed to send a high-level delegation to Western countries to see what kind of financial, logistical and technical support could be provided for a military intervention, the diplomat said.

The African Union and the U.N. declared Mr. Ouattara the winner of a Nov. 28 presidential runoff vote. 

But Mr. Gbagbo, the incumbent, says he is the rightful winner, and has been unmoved by economic and travel sanctions handed down on him and his allies by the European Union and the U.S. 

Key events in the recent political turmoil.

The apparent failure of the talks is another setback for African and Western governments hoping to avoid a violent outcome to the political impasse. 

Members of Mr. Ouattara's camp, barricaded inside the Golf Hotel, were dismissive of the Ecowas talks. "For President Alassane Ouattara the negotiations have ended," said Anne Ouloto, a spokeswoman for Mr. Ouattara. "He accepted the second round of negotiations because he's full of respect for his fellow heads of state. Mr. Gbagbo shows clearly that he's not willing to leave."

Foreign mediators have sought to avoid placing the two rivals in a power-sharing agreement similar to those brokered in Kenya and Zimbabwe after violent elections.

Mr. Gbagbo's camp, which has been able to retain control of state television and most of the country's military, despite international pressure, was more optimistic about the prospects of a positive outcome for the talks.

"I think during these recent negotiations we've been able to move forward," said Gnamien Yao, Mr. Gbagbo's diplomatic adviser.