After three years of debilitating drought, California appears headed into a second straight wet year, giving a boost to ski resorts, farms and communities that languished during the dry spell in the fiscally troubled state.

Since California's rainy season began Oct. 1, the state has received roughly double the mountain snowfall it normally gets, according to state estimates.

That means the rainy season is off to its best start in at least five years, with 16 of California's 24 major reservoirs equipped with flood controls already beginning to release water so they can take on spring runoff, state water officials say.

The bounty is providing a shot in the arm to many local economies across California, the nation's most populous state, which is struggling to recover from the recession.

Combined with last year's abundant rainfall, officials of some water districts, including the Santa Clara Valley Water District in San Jose, Calif., have dropped mandatory rationing restrictions. That particularly helps farming-related businesses, which are more dependent on water than most other parts of the economy, economists say.

Ski resorts are reporting visits and revenue above what they had anticipated, said Bob Roberts, executive director of the California Ski Industry Association. 

The state's fishing and boating industries also stand to gain, because they benefit when the levels of rivers and reservoirs rise, said Richard Howitt, professor of agricultural and resource economics at the University of California, Davis. 

The deluge has caused problems in other parts of the state. In hardest-hit Southern California, unusually intense storms in late December flooded downtown Laguna Beach and triggered mudslides on Ventura and San Bernardino counties. Hundreds of motorists were stranded for hours on Jan. 2 after a snowstorm closed a section of Interstate 5 known as the Grapevine north of Los Angeles.

Water managers said it was still too early to say whether all mandatory rationing measures imposed by local agencies during the drought would be lifted later this year. Some water agencies warn Californians can't become complacent because water supplies—largely drawn from the Sierra Nevada snowpack—haven't kept up with a population growth. 

It's also unclear how much longer wet conditions will last. Climatologists had forecast a "La Niña" condition in the Pacific Ocean this year, in which tropical waters turn unusually cold and typically cause drier weather in many parts of California. A dry pattern set in over the past week, potentially signifying the onset of La Niña.

"It will be a moderate supply year even if we don't receive another drop," said Maury Roos, chief hydrologist for the California Department of Water Resources.

Many communities and businesses say they are enjoying the water and snow. 

Around Lake Tahoe in Northern California, November and December were the two snowiest months on record for many ski resorts, industry officials said, and helped jump-start a ski season that normally begins in earnest after Christmas.

In all, seven ski areas, including Heavenly Mountain Resort and Squaw Valley USA, have received approximately 300 of the 400 inches of snow they get in an average season, said Eric Doyne, spokesman for Ski Lake Tahoe, a marketing group for the resorts. 

At Squaw Valley, spokeswoman Amelia Richmond said the number of skier visits so far this season "compares favorably" to the same time a year ago, when other industry officials say heavy snows helped lead to the region's second busiest ski season on record. Ms. Richmond said the resort didn't release numbers on skier visits, but industry analysts estimate those at about 600,000 annually.

"Snow always helps, but having the snow hit early has really helped," said Patty Baird, owner of the 42-room Cedar House Sport Hotel in nearby Truckee, Calif. She said her visitor nights rose 13% in December from the same month a year earlier.

California's Central Valley farmers, meanwhile, said they planned to expand production of water-intensive crops such as tomatoes and cotton that they largely cut back on during the dry years, while adding more workers.

Unemployment in some farming towns, such as Mendota, Calif., stands as high as 42%, but agricultural officials say those numbers will likely drop as farmers start hiring in the spring to plant more crops.

 Write to  Jim Carlton at jim.carlton@wsj.com 