Since we're all brushing up on the finer points of college basketball this week, here's a new vocabulary term to remember: "Three-point goggles." 

As you'll see in the NCAA tournament this week, players on teams from Duke to Kentucky will celebrate three-point buckets by fitting themselves with pantomimed spectacles, the kind your kindergartener might make while pretending to be a superhero.

To make the gesture, players form the 'A-OK' sign over both eyes to form "goggles" with their thumbs and forefingers, and (to denote the change in the score) stick the other three fingers up in the air. 

Duke star Nolan Smith, Vanderbilt's John Jenkins and Marquette's Darius Johnson-Odom have all donned the goggles in recent games. Kentucky freshman guard Doron Lamb was an early adopter: He's been doing the goggles for at least two months now.

The goggles are the latest fad in a sport that's increasingly full of them. A few years ago the gesture of the moment was "jersey-popping," where players would tug at the chest of their jerseys to show off the school's name. Pre-game dance huddles have had their moment, and continue to be popular. Some players continue to beat their chests after big shots, too.

Last season's craze was the inexplicably popular John Wall dance, which was named for Wall, the star Kentucky guard who later went on to be the No. 1 pick in the 2010 NBA draft. The "dance," such as it was, involved making a muscle with one's bicep and twisting one's fist back and forth. 

"Last year we had the John Wall dance," dumbfounded Kentucky coach John Calipari said. "I didn't even know. Now there's a goggles T-shirt that came out, and I'm like, what is that? I'm just trying to make sure they run back on defense."

The goggles started earlier this season in Portland as a joke. Patty Mills, a guard for the NBA's Trail Blazers, liked to tease teammate Rudy Fernandez about his poor eyesight. "I'd always give him a little bit—well, not a little bit, but a lot of grief for not being able to see," Mills said. In the first half of one particular game, Fernandez struggled from long range. Mills said he told Fernandez at halftime that he needed glasses or contact lenses—something. 

After halftime, Fernandez hit a few three-pointers. He turned to Mills on the bench and brought his pointer finger and thumb together in a circle over his eyes, with his three other fingers extended upward. "It was like, 'I don't need glasses. I've got these three goggles that work perfectly,'" Mills said.

The goggles caught on with the rest of the team and later, Blazers fans. Before long, as with any worthwhile fad, there were T-shirts. The rest of the NBA took notice, too: The Denver Nuggets' J.R. Smith has flashed his own goggles, as has Detroit's Ben Gordon.

The fad has filtered down to the college ranks and grown to the point now that the three goggles sometimes don't even have anything to do with a three-point shot.

On Sunday, when CBS revealed that St. John's had won a spot in the tournament, the network cut to a live shot of the celebrating team. One of its guards, Dwight Hardy, could be seen mugging for the camera by putting on the goggles. 

Teammates had no idea what he was doing. "I can't even tell you, to be honest," said injured guard D.J. Kennedy. "I think he's just showing his love for his neighborhood."

While some teams don't even know where the goggles came from or what the gesture means, others are fully aware. Marquette's players started to mark three-pointers with goggles for their Jan. 10 home game against Notre Dame after Wesley Matthews, a Marquette alumnus now with the Trail Blazers, called Johnson-Odom, a Marquette junior guard, and told him about the latest trend in Portland. "He made sure that we did it," Johnson-Odom said. 

When it comes to the goggles, the Golden Eagles are more fanatical than other teams. Because they were early adopters, Johnson-Odom said he expects the fad to endure past this season in Marquette. His teammates wear the goggles after every made three-pointer—and he says students on campus like to flash the goggles on campus. He says he's looking forward to the NCAA tournament, when the three goggles will be on display for everyone to see—even if Marquette's coach, Buzz Williams, pretends not to notice. "He knows that we're doing it, but he doesn't pay attention to it," Johnson-Odom said.

The goggles may have the look of tomfoolery, but most coaches don't seem to mind that their kids are doing it. In fact, the sight of players having such fun might be considered a recruiting tool.

"What happens is the players here are known," said Kentucky's Calipari. "People know who Wall is, who DeMarcus Cousins is, who Josh Harrellson and Darius Miller are. That's what it's about. If that's what happens, that's great."

From Portland, the sight of all these college kids donning make-believe goggles is an unexpected sight. "It's kind of weird to see it catch on," Mills said. "It's cool when you see it. Like, oh, we had a part in that."

—Sophia Hollander contributed to this article