SINGAPORE—Manufacturing data from two of Asia's key economies indicate the regional growth story remains intact, with a slight moderation in China's figures reflecting the weeklong Lunar New Year holiday more than any real loss of momentum, economists said.

China's official Purchasing Managers Index, issued by the China Federation of Logistics and Purchasing and the National Bureau of Statistics, fell to 52.2 in February from 52.9 in January, its third consecutive month of decline. A separate index from HSBC, prepared by Markit, fell to a seven-month low of 51.7 in February from January's 54.5. 

Still, any reading above 50 indicates that manufacturing is growing, and experts said February's lower readings probably reflect the long holiday closure at the beginning of the month. 

A similar index for India showed manufacturing growth accelerating in February, with HSBC's India PMI rising to 57.9 from 56.8. 

Coming after data Monday showed Indian gross domestic product grew a robust 8.2% in the October-December period, the strong PMI reading suggests Asia's growth is continuing apace. 

India's manufacturing PMI "has been a little bit of a regional leading indicator" in recent months, said  Glenn Maguire, Asia-Pacific chief economist for Société Générale. 

Mr. Maguire predicted that China's PMI would rise again in March. "It's always difficult to interpret the data around the Lunar New Year and we're looking for the numbers to bounce back into the 53-54 range in March, which for China is consistent with strong expansion," he said. 

Other data from around the region Tuesday showed growth remaining robust. HSBC's PMI for Taiwan fell to 55.8 in February from 59.8 in January, also affected by the Lunar New Year holiday but still well in growth territory. 

In Australia, a manufacturing index from the Australian Industry Group-PricewaterhouseCoopers rose 4.4 points in February to 51.1, creeping back into expansionary territory. 

Elsewhere, South Korean exports grew more than expected in February, while headline inflation in Thailand and Indonesia eased slightly but core inflation rose. 

"The fundamentals of the regional economy are fairly robust, and the monetary stimulus coming through is still very sizable despite the tightening we've recently seen in Korea and China," said  Frederic Neumann, co-head of Asian economic research at HSBC. "If anything, risks are still on the upside." 

Price pressures are likely to intensify in the second quarter as rising oil prices continue to be factored in, "adding to the challenges that policy makers face across the region," Mr. Neumann said. "They still need to raise rates, and the danger is that they're behind the curve." 

Société Générale's Mr. Maguire compared the pullback in the Thai and Indonesian headline inflation figures to the situation in 2007-2008, when prices paused briefly before rising. "What we're seeing with the moderation in Thai and Indonesian inflation is certainly not a trend reversal. We're going to see inflation pressures quite pronounced" later in the year, he said. 

"Manufacturing activity continues to expand at a strong pace, inflation has made the most marginal of pullbacks, risks remain to the upside and central banks need to tighten more," Mr. Maguire said.