PARIS—Dominique Strauss-Kahn's arrest has lifted the prospects of rival presidential candidates in France's Socialist Party, but they face a struggle to win over voters.

The arrest has sparked scrambling among Socialist Party power brokers at a time when President Nicolas Sarkozy's poor approval ratings have given the Socialists their best opportunity in years to win the presidency. But the party now finds itself without any obvious candidate.

Mr. Strauss-Kahn, 62 years old, hadn't declared his intention to seek the Socialists' nomination, but he was widely expected to do so within weeks and was looked upon by party members as the savior of a party that has produced only one French president in the half-century history of France's Fifth Republic.

On Monday, party chiefs clung to the hope that he would still be able to represent them despite the sexual-assault case brought against the International Monetary Fund chief in New York. 

Jean-Christophe Cambadélis, a Socialist lawmaker speaking at party headquarters in Paris, said reports on the case contained "many contradictions." He added: "We can't believe he's guilty."

Mr. Strauss-Kahn was arraigned Monday on charges of attempted rape, criminal sexual assault and unlawful imprisonment of a maid in the New York City hotel where he was staying. He was ordered held without bail. His lawyer said Mr. Strauss-Kahn plans to plead not guilty.

French Socialists missed the 1990s trend for left-of-center parties—such as the British Labour Party and Germany's Social Democrats—to adopt versions of the small-government, pro-market economics they had in the past opposed. Instead, a Socialist government in France in 2000 reduced the standard workweek to 35 hours from 39, making workers grateful but businesses uncompetitive. 

Last month, the party announced a policy platform whose centerpiece was a program to create 300,000 jobs by raising certain taxes. It also proposed raising the minimum salary—something economists say would hurt French business, as labor costs in France have already overtaken those of neighbor Germany.

The three leading Socialists now vying for the party's nomination are all party insiders, who suffer from an awkward combination of age and inexperience. 

Two are former partners: François Hollande and Ségolène Royal, who had four children together before separating in 2007. Mr. Hollande is the youngest at 56, but has never held a cabinet position, instead holding party posts over the years, including serving as secretary-general between 1997 and 2008. 

Mr. Hollande declared his candidacy in March and has been crisscrossing France lately campaigning in fishing ports and agricultural regions.

"Strauss-Kahn dropping out of the race opens a boulevard for Hollande," said Emiliano Grossman, a politics professor at the Paris college Institut d'Études Politiques de Paris. "The fact that he hasn't held any government post is a weakness, but it also makes him look quite novel."

An Ifop poll taken before the arrest and published Sunday in the Journal du Dimanche showed that 26% of respondents would vote for Mr. Strauss-Kahn in the first round of the presidential election, compared with 23% for Mr. Hollande and 22% for Mr. Sarkozy.

Ms. Royal, who declared her candidacy in November, was the Socialist presidential candidate in 2007, when she lost to Mr. Sarkozy. In 2008, she failed in her attempt to become secretary-general of the party, losing to Martine Aubry. An aide to Ms. Royal declined requests for comment.

Ms. Aubry seems in many ways like the party's natural candidate, though she hasn't yet said she will run. She is its leader and has twice served as employment minister, becoming known as the architect of the 35-hour workweek. 

Still, she has so far seemed hesitant about running, and last week had to deny she had shelved her presidential ambitions. A spokesman for Ms. Aubry couldn't be reached for comment. 

BenoÎt Hamon, the Socialist Party spokesman, said Monday that Socialist leaders would meet Tuesday to discuss Mr. Strauss-Kahn's arrest. He said party primaries would run according to schedule, with candidates declaring by July 13 and voting to take place in October. 

Before his arrest, Mr. Strauss-Kahn looked like a realistic candidate—but still, in some ways, a strange one. He failed to secure the party's nomination for the 2007 presidential election and spent the past four years living overseas working as head of the IMF. 

While serving in Washington, he pronounced on the world economy, but mainly stayed out of French domestic politics. One notable position he took—in favor of raising France's minimum retirement age from 60—put him at odds with the Socialist Party's position. 

 Write to  Sebastian Moffett at sebastian.moffett@wsj.com and Gabriele Parussini at gabriele.parussini@dowjones.com 