The Obama administration on Wednesday proposed requiring power plants using coal or fuel oil to reduce emissions of mercury and certain other hazardous pollutants by 91%, in a move that could accelerate the U.S. shift toward natural gas.

If adopted, Environmental Protection Agency Administrator Lisa Jackson said, the standards would prevent as many as 17,000 premature deaths a year.

The EPA says the annual cost to meet the new regulation will be about $11 billion in 2016, and that it will increase consumers' electric bills on the order of three or four dollars a month.

The announcement comes as some Republicans have targeted the EPA for budget cuts, saying regulations like the one proposed on Wednesday go too far.

American Electic Power Co. and some other utilities have expressed concern they won't have time to bring their coal-fired plants into compliance on roughly half a dozen regulations expected to be proposed or adopted by the EPA over the next 20 months that target pollution. 

That suggests they may ask Congress to intervene. "We do know many members of Congress are concerned about the economic impact of these rules, and more time will help mitigate the economic impact of making additional emission reductions," an AEP spokeswoman said.

The Electric Reliability Coordinating Council, which also opposes the rules, raised another concern in a statement Wednesday: That utilities' need to comply with these and similar rules would lead to a rush of demand for new construction and smoke-stack clean-up technology, resulting in higher costs or delays for some utilities.

The nation's coal-fired power plants are the largest unregulated industrial source of mercury emissions nationwide, according to the U.S. Government Accountability Office. They annually emit 48 tons of mercury, a toxic element that can cause neurological disorders in children, according to the GAO. The EPA declared more than a decade ago that mercury emissions from power plants pose "significant hazards to public health" and must be reduced. 

Some industry analysts have predicted the rule could hasten a shift from coal, source of half of the country's electricity supply, to natural gas, which is cleaner burning and accounts for 23% of the nation's electricity. 

A report last September from bank Credit Suisse said the anticipated mercury rules, along with separate, previously proposed regulations targeting sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide, could lead to the closing of 18% of the nation's coal-fired generation capacity. 

EPA officials projected a much more modest impact. The agency said Wednesday it expected plants accounting for only 2% of the nation's coal-fired capacity would be retired by 2015 in response to the new rule.

Ms. Jackson said the rule's costs would be far outweighed by the public-health benefits, which the EPA puts at between $59 billion and $140 billion in 2016, much of it from avoiding premature deaths. More than half of all coal-fired power plants already meet at least some of the proposed standards, she said.

The new standards appear likely to benefit companies that have invested in wind, solar power and nuclear energy. White House Chief of Staff William Daley met with some of those companies last week, including Constellation Energy Group Inc.

"We know from experience that constructing [pollution-control technology] can be done in a reasonable time frame," Constellation said in a statement. Some industry analysts predicted the regulation would also benefit firms that make pollution-control equipment, including Babcock & Wilcox Co. and URS Corp. 

Coal, natural gas and oil collectively account for about 70% of the U.S. electricity supply, according to the Energy Information Administration, while nuclear power generates 20% and hydropower 7%. The remainder is generated by solar, wind, geothermal and biomass sources.

Under Wednesday's proposal, power plants would be obligated to meet numerical emission limits for mercury and other hazardous air pollutants within three years. But the agency said facilities could get an additional year "if technology cannot otherwise be installed in time." The EPA is expected to make a final decision in November. 

In a written statement, Sen. James Inhofe (R., Okla.) took exception to the proposal. "EPA continues to propose and promulgate rules at a breakneck pace without a complete and accurate understanding of their impacts on consumers, jobs and small businesses," he said.

But Marian Burton, president of the American Academy of Pediatrics, endorsed the EPA's approach. "If you think it's expensive to put [pollution controls] on a smokestack, you should see how much it costs to treat a child over a lifetime for a preventable birth defect," she said. 

 Write to  Stephen Power at stephen.power@wsj.com 