Here's a list of movies that former U.S. Sen. Chris Dodd should watch now that he's getting more than $1.5 million a year to be the chief lobbyist for the Motion Picture Association of America:

" Justin Bieber: Never Say Never" (2011): "No lobbying, no lobbying," the Connecticut Democrat promised in August. Sounds like another song and dance, doesn't it?

"The Haunting in Connecticut" (2009): Not as scary as Mr. Dodd's five terms in the Senate.

"The Manchurian Candidate" (1962): Commies are inefficient. Capitalists know an easier way to brainwash politicians: money.

"Love and Other Drugs" (2010): At least Mr. Dodd's move isn't as nauseating as former Louisiana Republican congressman  Billy Tauzin's. Mr. Tauzin gave us the socialized medicine known as Medicare Part D. Then he left Congress in 2005 for a $2.5-million-a-year gig running the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America.

"The Bank Job" (2008): It's not like Mr. Dodd -- former chairman of the Senate banking committee and co-author of the Dodd-Frank financial-reform bill -- got a high-paying job at  Bank of America
BAC


2.69
%




 or  Citigroup.
C


0.97
%




 But they owe him one.

"Alice in Wonderland" (2010): Before their near collapse and subsequent government takeover, Mr. Dodd swore Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were "fundamentally strong." I swear the Mad Hatter must have been speaking to him: "You have a regrettably large head! I would very much like to hat it!"

"The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas" (1982): Do-gooder politicians say they want to shut it down. But they might as well install a revolving door.

"The Day the Earth Stood Still" (1951): Washington panics when a UFO lands near the White House. But real panics come from monsters lobbying the Senate banking committee.

"Zombieland" (2009): A popular term for the banking industry, thanks to Mr. Dodd.

"Despicable Me" (2010): Mr. Dodd took out mortgages through Countrywide Financial. Villainous Gru couldn't garner this much deplorability when he tried to steal the moon.

"The People Vs.  Larry Flynt" (1996):  Jimmy Carter's sister converts Mr. Flynt to Christianity. But instead of getting out of the porn biz, he sticks angels' wings on his models. Reminds me of the Dodd-Frank financial-reform bill. Bankers are still naked and making obscene profits.

"Liar, Liar" (1997):  Jim Carrey plays a lawyer who finds himself incapable of telling a lie for 24 hours. Now this would be a frightening disability for anyone in Washington.

"Wall Street: Money Never Sleeps" (2010): The people who steal the most of it sleep fine.

"Plan 9 From Outer Space" (1958): Worst movie ever, but offers a better solution than the Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008.

"Repo Man" (1984): Hey, Mr. Dodd, when people can't make the payment, guess what happens to the property?

"You Don't Know Jack" (2010):  Al Pacino plays euthanasia enthusiast  Jack Kevorkian. Great fun for anyone serving on the Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee. Can anyone think up another dying field to add to this committee's name?

"Meet the Fockers" (2004): Never mind. Mr. Dodd knows them all.

—Al Lewis is a columnist for Dow Jones Newswires in Denver. He blogs at tellittoal.com; his email address is al.lewis@dowjones.com 