During the final approach before landing at almost any airport, I find myself strangely captivated by the cheerless landscape visible just beneath the wings: boxy warehouses, weedy parking lots, a dowdy strip mall with a liquor store, lone autos moving with an odd languor, a stranded subdivision or two filled with sooty houses. If I had to move here, I used to think, I'd pack light: a gun and one bullet. 

Now I think I view that landscape differently, thanks to John D. Kasarda and Greg Lindsay, the authors of "Aerotropolis." The areas off the end of the runways aren't dreary "noise ghettos," as they've been tarred, or exurban wastelands. They're "The Way We'll Live Next," as the authors' subtitle has it—the kernels of a bright, prosperous future of new cities built around a path of least resistance for cargo and people.

What exactly is an aerotropolis? Mr. Lindsay—who is the authorial voice of this co-written book—quotes Mr. Kasarda defining it as "basically an airport-integrated region, extending as far as sixty miles from the inner clusters of hotel, offices, distribution, and logistics facilities." In such a setting, the airport is no longer a piece of infrastructure "but a city itself. The airport city." 

The notion of an aerotropolis isn't new—Mr. Kasarda, a business professor at the University of North Carolina, wrote about it more than a decade ago and has been its evangelist ever since. But I'd wager that the notion is about to occupy a little more real estate in the popular imagination. This book will no doubt do for airport cities what Joel Garreau and his "Edge City" did for suburban office parks and shopping malls two decades ago: It will relocate the center.

Over the past couple of millennia, Messrs. Kasarda and Lindsay argue, economic vitality has moved from ocean harbors to river ports to railroad hubs to highway interchanges and, now, to airports. "Transportation is destiny," they say. The driving force behind the development of the aerotropolis is fairly simple: the elimination of friction. Just as information now freely and effortlessly traverses the globe, goods and people are drawn toward friction-free networks. Airports are, in effect, routers for goods and people or, as the authors put it, "factories for connectivity." 

 By John D. Kasarda and Greg Lindsay  Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 466 pages, $30

"Aerotropolis" is as descriptive a book as it is predictive, since the shift is well under way. The most compelling sections are case studies of emerging airport cities, including near Memphis, Denver, Detroit, Dubai, Bangkok and some of the 100 new aerotropoli— a coinage too cute by half—planned for China within the decade. Memphis, for instance, has become "an inland port for goods arriving from Asia," thanks to FedEx and the two million packages that transit its complex every day. This activity, in turn, has attracted industries like computer-repair contractors who thrive by plugging seamlessly into the established transportation network. ("Memphis: America's Aerotropolis" is a now a service mark of the Greater Memphis Chamber.)

Frictionless air transport is upending retail as well. In the fresh-flower industry, which now depends in large part on exports from Africa to Europe and from South America to the U.S., blossoms and buds move along a smoothly efficient "cool chain," an unbroken series of refrigerated trucks, cargo holds and warehouses. A once-local product has gone global. The tiny emirate of Dubai foresaw this shift early on and, sitting at the confluence of three continents, built what is essentially an air-based global souk. It has attracted business, trade and tourism thanks to a massive modern airport and the long-haul marvel that is Emirates Air. 

In "The World Is Flat" (2005), Thomas Friedman outlined a brave new world where software programmers in Bangalore play on the same field of global commerce as Americans. "Aerotropolis" takes this idea a bit further, describing this brave new world as it is actually appearing on the ground. It's not always an inviting picture, whatever the economic logic.

The authors write about "community without propinquity" and "residential neighborhoods without residents." (In places like Dubai global homebuyers acquire houses but never really move in.) And once the aerotropolis model has been ironed out, the authors assert, there will be little reason to reinvent the wheel: The successful model will simply be replicated world-wide—resulting in pop-up cities with no claim to local heritage or culture and bleached of any genuine sense of place. (The vision for the Bangkok aerotropolis included golf courses to "keep the expats happy," as well as "shopping malls, movie theater, and schools that seem airlifted straight from Southern California.")

Messrs. Kasarda's and Lindsay's account is imbued with a rah-rah cheerleader tone, in which mostly obligatory shoulder-shrugging is given to the potential downsides of a vast global chain of connectivity factories. Is getting a USB cable shipped from China overnight worth the greenhouse gases that the workings of a global network will produce? Can the aerotropolis survive a surge in oil prices, or will these nascent transit-states become the ghost towns of the future? Do people really want to live near airports? ("Aesthetics aren't high on anyone's list," the authors admit at one point discussing the forces behind these developments. Elsewhere they write: "Airports are noisy and filthy, it's true.") Messrs. Kasarda and Lindsay tend to regard those who bring up such flaws as spoiled Luddites, certain to be left behind in the headlong rush toward the future. 

Ultimately the prospect sketched out in "Aerotropolis"—while slightly thrilling, as tectonic shifts often are—feels about as dispiriting as those warehouse zones clustered near the ends of runways. And it's made all the more so by the realization that the authors are undoubtedly right.

 Mr. Curtis, a contributing editor at the Atlantic, is a writer based in New Orleans. 