BANGKOK—Sporadic skirmishes between Thai and Cambodian troops along the two countries' disputed border continued early Friday despite military commanders agreeing to a tentative cease-fire the previous day, throwing into doubt prospects for a lasting resolution to an increasingly bitter conflict.

Thai Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva Thursday said the two nations could discuss re-positioning troops at the frontier if there were no further clashes over the next 24 to 48 hours, but was careful to add a note of caution by saying the conflict hadn't yet been resolved at a national level.

"This is being worked out at a local, regional command level," he said. "They will try to resolve it a local level and then take it from there." 

The tentative truce fell apart later on Thursday and both sides exchanged fire near the site of the Ta Krabey temple in a disputed border zone. Thai army spokesman Co. Sansern Kaewkamnerd said Cambodian forces started the fighting, suggesting that local commanders in the area might not following the orders of their superiors.

Cambodia's Col. Suos Sothea, meanwhile, accused Thailand of firing artillery shells into the area early Friday, the Associated Press reported.

Despite the conflict, the prime minister told journalists he remained committed to dissolving Thailand's parliament as soon as next week and to holding elections late June or early July. 

Thailand also is suffering deep domestic political divisions and is struggling to contain rising inflation. Violent street protests have proliferated since a military coup removed former premier Thaksin Shinawatra in 2006. Mr. Abhisit has acknowledged the planned election would be a close contest between his Democrat Party and supporters of Mr. Thaksin, who lives overseas to avoid imprisonment on a corruption conviction that he describes as politically motivated. 

The clashes with Cambodia, however, have taken center stage over the past week. 

One point of contention between the two countries is the question of whether to bring in outside mediators to help resolve the conflict. Cambodia has repeatedly tried to get the United Nations and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations involved in resolving the dispute. 

Mr. Abhisit said the latest clashes, in which at least 16 soldiers have been killed in the past seven days, are largely the result of Cambodia's efforts to internationalize the countries' dispute over their frontier. 

The Thai leader has rejected the need for third-party mediation, saying that Thursday's agreement was evidence that a bilateral approach was working. The government prefers the two countries to negotiate on their own and Thailand's armed forces have rebuffed an offer from Indonesia to send observers to the area. 

Mr. Abhisit said Indonesia "has played a very constructive role." But he later added that "nobody knows the problems better than Thailand and Cambodia . . . . These are two countries that have shared a common border for a very long time and the demarcation [of that border] is still not complete, so there are a number of potential trouble spots." 

Thailand and Cambodia have wrangled over the exact position of their border for decades, but the conflict escalated in 2008 when Cambodia secured U.N. World Heritage recognition for the ancient Preah Vihear temple just inside Cambodia's border. 

Since then, influential nationalist groups in Thailand have demanded that Mr. Abhisit's government take firmer action to contest Cambodia's claim to the historic site. Political analysts say the heated rhetoric on both sides of the border contributed to a series of clashes this year. Several soldiers were killed in February at the Preah Vihear site. The latest round of skirmishes began April 22 at the site of two other crumbling temples at Ta Moan and Ta Krabey. 

Cambodia's Prime Minister Hun Sen has blamed Thailand for initiating the clashes, saying that local politics in Bangkok, including Mr. Abhisit's plan to dissolve parliament and call elections, have worsened tensions in the disputed border zone. 

Mr. Abhisit, a 46-year-old British-educated economist, denied that allegation Thursday, saying each time fighting has erupted, Cambodian forces instigated the clashes. 

"Over the last couple of years Prime Minister Hun Sen has attacked me on a number of occasions but I think people know the reality and I'm not bothered by it," Mr. Abhisit said. 

The Thai leader also said he suspected that communication lapses on the Cambodian side contributed to the recent escalation of the problem. "There appears to be a gap in understanding between local commanders and the leadership in Phnom Penh," Mr. Abhisit said. 