A long-neglected, 35-acre property in the Stapleton neighborhood of Staten Island, which once housed a home port for the U.S. Navy, is poised for development after getting the go-ahead on a plan for the city-owned site.

The approval this month by Staten Island officials is viewed as a much-needed real-estate stimulus in an Eastern Shore area that was once a premier shopping destination and civic center, but has been struggling to regain its footing over the last several decades.

The Stapleton site is one mile from the Staten Island Ferry terminal, but is fenced off to the public. The premier tract of land offers imposing views of Manhattan, the Lower Bay and the Narrows that separate Brooklyn and Staten Island, where the Italian explorer  Giovanni da Verrazano, sailing for the French, anchored his ship in 1524. 

  Greg Russo, a senior vice president of the New Jersey-based Ironstate Development Co., said his company is investing $150 million at the site. Initially, it will initially build two building with between 800 and 900 four-and-five-story rental units in each. Estimated monthly rents will range from $1,100 for a studio to $2,000 for two bedrooms. 

Ironstate Development is purchasing seven acres from the city for $11 million and holds options for two other city-owned sites adjacent to the planned development. The parcels being built by Ironstate will be returned to the city tax rolls; Mr. Russo estimated the New York City real-estate taxes will be in a range between $1.7 million to $2.3 million a year.

 "We are geared up for 50% housing and 50% shopping," Mr. Russo said, adding that he plans to draw apparel stores and restaurants in a 33,000-square-foot section of the property. Ironstate has had preliminary discussion with local retailers and restaurateurs, but no leases have been signed.

Mr. Russo said that the proximity to Manhattan could also serve as a tourist attraction, since two million visitors to New York take the 25-minute ride on the world-famous ferry every year. The development site is a five-minute trip from the ferry on the Staten Island Railway, operated by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority. The site is also served by four local bus lines.  

Community activists are urging Ironstate to submit an application for the city's 421A housing program, which offers real-estate developers tax abatements in return for providing affordable housing to eligible renters. The company hasn't made a final decision, Mr. Russo said.

Under the new plan, the public will have unfettered access to the waterfront where container ships, oil tankers, cruise ships and natty tug sail by, not to mention many actual sailboats. The city has promised $33 million in capital budget improvements in the area, including construction of a waterfront esplanade and turning a flood-prone winding main road into a wider, straighter boulevard with trees and plantings. 

Another major feature will be a public launch open to non-motorized boats and historic vessels. Occupants currently using the Stapleton site, including city agencies and state courts, will be relocated.

Stapleton's streets were laid out in 1832 after two developers, including the son of  Daniel Tompkins, a former New York governor and U.S. vice president, bought a part of  Cornelius Vanderbilt's farm. In the 1920s, the home-port land was known as "Hylan's Folly," named after former Mayor  John Hylan who built piers but couldn't generate enough revenue to make them profitable.

In its heyday, Stapleton was the home of a National Football League franchise called the Staten Island Stapes, a Piels brewery and a 2,500-seat Art Deco movie theater, opened in 1930, where Hollywood stars  Clark Gable, Mae West and  Mary Pickford appeared on stage. It closed in 1997. 

In the mid-1980s, Stapleton was chosen as the home port for a group of Navy ships, and it opened in 1990. President Bill Clinton scuttled the home port in 1994 to reduce federal spending. 

There have been several plans for using the site since then, including a Nascar track and an amusement park. Actor  Danny Aiello and some partners built a sound stage and produced Comedy Central shows and two movies there, but the city declined to renew his short-term lease. 

Today, it has a commercial strip along Bay Street, a superbly restored Town Hall built in 1886 and New York City Housing Authority apartments just north of the home-port site. Stapleton also has a historic preservation district called Mud Lane, which feature stately Greek Revival and Queen Anne mansions, some of them built before the Civil War.

  Jon Salmon, a Staten Island real-estate agent who isn't connected to the development, called the plans for the former home port "outstanding news" representing "a turning point for the entire East Shore." 

City Councilwoman  Debi Rose, who represents the area, said: "The home port is a unique piece in the revitalization of the Stapleton waterfront and I am happy that work is finally going to begin on the site. Our waterfront has laid dormant for much too long."