John Kendall imported the Suzuki method of music training to the U.S. and helped foment a revolution in string pedagogy.

Mr. Kendall, who died Jan. 6 at age 93, became a leading evangelist for the method, which involves teaching children as young as three years old to play violin and other instruments by ear. 

The Suzuki Association of the Americas estimates that perhaps 100,000 students annually are taught with Suzuki techniques, although the true number is impossible to define. Suzuki practitioners agree that it brought more kids into music training.

"It was once thought that you had to have innate talent to play the violin," said Pam Brasch, executive director of the association. "John used Suzuki's ideas to change music training in general."

In its early years Suzuki training was confined to violin, but today it is used to teach other string instruments as well, including the guitar and harp.

Mr. Kendall's first exposure to the Suzuki method came in the late 1950s, when he saw a documentary film featuring 750 Japanese Suzuki students playing Bach's Double Concerto for Two Violins.

"I was curious but very skeptical," he told the St. Louis Post-Dispatch in a 1997 interview. "Were these kids really benchwarmers, just pretending to play?"

Traveling to Japan on a grant in 1958, Mr. Kendall met Shinichi Suzuki, a concert violinist who had developed his techniques for decades. 

Mr. Kendall returned intent on adapting the Suzuki method for U.S. students.

Key to the Suzuki method was the insight that children can learn music as they do language—by listening and trying to repeat what they hear, with lots of parental encouragement.

Children as young as three were given small violins, and within months could be taught Bach and Vivaldi, which they sometimes played while marching around.

Speaking in an interview with NPR after Mr. Suzuki died, Mr. Kendall said, "He seemed to have a knack for knowing what would appeal to children, on the one hand, and what would stand the abuse of constant repetition on the other."

Musicians including cellist Pablo Casals and violinist David Oistrakh had visited Mr. Suzuki's Talent Education centers in Japan and came away singing their praises.

In 1964, Mr. Kendall organized a highly-publicized national tour for Mr. Suzuki and ten students. Wherever they played, crowds turned up to goggle at the Japanese children playing perfectly in unison.

 The Boston Globe's music critic found the stylized interpretations "downright frightening," but added, "Nevertheless there was the fact, impossible to escape, that the kids could play the violin."

A long-time music director at Southern Illinois University Edwardsville, Mr. Kendall had studied at the Oberlin College Conservatory of Music and Columbia Teacher's College.

 He was a native of Kearney, Neb., and grew up on his family's egg farm. Quaker by upbringing, he was a conscientious objector in World War II and worked instead as a janitor in a mental hospital.

Mr. Kendall became a kind of ambassador for the Suzuki technique, helping to seed programs across the U.S. 

He produced the first English language versions of Suzuki's primers, called "Listen and Play," and helped organize the Suzuki Association. 

He brought Suzuki demonstrations to South America, Europe and Australia. 

Although Mr. Kendall never made it to China, a colleague once dubbed him "The Marco Polo of the Suzuki method." 

In 2010, he published a memoir, "Recollections of a Peripatetic Pedagogue."

 Email remembrances@wsj.com  

 Corrections & Amplifications  The flute is a woodwind instrument. A previous version of this article grouped the flute with the guitar and harp as an example of string instruments.