Webster Avenue in the Bronx is lined with apartment buildings, car-repair shops and empty lots, and is known as the site of illegal, late-night drag races. Residents hope that a rezoning plan under consideration by the city will transform nearly two miles of the thoroughfare into a vibrant residential and commercial district. 

The Department of City Planning held a hearing Wednesday on the plan, which would replace zoning regulations enacted in 1961. Along with another previously approved zoning plan for nearby Third Avenue, city officials aim to promote affordable housing and commercial corridors in the North Bronx. 

The plan for Webster Avenue, located west of the New York Botanical Garden and Bronx Park, would rezone about 80 blocks and permit the development of a mix of residential, commercial and community buildings. The street is now primarily zoned for low-rise auto facilities and heavy commercial use. 

"Currently Webster Avenue has a lot of vacant properties. At night it's pretty much abandoned," said  Fernando Tirado, district manager for the local community board. "This is going to provide a great economic engine for the Bronx."

The City Planning Commission will vote on the matter by March. After that the proposal heads to the City Council. 

City officials hope that developers will be drawn to Webster Avenue if larger properties, such as hotels and theaters, are allowed to be built on the street. Rezoning the area would permit the development of about 100,000 square feet of retail and office space. It would also allow about 720 new housing units, 20% of which would be set aside for low-income residents. 

The rezoning plan also covers the residential neighborhoods of Bedford Park and Norwood and would cap the height of new buildings there. Currently there are no height limitations in the area, and residents have complained of 10-story buildings being constructed adjacent to single-family homes. 

"It will also make sure that future development in the Norwood and Bedford Park respects the unique character of those residential communities," said City Planning Commissioner  Amanda M. Burden when proposing the rezoning last year. 

While the economic climate could delay revitalization efforts in the area, Mr. Tirado said that many property owners along Webster Avenue are anxious for the plan to be approved. 

"Of course we've had a lot of speculators, people rushing in to try to buy a lot of the properties," Mr. Tirado said. "The ability to design mid-rise housing with ground-floor commercial will obviously be an economic boon for all those property owners and businesses." 

One hopeful local developer is  Michael Gilbert of Best Bronx Management, which owns and manages several commercial buildings in the borough. Mr. Gilbert predicts more developers will come to Webster Avenue if the zoning changes pass. 

Last year Mr. Gilbert's company erected a building on Webster Avenue that now houses a discount store. Mr. Gilbert would have preferred opening a daycare or school, but zoning restrictions didn't permit it. 

"It would be a great fit. We just weren't able to put it in," Mr. Gilbert said. "With the rezone it should change that and make things better."

 Write to  Joseph De Avila at joseph.deavila@wsj.com 