With 90% of Britons now living in urban or suburban areas, it is perhaps unsurprising that the nation's appetite for the great British wilderness remains undimmed, at least in literature. Following in the recent footsteps of hugely popular nature-philosophers such as Richard Mabey, Roger Deakin and Robert Macfarlane—writers able to locate ruggedness in apparently unlikely settings—Neil Ansell demonstrates in a slight but potent new memoir that feral living is never more than a hitchhike away. 

To be fair to Mr. Ansell, his corner of the boondocks is genuinely remote. He may be able to walk to the nearest town, but his dilapidated Victorian gamekeeper's cottage in a mid-Wales wood is so far off the beaten track that he is able to keep count of the passers-by whom he encounters during a five-year period of isolation: "Not one." The house itself has no electricity or running water, has been uninhabited for fifty years and is situated on an exposed patch of ground in an environment so blasted that it appears to "rain uphill." "Deep Country" is Mr. Ansell's account of "a hard life freely chosen," of solitude and self-sufficiency, of "the hidden places that I came to call my own."

Not a seasoned handyman or gardener, he learns by his errors, earning a little money on the side from writing and surveying birds for the University of Wales. There are no rules to his project, merely a desire to "know how lightly I could tread on the earth" (around a carrier's bag of waste per month, if you're wondering). More used to physical escape ("I had never grown anything before, I had never stayed in one place long enough to even think about it"), he now sinks into himself: "I was not attempting a scientific study, rather an experiment in life." 

In this, Mr. Ansell is reminiscent of Henry David Thoreau in "Walden" (the Bhagavad Gita-loving sensualist-ascetic rather than the obstreperous New Englander), committed to the dedicated "business" of living and observing. But while Thoreau affirmed the ascendancy of the ego ("In most books, the I, or first person, is omitted; in this it will be retained," he wrote), Mr. Ansell's overriding discovery is one of self-effacement, a Buddhistic "state of being free of thought": "My attention was constantly focused away from myself . . . I had become a part of the landscape, a stone."

 By Neil Ansell  Hamish Hamilton, 224 pages, £16.99

Formerly a highly social being, he submits himself to nature, his life expanding in summer and contracting in winter, the seasons evolving infinitesimally while the years blur by apace. But human curiosity remains a potent force and in this Mr. Ansell is more like Thoreau than he may believe. The ego is reflected rather than subsumed by the forces all around him. Pondering his love of birds, he concludes that "their appeal is not simply aesthetic. We watch them because of what they tell us about ourselves, and about our sense of what it means to be wild and free."

Mr. Ansell's habitat becomes his society, the activities of its inhabitants his soap opera. Although bracingly unsentimental about nature ("it doesn't pay to get too attached to the fate of individual birds"), he follows its myriad dramas, its couplings, births and deaths, its triumphs and tragedies, with the enthusiasm of any sports fan, theater-goer or village gossip. He comes to see the curlews and dunlin, the Brent geese and sparrowhawks, "no longer . . . as representatives of their species" but as individual beings, with homes, ages and "histories." He shows that empathy and communality can thrive in the apparent social vacuum of hermit life.

Mr. Ansell's nature writing is both lyrical and practical, from his observations on the longevity of bats (up to 30 years) and the intricacy of the woodpecker's tongue (which loops behind the dome of its skull), to the beauty of the kingfisher ("so glamorous and unexpectedly tiny") and the swarming swallows drawn to a hawk "like iron filings to a magnet."

But even more compelling is the specter of Mr. Ansell himself, looming stubbornly half-hidden from the picture. His impossible task is to reinsert his ego into a life that he claims has dispensed with it. Like Wordsworth, he takes his inspiration from emotion recollected in tranquility, insisting: "Any insight I have gained has been the result of later reflection." Only having come out the other side is he able to redefine a world apparently denuded of self-definition. 

If Mr. Ansell comes close to achieving this, where he falls short is in his framing of the isolation. While he gives us an excellent insight into the resources we are able to draw upon in solitude, he balks at confronting what happens when those resources are depleted. Like Thoreau, the author eventually returns to "the world of men," following an event that he obliquely refers to as "some kind of nervous breakdown." He becomes ill, exhausted, sleepless, listless. At this point, a psychoanalyst might inquire whether his self-disappearance weren't merely self-repression. 

And this brings to mind the other neglected aspects of the author's narrative: the "bridges" he has "burned" back at home; his apparent lack of sexual desire; his "visceral" craving, omitted in this book but referred to in a recent article, to have children. "Solitude embraced is the opposite of loneliness," he writes in "Deep Country." It is the author's attempt to protect that solitude while simultaneously sharing it with his readers that is both the achievement and the failure of his book.

 Mr. Lichtig is a freelance writer, editor and producer. His criticism regularly appears in the Times Literary Supplement, among other places. 