FLORHAM PARK, N.J.—The kick—the miss, really—that forever preys on Nick Folk's mind happened on Sept. 18, 2004, when he was a sophomore at the University of Arizona.

The Wildcats played Wisconsin in Tucson that night—the game delayed 88 minutes in the second quarter by lightning flashes and a torrential rainstorm. With Wisconsin leading 9-7 and 43 seconds remaining in regulation, Mr. Folk attempted a 47-yard field goal. The ball drifted to the left. The kick was no good. Arizona lost.

"It was going right down the middle the entire way until about the end zone," he said. "Just to feel the weight of the team, you don't want to feel that ever again. That stuck with me a long time."

Mr. Folk, the Jets' placekicker, can ill-afford to have a similar sequence play out in Sunday's AFC Championship Game amid the freezing temperatures and fickle winds at Pittsburgh's Heinz Field. Should the game's outcome come down to a field goal, the first Jets Super Bowl appearance in 42 years will rest on Mr. Folk's right foot—a scenario that, whatever his personal fixations might be, probably won't make head coach Rex Ryan all that comfortable.

 Mr. Folk, 26, missed nine field goals during the regular season, frustrating Mr. Ryan to the point that he considered auditioning another kicker.

Already this postseason, though, Mr. Folk has done his job when the Jets most needed him to, drilling a 32-yard field goal on the last play of their 17-16 first-round victory in Indianapolis two weeks ago. But that was a relatively short kick under ideal conditions: Lucas Oil Stadium features a retractable roof—it was closed for the Jets-Colts game—and is carpeted in plush, perfect Fieldturf.

Heinz Field has no such cushy amenities. AccuWeather is forecasting a low temperature of 6 degrees Fahrenheit with wind gusts between 9 and 13 mph in Pittsburgh on Sunday. All things being equal, Mr. Folk estimated, those sorts of conditions can cost a kicker eight to 10 yards in distance on a field-goal attempt, since the cold makes the air is denser and the football harder. In Indianapolis, Mr. Folk was booming kicks from 56 yards during his pregame warm-ups, but he guessed that a 47-yard try would push the limit of his range in Pittsburgh.

More, because Heinz Field is in such heavy use throughout the fall—it's the home field for the University of Pittsburgh's football team, and several high school games are held there annually—its turf is notorious for providing players' poor footing.

Since the stadium opened in 2001, kickers have made only 75.7% of their field-goal attempts there; the league average over that period is 80.7%, according to Stats Inc., a firm that tracks statistical trends in sports. The last time the Jets played a postseason game in Pittsburgh, Doug Brien missed two field goals in the final 2:02 of the fourth quarter in a divisional-round game on Jan. 15, 2005. The Steelers won in overtime, 20-17.

"I've heard about that, but I haven't really paid much attention to it," Mr. Folk said. "Long time ago."

Mr. Folk has never had a problem kicking at Heinz Field. In two regular-season games there, including the Jets' 22-17 victory on Dec. 19, he made all four of his field-goal attempts and all three of his extra-point attempts. He will bring four pairs of left-footed cleats with him to the stadium on Sunday, he said, each with a different spike length. That way, he'll be better able to plant his foot into the stadium's precarious ground. 

No one asked him what he'll do if it happens to rain or, more likely, snow.

 Write to  Mike Sielski at mike.sielski@wsj.com 