CANBERRA, Australia — China's growing military influence across the Asian-Pacific region will top the agenda when U.K. Foreign Secretary William Hague and Defense Secretary Liam Fox arrive in Australia this week for bilateral talks, shortly after pictures were released of China's first stealth fighter aircraft.

The U.K.'s Conservative-led coalition government has dispatched the two senior ministers to Australia—backed by a team of high-ranking defense officials that includes Iain Lobban, director of Britain's spy agency, and Gen. David Richards, chief of the defense staff—as defense spending in the Asian-Pacific region grows along with its surging economies.

"This is the century of the Asia-Pacific," Australian Defense Minister Stephen Smith told reporters in Sydney on Monday. "Influence is moving to our part of the world, and the world needs to adjust to that."

The visit is the first by a British foreign secretary since Douglas Hurd's trip in 1994. It comes as Australia's exports of coal and ore are turning it into an emerging regional economic powerhouse, spurred by demand for its resources from Asia.

"Our visit will be an opportunity to explore how Britain and Australia can work together to bring peace to troubled areas, to counter terrorism, to tackle climate change and to manage evolving global power structures," Mr. Hague said in a statement on Monday.

The centerpiece of the visit will be a day of talks on international policy and security issues Tuesday, led by Mr. Smith, the Australian defense minister, and Australian Foreign Minister Kevin Rudd, followed by a dinner with Prime Minister Julia Gillard.

The visit coincides with a rise in China's military power and in Beijing's involvement in regional issues, including recent tensions involving territorial disputes with Japan and Vietnam and China's continued unease about U.S. support of Taiwan. Tensions between North and South Korea have also complicated China's relations in the region. 

Canberra is pressing for greater military transparency in the region. Mr. Rudd used a recent visit to China to press for more openness in response to Beijing's military buildup. 

Australia's defense department estimates that China spent more than US$150 billion in 2009 on its military, more than double the official Chinese figure.

Meanwhile, the U.S. and Europe are looking for ways to trim military spending. Defense cuts in the U.K. are expected to shave 11% from military spending by 2017 and threaten a number of key programs, according to military think tank the Royal United Services Institute. 

Britain is also seeking buyers for some of its old equipment, including its fleet of Harrier jump-jet fighters and aging aircraft carriers. 

Advisers say Messrs. Hague and Fox will use the visit to help market U.K. defense sales, but the talks are unlikely to deliver firm commitments to buy equipment.

Australia is boosting defense spending as it seeks to counterbalance China's power in the region. Canberra plans to spend more than US$50 billion over the next 20 years on projects that include purchasing air warfare destroyers, submarines, frigates and F-35 Joint Strike Fighter aircraft.

British and Australian troops have served in combined U.S.-led operations recently in Afghanistan and Iraq, with the campaigns stirring controversy in both countries.

Australia has thwarted numerous home-grown terrorist incidents in recent years, including plans by a Melbourne-based cell to carry out an attack on the Holsworthy Army Barracks in western Sydney in 2009. The government plans to triple its secret-service numbers to 1,860 by July this year, and is building a new high-security office on the shores of Lake Burley Griffin in Canberra, the country's capital.

Only a handful of Australian security personnel remain in Iraq, helping protect the Australian Embassy, after the center-left Labor government made good on a 2007 election promise to withdraw combat troops. 

In Afghanistan, Australia currently has around 1,500 troops helping train a brigade of more than 3,000 Afghan soldiers to take over responsibility for security in Uruzgan province. 

Units of Special Air Service soldiers and Australian commandos also have been deployed in the international effort to search out insurgents, though their identities and operations are closely guarded.

 Write to  Rachel Pannett at rachel.pannett@dowjones.com 