LONDON—European stocks recovered from early losses, closing only marginally lower, as concerns subsided about how the arrest of the head of the International Monetary Fund will affect efforts to aid fiscally troubled euro-zone countries.

Stocks took a beating early in the day as a two-day meeting of European finance ministers got under way in Brussels. Dominique Strauss-Kahn, the IMF's chief, was absent after being arrested on sexual-assault charges in New York over the weekend. 

The market rebounded as market participants came around to the idea that Mr. Strauss-Kahn's arrest was unlikely to derail the outcome of the Brussels talks, during which finance ministers were expected to finalize the terms of a bailout for Portugal, as well as discuss the situation in Greece. 

A late-session rally in the resources sector also lent support. The euro gained against the dollar, while gold prices rose and oil fell. 

The Stoxx Europe 600 index closed down 0.1% at 280.13. France's CAC-40 index ended down 0.7% at 3989.82 and Germany's DAX fell 0.2% to 7387.54. The U.K.'s FTSE 100 index erased earlier losses to end marginally lower at 5923.69, thanks to gains in the mining sector. 

Bank shares, which had been hit hard for most of the session, managed to come off their lows as the close approached. In Paris, Crédit Agricole slipped 1.3% and BNP Paribas lost 1% amid concern over their exposure to Greek debt. 

In Frankfurt, Commerzbank fell 3.5% and Deutsche Bank ended down 0.8%. 

Edmund Shing, equity strategist at Barclays Capital, said that in addition to assessing the euro zone's troubles, investors are also weighing recent earnings reports from European banks. The results were mixed, with underlying profit growth "not impressive at all and credit growth slow," he noted. 

"On the banking side of things, there's not a whole lot to get excited about," said Mr. Shing, adding that borrowing costs are also a worry. "People are concerned that European banks have a lot of capital-raising ahead." 

In London, mining stocks rose. Antofagasta was up 3.8%, Kazakhmys gained 2.4% and Fresnillo rose 2%. Earlier in the day, Kazakhmys said it would seek a secondary listing of ordinary shares in Hong Kong. 

U.S. stocks lent support, moving into the black after early losses despite some less-than-inspiring economic news. an index of manufacturing activity in New York state fell, while the National Association of Home Builders' index remained stable at 16 in May. Economists expected an improvement to 17. 

European data released earlier were no more encouraging. Inflation in the euro bloc hit a 30-month high of 2.8% on the year in April, up from 2.7% in March and compared with 1.6% a year earlier. The figures will add weight to the European Central Bank's case for tighter monetary policy in the region, despite the weakness of heavily indebted countries such as Greece, Ireland and Portugal. 

In major market action: Shares of Deutsche Börse surged 3.8% after Nasdaq OMX Group and IntercontinentalExchange withdrew their joint bid for NYSE Euronext, citing regulatory issues. 

The bid had been viewed as an attempt to dislodge plans—announced in February—for Deutsche Börse and NYSE Euronext to merge. 

Also in exchange news, shares of London Stock Exchange Group rallied 6.8% after Canadian exchange operator TMX Group received a rival bid from a consortium of Canadian banks and pension funds. In a statement over the weekend, the LSE said it is committed to a deal with TMX on the terms it had agreed to previously. 

In the currency markets, the euro regained ground against the dollar, having slipped back earlier on concerns about the outcome of this week's meeting of European finance ministers. By the time of the European stock markets close, the common currency was trading at $1.4217 from $1.4107 late Friday in New York. Sterling traded at $1.6237, from $1.6193 and the dollar was at ¥80.81, unchanged from late on Friday.

Late in Europe, light, sweet crude for June delivery was off the day's lows but still in the red, down 78 cents at $98.87 on the New York Mercantile exchange. Gold for May delivery was up 0.3% at $1498.54 per troy ounce late in Europe on the Comex division of Nymex. 

 Write to  Michele Maatouk at michele.maatouk@dowjones.com 