India will soon have its first online market for venture capital, offering a single platform for fund seekers, investors and other stakeholders to announce their requirements. 

The India Venture Board will facilitate primary investments, secondary liquidity and stake sales by venture capital and private equity investors. 

The idea was "triggered by the fact that we need to get the whole venture capital ecosystem on a common platform", said Mahendra Swarup, president, Indian Private Equity and Venture Capital Association (IVCA). "It's a very disorganized sector. A lot is happening outside the top cities. The issue is how to bring these opportunities to light." 

The board, which will be operational in a couple of days, is a collaboration of the association, the National Stock Exchange (NSE), the Small IndustriesDevelopment Bank of India, the Indian Angel Network and Mumbai Angels. 

IVCA is a group of about 80 venture capital and private equity firms. The two angel networks collectively represent about 200 individual investors, who are mostly rich businessmen and executives looking to invest in very early-stage companies. 

The board will have three forums: one for entrepreneurs and unlisted companies to make their pitches to investors and investment banks in a secured manner; an announcement board for investors, investment bankers and incubators; and a "deal corner" where participants can post primary and secondary investment calls. 

The platform will also eventually facilitate liquidation of employee stock ownership plans. 

"The early stage, growth-stage investors find it difficult to wait till the listing actually happens," Swarup said. "Exits in India are through public listing." 

In venture-funding parlance, the secondary market is where an investor purchases stakes from an existing investor in a company rather than from the founders. 

Online markets are popular in countries such as the U.S. Shares Top, for instance, allows trading by investors, but participation is by invitation only. The Indian board will send invites to 100 investors and 12 intermediaries such as investment bankers, initially. Companies seeking investments do not need an invite to put up their requirements. 

But the board will require participants to be endorsed by IVCA, or the two angel networks, and insist on companies posting documents on their business plans and credentials on its website. 

Services will be free initially, but IVB will charge a transaction fee once secondary deals begin to be announced. For now, it is funded by IVCA, Sidbi and NSE. 

Swarup expects about 1,500 start-ups, about 100 VCs, 100 intermediaries, and 250-300 angel investors to be a part of the platform in the first year. 

"Deployment of capital is very slow," said Swarup. "We are sitting on $30 billion dry powder," he said, referring to uninvested capital. 

The platform will offer firms access to deals beyond their own network. "We will look at the platform to know what is going on in the market," said  Sudhir Sethi, chairman and managing director, IDG Ventures India. "It's a more efficient, faster way of connecting with all the participants of the investment ecosystem for sharing information."