Before he moved to Los Angeles last May, British director Duncan Jones could name only a few of the city's landmarks, including the Hollywood sign and the Bradbury Building.

Mr. Jones knew the Bradbury, built downtown in 1893, as a key setting for the 1982 science-fiction masterpiece "Blade Runner," and he made a recent pilgrimage there.

Inside the lofty atrium, where Harrison Ford's character once hunted rogue androids, Mr. Jones mused on the building's role in the Ridley Scott movie he's watched maybe 50 times. 

"In that film, you get a really good sense of world-building, an environment that goes beyond the scope of the story that's being told," he said. "I hope's that's what I'll be able to do: create believable worlds."

Mr. Jones's own realm is expanding. His 2009 film debut, "Moon," about the unraveling of an isolated lunar worker, was made for just $5 million using scale-model miniatures. It won him the chance to make a second film with loftier ambitions. 

"Source Code," premiering Friday at the South by Southwest festival in Austin and opening nationwide April 1, stars Jake Gyllenhaal as a soldier on a time-travel mission. Thrust into another man's body, he relives the same eight minutes repeatedly to locate the source of a bomb that explodes a commuter train. As military superiors remotely guide his quest to prevent further attacks, he makes jarring discoveries about himself.

Mr. Gyllenhaal was so taken by "Moon" that he sought out the director to read the "Source Code" script. After Mr. Jones signed on, they tried to develop a warmth lacking in many high-concept sci-fi thrillers. 

"We both agreed that what the script needed was a little injection of humor," the director says, adding that in scenes with co-star Michelle Monaghan, Mr. Gyllenhaal played off the inherent absurdity of experiencing the same moment over and over, literally to death. 

Mr. Jones's dual allegiance to character development and genre history has already earned the 39-year-old director a following. He came to film relatively late. The son of rocker David Bowie, he studied philosophy in college, then completed nearly three years of a Ph.D. program at Vanderbilt University. Aware his son was miserable in his studies, Mr. Bowie invited him to a TV shoot he was starring in, directed by Tony Scott (Ridley's brother), who suggested film school. 

Mr. Jones returned to England and, after graduating from film school, worked up to directing commercials and music videos. He did stints with Jim Henson's Creature Shop and a videogame studio, where he picked up practical experience of a sort, controlling virtual cameras that captured in-game action.

 "I had the chance to do camera moves there that I won't be able to do until I'm making $100 million films," he said. He included a videogame homage in "Source Code": When Mr. Gyllenhaal's character jumps off a moving train, the camera seamlessly tracks his violent, tumbling landing, as it would in "Grand Theft Auto," for example.

With "Source Code," Mr. Jones worked with a script by Ben Ripley and a bigger budget, allowing for computer-generated effects. Still, the new movie is linked to his debut in some respects. In "Moon," actor Sam Rockwell's character confronts a clone of himself while isolated in a lunar station. In "Source Code," Mr. Gyllenhaal's character struggles to get a grip on reality while locked inside a mysterious capsule. 

"Discovering you're not who you thought you were," Mr. Jones said, describing a theme that has driven his work and, as it turns out, his career. Last year, as he tearily accepted a prestigious British Academy Film Award for "Moon," he said, "It's taken me an awful long time to know what I wanted to do with my life. Finally I think I've found what I love doing."

 Write to  John Jurgensen at john.jurgensen@wsj.com 