 Yuan appreciation won't resolve the U.S.'s trade imbalance with China, said Chinese Vice Commerce Minister Jiang Yaoping, as the exchange rate has little effect on the import of materials used in goods that are then exported. The remarks came as Chinese President Hu prepares for a visit to the U.S. this month.  

 The leaders of Japan's three major business lobbies predicted a mild economic recovery in the next fiscal year and said the yen isn't likely to rise sharply soon.  

 Japan's auto dealers said sales rose in 2010 for the first time in seven years, but demand is weakening after the expiration of government purchase incentives.  

 Shanghai Pudong Development said profit rose 44% in 2010, raising the curtain on what is likely to be a robust earnings season for China's banking industry.  

 China's central bank will step up efforts to cut financial-system risks, in part by forcing big banks to hold more capital and by varying reserve requirements.  

 First Solar and China Guangdong Nuclear Solar Energy Development plan to build a solar field in Inner Mongolia that they expect will be the world's largest solar-energy project.  

 Chinese Vice Premier Li Keqiang reiterated Beijing's pledge to support Spain in a meeting with Zapatero, as the two countries began signing $7.3 billion in deals.  

 Samsung unveiled an aggressive investment plan for this year of $38.3 billion, as South Korea's biggest conglomerate stepped up development of next-generation technologies.  

 Qualcomm agreed to acquire Wi-Fi chip maker Atheros for $3.1 billion, as the suitor attempts to fill a hole in its semiconductor-making operations.  

 Kingstone Marble of China is seeking to raise $300 million to $500 million from a Hong Kong IPO in the first quarter, people familiar with the situation said.  

 Korea's financial watchdog will check banks' exposure to project-financing loans this month amid concerns about the impact of a weak property market.  

 Early-buyback provisions are allowing some "junk" bonds to be retired at a discount, sticking bondholders with losses.  

 U.S. stocks treaded water as falling commodity prices offset encouraging data from the labor market and service sector. Asian indexes ended generally lower, hurt by resources shares.  

 North Korea issued a vague invitation to the South to talk, but Seoul rejected the offer.  

 The assassin of a Pakistani governor who spoke out against the country's blasphemy laws had told others about the pending attack but had still been assigned to guard his victim.  

Cold weather has forced the evacuation of more than 20,000 people from their homes in southern China, as the region braces for more temperature drops.

Near-freezing temperatures have killed dozens of people in northern India over the past two weeks and forced schools to close in New Delhi, officials said.

 Ohio Rep. John Boehner was set to become speaker of the U.S. House, promising to make "tough decisions" and restore a measure of civility to the chamber.  

Anti-U.S. cleric Moqtada al-Sadr, who led uprisings against American forces in Iraq, returned to Iraq more than three years after he left the country for Iran.