What if the New York Jets weren't the New York Jets? What if Rex Ryan's green rogues were instead a beacon of humility—a soft-spoken franchise that didn't crow, didn't chirp, didn't predict Super Bowls, didn't crudely curse their opponents, didn't thunder at every slight real or imagined, didn't celebrate victories by running around with their arms outstretched like Boeing wings, and weren't led by a loud coach fond of distilling a team sport into a narcissistic revenge fantasy?

It wouldn't be the same. It would be gracious. It would also be totally boring.

Let's curb all the cheap, easy moralizing about the Despicable Jets. Time to end the caterwauling about the End of Sports Civility and the theatrical hand-wringing about the pristine sensibilities of young fans. Let's stop leaving a copy of John Wooden's "Pyramid of Success" on Mr. Ryan's bedside table and hoping he'll transmogrify into the genteel Wizard of Westwood. Call off the town-meeting intervention with Tony Dungy, Coach K and Miss Manners. The pitchfork parade of Jets haters, so eager to see Earth's Most Obnoxious Team get a comeuppance, has officially become prissy, joyless and soooo last week.

In a swaggering rebuke, the Jets backed their big talk on Sunday, shocking the New England Patriots, 28-21, in a game not nearly as close as that final score. Confirmed loon Mr. Ryan outcoached confirmed genius Bill Belichick, the earthbound Mark Sanchez out-quarterbacked the otherworldly Tom Brady, and the "Same Old Jets" will leave their Meadowlands garage apartment for a second consecutive AFC Championship game. The Great Jets Comeuppance is postponed—at least until Sunday in Pittsburgh. The wild-card Jets are the NFL guest that won't leave—propping a pair of muddy cleats up on Roger Goodell's coffee table, belching loudly and asking what's left in the fridge.

Surely there are those who will continue the high-minded crusade against the Jets. No doubt Mr. Ryan and his men do and say foolish things, but there has been something misplaced and overbaked about the outrage. This is football, after all—cartoonish, violent, excessive entertainment. It's a multibillion-dollar sport with high-tech gimmicks that still has old men reaching into their socks to pull out red kerchiefs to stop play. It's supported by beer commercials that depict men as 13-year-old half-wits and women as appendages. It has Tony Siragusa and Ron Jaworski and Chris Berman. It's goofy. It's not church.

Does football really want the Jets to tone it down? The game's establishment loves to condemn misbehavior in the short term, only to turn around and celebrate the same misbehavior a generation later. The teams that get fetishized in books and TV specials—the '85 Bears, the early '90s Cowboys, the old Raiders, those Miami Hurricanes—were thick with hellraisers. No doubt there will come a time when these Jets will be fondly recalled not as reprobates but lovable eccentrics.

So let the Jets be the Jets. If Mr. Ryan wants to provoke the Steelers ahead of Sunday's game—and defy all the clichés about "bulletin board motivation"—he has earned the right. If he wants to needle Ben Roethlisberger by claiming he's not Tom Brady, just as he needled Mr. Brady by claiming he's not Peyton Manning, it's on him. If he wants to hobble into the end zone after a touchdown like a Pop Warner coach—Mr. Ryan later explained the limp by saying he'd taken a "header" days before—it's tough to argue the bottom line. Magic Khakis is 4-1 as a playoff coach, despite not having one home game. If he could clear snow off New York's streets, he could be mayor for life.

There are competing theories as to why Mr. Ryan acts the way he does—that he hams it up it to distract focus on his still-developing team; that he does it to sell tickets and personal seat licenses; that he's an ego case addicted to the attention. What gets ignored is the simplest explanation—that Mr. Ryan is being himself. It's not schtick, which is why Jets owner Woody Johnson gives him a long leash, and why the pleas to be circumspect like Mr. Belichick have zero impact.

And now Mr. Ryan has won his Big Game That Mattered. If you strip away all the chatter and hype from Sunday's game against New England—and the increasingly unoriginal taunts about feet—you're left with the fact that almost nobody thought the Jets could beat the 14-2 Patriots in Foxborough, and that includes a significant helping of Jet Nation. After thrashing them 45-3 in December, the Patriots considered the Jets a speed bump. Mr. Ryan may have touted the divisional playoff as the biggest game in Jets franchise history since the Super Bowl in 1969, but New England saw the Jets as a raccoon that had gotten into the trash again.

But as more than one Jets employee shouted Sunday as the players merrily ran off the field, arms stuck out horizontally, this is why the games get played. If there is one hazard of a brutish New York Cinderella in the semifinals, it's the inevitable attention they will suck away not only from the formidable Steelers, but also a delicious Chicago-Green Bay NFC Championship—the latter a matchup so classic and old-school it should be played in two feet of snow and broadcast in black and white.

This is not the Jets' concern. They're not worried about the Steelers, Bears or Packers. They've been telling you since the summer that they're going to win the Super Bowl. You don't have to like them, but maybe now it's time to start taking their crazy words a little more seriously. 

—See Jason Gay's daily Greater New York sports columns at WSJ.com/NYSPORTS.