In the latest screen version of Charlotte Brontë's 164-year-old novel "Jane Eyre," 21-year-old Mia Wasikowska plays the title role. The filmmakers had sought a lead actress close in age to the young heroine, part of an effort to freshen a work that's been fodder for countless film, TV and stage adaptations. Director Cary Joji Fukunaga ("Sin Nombre") emphasized the story's spooky elements, in some scenes flirting with the horror genre, and screenwriter Moira Buffini reordered the novel's narrative structure, making use of flashbacks to ratchet up the drama. 

Co-starring with Michael Fassbender as Edward Rochester, Ms. Wasikowska creates the governess who transcends a lowly station—"poor, obscure, plain and little"—and continues a rapid cinematic rise. After landing in a recurring role in HBO's "In Treatment," last year she appeared in the title role of Tim Burton's box-office smash "Alice in Wonderland," and in the Oscar-nominated "The Kids Are All Right" as a pensive teen who seeks out her sperm-donor father. In her native Australia (where she lives with her parents in Canberra when she's not working), Ms. Wasikowska spent years studying ballet before abandoning dance for the less rigid discipline of acting. Future projects, she says, include films by Gus Van Sant and Park Chan-wook. For the Korean director's "Stoker," Colin Firth and Nicole Kidman are in talks to play her parents.

 The Wall Street Journal: The first scene you filmed was Jane fleeing Rochester's Thornfield estate, where you're stumbling and crying and soaking wet. How did you ramp up to that intensity? 

 Ms. Wasikowska: Ah yes, stumbling through the moors. I think that was day two. That's the thing about films—you can never choose when you do anything. You have to be ready at any moment to turn on a certain emotion. It would suck to do those scenes against a [special effects] green screen. Out there, it was windy and cold and I could at least imagine what it would be like. 

 Were there passages of the book that especially helped you unlock the character? 

By the time I'd finished rereading it I'd underlined pretty much the whole book. From start to finish it's Jane's inner monologue, but the big key to understanding Jane is Rochester. Almost everything he says unlocks who she actually is. 

 You finished high school through correspondence courses. Was "Jane Eyre" part of your curriculum?  

No. I read the book after I'd finished filming "Alice in Wonderland." I made a list of 10 books that I thought were classics and "Jane Eyre" was on that list. I was on the fifth chapter when I emailed my agent to ask if anyone was adapting it. Two months later she sent me the script and I was meeting Cary.

 Did you feel it was important to be grounded in how other filmmakers and actresses have portrayed Jane?  

I chose not to watch previous versions of the film. Partially because I was overwhelmed by how many there were, plus I didn't want to be influenced by other performances. 

 What makes Jane contemporary? 

She has such a strong sense of self. She doesn't compromise herself. There's something in her that makes her think she's worthy of happiness, and that's really an important thing for young women to remember, especially when they're falling in love.

 You were a ballet dancer before switching to acting. What's worse: point shoes or the corsets you wore for this role? 

Corsets. There's something about feeling that you're trapped in a cage that gives you the sense of repression that women were under at the time. You can't bend over and you can't reach up, so you have to rely on people all the time. I've never been happier to be born in this time than when I was wearing a corset. 

 Is acting a form of artistic expression for you, or is it more of a profession?  

With both acting and ballet, often you can't just choose when you do it, whereas a painter can go at his own pace. As an actor you have to wait for someone to cast you, so you're relying on the business. I think it's essential to have another creative outlet. Photography, for me, is something I can control fully. It's wholly my own expressions. Plus there's a lot of downtime on set to take pictures. 

 Are there actors who you admire, not just for their talent but also for the arc of their careers? 

So many. Cate Blanchett is amazing. Tilda Swinton. Juliette Binoche. Gena Rowlands in "A Woman Under the Influence." Holly Hunter in "The Piano." 

 A big part of your performances is the way emotions pass across your face. Are you conscious of your expressions in those moments? 

Sometimes I am and sometimes not, but I'm always guaranteed a surprise when I see the film. I try to work from the inside out, so I don't always know what's showing up on my face. Still, sometimes you have to control your face based on what you hear from the director—more of this, less of that. 

 In "Jane Eyre," the romantic tension between Jane and Rochester is so critical. Was there a way the filmmakers tested that when they cast the film? 

Michael and I hadn't met before the first day of rehearsal. That was a big leap of faith for them and there was a huge sigh of relief when we got along. Half your job is done if you can just have fun together. 

 You've played characters roughly your own age, who are making the rocky transition from adolescence into adulthood. Do these roles ever spill over into your own life?  

It wouldn't be right to say a role doesn't affect you personally, even if you don't realize it until later. When I was playing Sophie in the HBO show, I was 16, I was in America for the first time and I had no friends. So Sophie was my friend. And any time I got a new episode I was so excited to see what would happen to this character who was also me, in a way. 

 Write to  John Jurgensen at john.jurgensen@wsj.com 