TOKYO—Japan Prime Minister Naoto Kan passed his first full-year budget through parliament Tuesday, but he is far from securing the survival of his government beyond the next few weeks.

Mr. Kan's hold on power continued to grow shakier in recent days as he has struggled on two fronts. Opposition parties have refused to engage in discussions over how to find money to execute the new budget. Meanwhile, confrontation with members of his own ruling party has intensified, raising the specter of a breakup.

Unless he can break the logjam by the end of March, Mr. Kan could be forced out, becoming the sixth prime minister to vacate the top government job in less than five years. Alternately, Mr. Kan could try to hold on to power by calling general elections two years ahead of the schedule, risking a huge potential defeat of his ruling Democratic Party of Japan.

Either way, with few prospects for the establishment of a steady government that could control the legislative process, Japan's political paralysis would likely deepen. That would fuel concerns about the future of its economy, already weighed down by huge government debts and the soaring costs of the aging and shrinking of the population. Two major U.S. rating agencies recently lowered their views on Japan's sovereign debts, citing the government's inability to solve its fiscal problems.

"The chance of Prime Minister Kan surviving the current political crisis is small," said Koichi Nakano, associate professor of political science at Sophia University in Tokyo. "He is facing strong calls to quit, the kind that can hardly be reversed once started."

The prime minister's plight was highlighted Tuesday, as 16 DPJ lawmakers failed to show up for an important session at the lower house to vote on the government's budget plan for the new fiscal year starting April 1. These members are close to former party chief Ichiro Ozawa and have been protesting the party brass's recent decision to distance themselves from the scandal-tainted senior lawmaker.

The row represents the growing divide within the DPJ, a center-left party made up of politicians with eclectic backgrounds and political views. Facing the nation's tough fiscal and economic conditions, Mr. Kan and other party leaders are increasingly leaning toward fiscal consolidation and growth-oriented policies such as trade liberalization. 

That, along with the banishment of Mr. Ozawa, has alienated others in the party. Those members, who include Mr. Ozawa, prefer to stick with the party's original campaign pledges in 2009 for steps to prop up households through direct handouts.

The infighting has disappointed voters, who propelled the DPJ to power with an overwhelming mandate just a year and a half ago. According to a poll published by the Nihon Keizai Shimbun economic daily on Monday, the support rating for Mr. Kan's cabinet slumped to 22%, down nine percentage points from January and hitting a new low.

Meanwhile, the main opposition party threatened Tuesday to bring a no-confidence vote against the prime minister in the upper house, where the DPJ lacks a majority. Members of the Liberal Democratic Party complain that the DPJ rammed the budget plan through the DPJ-controlled lower house. Japan's law ensures the national budget become automatically effective 30 days after the lower house's approval even if the upper house votes it down. But the opposition-controlled upper house's approval is needed for a separate bill to issue bonds that would fund the budget.

"I've thought passing and executing the budget was the most pressing task for us, so I am filled with gratitude," a smiling Mr. Kan said after the lower house approved the budget. When asked about the no-show by the 16 members, Mr. Kan called it "disappointing."

Other tax-related bills likely to face opposition include a legislation to implement a 5% cut in the corporate income tax rate promised by the ruling party last year as an economic stimulus step.

Financial markets are closely watching the fate of the budget-related bills as an indication of the government's ability to manage the increasingly difficult fiscal situation. Failing to approve the deficit-financing bills could trigger harmful rises in the yields of Japanese government bonds, given the growing jitters about sovereign risks around the world after crises in countries like Greece and Ireland.

"If the government runs out of cash, how would the bond market react?" Taro Kono, an opposition lawmaker. "They may completely ignore us, but it's a risk we can't afford to take." 

—Toko Sekiguchi contributed to this article.