Any impulse among cultural snobs to deny the significance of videogames as either entertainment or business should have vanished last November, with the release of Activision's "Call of Duty: Black Ops." This "first-person shooter," in which the player sees the game world through the eyes of a soldier fighting various battles, took in $360 million on its opening day. By the end of the year, it had made a billion bucks, faster than any Hollywood blockbuster ever—save "Avatar," itself a videogame manqué.

 Reality Is Broken: Why Games Make Us Better and How They Can Change the World  By Jane McGonigal  Penguin Press, 388 pages, $26.95

Indeed, the rise of gaming in the past quarter-century is such a significant social and economic development that it has begun to attract the notice of those who make their living telling us What the Future Holds and What It All Means. The cinema-centric Los Angeles Times began 2011 by proclaiming that "video games deserve to be taken just as seriously as anything Hollywood puts out." The Wall Street Journal followed two days later with an op-ed by Andy Kessler, outlining how games are rapidly replacing the military as the matrix of new technology. As to the effect of games on their players, Steven Johnson, in his 2005 book, "Everything Bad Is Good for You," argued that videogames made kids smarter, while Dr. Leonard Sax, in 2007's "Boys Adrift," claimed they "distort the motivation of boys and young men, so that they no longer have the same interest in . . . real-world achievement."

Now there is Jane McGonigal, who sees in videogames nothing less than the path to a golden tomorrow. Ms. McGonigal is, so help me, the Director of Games at the Palo Alto, Calif.-based Institute for the Future. She has, however, traveled back to the present to bestow upon usher observations in "Reality Is Broken."

The book's thesis is essentially that real life isn't as fun or rewarding as videogames, and so life should be "fixed" to be more like the games. This would be achieved by applying gaming scenarios and game logic to real-life interactions, ranging from doing the laundry to saving the world. She details cute-sounding phone-based and online games, for instance, that are intended to ease the boredom of airport waits or encourage families to share household chores. She also shows how communal, game-like approaches have been used to imagine new energy policies and investigate public records for proof of corruption.

All this is necessary, she says, because life just doesn't deliver the goods like a videogame does. "Gamers want to know: Where, in the real world, is that gamer sense of being fully alive, focused, and engaged in every moment?" she writes. "Where is the gamer feeling of power, heroic purpose and community? . . . While gamers may experience these pleasures occasionally in their real lives, they experience them almost constantly when they're playing their favorite games."

Ms. McGonigal's notions about how to enliven what gamers call "RL" ("real life") run the gamut from shallow to, well, that's it, really. It's not that she has nothing interesting to say about the role of videogames in shaping reality; it's that she has little if anything to say about reality itself. She writes like someone who has never seen a Shakespeare play or volunteered at a soup kitchen or fallen in love or raised a child or said a prayer.

RL, as Ms. McGonigal sees it, has nothing of the romance and excitement that can be found by interacting with an Xbox or PlayStation 3. Her "fixes" are meant to address such issues as:

•"Compared to games, reality is depressing. Games focus our energy, with relentless optimism, on something we're good at and enjoy."

•"Compared to games, reality is trivial. Games make us a part of something bigger and give epic meaning to our actions."

•"Compared to games, reality is pointless and unrewarding. Games help us feel more rewarded for making our best effort."

In assertions such as these, Ms. McGonigal seems to confuse states of feeling with facts. She speaks, for instance, about the "awe" that gamers feel at the immense make- believe world of "Halo," an extremely popular first-person shooter in which players wage a "Great War" against an alien empire called The Covenant. Ms. McGonigal says that when Bungie, the game's creator, announced that "Halo" participants world-wide had scored 10 billion Covenant "kills," players were carried away by a sense that their actions in the Great War had "meaning." 

While she acknowledges that "Halo" is "only a game," she goes on to write, rather remarkably: "Just because the kills don't have value doesn't mean they don't have meaning. Meaning is the feeling that we're a part of something bigger than ourselves. It's the belief that our actions matter beyond our own individual lives." But no, actually, that's not what meaning is at all. Meaning is when those feelings and beliefs refer to something that is true. This error consistently undermines Ms. McGonigal's thinking.

I have been an avid gamer since the advent of Pong in 1972. At their best, videogames strike me as a form of art. Like all art, they can augment outer reality and shape our inner reality—but they do this by the very nature of the fact that they are not reality but a Place Apart. Being awestruck at "Halo" does not entail awe any more than "grieving" for Cordelia entails grief. Rather, art at its most serious is a sort of exercise, a formative practice for life—like meditation, only more fun.

Ms. McGonigal's descriptions of how some of the ideas behind gaming can modify the world are interesting, but her claims for the results are hugely overblown. She builds from her minor examples to imagine a universal game lasting 1,000 years, during which all mankind engages in "social rituals and circle games to build common ground," including "crowdsourced challenges . . . to focus the world's energy and attention on a single problem" as well as "forecasting exercises to create shared momentum." The result might be "a whole- planetary mission . . . to raise global quality of life . . . and to sustain our earth for the next millennium and beyond."

Sounds dreadful, I know, but I wouldn't worry about it. While certainly one must agree with Ms. McGonigal—or indeed with Mary Poppins—that there is an element of fun to every job that must be done and if you find the fun, then—snap!—the job's a game, the possibilities seem to me fairly limited. As Tom Sawyer learned, "work consists of whatever a body is obliged to do, and . . . play consists of whatever a body is not obliged to do." If ever we're all dragooned into "playing" for the dreary objectives of utopian dreamers, the fun will go out of gaming very quickly.

On top of which, the conflicting goals and desires of individuals, the problem of evil, and the presence of death all guarantee that life will remain its old tragic self no matter how many copies "Call of Duty" sells. Reality is a lot more broken than Ms. McGonigal comprehends. And while art—including games—may be a consolation, it is doubtful ever to become a permanent fix.

—Mr. Klavan's latest thriller novel is "The Identity Man." 