Former Esquire publisher and Edison Schools cofounder Christopher Whittle is back at his quest to build an educational empire, more than two years after a deal fell through to build a $200 million private school on the West Side. 

On Tuesday, Mr. Whittle and Benno Schmidt, former president of Yale University, will announce they've raised $75 million from two private-equity investors to launch Avenues, a for-profit, elite private school slated to open along the High Line in Chelsea in September 2012. 

School desks are in demand in New York City, where the number of kids enrolled in kindergarten grew by more than 10% between 2005 and 2009, according to U.S. Census data. Admissions counselors say the number of slots at top private schools have remained stagnant. 

That helps explain why a number of for-profit private schools such as the Claremont Preparatory School and the British International School of New York have opened over the past few years. While for-profit schools have thrived elsewhere in the world, experts say it will take years for schools to turn a meaningful profit in New York, where they face tough competition with the city's established private schools. 

"The New York consumer sets a pretty high bar to have to please in one of the most expensive markets in the world," says Susan Wolford, a managing director at investment bank BMO Capital Markets. If run well, Ms. Wolford says for-profit schools can generate profit margins of 25% to 30%, before taxes, interest payments and amortization.

Mr. Whittle has been on a for-profit educational crusade for more than two decades. In 1989, Mr. Whittle launched Channel One News, a free educational television network for classrooms now owned by New York-based Alloy Media and Marketing. 

In the early 1990s Messrs. Whittle and Schmidt launched Edison Schools, Inc. a for-profit company designed to bring private-sector efficiencies to public schools. Going public several years later, the company helped spur today's charter school movement but eventually came under investigation for financial mismanagement by the Securities and Exchange Commission. Edison Schools settled with the SEC without admitting or denying the commission's findings. 

The company was taken private in 2003 by Liberty Partners, a private-equity firm that mainly invests on behalf of Florida's state pension fund. Changing the company's name to EdisonLearning Inc., Liberty pushed out the company's management team and is now focusing on educational software. 

So Mssrs. Whittle and Schmidt decided to turn to the private school circuit, where the duo says they can fulfill a growing demand while using the school as a type of think-tank for global education and research. 

Their first attempt at launching a so-called global school came in 2008 when Mssrs. Whittle and Schmidt announced what was then called Nations Academy, a global network in partnership with Dubai-based educational entrepreneur Sunny Varkey. Mr. Whittle said at the time that he planned to build 60 campuses by 2021. The Manhattan location called for a $200 million investment to build a new school on developer Douglas Durst's property on West 57th Street. 

Amidst the 2008 financial meltdown, the school's funding fell through and the project fizzled out. Says Mr. Schmidt, "The capital markets shut down entirely and we just couldn't raise the money." 

Mr. Durst and the school parted ways, at the time citing "irreconcilable differences." Meanwhile, differences about how to proceed with the school evolved between Mr. Varkey and Mr. Whittle and they "mutually parted ways in late 2008," said a spokesman for Mr. Varkey. 

Now on better financial footing, Mssrs. Whittle and Schmidt say they're back on track to make their global school happen.

Avenues secured $37.5 million from Liberty Partners, the New York private-equity firm that became EdisonLearning's majority owner and still runs the company. The school secured an additional $37.5 million from LLR Partners, a Philadelphia-based private-equity firm. Ten percent of the funds are personally guaranteed by Mr. Whittle and Alan Greenberg, a media executive who will serve as Avenues' president. Both private-equity funds verified the investments but declined to comment further. 

The school says the $75 million investment is only sufficient to build out the Manhattan location and that it will have to raise additional capital to build future schools. 

Nearly $60 million of the funds will go toward renovating Avenues' building, a 215,000 square-foot warehouse owned by real estate investor Douglas Oliver. The school recently signed a 48-year lease with the owner and in February will begin renovations led by architect Perkins Eastman and interior designer Bonetti/Kozerski Studio. 

The 10-story building, which has been used for two decades to store sets and props used by ABC television shows, is located on Tenth Avenue and 25th Street, across from the Elliot-Chelsea Houses, an affordable housing project where Mr. Whittle says he looks to offer part of the school's $4 million-a-year scholarship money. 

Getting into the school will be competitive, Mr. Whittle says. Avenues will launch early admissions in February for students in nursery through 9th grades. At full capacity the school will have 1,600 slots, or about 100 students per grade. The school won't be cheap: $36,000 to $38,000 a year for tuition. 

Set to become what the founders call "the first global school," the vision for Avenues is to become a network of more than 20 campuses around the world. The flagship New York campus will open in 2012, likely followed by schools in China, India and England. 

The school has already poached from the city's best private schools, tapping Nancy Schulman, the current director of the 92nd Street Y Nursery School, to run its early childhood programs and current Dalton Middle School head Libby Hixson to run its middle school. Its administration is comprised of former heads of school at Phillips Exeter Academy, as well as the Hotchkiss and Dalton Schools. 

 Write to  Shelly Banjo at shelly.banjo@wsj.com 