TUNIS—Tunisian President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali, facing renewed waves of violent unrest against his long rule, appealed for calm Thursday and promised not to seek another term in office. It was unlikely the speech would calm tensions around the country, and protesters vowed to pursue strikes already called in various cities on Friday.

Meanwhile, with the capital under military curfew for the second straight day, the State Department advised U.S. citizens to put off nonessential travel to the North African country, citing the "intensifying political and social unrest." European nations also issued warnings against traveling there as monthlong protests have taken on an increasingly violent tone.

The travel warnings came in the wake of riots in Mediterranean beach resorts close to the capital Tunis that are popular with European tourists. Beach-lined streets were strewn with trash and burned cars, while villas owned by wealthy Tunisians, including members of the president's family, were looted.

In his 10-minute nationwide address, Mr. Ben Ali showed remorse for the deaths that have occurred during the unrest and said he was "sad" about the instability.

"I understand the Tunisians, I understand their demands. I am sad about what is happening now after 50 years of service to the country, military service, all the different posts, 23 years of the presidency," he said.

Mr. Ben Ali told the nation he had no intention of changing the constitutional age limit for presidents, which stands at 75, meaning that at the current age of 74 he would be ineligible to run again. Mr. Ben Ali's term expires in 2014.

He also said he has ordered security forces not to use live rounds against demonstrators.

The president also promised more press freedom and an end to Internet censorship. He also said the government would cut prices for sugar, milk and bread. He didn't give details on when these new measures would be implemented. 

Tunis's streets were empty of cars, but for more than an hour after the president's speech ended, a deafening chorus of car horns rang continuously throughout several downtown neighborhoods, underscoring the high emotions in the capital. 

Nationwide protests over unemployment and police crackdowns erupted in mid-December in the western Sidi Bouzid region, but quickly spread across the country and this week finally engulfed the relatively wealthy capital as well.

The government says 23 protesters have been killed since the unrest began, but official casualty figures haven't been updated for days. The United Nations says the number of dead is actually double the government estimate, while protest leaders claim a death toll higher than 60 people.

There is no evidence that foreigners are being targeted in the wildcat protests and rioting that has become more common around the capital in the past two days. Armored patrol vehicles cruised through main downtown streets in Tunis, and took up defensive positions in the commercial district before sundown. People were ordered off the streets by 8 p.m.

Throughout Thursday, shouting protesters frustrated with what they say is an unresponsive government prowled the streets of Tunis. Police fired live rounds and tear gas in multiple confrontations with such groups, according to witnesses. An American citizen was shot in the leg when he was documenting police clashes on a small camera, said one of his friends.

Mr. Ben Ali, who has ruled Tunisia for 23 years, and his family are accused of widespread corruption and protesters have increasingly taken up the chant "Down with Ben Ali."

In an attempt to calm the tensions, the president fired his interior minister on Wednesday.

 Write to  Margaret Coker at margaret.coker@wsj.com 