TAIPEI—Fitch Ratings Ltd. lowered Taiwan's local-currency credit rating by one notch to AA-minus from AA on Wednesday due to the island's high public debt and lagging fiscal revenue growth. 

The rating agency is keeping Taiwan's foreign-currency credit rating at A-plus because of the favorable global economic outlook and Taiwan's status as a strong external creditor with sovereign net foreign assets of 91% of its gross domestic product in 2010. 

Taiwan is among Asia's fastest-growing economies, with economists expecting fourth-quarter GDP growth of 5.5% to 6% from a year earlier, due to robust global demand for the island's electronics and petrochemical products. 

However, infrastructure spending aimed at boosting employment and the government's decision to lower the personal-income tax rate to reduce income disparity have contributed to what Fitch Ratings described as a "structural deterioration" in the island's public finances. 

Taiwan's government lowered the income tax rate for all income brackets by one percentage point from late 2009, while raising the minimum annual income on which taxes must be paid to NT$500,000 (US$17,200). It didn't say at the time what the previous minimum was. 

Taiwan's fiscal deficit remained high at 3.5% of GDP in 2010, down from 2009's 4.5%, but still much higher than 2008's 0.9%, Fitch Ratings said. 

The island's tax revenue fell to 11.4% of GDP last year, from 11.9% in 2009, and is expected to be 11.5% to 11.6% in 2011 and 2012, it said. 

The ratings agency added Taiwan's government debt could rise to more than 50% of GDP by 2016 due to increased infrastructure investment, while the central bank will likely contribute less revenue to the Treasury as domestic interest rates are rising. 

A Taipei-based foreign-exchange trader said Fitch Ratings's cut is unlikely to have an immediate impact on the New Taiwan dollar, although it could push the local currency lower if the downgrade affects investor confidence and the stock market. 

"People will probably be focusing on GDP numbers, which are high because 2009 was so bad, but this could shake confidence a bit and push the [U.S. dollar/New Taiwan dollar] pair up a tad," the trader said. 

Fitch Ratings said Taiwan's improving ties with China are generally positive for Taiwan's credit rating, but "the improvement could be vulnerable to a change in Taiwan's political climate. A meaningful resolution of the issue would diminish political risk." 

 Write to  Aries Poon at aries.poon@dowjones.com 