To an extent unique in post-World War II history, the U.S. economy's climb out of recession has been led by selling crops, natural resources and manufactured goods to the rest of the world.

With housing and construction in the dumps and consumer spending pinched by thrift and tight credit, exports have powered nearly half of U.S. economic expansion since the recession ended in mid-2009. 

Now that important engine for U.S. growth—the rest of the world—is damping the improving outlook. The world's No. 3 economy, Japan, is reeling from an earthquake and nuclear crisis. Unrest in the Middle East has sent oil prices—and global anxiety—soaring. Fast-growing China, anxious about inflation, and other emerging markets are trying to tap the brakes. And fiscal strain looms over Europe.

"An accumulation of shocks, notably from higher oil prices and the natural disaster in Japan, has tempered our optimism," economists at J.P. Morgan wrote in a note to clients Friday. They have reduced their global growth forecast from 4% to 3.4% for 2011. 

Macroeconomic Advisers LLC, an economic-forecasting firm, projects the U.S. economy expanded at a meager 2.3% annual rate in the first quarter which ends this week. It was 4% in early February. 

Shocks abroad hit the economy through higher fuel costs, disruptions to supply chains, greater financial-market volatility and heightened uncertainty. Many executives and economists say the U.S. recovery is strong enough to withstand the challenge. And places such as Japan could grow more as they rebuild. But signs of turbulence are already evident. 

"Certainly it has impacted sales in the last week,"  Bradley Holiday, chief financial officer of Callaway Golf Co., said aboutof the effect of Japan's earthquake on his company. Japan is the second-biggest market for the golf-equipment maker, accounting for 17% of its sales. 

Japan also is the second-biggest market for software maker  Adobe Systems Inc., which reduced its revenue estimates for the latest quarter by $50 million because of disruptions in the country. March is normally its biggest month there. In response, Adobe plans to curb its own spending so that operating expenses don't grow until it sees Japan improve, executives said last week. 

Luxury jeweler  Tiffany & Co. is bracing for a 15% drop in sales in Japan, where it has 55 stores, while  General Motors is squeezing spending and temporarily closing some U.S. plants because of supply-chain problems. 

In the Middle East, shipping and insurance costs have ticked up, says  Mark Palmquist, who runs the agriculture business of  CHS Inc., a U.S. agriculture and energy cooperative with $15 billion in annual sales, 60% of which are abroad. 

Most economists agree that one of the best ways for the U.S. to prosper is to rely less on domestic consumer spending, less on housing, less on borrowing from abroad—and more on exporting. That appeared to be happening before the latest shocks. A cheaper dollar makes U.S. exports more appealing to foreigners. Booming emerging markets, led by China, have a growing appetite for imports. Rising productivity in U.S. factories makes their wares more cost-competitive. 

The bulk of what America makes is still consumed at home, and the bulk of what it consumes is made in America. But exports today amount to 12.8% of all U.S. output, the highest level since the Commerce Department began tracking it in 1929 and up from nearly 10% a decade ago. That's thanks in part to exports of industrial equipment, pharmaceuticals, chemicals and agricultural goods. U.S. sales of soybeans to China, for example, have risen from less than $1 billion in 2002 to more than $10 billion last year. Sales of semiconductors and passenger cars to China also have soared. 

Because they are climbing so fast, and consumer spending is growing slowly, exports are contributing disproportionately to growth. On average, the Commerce Department estimates, exports contributed 1.4 percentage points to the economy's 3.0% growth rate since the recovery started, or almost half of growth, their biggest contribution over an 18-month stretch on record.

The export rebound partly reflects the recovery in global trade following a collapse after the failure of Lehman Brothers in September 2008. Imports also bounced back. 

Many of the economy's best-performing sectors are highly exposed to global trade, including manufacturing, agriculture and natural resources.

Since the recovery began in mid-2009, total income produced by domestic durable goods manufacturing—profits from U.S. plants combined with the pay their workers bring home—is up 21%, according to the Commerce Department. It is up 27% in mining and 26% in agriculture, but just 6% for domestic retailing. Construction is down 2%. 

A long stretch of resource-rich and trade-oriented land from North Dakota all the way down to Texas—like a zipper running through the Great Plains— boasts the lowest unemployment rates in the country. Manufacturing states in America's industrial core circling the Great Lakes have turned around faster than housing-bust states such as Florida, California, Arizona and Nevada. 

At Materion Technical Materials Inc., which makes metal parts for electronics, medical and automotive firms, Japan's crisis caused some clients to postpone orders or shift them to other locations, said Al Lubrano, president of the Lincoln, R.I., company. He expects the shock to be temporary, but says, "people are scrambling." Exports from U.S. plants account for 30% of Materion's sales, up from 10% during the years just before the recession. To help meet global demand, Lincoln Electric Inc., an Ohio maker of welding equipment, plans to add 150 to 200 production workers this year to the 2000 it has near Cleveland. Chief Financial Officer  Vincent Petrella still expects strong growth but worries about jitters in foreign markets. "Uncertainty breeds inaction," he says, meaning less spending and investment by customers. 

Even if the U.S. weathers this storm, as economists and executives generally expect, volatility might be a longer-lasting price that American business and workers pay for increased global exposure. In agriculture, global demand has driven up prices for crops, a boon for U.S. farmers. It also pushed up costs for land and fertilizer, giving farmers little margin for error. 

If demand shrinks, farmers face bigger losses than before, said Mr. Palmquist of CHS, the agriculture exporter. "The profitability of U.S. farmers is going up," he said, "and so is the risk." 

 Write to  Jon Hilsenrath at jon.hilsenrath@wsj.com and Sara Murray at sara.murray@wsj.com 