Can the dollar be dethroned as the world's reserve currency of choice?

Read the full  Foreign Exchange report .

The financial crisis—coupled with the U.S. government's troubled long-term fiscal position—has raised that possibility. But to many economists, at least for now, the speculation seems largely talk.

"There is, I submit, no plausible candidate" to replace the dollar, Princeton University Prof. Peter Kenen argued in a paper presented in January to the American Economic Association.

That's a prevailing view in the markets, too. "We try to think of the alternatives, and none exist of any consequence," says Tony Crescenzi, a market strategist and portfolio manager at Allianz SE's Pacific Investment Management Co. The dollar's share of global foreign-exchange reserves stood at 61.3% as of the end of last year's third quarter, according to the International Monetary Fund.

But that has not stopped an increasing buzz among policy makers around the world that the dollar's dominant position should be reconsidered. French President Nicolas Sarkozy is expected to make the issue a priority for France's presidency of the Group of 20 meetings this year, and even U.S. officials have acknowledged that a rethink of the dollar-centric world is inevitable.

"There's going to be an attempt, I think, in the next year or two…to say, 'Yes, this is a problem, and we ought to consider reform in the broader sense in the international monetary system,'" former Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker said in a December presentation in Washington.

But there's little consensus about who or what would replace or share power with the U.S. and the dollar. Proponents see a range of possibilities, including a multipolar world with a handful of dominant currencies, a supranational note issued by a global body, and a bigger role for China and the yuan.

The biggest question involves China. Would Beijing bear the global economic responsibility that comes with having a favored reserve status? China so far has resisted international pressure to stop holding down the value of the yuan, also known as the renminbi, and still has a comparatively underdeveloped financial system.

"How much of a financial center can they be if they insist on continuing to control the financial sector?" asks Menzie Chinn, an economics professor at the University of Wisconsin. Until Beijing frees up its financial markets, "who wants to have a lot of assets denominated in renminbi?" he says.

Harvard economist Kenneth Rogoff says he thinks the yuan and the dollar could be on a course to be the two major world currencies, a status the two could share possibly for as long as two decades, he says. But during such a period, he adds, the U.S. would likely see a gradual weakening in the extensive benefits it receives from having other countries peg their currencies to the dollar. Among these benefits: confidence in its markets, low interest rates, and less volatility in prices of imports and exports.

Any transfer of reserve status from the dollar to the yuan would likely take most of this century, he says. Meanwhile, he says, the dollar "will remain the reserve currency for some time, but the benefits will diminish."

Many currency experts reject the idea of a supranational or global currency. The IMF's Special Drawing Rights and other international measures discussed as potential replacements for the dollar have historically not been embraced widely enough, suggesting a lack of confidence in the idea on the part of financial markets. Setting international monetary policy in a quick and unified manner could prove highly difficult, economists say.

The current problems facing the European Union and its struggles to keep its own financial house in order highlight the problems with a supranational currency. The debt issues and economic-policy squabbles now plaguing Europe would likely be magnified in times of stress for any international monetary union. "There's just not going to be a global currency that's not identified with a national government," Mr. Rogoff says. "Look at the problems they're having in Europe; think of that on the international level."

Advocates for the dollar's reserve status point to its history as a safe haven for central banks during the recent global economic crisis. The dollar's supremacy during such a disruptive period demonstrates its resiliency.

"If there was ever a vote for the dollar system, that would be it," says Michael Dooley, an economist at the University of California, Santa Cruz, who has consulted for the Federal Reserve and the IMF. Other countries, he says, have found "that having a huge stack of dollars is not a bad thing. Look at China—they came through this without a recession."

Even those with competing interests acknowledge that the dollar, at least for now, will remain king. In a speech in Paris late last year, European Central Bank Vice President Vitor Constâncio said, "I do not see a major reform of the international monetary system on the horizon, as there is no real substitute for the U.S. dollar in the medium term."

 Mr. Crittenden is a reporter for The Wall Street Journal and Dow Jones Newswires in Wash ington. He can be reached at michael.crittenden@dowjones.com. 