When I'm at a restaurant with a sommelier I trust, I often ask him to pick something for me. Sommeliers are on the front lines, tasting every day, seeking out treasures, and they certainly know their own lists better than I do. Unlike my collector friends, who tend to search out the classics—the known commodities—the soms have their palates primed for what's new. They are looking for the next great region, the next great maker. Twice in the past month, two of my favorite soms have picked Cornas, a red wine made with Syrah grapes in France's northern Rhône. In both cases, I liked the wine very much. Moreover, I've recently heard several young winemakers express their admiration for Thierry Allemand, the rising star of Cornas. Is Cornas finally having its moment? 

Some 10 years ago I found myself clinging to the base of a vine in the Les Ruchets vineyard, high above the town of Cornas, and the serpentine Rhône River just beyond, trying to not to slide downhill. My luggage had been lost somewhere between New York and Marseilles, with the result that for the third day in a row I was wearing Gucci loafers, which didn't provide the best purchase on the steep, rocky hillside as I attempted to assist Jean-Luc Colombo and his crew harvesting Syrah grapes. I could well understand why many of these vineyards, too steep for a tractor, had been abandoned in the early part of the 20th century.

As far as I can tell, Cornas hasn't really been fashionable since the era of Charlemagne. The wine critic Jancis Robinson once wrote a piece describing her failure to fall in love, or even in like, with Cornas. " 'Virile' is a favorite description of Cornas with Frenchmen," Ms. Robinson wrote. " 'Obdurate,' I would suggest is nearer the mark." I know what she means. Cornas has always been a rustic wine, with formidable tannins and, sometimes, a barnyard funk that suggested a lack of hygiene in the cellar. The first few examples I tasted made me wonder if the grapes had been stomped by someone with very stinky socks. 

If it was ever beloved, Cornas has long since had its reputation eclipsed by Hermitage and Côte-Rôtie to the north. All three appellations make powerful red wines exclusively from the Syrah grape, which has grown in the region at least since Roman times. The steep, granitic vineyards of Cornas were hard to farm and many were abandoned, even as Côte-Rôtie and Hermitage were gaining international renown and Syrah was being planted everywhere from Stellenbosch, South Africa, to the Santa Rita Hills in California. A few hardy growers like Auguste Clape and Noël Verset carried the torch of the appellation, making traditional, earthy Cornas for the faithful. A good Cornas is like the Delta blues, soulful and earthy, though not for everyone. 

As is often the case, it took an outsider to cut through the cobwebs in this ancient village. Jean-Luc Colombo, an oenologist from Marseilles, moved here with his wife, Anne, in the 1980s, first establishing a negotiant/consulting business and later buying vineyards. Like the Chicago players who electrified the rural sound of Charlie Patton and Robert Johnson, Mr. Colombo introduced modern viticultural methods to Cornas. He brought with him techniques like destemming and new-oak barrel aging, creating cleaner, more modern versions of Cornas that seduced some critics while outraging some traditionalists. Mr. Colombo is the epitome of the modern high-flying winemaker, a compact dynamo who consults with some hundred-plus clients in the Rhône Valley and beyond. On my most recent visit he started the day with clients in Châteauneuf-du-Pape, met me some 70 miles south for lunch in Marseilles, drove half an hour up the Côte Bleue to tour some vineyards he's leased near St. Julien les Martigues, raced two hours north to les Alpilles in Provence to taste through 20 barrels in the cellar of client Mas de la Dame, stopped off in St. Rémy for dinner, then drove another two hours north to Cornas, where we arrived about 1 a.m. "This day, she is fairly typical," he tells me, when I comment on my exhaustion. 

Mr. Colombo has sometimes been criticized for making internationally styled wines that allegedly don't speak of their place of origin. In recent years, he has dialed back on the use of new oak and developed a lighter touch. In the meantime, a new generation of younger winemakers has stepped in, reviving abandoned vineyards and adopting those of retiring winemakers like Noël Verset and Robert Michel. The most influential of the new makers is Mr. Allemand, the son of a factory worker, who grew up in the town of Cornas and embraced its winemaking traditions, apprenticing with Robert Michel at the age of 18. Mr. Allemand bought an overgrown vineyard, complete with ruined stone terraces and gradually rehabilitated it, producing his first wines in 1982.

Duncan Arnot Meyer of California winery Arnot Roberts, which has gained cult status for its Sonoma Syrahs, says Mr. Allemand has been a huge influence: "I think his wines are some of the most expressive bottlings of Syrah on the planet." 

It's a sentiment I've heard frequently in the last couple of years. Bearded and bare of pate, Mr. Allemand lives with his wife and four children in an old stone house in the town of Cornas and works his vineyards almost entirely by hand. Like many young winemakers around the world, he has looked to the past for inspiration, using whole grape clusters including stems and aging in neutral (i.e., used) barrels, which don't impart toasty flavor to the grapes. A leader of the natural-wine movement, he uses very little sulfur to preserve the wines, a risky strategy that seems to work for him—I have yet to taste an off bottle. His wines are very earthy and even rustic—you'd never mistake a bottle of Allemand Cornas for Australian Shiraz—but they have a freshness and lift which was lacking in most old-school examples. 

Most of the new wave of young winemakers seem to be deeply respectful of the traditions of Cornas. Among the new kids on the block is Franck Balthazar, who inherited five acres of 90-year-old vines in 2003 (he made the wine with which sommelier Richard Luftig of Manhattan's Cookshop recently wowed me) and Guillaume Gilles, a disciple and heir of Mr. Allemand's mentor, Robert Michel, who retired in 2006. Vincent Paris, Matthieu Barret and Gilbert Serrette are also rising stars. 

Despite the young generation's respect for tradition, one is less likely to encounter a really stinky bottle of Cornas these days. But a good Cornas will always be more earthy and even gamey than a new-world Syrah. Black licorice is part of its flavor profile, and the wines usually show an earthy bass note. Even in lighter vintages like '06 and '07 it's a pretty big wine, requiring red meat or braises to balance its power. It's not a summer red. Mr. Colombo says of Cornas, "It's like a wild sea bass as opposed to a farmed one."

The old-school Cornas often took years to shed its tannin, but most of the 2006s and 2007s I have tasted are approachable now, though I might wait on the 2005s. If you find an older Cornas you may be in for treat; it will cost you a lot less than an old Hermitage or Côte-Rotie. I had a 1990 Robert Michel La Geynale the other night that was really singing. The blues, of course.

All of these wines are made in small quantities, and persistence is required to find them.