 Paul Gigot: This week on "The Journal Editorial Report," murder in Tucson and political exploitation. While President Obama appeals to the better angels of our democracy, others use the massacre to score political points. We'll examine the fallout. And fresh from his State of the State address, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie takes on teacher tenure, public pensions and comprehensive tax reform. He'll tell us what's in store for the Garden State.

  President Obama: Bad things happen. And we have to guard against simple explanations in the aftermath. But the truth is, none of us can know exactly what triggered this vicious attack. None of us can know with any certainty what might have stopped these shots from being fired, or what thoughts lurked in the inner recesses of a violent man's mind. . . . But what we cannot do is use this tragedy as one more occasion to turn on each other. 

 Gigot: Welcome to "The Journal Editorial Report." I'm Paul Gigot.

That was President Obama on Wednesday at a memorial service honoring the victims of last Saturday's massacre in Tucson, Ariz. The shooting rampage, which left six dead and 14 wounded, including gunman Jared Loughner's intended target, Congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords, has led to a sometimes uncivil debate about bringing civility back to our political discourse. 

Joining the panel this week, Wall Street Journal columnist and deputy editor Dan Henninger, senior editorial page writer Joe Rago, editorial board member Dorothy Rabinowitz and OpinionJournal.com editor James Taranto. 

So, Dorothy, I happen to think that President Obama's speech was the best I've heard from him since maybe the 2004 Democratic Convention. He rose above the blame game, and some of the political back and forth, and really zeroed in on the fact that sometimes these violent acts are really unexplainable. You haven't always been full of praise for this president and some of his speeches. What did you think? 

 Rabinowitz: Well, I happen to agree with you, but completely. I think this is one of those events that were made for him. I could just--let me interpolate for a minute by saying that this whole event must have told people around the world what a nation we are. I cannot think of any other nation that talks about itself as a family--you can go around Europe--and Obama played into it, and he did it in a thoroughly believable way. And when he said things like, we are "broken," we are "broken," you can feel that resonate, and it was an expiation. 

 Gigot: Any dissenters here on that point? 

 Taranto: Well, I would just add, he not only rose above the blame game, but he pointed a finger, himself. He said, if this causes our rhetoric to become more civil, it will not be because this was caused by uncivil rhetoric. He said, "It did not"--uncivil rhetoric did not--

 Gigot: He said flatly, "It did not."

 Taranto: It did not. Right. 

 Gigot: Now, you've been following the debate, James, over this, particularly in the blogs and in some of the papers. And you've made the point that a lot of the liberal Democratic politicians have behaved better, more responsibly, than liberal commentators. What do you mean by that? 

 Taranto: Well, let's take an example. A commentator who shall remain nameless cited Rahm Emanuel and his famous--

 Gigot: Former White House chief of staff. 

 Taranto: Right. His famous line, "Never let a good crisis go to waste." This columnist wrote, "The same goes for the shooting of a beloved congresswoman." He was actually that glib and crass about it. 

 Gigot: To say the White House should exploit this. 

 Taranto: Right. 

 Gigot: Blame its political opponents and do what Bill Clinton did, in some sense, after the Oklahoma City bombing in 1995. 

 Taranto: Yeah, or capitalize on it in some way. So Rahm Emanuel, who's now running for mayor, was asked about this use of the phrase at a press conference. Rahm Emanuel is not known as the most high-minded, civil man in politics, but he looked stricken when he was asked about this. And he said, "That's not what I meant. This doesn't apply at this moment." You know, Rahm Emanuel showed himself to be much more decent than a liberal journalist. 

 Gigot: Let's give an example of this. I want to read an excerpt from Monday's editorial in the New York Times": "It is facile and mistaken to attribute this particular madman's act directly to Republicans or Tea Party members. But it is legitimate to hold Republicans and particularly their most virulent supporters in the media responsible for the gale of anger that has produced the vast majority of these threats, setting the nation on edge." 

 Henninger: Mm-hmm. 

 Gigot: Dan, your response. 

 Henninger: My response is that it has not only produced the vast majority of the anger that did that, it has produced the vast majority of anger that defeated them in the November elections, OK?

 Gigot: But it's not violent, Dan. 

 Henninger: Look, what Jared Loughner did has nothing to do with what we're talking about. Everybody agrees. But we're talking about it. 

 Gigot: Right. 

 Henninger: It is inevitable that this political debate is going to emerge. And here is their problem. These commentators and to a certain extent the entire Democratic Party is absolutely obsessed with the idea that this network and people like Rush Limbaugh are driving voters over into the tea-party camp and costing them elections. And they think the strength and intensity of the tea-party movement is somehow turning people's minds. And if they can damp that down--and I think they're using this instance as an opportunity to try to dial back both commentators here and on talk radio--they regard that as a net win for them. 

 Gigot: So, raw political calculation, Dorothy? Is that what's going on? 

 Rabinowitz: I think there is that element. I also think there is that element of helpless obsessiveness, so that you can say about all of these comments that every one of these media commentators, and they ran the gamut, that used the word "rhetoric" in the same sentence as this act, that used the word "activist," whatever other explanations they made, showed you the kernel of this helpless--it is like a science fiction film. It's a great cloud that you can't stop. 

 Gigot: Was the president implicitly rebuking these commentators? 

 Taranto: Yes, and I think we really need to single out the New York Times here. The so-called debate about civility is really about the mainstream media and about the New York Times. The New York Times used to be the gatekeeper. The New York Times used to set the news agenda and had a great deal of power over setting the limits of political discourse. It doesn't have that authority anymore. Its authority is rapidly diminishing. 

This editorial is really nothing short of a smear campaign. This is yellow journalism. And what the Times is doing is, it's trying to restore its authority by tearing down its opponents--by tearing down people like Rush Limbaugh, by tearing down institutions like this network. And it's not going to work. They have merely exposed themselves to be unworthy of that authority. 

 Gigot: Are they going to--there was a little walkback this week, at least an attempt at that, I thought. Kind of, I don't know whether it was tactical or whether they really regret what they wrote, but there was a little bit. Is this going to hurt the people on the left who walked out on this limb? Because there really is no evidence that Loughner was motivated by anything political. 

 Henninger: I think they did damage themselves. There's been a series of polls this week that indicate that very few people agree with this line of argument. And I think, unwittingly, they opened the vulnerability. They thought what happened after the Oklahoma City bombing in 1995--which Bill Clinton kind of associated that with militias and extremists to his own benefit--could be repeated, and it backfired. 

 Gigot: I want to get in Joe here to talk about mental illness, because that's clearly--I'm not a psychiatrist, but from what I've heard on television by people who understand the symptoms, he did--Loughner did seem to be sick and have perhaps schizophrenia. Is there more we can do as a society to protect ourselves against people who are potentially violent schizophrenics? 

 Rago: Yeah, you know, that's one of the things that's really gotten lost in the political debate. You know, a lot of mental illnesses start to emerge in the college years. 

 Gigot: Right. 

 Rago: You had sort of several months of increasingly disruptive and disturbing behavior on Loughner's part. And everyone sort of said, something's wrong here, but we don't have the tools we need to help this kid. And so, what colleges need is a relaxation of some of the privacy laws--

 Gigot: Privacy laws. 

 Rago: --that prevent them from helping people and just really--there's not a comprehensive approach to mental illness that can be deployed.

 Gigot: We didn't give you enough time for this, Joe. That's a good future discussion. Thank you. 

Panel, thanks. 

When we come back, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie. He's known for his candid, some say confrontational, style. So is he going to tone it down at all in the wake of the Tucson events? I'll ask him that and a whole lot more next. 

 Gigot: New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie delivered his first State of the State address this week, focusing on pension and education reform, among other themes. I sat down with Christie earlier this week to talk about his plans for the Garden State, which faces an $11 billion budget shortfall and one of the highest tax burdens in the nation. 

But first, I asked the candid governor what he thought of the argument that Jared Loughner's rampage in Tucson may have been the result, directly or indirectly, of overheated political rhetoric. 

 Christie: First thing, let's say that Jared Loughner is obviously a deeply disturbed young man. And I think that what caused him to do what he did is that deep mental problem. So, I think that's the premise we all have to deal off, and you see some of the writings and the videos, that's what it leads to. 

I think, secondly, we always should be examining how we speak to each other, and we should speak to each other civilly. But if speaking to each other civilly means not telling the truth, or putting so much varnish on what we say, that you can't tell where people really stand, I'm not in favor of that. 

 Gigot: You wouldn't consider changing any of your rhetoric? 

 Christie: Oh, no, because mine's all on substance. I mean, it's not--listen, I don't think disagreeing with someone is hateful unless you make it so. And I don't think that, you know, we disagree in that way in New Jersey, for sure. And in the end, what we need to do is to speak very clearly to people. 

I think at times like this that are real crisis moments--and certainly what happened with Congresswoman Giffords and the other victims is a crisis moment for us, because it's a loss of life in a very public way--I think what we need to do is redouble our efforts for the truth, and to speak the truth to each other. And if we do that, we're going to be fine as a country. 

 Gigot: OK, let's talk to New Jersey issues. New year, new State of the State message this week, and a budget coming up. Left over from last year is the big pension property tax reform issue. You passed a 2% cap on property taxes. 

 Christie: Yeah. 

 Gigot: No more increases beyond 2% a year. But there are some big loopholes in here: health care, there are school enrollment and pensions that some of the local school districts could use to raise beyond 2%. How do you ensure that these local school districts aren't going to abuse those loopholes and increase more than 2%? 

 Christie: The only way you ensure it, Paul, is because I have an agreement with the Democrats in the Legislature that we're going to do significant pension and benefit reform in the first quarter of this year. And if we don't, then when property taxes go up, then it's at the feet of the Democrats. So we can do it. I think we'll find common ground to get it done, and then you have a real tight, hard cap at, 2%, which, in a state like New Jersey, where property taxes have risen 70% the last 10 years, that will be significant relief to our taxpayers. 

 Gigot: So what kind of guarantees do you have from the Democrats this year that they're going to go along with this? Has the--because last year, they fought you most of the way before they finally agreed. Has the debate in New Jersey changed at all? Have you seen the Democrats move--come over to your side of the argument? 

 Christie: Well, in part. Let me tell you, to give you some evidence of how the debate's changed in New Jersey. You'll recall that last year, when I came into office, the big push from the Democrats was an extension of the millionaires tax, which was expiring. 

 Gigot: Right. 

 Christie: And they told me I'd have no budget, my budget was dead on arrival, if I didn't sign it. I vetoed it. The veto was sustained. New Jersey, for the first time in eight years, didn't have an income-tax or other tax increase. 

 Gigot: Right. 

 Christie: This year, before my State of the State, in the week and a half before my State of the State in the new year, they passed 25 bills cutting taxes in New Jersey, Democrats, with Democratic majorities, with business tax credits and other kind of cuts. You have Democrats talking about tax cuts in New Jersey, Paul, to spur economic growth. We have won the argument. Now we're just arguing over the details. 

 Gigot: Are you going to support all of those tax cuts or--

 Christie: I don't know. I'm going to look at them. But all of them have to be done in context of a balanced budget. And some of them are kind of targeted tax cuts and tax credits that--to favor particular industries that maybe I'm not so much in favor of. Others that are more broad-based I'd be more in favor of. So it's kind of a bill by bill basis. 

 Gigot: Right. 

 Christie: But here is the good news for New Jersey business. There will be tax cuts in this year's budget for New Jersey business, and that's good news for our businesses and also to attract more businesses to New Jersey. 

 Gigot: You've taken a tax increase off the table. 

 Christie: Absolutely. 

 Gigot: All right. You have also talked, in your State of the State, about tax reform. New Jersey has an income tax top rate that's almost 9%, one of top in the country. Do you think that is a significant competitive hindrance to New Jersey job creation? 

 Christie: Yes, I do. 

 Gigot: OK. Are you going to do something about it in your budget this year? Are you going to propose cuts in that rate this year? 

 Christie: I don't know whether we're going to be able to do it this year or whether we're going to have to wait until next year to do it. What I said during the campaign was that in the first four years of my administration, we would cut income taxes across the board for everyone. and that's what we're going to do. Now, what I'm really trying to make a decision on--I haven't made a decision yet--is the difference between those kind of cuts and business--because we have a corporate business tax as well. 

 Gigot: What's that rate? 

 Christie: That rate is at 6%. 

 Gigot: Six percent. 

 Christie: So we've got a corporate business tax rate that's not really competitive either in the marketplace. So what I really wanted to see, and what I'm asking my treasurer to analyze for me, is which one he thinks would be most stimulative to job growth, and that's how I'm going to make the decision, Paul. So both can't happen this year, because we have a constitutional requirement to balance the budget. So--

 Gigot: So any tax cuts would be have to be offset, dollar for dollar, by spending cuts? 

 Christie: Absolutely. 

 Gigot: And you plan to do that? 

 Christie: We're going to do it. I mean, there's no wiggle room in that at all. And I made that clear to the Democrats in the Legislature yesterday during my State of the State. 

 Gigot: More of my conversation with New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie after this short break. Never one to shy from a political fight, he's once again taking on the teachers unions, calling for an end to tenure in New Jersey's public schools. But when it comes to pensions, he's not ready to ask state employees to switch to a 401(k). Find out why, next. 

 Gigot: We're back with more of my conversation with New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie. His state, of course, is not alone in its budget woes. Many are facing big shortfalls, thanks in part to huge public employee pension obligations. And some other governors are looking hard at the option of transferring state employees and their pensions to 401(k) plans, which most Americans in the private sector now have. 

I asked Gov. Christie why he hasn't proposed that. 

 Christie: Well, because I think it's a two-step process. We're talking about an unfunded liability in our pension system right now of $54 billion. 

 Gigot: That's incredible. 

 Christie: It's extraordinary. And what we need to do--if my plan is adopted, in 15 years, we can cut that in half. Now, that puts us on the road to solvency. Then, I think, if you put those kind of reforms in place, then you can look at pulling people out of the system with a 401(k). But unless you reform it, Paul, you will precipitate its collapse by pulling more people out of it before you reform it. So my view is I want to get there. I want to get to a 401(k)-type plan. I said that during the campaign. And I've said it over and again as governor. But first, you've got to reform this current plan. Because there are certain people you made promises to that legally you couldn't pull into a 401(k) at that point. You've got to make sure you fulfill those promises to them by having at least a solvent fund, even if the benefits are lower. 

 Gigot: Well, you have to deal with a Democratic Legislature, both houses. 

 Christie: Yep.

 Gigot: To get this kind of real structural reform, do you have to have a Republican Legislature? The elections in New Jersey for the Assembly and the Senate are this coming autumn. Do you have to get back a Republican Legislature to get that kind of reform? 

 Christie: I think it would help significantly. 

 Gigot: But--so Democrats are just too allergic to 401(k)-type plans to actually pass it. Was that part of your thinking?

 Christie: They have been so far. 

 Gigot: They have been so far. 

 Christie: They have been so far. And in discussions with them, that's been a nonstarter. 

 Gigot: All right. You also talked about the education reform in your State of the State, and you talked about taking on teacher tenure and saying you would like teachers to be entirely paid on merit. How do you go about that? Because you've got a teacher union contract in place. Can you make that happen in New Jersey? 

 Christie: Sure. You can make statutory changes that change the work conditions for all the people in the public workforce, so you can get it done. Listen, I just think there's some simple principles here. Right now, in the system of New Jersey, after three years as a teacher, you're guaranteed a job for life no matter whether you're a good teacher or a bad one. 

 Gigot: Wow. 

 Christie: I don't mind guaranteeing a good teacher a job for life. I want that teacher to be teaching for the rest of his or her life, because they're doing great work to prepare our kids for the future, and they're the foundation of our country in the future, and of my state. But we should have the ability to get rid of bad teachers. And we don't have that ability right now because of the tenure system. So what I've said is, let's eliminate teacher tenure. Let's have people have contracts for a length of time, five years perhaps. 

 Gigot: For individual teachers, not just all teachers collectively.

 Christie: Yes, sir. 

 Gigot: But individual teachers sign a five-year contract that says we'll evaluate you at the end of that five years and then decide what to do? 

 Christie: Yeah.

 Gigot: Up or out? 

 Christie: Yeah.

 Gigot: That can't be something going down very well with the unions, who have been used to this lifetime job tenure. 

 Christie: I'm sure it's not, but you know what? The good teachers in New Jersey won't mind, because they'll know that--they know they're good, and they know that they're a valuable commodity. Listen, I love public schoolteachers. I really do. And I think they do extraordinary work. But the bottom line is the good ones need to be rewarded and paid more, and we've got to get rid of the bad ones. 

 Gigot: Do you think you'll have a chance of getting that kind of reform this year? 

 Christie: Listen, I'm going to work real hard at it. I hope to get some kind of reform this year. I think we can get this, because I'll tell you what's happening. In urban districts across New Jersey, represented predominantly if not exclusively by Democrats, those children are the ones that are being hurt the most by our refusal to take on the educational establishment and craft a system that caters to the needs of our children, not to the feelings of adults. 

 Gigot: OK, you've also said that your biggest mistake in the first year, since you've been governor, was underestimating--misjudging the Legislature. You didn't understand how a legislature worked. Explain that. 

 Christie: Well, you know, I'm an action guy, and I want to get things done. I have very strong beliefs, and I want to move to them. But I've found about legislatures are they just tend to meander a little bit more. They want to take things very slowly. They want to avoid action at times because by avoiding action, you avoid offending people. 

 Gigot: They're on a different time-zone calendar? 

 Christie: Yeah, a different calendar. A little bit of a slower calendar. And so when that would happen, I would at times lash out about that. And I think there are other ways to more effectively deal with pushing them along. And so it's a maturing process on my part as governor. It doesn't mean I'm going to say things any less directly, because this is who I am. I'm a blunt, direct guy. But I also will figure out the right things to complain about and the things that, even if I complain, I'm not going to change. 

 Gigot: All right, Governor, we'll be watching. Thanks so much for being here. 

 Christie: It's a pleasure to be here, Paul. Thank you. 

 Gigot: We have to take one more break. When we come back, our "Hits and Misses" of the week. 

 Gigot: Time now for "Hits and Misses" of the week. Dorothy, first to you. 

 Rabinowitz: Yes, well, here's a hit to the British investigative journalists who absolutely put the lie to this fraudulent faith that autism is caused by vaccination. Finally. As Mark Twain said, a lie travels halfway around the world while the truth is still putting its shoes on. Heaven knows how many people will listen to this. They will go to their deaths believing that this still happens. 

 Gigot: All right, Dorothy, thanks. Joe? 

 Rago: Four hits this week, Paul, to the states who joined the historic constitutional challenge to ObamaCare. That's Wisconsin, Wyoming, Ohio and Kansas. That brings the total to 25, and it's an important symbolic milestone. 

 Gigot: Half of the states. All right. Dan? 

 Henninger: A big miss to the lame-duck legislature of Illinois, which this week, in answer to its own out-of-control spending, jacked up taxes on individuals and corporations in Illinois. Well, of course, instantly, governors in nearby states started to circle. Mitch Daniels of Indiana, said it was like living next door to "The Simpsons." Scott Walker--

 Gigot: Dysfunctional state.

 Henninger: Right, exactly. Scott Walker of Wisconsin started inviting companies in. I'm glad they did it, because we're going to discover, once and for all, whether you can raise a dying state by raising its taxes. 

 Gigot: You know what else? Pat Quinn, the governor, he did campaign on a tax increase, you know, last year. Granted, the one he--they passed is twice as large as the one he promised. But nonetheless, Illinois voters knew what they were getting into. Is this a case, Dan, of the voters getting the government they deserve? 

 Henninger: Yeah, I think so. Well, it's a highly unionized state and they think somehow the system will bail out these commitments. And now we're going to find out. 

 Gigot: All right. Good luck as they escape to Wisconsin. 

That's it for this week's edition of "The Journal Editorial Report." Thanks to my panel and to all of you for watching. I'm Paul Gigot, and we sure hope to see you right here next week. 