SAN FRANCISCO -- U.S. government agencies said Thursday they have increased monitoring of radiation levels along the West Coast, but they don't expect a significant amount of radiation will reach U.S. shores from Japan. 

The Environmental Protection Agency said Thursday that it continuously measures radiation levels at more than 100 sites nationwide, and that it had installed seven additional radiation-monitoring devices in Guam, Hawaii and the Aleutian Islands off the Alaska coast to test for any radiation floating over the Pacific. The agency said it doesn't expect to see harmful levels of radiation in the U.S. 

Japan continued to battle the risk of radiation at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear-power plant Thursday, dousing the reactors with water cannons and seawater dropped by helicopters in an effort to cool them. 

California's top public health official said Thursday radiation particles emitted from a Japanese nuclear reactor would disperse long before reaching California, posing no threat to people's health in the state or along the West Coast. 

"The best estimates of whether radiation will reach our shores indicate that if [it does], the amounts will be so small as to basically be equivalent to our normal background radiation sources from air and soil," California Department of Public Health Director Howard Backer told reporters. 

Mr. Backer said such particles could reach the West Coast in a matter of days, but that the radiation would be at low levels. 

Mr. Backer suggested a forecast developed by a United Nations agency that charted a potential path of a radiation plume from Japan to the U.S. West Coast -- that was obtained and published by The New York Times -- might not be accurate because by the time radiation particles reached U.S. shores they would be dispersed and no longer a plume. 

"I'm not sure that a model of a plume this far away is accurate," Mr. Backer said. "We're talking about dispersal." 

The U.N.'s Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty organization confirmed it developed the "radiation plume" forecast and provided it to the governments of 120 nations, but declined to release the data to the public. 

A spokeswoman at the EPA couldn't say whether the agency had obtained data from the U.N. organization. A telephone call to the U.S. Department of Energy wasn't returned. 

The forecast shows that radiation particles would be diluted by a factor of more than 100,000, essentially harmless levels, on their journey from Japan to California, said  Thomas McKone, a nuclear engineer and professor of environmental health sciences at the University of California in Berkeley. He added that the difference between a lethal dose of radiation and a trivial dose of radiation is only a factor of 1,000. 

"The dilution factors are enormous in that cloud," Mr. McKone said in an interview. 

Mr. McKone added that the major concerns are the levels of radiation at the plant and near the plant, both in the air and on the ground. 

"Radioactivity does deposit onto the surface of the land, and agricultural areas will have to be monitored and the food supply has to be monitored," Mr. McKone said. "It's a long-term issue." 

At Fukushima City, 60 miles from the plant, government monitors recorded radiation of 20 microsieverts an hour, a level that won't have long-term health effects but is roughly 1,000 times higher than in Japanese cities far from the plant. 

Also in Fukushima City, radioactive elements, including iodine, cesium-135 and cesium-137, were found in drinking water. The amounts of such elements were roughly one-quarter the levels that will make the water unfit to drink, Fukushima prefecture said. 

—Yuka Hayashi contributed to this article.

 Write to  Cassandra Sweet at cassandra.sweet@dowjones.com 