LONDON—New data for the euro zone Friday showed that growth was slightly weaker than had been previously estimated in the third quarter of last year and unemployment remains at its highest rate for more than 12 years. 

Lower-than-expected data for retail sales, industrial output and the trade surplus in Germany—which has driven the currency area's recovery from recession—also disappointed economists, although most are confident the country's economy will power ahead this year. 

One of the more-notable aspects of Friday's statistical releases are signs that while Germany and France are enjoying strong growth, the countries at heart of the euro zone's debt crisis, such as Spain and Ireland, are lagging further behind. 

"It is therefore hard to see growth gathering any further momentum in 2011 as weakness in the periphery, compounded by ongoing efforts to reduce budget deficits, looks set to offset the robust growth that we are seeing in the core nations of Germany and France," said  Chris Williamson, chief economist at financial information firm Markit. 

The European Union's statistics agency Eurostat said Friday that gross domestic product in the euro zone was 0.3% higher in the third quarter than in the three months to June, and 1.9% higher than the comparable period of 2009. 

Economists hadn't been expecting any revision to Eurostat's earlier estimate that growth slowed to 0.4% in the third quarter from 1.0% in the second. By contrast, the U.S. economy grew by 0.6% in the third quarter, while the Japanese economy grew by 0.9%. 

"We expect euro zone growth to be relatively muted overall during 2011 in the face of significant headwinds, most notably significant fiscal tightening increasingly kicking in and persistent sovereign debt problems,"  Howard Archer, chief U.K. and European economist at IHS Global Insight, said in a note. 

Weak consumer spending was the main reason for the downward revision.

Consumers spent 0.1% more than they did in the second quarter, and Eurostat had previously estimated that they spent 0.3% more. 

But businesses were also cautious, despite surveys indicating growing optimism during the period. Eurostat had previously calculated that investment spending was flat during the quarter, but now estimates that investment fell by 0.3%. 

Consequently, the euro zone remained dependent on exports and stock building for growth, and the weakness of domestic demand indicates that the recovery remains fragile and vulnerable to developments in other parts of the global economy. 

Hopes for a firm rebound in consumer demand were also undermined by Eurostat figures showing the euro zone's unemployment rate was steady at 10.1% in November, the highest since July 1998. 

Although the number of unemployed people across the single currency area fell 39,000 between October and November, the sharpest fall since June last year, that represented a tiny fraction of the euro zone's 15.9 million jobless population. 

Government spending is also unlikely to be a support in the months to come, with many euro zone members having embarked on austerity programs designed to cut their large budget deficits. And the build-up in stocks appears to be coming to an end, having made a smaller contribution to growth than in the first and second quarters. 

With few signs of a pickup in consumer spending any time soon, the European Central Bank is unlikely to raise its key interest rate in the months to come, even though the inflation rate breached its target in December for the first time in more than two years. 

The other difficulty facing policy makers is that different parts of the euro zone are growing at very different rates. While the German economy grew by 0.7% from the second quarter, Spain's economy was stagnant and Greece's economy contracted by 1.3%. 

The divergence was also reflected in the jobless numbers. Spain topped the table with 20.6% for a third consecutive month while Ireland's rate was stable at 13.9%. By contrast, France's unemployment rate inched up to 9.8% and Germany's was steady at 6.7%. 

Germany's recovery isn't without hiccups, though. The country's economic ministry said Friday that industrial output dropped 0.7% in November following a powerful 3.0% jump in October. 

That was worse than economists' expectations of a 0.2% drop from October, but not by enough to dent the overall outlook. 

"For Q4 2010 as a whole, with two months' data out of three now available, industrial output is on track to rise by well over 2% quarter-on-quarter, a pretty strong gain and typically indicative of robust GDP growth over the quarter,"  Ken Wattret, chief euro zone market economist at BNP Paribas, said in a note. 

Germany's Federal Statistics office also said retail sales declined 2.4% in November from the previous month, although it said the preliminary figures would probably be revised higher later. Economists were expecting a 0.8% monthly rise in sales. 

It also released trade data showing Germany's surplus narrowed unexpectedly to €12.9 billion in November as imports outpaced exports.

 Write to  Paul Hannon at paul.hannon@dowjones.com and Nicholas Winning at nick.winning@dowjones.com 