LONDON—Santander U.K. plans to make commitments to the British government on how much money it will lend to small businesses this year, Chief Executive Officer Ana Botin told U.K. lawmakers Tuesday, amid a broader industry and government effort to boost lending through an initiative dubbed "Project Merlin." 

Ms. Botin, testifying to the Treasury Select Committee at a hearing on competition in U.K. banking, said loan commitments would be made "in our own way" and that talks with the government are continuing. 

The amount of money being lent to small businesses has been a major political issue in the U.K. since the financial crisis occurred. Politicians and business owners say banks aren't doing enough to help revive the economy, while banks argue that loan demand is down and that existing customers are paying down their debt. 

The U.K.'s other major banks— Barclays
BCS


0.15
%




 PLC,  HSBC Holdings PLC,  Royal Bank of Scotland Group PLC and  Lloyds Banking Group PLC—are also in talks with the government about lending commitments. These commitments, including Santander UK's, are seen totaling as much as £200 billion ($317.70 billion). 

However, the other four banks are expected to agree to further measures in an effort to improve their image with customers and taxpayers, including paying less in bonuses than they might have. 

Santander U.K. is the U.K. arm of  Banco Santander SA, built up through a series of acquisitions at knock-down prices in 2008 that included Alliance & Leicester and branch networks of Bradford & Bingley. 

In earlier testimony Tuesday, Virgin Money CEO Jayne-Anne Gadhia told the committee she would like to see the separation of investment banking and retail banking, "so that retail-banking customers can be confident their capital is safe and being properly invested." 

Ms. Botin said she disagreed that separating the activities would make the financial system safer. She said big, universal banks encompassing retail and investment banking have proved to be some of the most resilient in the financial crisis. 

