After a week when  Citigroup
C


0.66
%




 reported disappointing results, and financial stocks struggled, it seems odd to think of this sector as potential champions of 2011. But a lot of people still believe that financials will lead the way this year, and that has good implications for the stock market.

The financial sector, of course, was at the epicenter of the financial crisis in 2008. Lehman Brothers collapsed; other big banks including Citigroup were rescued by taxpayer money; the market swooned and the financials plunged more than 50%. Since then, banks have slowly recovered and global regulators have pieced together new, tougher requirements for banks.

In addition, the U.S. government has steadily made moves to exit its position in the sector it bailed out in the wake of the financial crisis in 2008. It has made more than $12 billion in its rescue of Citigroup and has announced plans to sell its remaining stake. Even though  American International Group
AIG


0.30
%




 has paid back loans to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the U.S. government still holds 92% of the insurance giant. A good chunk of the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) money that went to a wide array of banks has been paid back (at a gain to the government) and most extraordinary rescue programs have been wound down.

The wide array of programs aimed at saving the financial system in the wake of the financial crisis underscores how crucial this sector is to the broader economy. To the ire of many, the government had to step in to save the banks because of speculative excess that had little to do with the sector's core functions. Today, with new regulations coming into place and banks chastened by their near-death experience, the group is worth a closer look from investors.

Even with a huge amount of government help, the financials trailed the major averages last year. The financial stocks in the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index gained 10.8%, trailing the S&P 500's 12.8%.

This year, analysts believe financials will beat the market averages as they emerge from intensive care to return to more normal business footing.  Morgan Stanley
MS


0.20
%




 says it expects "a positive tone" for fourth-quarter earnings (which is already happening, Citigroup aside) setting "the stage for further gains in 2011."  Wells Fargo
WFC


0.99
%




 recently upgraded its investment rating on big banks, citing increased loan originations and improved credit positions.

With numbers getting better, banks, especially bigger ones, are widely expected to boost their dividends. The combination could drive financial stocks higher and potentially help lead the market to another strong year, with some making the case for a rare third consecutive double-digit gain.

The dividend argument for banks is strong. Currently, most big banks pay tiny dividends.  Bank of America,
BAC


2.69
%




 J.P. Morgan Chase,
JPM


0.00
%




 Wells Fargo, Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley all sport dividend yields of less than 1%, compared with a dividend yield for the S&P 500 of 1.84%. Citigroup pays no dividend. Banks have historically paid higher dividend yields than the market, but they will most likely increase dividends conservatively rather than leap to their pre-crisis yield levels quickly.

Earlier this month, big banks submitted data to the Federal Reserve for another round of stress tests. The Fed is expected to use these tests to green light a round of dividend increases among the bigger banks. Citigroup, however, is unlikely to join them. The bank said during its earnings report last week that it won't be looking to re-initiate a dividend until at least 2012.

According to a recent stock screen by Oppenheimer & Co., an asset-management firm, Bank of America, Morgan Stanley, J.P. Morgan and  Bank of New York Mellon
BK


0.42
%




 are especially well positioned to increase dividend payouts. These banks have price/earning multiples that trail the market average, meaning they represent some value. And they are expected to generate free cash flow that's greater than their current dividend payout, meaning they're likely to raise their dividends in 2011.

While the big banks have mostly recovered, among smaller banks the picking gets trickier. A recent story in The Wall Street Journal reported that nearly 100 smaller banks that had received TARP funds faced the prospect of failing. Still,  Jeffrey Saut, strategist at  Raymond James, has declared that 2011 may be the year of the banks and likes smaller names, including  Iberiabank,
IBKC


0.66
%




 Peoples United Financial and  Huntington Bancshares.
HBAN


0.57
%






Rather than taking the risk of buying individual stocks, investors who believe in the bank thesis can purchase sector mutual funds such as the Burnham Financial Services fund (BURFX), which is down 2% in the last year, but has an average annualized gain of 6.5% over the past five years, according to Lipper. The John Hancock Regional Bank fund (FRBAX) is up 9% in the last year, but has an annualized loss of 4.2% over the past five years. Among exchange-traded funds, the SPDR KBW Bank ETF (KBE), tracks the popular KBW Bank index.

—Dave Kansas is The Journal's chief markets commentator in New York. Blog: blogs.wsj.com/marketbeat Email: dave.kansas@wsj.com 