Like dozens of the wealthy Americans who joined Bill Gates and Warren Buffett's campaign last year, Alfred and Claude Mann vowed to give a majority of their estate to philanthropy. 

The couple are putting the pledge into action: The aerospace and pharmaceutical industry entrepreneur and his wife are giving $4 million to the Walter W. Naumburg Foundation, a charity that operates out of the Manhattan School of Music and sponsors competitions for young classical musicians in North America. 

Founded in 1929 by the late banker and philanthropist Walter W. Naumburg, the foundation started as a way to help young musicians gain recognition and launch their careers. The foundation has since supported musicians in all stages of their careers and has been involved in commissioning new works by leading composers. It counts two Pulitzer Prize-winning scores among its compositions.

In 1971 Robert Mann, Alfred's older brother and a founding member and first violinist of the Juilliard String Quartet, was elected president of the Naumburg foundation. At age 90, he still leads the charity. Other family members sit on the foundation's board of directors. 

"It's much harder to develop a sustaining career in the performing arts today and we want to support musicians to keep classical music alive," Robert Mann says. 

Alfred and Claude Mann's gift to the Naumburg Foundation follows $6 million in donations to endow chairs in Robert's name at the Manhattan School of Music and at University of Southern California's Thornton School of Music.

"All of our money is going to go to charity anyway, so we wanted to do something for Alfred's brother, for his legacy and for our family," Mrs. Mann says. "He deserves to have recognition as one of the top musicians in the world." 

Alfred and Claude's primary philanthropic focus, however, is on medical research. 

In 1985, Mr. Mann founded the Alfred Mann Foundation, a medical research organization that works to develop treatments for diabetes, address neural muscular disorders and restore hearing. 

In a commitment to the Gates-Buffett Giving Pledge, Mr. Mann laid out a plan to give $100 million to a number of research universities to create biomedical institutes that can advance medical technology. 

"I want to use those resources to make this a better world—and to do as much as I can during my lifetime," Mr. Mann wrote in a letter. 