HONG KONG—Asian electronics companies stand to benefit from a surge in demand for components in the new iPad but will see their already battered ambitions to make their own tablets challenged further.

Companies including Japan's  Toshiba Corp.
TOSYY


-2.15
%




 and South Korea's Samsung Electronics Co. and  LG Display Co. supply key components, such as memory chips and screens in the new version of the  Apple Inc.
AAPL


0.95
%




 tablet. But LG Display's parent company, LG Electronics Inc., as well as Toshiba and Samsung also make their own tablets.

If the new version of the iPad, unveiled Wednesday, is as successful as the original version, these component makers stand to benefit from an increase in sales, analysts say. 

But profit margins for their tablets could slip, given their late entry into the market and because more devices are being introduced this year, intensifying competition.



"It's a difficult balance for these companies," said  Kirk Yang, head of Asia technology hardware research at Barclays Capital. 

"Looking at the new version, we're even more convinced that Apple's iPad 2 will continue to dominate the tablet market this year with about a 70% market share."

Samsung, Toshiba and LG Electronics declined to comment Thursday on how the iPad 2 might affect their own tablet sales. Apple, which typically doesn't comment on its suppliers, wasn't immediately available for comment.

At an event Wednesday in San Francisco, Apple Chief Executive  Steve Jobs said the company had more than a 90% share of the market and "our competitors are just flummoxed." He added that if 2010 was the "year of the iPad," he might call 2011 "the year of the copycats." 

Mr. Yang predicts that Apple will sell more than 33 million iPads this year. That compares with more than 14 million the company has sold already.

Mr. Jobs said the iPad 2, which has a faster dual-core microprocessor and two video cameras, is thinner and lighter than its predecessor. The new version will start at $499, which is the same price as the original model. 

Apple said it will begin shipping on March 11 in the U.S., and in more than two dozen countries on March 25, including Japan and Australia.

A Toshiba spokeswoman said the company hopes the iPad 2 will help further boost the market for what are known as NAND flash memory chips—the chips used to store songs, video and photos in electronic devices. 

Toshiba is the world's second-largest supplier of these chips by revenue behind Samsung. 

Pricing in the NAND flash memory chip market has stayed firm this year thanks to strong demand from smartphone and tablet makers.

Toshiba in November released its tablet, Folio 100, in Europe. The Folio 100 runs on  Google Inc.'s Android operating system, but it has had little global presence in the market for tablet computers. 

The company said it plans to release an Android-based tablet in the U.S. and Japan later this year.

Samsung, which launched its Android-based tablet called Galaxy Tab last year to compete with the iPad, said in February it would be launching an upgraded version of the device. 

The upgraded model adds a brighter screen, dual-core processor and thinner design to its earlier Galaxy Tab, which has racked up about two million units sold since its launch in October. 

It also sports an eight-megapixel rear camera, two-megapixel front-facing camera as well as high definition video recording ability.

LG, which has been late in tablets, said last month its 8.9-inch tablet, which runs the Android software, will first hit the U.S. market in March through T-Mobile USA.

China telecommunications equipment supplier  ZTE Corp.
ZTCOY


1.09
%




, which isn't an iPad supplier, is hopeful that it can compete with Apple in tablets. 

"We believe our seven-inch tablet is competitive against the iPad as it has better resolution and can also make phone calls," said  David Dai Shu, director of corporate brand and communications at the Shenzhen-based company.

ZTE, traditionally a low-cost telecom equipment supplier, launched its first tablet called "Light" in October in several markets, the company says. 

ZTE said that in the first two months, the company sold 300,000 units, and now shipments stand at about 400,000 units.

It plans to launch a new version called Light Plus sometime in April, he said, selling them first in overseas markets.

Perhaps a clear beneficiary of the iPad 2 launch is  Hon Hai Precision Industry Co.
2317


1.06
%




, which assembles the device. 

Analysts at Citigroup said in a research report Thursday that the Taiwan-based contract manufacturer of electronics is the sole assembler of the device.

"We estimate that total iPad (shipments) will account for 11% to 12% of Hon Hai's 2011 revenue, up from 5% to 6% in 2010," Citigroup wrote in the report. "More important, we believe that Hon Hai has managed to renegotiate a better price with Apple on iPad 2 and also got higher allocation of the casing."

A Hon Hai spokesman didn't return calls.

—Juro Osawa in Tokyo and In-Soo Nam in Seoul contributed to this article.

 Corrections & Amplifications  Samsung's Galaxy S II is a smartphone. An earlier version of this article incorrectly said it was the successor to the company's Galaxy Tab.

 Write to  Yun-Hee Kim at yun-hee.kim@dowjones.com 