What's Broadway all about right now? In a word: Broadway. 

The nominations for the 65th annual Tony Awards, which were announced Tuesday morning at the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, embrace shows that define and celebrate the genre—not vehicles for Hollywood celebrities, not jukebox musicals, not attempts at reinventing the wheel.

The four productions nominated for Best Musical (only three of which you can still see) are firmly rooted in the garden of musical theater. "The Book of Mormon," which scored the most nominations with 14, has a sense of humor aimed at adolescent males, but frames it with well-crafted send-ups of classic song-and-dance numbers. "Catch Me If You Can," with four nominations, celebrates the razzle-dazzle of the showman, complete with leggy chorus girls. "Sister Act" (five nods) delivers hilarious original songs performed by strong, talented voices. And very little says "Broadway" more than the roster of talent behind "The Scottsboro Boys": songwriters John Kander and Fred Ebb and director Susan Stroman.

What happened to that genre-crossing, emo-musical "Bloody Bloody Andrew Jackson"? It's nominated for Best Book of a Musical, but it would have to beat "Mormon," "Scottsboro" and "Sister Act" for the award.

Indeed, the Tony voters' support for "Scottsboro," which flopped on the Great White Way after a successful off-Broadway run, seems especially like a pat on the back for the home team. Despite its truncated run, the show pulled in 12 nominations, placing it second only to "Mormon."

And which production came away with the third-most nominations? That Broadway perennial "Anything Goes," which was created in 1934 and features stage veterans rather than Hollywood celebrities in the leading roles.

What of this year's crop of Tinseltown transplants? It seems that, unlike in previous years, they're no longer Tony bait. Among the film stars left out: Daniel Radcliffe ("How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying"), Robin Williams ("Bengal Tiger at the Baghdad Zoo"), Ben Stiller ("House of Blue Leaves"), Chris Rock ("The Motherf— With the Hat"), Kathleen Turner ("High"), James Earl Jones ("Driving Miss Daisy")—and the entire cast of "That Championship Season."

There is, of course, Al Pacino's nod for Best Actor in a Play, for a production that is deeply of New York: the Public Theater's production of "The Merchant of Venice" started as Shakespeare in the Park last summer. The play landed seven nominations, including one for Lily Rabe as Best Actress in a Play. If both win, this will truly be the summer of Shakespeare.

"Merchant" is also battling for Best Revival of a Play, a category slanted in favor of the British, with Tom Stoppard's "Arcadia" and Oscar Wilde's "The Importance of Being Earnest" up against American Larry Kramer's "The Normal Heart." The odds are more even in the Best Play category: "War Horse" and "Jerusalem" hail from Britain, while "The Motherf— With the Hat" and "Good People" are homegrown.

Among the talent awards for musicals, the notable omission of Mr. Radcliffe leaves the category of Best Actor in a Musical with a pool full of local talent. And "Anything Goes" star Sutton Foster, whose name could be veritably written as "Broadway's Sutton Foster," is working her way to industry icon status.

Perhaps less surprising, the Best Original Score category draws deeply from Broadway tradition: Alan Menken and Glenn Salter for "Sister Act"; "South Park" masterminds Trey Parker and Matt Stone, joined by Robert Lopez ("Avenue Q"), for "Mormon"; and David Yazbek ("The Full Monty," "Dirty Rotten Scoundrels") for the resounding dud that was "Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown." And of course: Kander and Ebb for "Scottsboro."

Top all this off with the fact that this year's Tony Awards ceremony, slated for June 12, will be squeezed into the Beacon Theatre, which has less than 3,000 seats, as opposed to the 6,000 at the Tonys' usual home, Radio City Music Hall. It may well turn out to be a wise move, and reflective of the nominees: Rather than trying to compete with Hollywood for splash and sizzle, the industry seems to be moving toward a more realistic view of itself and supporting its own.

And why not? Let Broadway be Broadway. 