LONDON—The former head of England's World Cup bid accused four members of world soccer's governing body of "improper and unethical" conduct in the bidding process to select the venues for the 2018 and 2022 FIFA World Cup tournaments, the latest fallout from the vote-rigging allegations that marred the selection process.

David Triesman, speaking to a British parliamentary inquiry into England's failed 2018 World Cup bid, said FIFA executive committee members Jack Warner, Nicolas Leoz, Ricardo Teixeira and Worawi Makudi asked for favors in return for their support in December's vote to select the venues for two upcoming editions of the quadrennial tournament. 

Messrs. Warner, Leoz, Teixeira and Makudi couldn't immediately be reached for comment. FIFA president Josep "Sepp" Blatter said he would ask for evidence of any allegations to be passed to the organization's executive committee, but couldn't speak for individual executive committee members.

"I cannot say they are all angels or they are all devils,'' Mr. Blatter told reporters. "We must have the evidence and then we will act immediately against all those [who] would be in breach of the ethical code rules."

Lord Triesman said Mr. Warner, a FIFA vice-president and chairman of the Trinidad and Tobago Football Association, asked him for £2.5 million ($4.1 million) to be channelled through him for an education center in Trinidad. He said Sir Dave Richards, the chairman of the English Premier League and a member of the 2018 World Cup bid, was also present during this conversation. A spokesman for the Premier League said Sir Dave had no comment.

Lord Triesman also said Mr. Warner later asked him for £500,000 to buy rights to screen the 2010 World Cup in Haiti following the earthquake in the country.

Mr. Warner has previously denied any wrongdoing in the bid process.

In addition, Lord Triesman said Mr. Leoz, a Paraguayan member of FIFA's 24-member executive committee, asked him for a knighthood in exchange for his vote, while Mr. Teixeira, a Brazilian committee member, allegedly told Lord Triesman to "come and tell me what you've got for me."

Mr. Makudi, Thailand's FIFA executive, allegedly requested that Lord Triesman give him the TV rights to an exhibition game between England and Thailand, said Lord Triesman.

Lord Triesman did not say whether there were any other parties to his conversations with Messrs. Leoz, Teixeira and Makudi. 

"These were some of the things that were put to me ... which in my view did not represent proper and ethical behavior on the part of members of the executive committee," Lord Triesman said. He said all the requests for favors came in face-to-face conversations.

Russia and Qatar won the right to host soccer's World Cup tournaments in 2018 and 2022, respectively, in a vote by FIFA executives in Zurich last December, ending a process that was marked by sustained accusations of vote rigging for the first time. Although FIFA has an ethics committee and a code of conduct that all bidding nations and members must agree to, gifts to executive committee members aren't completely prohibited.

Just ahead of the vote, two members of FIFA's 24-member executive committee were fined and barred from the final vote for unspecified breaches of the FIFA ethics code following an internal corruption investigation into allegations that they had sought payment in exchange for their votes. 

At the same time, FIFA's ethics committee said it said it "did not find sufficient grounds" to support a separate accusation from a British newspaper that the Spain-Portugal bid had broken the rules by allying with Qatar to win their respective bids. Sheikh Mohammed bin Hamad Al-Thani, chairman of Qatar's bid, denied the existence of a vote-trading deal following December's vote.

Lord Triesman, who resigned from England's failed World Cup bid six months before the final vote after he was filmed by a British newspaper accusing Russia and Spain of plotting to bribe referees at the 2010 World Cup, said he didn't report the incidents to FIFA because he feared the allegations would damage England's bid.

"I think… we would have burned off our chances," Lord Triesman said when asked why he didn't report the alleged improprieties. "In retrospect that was not the right view to take and I accept that."

In other developments Tuesday, a letter submitted to the inquiry by a British newspaper also claimed that two other executive committee members were paid $1.5 million by Qatar to vote for the country's 2022 World Cup bid. The Sunday Times of London wrote and submitted a five-page letter that included what it says are details of a conversation with a whistleblower who worked with the Qatar bid and told the newspaper that Issa Hayatou, a Cameroonian member of FIFA's executive committee, and Jacques Anouma, from Ivory Coast, were paid in exchange for their votes. 

The Sunday Times said it hadn't published the names of the members involved or the bidding country in its newspaper for legal reasons.

Messrs. Hayatou and Anouma couldn't be reached for comment. 

 Write to  Jonathan Clegg at jonathan.clegg@wsj.com 