OKUMA, Fukushima—Kenji Tada recalls the awful boom ringing through the suppression chamber of the No. 4 reactor at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant when the earthquake hit at 2:46 p.m. on March 11. 

Another young man remembers the way managers handled a malfunctioning gate in the hazardous-waste building.

Masatsugu Hoshi recalls dust as thick as smoke; his friend Takuya Bamba remembers the lights going out in the basement of the No. 4 reactor. Kenji Mougi and Matsuo Watanabe saw asphalt split and cracks open in the roads threading through the complex.

Their stories—some of the first personal accounts from the ground—give a more textured view of the goings-on in the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear complex during the hours after the magnitude-9 quake hit. The tales underscore the enormous destructive power unleashed on the plant. But they also paint a picture of a facility that was disciplined and orderly, and that seemed to have survived the initial battering of nature quite well—until a tsunami destroyed its backup generators.

For Mr. Tada, a 29-year-old employee in the Fukushima branch of Tokyo-based Tokai Toso Co., the first hint of the quake was a gentle rocking. At the time, he was shrouded in a white protective suit and mask, deep in the bowels of the plant's No. 4 reactor. The reactor had been shut down for a major overhaul, and Mr. Tada had been scanning the surface of the suppression chamber, which lies below the container surrounding the fuel rods, for signs of corrosion.

When the swaying started, then grew more violent, Mr. Tada grabbed at some hanging pipes to hold himself upright. Then came the terrible boom, magnified in the doughnut-shaped chamber. The earthquake knocked out the plant's regular power, but Mr. Tada and his three companions in the chamber made their way out by the emergency lighting—the tsunami that destroyed the plant's backup generators was still an hour away.

Mr. Tada emerged into a crowd of several hundred other workers, all heading toward a handful of exits from the reactor building. But he said there was no panic. Managers from plant operator Tokyo Electric Power Co. had shown up, and were directing workers into lines to file out. "I thought it was amazing,'' Mr. Tada said, referring to the orderliness of the departure. 

Discipline was the impression of another worker, employed under contract to a big nuclear-equipment maker, who asked not to be named. The 27-year-old had just finished testing some broken equipment at reactor No. 3, and was throwing away garbage in a hazardous waste building. He too felt the rocking, the jolt and saw the main lights go out. 

When the shaking stopped, he recalled making his way to the exit with a couple of hundred other workers, and being halted by the gate that normally screened for radioactive particles. The gate was malfunctioning, and plant policy forbade anyone from passing through without being cleared. Amazingly, despite a growing sense of panic, nobody disobeyed, he said. 

A Tepco manager showed up shortly with a manual scanner, but was soon ordered to let everyone out as soon as possible, and not bother with screening, the man recalled. 

Outside, the air was filled with simultaneous announcements from each of the plant's six control rooms, while what seemed like hundreds of malfunctioning alarms were clanging from every corner, the man said. But he took the cacophony as an encouraging sign that the plant's main control board was working, he said.

Not everyone's evacuation went so smoothly. Mr. Hoshi was building scaffolding at the turbine in the No. 5 reactor when the earthquake hit. The 25-year-old laborer already knew about earthquakes and nuclear power plants; he had been working at the Kashiwazaki-Kariwa nuclear power plant in the Japan Sea region of Niigata when a magnitude-6.6 quake struck in 2007.

In the March 11 quake, "the walls started crumbling and dust as thick as black smoke filled the room,'' Mr. Hoshi recalled. There was a shock, the lights went out, then a boom that sounded like an explosion, he said.

"I was in a panic,'' Mr. Hoshi said. "I thought, 'This is bad. I've got to get out.' "

Mr. Hoshi fled to the workers' changing room, where he slipped out of a company work outfit and into his own clothes, grabbing his wallet and keys.

While Mr. Hoshi was still at reactor No. 5, his friend and neighbor, Takuya Bamba, was straightening up the first floor of the basement of the turbine building at reactor No. 4, putting away safety belts and other items used at the plant. The ground started rumbling, and then the lights went out. 

After the quake subsided, the workers grabbed flashlights and made their way to the exit, Mr. Bamba recalled. Normally, workers leaving the Fukushima Daiichi plant get tested for radiation contamination before they leave. But Mr. Bamba said workers simply streamed out of the building after the quake struck. The workers also chucked the radiation-detection badges they wear on their chests and ran, he recalled.

Mr. Mougi, 40, and Mr. Watanabe, 59, were already outside when the quake struck hit. The two laborers for nuclear-site construction specialist Hokuto Kogyo were working in different yards of the complex—Mr. Mougi unloading metal pallets from a truck with a forklift and Mr. Watanabe heading off for a break, after finishing a survey for a duct installation.

Both felt the earth buckle and saw cracks form in the asphalt, some so deep that Mr. Mougi had trouble getting back to three other members of his crew who were working in a neighboring yard. As for the break room where Mr. Watanabe had been headed, the earthquake left it sunken and tilted to one side, he recalled. 

"If it had hit five minutes later, I'd have been there drinking juice and smoking a cigarette,'' he said.

All six left the site without realizing just how much worse the tsunami would make everything.

 Write to  Phred Dvorak at phred.dvorak@wsj.com and Andrew Morse at andrew.morse@wsj.com 