With the results of the Afghanistan surge now under debate, the question of how we assess the success or failure of counterinsurgency operations is very much in the air. Have the additional American units in Afghanistan weakened the insurgency there? How much closer is the day when the Afghans can provide their own security? And is the insurgency's reliance on sanctuaries in Pakistan important enough for the U.S. to take up the issue with the Pakistani government in the wake of the Bin Laden discovery?

Gregory Daddis, a West Point professor, is not the first historian to examine the subject of assessing counterinsurgency, but he is the first to devote an entire scholarly book to it. Focused on the U.S. military's attempts to measure its progress during the Vietnam War, "No Sure Victory" is a timely history that draws on extensive primary research to argue that the U.S. military "never could determine if it was winning or losing" in South Vietnam.

Mr. Daddis faults each of America's top military commanders in Vietnam and Robert McNamara's Defense Department "Whiz Kids" for relying on dubious statistics such as "body count" and "population control" while disregarding less quantifiable matters, such as popular support and military morale. "Flawed measurements," Mr. Daddis writes, "validated imperfect counterinsurgency methods and provided [U.S. commanders] with a false sense of progress." An obsession with body count, he contends, led to a preoccupation with conventional military operations and a neglect of the war's political aspects, which in turn enabled the Viet Cong to keep recruiting villagers in South Vietnam to offset their losses. 

It is true that statistical analysis often yielded misleading results in Vietnam. But in criticizing an over-reliance on body count, Mr. Daddis fails to appreciate how much the war changed over time, from a primarily guerrilla conflict in the early 1960s to a primarily conventional war in the mid-1960s. As in most conventional wars, the enemy's forces had to be reduced to prevent them from winning battles and seizing territory. Body count was a way of measuring that reduction. What is more, communist resilience in the face of heavy casualties resulted not from recruitment in South Vietnamese villages, as Mr. Daddis contends, but from massive infiltration of North Vietnamese troops through Laos. The communists, according to their own count, made up for their combat losses from the mid-1960s onward by importing in excess of 50,000 North Vietnamese soldiers per year.

 By Gregory A. Daddis  (Oxford, 334 pages, $34.95)

The scathing tone of Mr. Daddis's critique would be tolerable if he enumerated workable alternative metrics and sources that were overlooked by U.S. commanders as they tried to judge the effectiveness of their strategy. But he offers only one alternative in each category. His alternative metric—the amount of information provided by the population to the counterinsurgents—is excellent in principle, but its utility is constrained by human nature. When information volunteered by the population becomes a top priority, local leaders may use carrots and sticks to persuade citizens to show up "voluntarily" with fabricated information that is impossible for analysts to disprove. Intelligence agencies can be similarly culpable, inflating the amount of information received to make themselves look good or refusing to report anything in order to "protect sources." 

Mr. Daddis's alternative source—polling the population—is even more problematic. The indigenous personnel who administer surveys often concoct survey responses to avoid visiting dangerous areas. And survey respondents often lie for fear that their responses will be reported to government officials, who might order them beaten or imprisoned for supplying the wrong answers.

Although many efforts to measure effectiveness in Vietnam were fruitless, Mr. Daddis errs in concluding that all were. Various officials—including ambassadors (Maxwell Taylor), senior CIA officials (William Colby), foreign consultants (Robert Thompson) and on-the-ground commanders (Creighton Abrams)—produced incisive assessments of the war effort. With hindsight we know their reports to be correct because they match up with accounts produced after the war by communist historians, who had different axes to grind.

These assessments accorded the most weight to the information that had the greatest bearing on America's strategic objectives: insurgent casualties (yes, body count); the number of enemy troops infiltrated; and the willingness of the population to provide information. The quality and quantity of enemy personnel also served as a crucial measure, reflecting not only casualties and infiltration but also recruitment and desertion.

The most accurate assessments were based on information gleaned in the field from counterinsurgent personnel and the civilian populace. Expert questioning illuminated the essence of the war in ways that no statistic could. U.S. analysts also made good use of captured documents, prisoner interrogations and signals intercepts: These sources proved to be the most reliable, because the insurgents, unlike the counterinsurgents, derived no personal benefit from reporting U.S. successes.

We have been late in adopting what worked in Vietnam for the war in Afghanistan—not least in the area of assessment. But within the past year measuring enemy casualties and enemy strength has risen to prominence as a metric, along with tracking Afghan leadership appointments and the quality of Afghan army and police units. Some important lessons remain to be absorbed, including one that Mr. Daddis spells out: The more we ask our field commanders to measure effectiveness, the less time they have for actions that achieve it.

 Mr. Moyar is the director of research at Orbis Operations and the author of "Triumph Forsaken: The Vietnam War, 1954-1965." 