Foreign banks have been knocking on India's doors for several years now. Like other foreign investors, they are keen on a bigger slice of the action in an economy that has been growing at 8-9% in recent years. The Reserve Bank of India, the central bank and the regulator of the financial system, has welcomed them for adding to competition in the banking sector. But it hasn't always done so with open arms, fearful of how these banks will affect the stability of the domestic financial system.

In a discussion paper on foreign banks in India released in late January, the RBI suggests it may soon open its arms slightly wider. But the paper also drives home the balanced approach the RBI would take here, that any increase in foreign banks' presence in the country will be subject to measures to contain the "downside risk to financial stability" that they pose.

This paper is the RBI's first document on this subject since its famous 2005 roadmap, in which it laid out a two-stage approach. Until 2009, the regulator would prioritize strengthening domestic banks, with foreign banks taking a back seat. In 2009, it would consider a bigger role for outside institutions based on a review of the experience to that point. 

Today, India's metropolitan areas are well served by domestic banks, which have become stronger, as intended, since 2005. The challenge for the RBI is to define a role for foreign banks in this context. It doesn't want foreign banks crowding the metropolitan market, which naturally has the biggest borrowers and depositors. And it clearly sees a role for foreign banks in the much-vaunted goal of financial inclusion—of bringing the poor, especially in rural areas, into the formal financial fold. 

India's domestic banks have historically ignored these under-banked regions, focusing instead on urban centers. But as microfinance institutions have proven over the last decade, handing credit to the rural poor can be profitable. The industry is slowly realizing that moving toward the countryside is the next logical business step. That's why the opportunity the RBI has dangled before foreign banks is a significant one.

Foreign institutions have already shown that they can compete in India despite their small presence. The 34 foreign banks in India account for only 8% of the total assets of the banking sector, but in the 2009-10 fiscal year, they averaged a return on assets of 1.26%. State-owned banks, which hold 70% of assets, had an average return of only 0.97%. 

Outside banks could also bring in badly needed innovations in India's underbanked regions. In the late 1990s they opened up the county's market for retail finance, offering mortgages, auto finance and credit cards.

What perturbs the RBI is that all of India's foreign banks currently operate as branches, not subsidiaries of the home business that are legally incorporated in India. In its discussion paper, the central bank stipulates that these banks can remain branches if they choose. But it makes clear that it favors the subsidiary form, with proposed incentives to encourage new foreign banks either to set up shop as subsidiaries or to convert existing branches to subsidiaries. 

The central bank's preference here makes sense. With subsidiaries, regulators can clearly delineate the assets and liabilities of the domestic bank and those of its parent, the better for regulators to ring-fence these assets and liabilities in times of financial crisis. With branches, this proves difficult. 

Even if foreign banks operate as subsidiaries, though, the RBI has sound reasons not to allow them to take a dominant position in India's financial system. History suggests that foreign banks grow at the expense of domestic banks when the host economy is booming but curtail their foreign operations when crises occur at home. The issue here is liquidity. For foreign banks, much of the lending in the host market is done by raising funds back in the home market. So when there is a crisis at home, the foreign subsidiary's liquidity needs become secondary to the parent's.

Hence the RBI's caution. The central bank says it will retain the right to limit the expansion of foreign banks once their capital and reserves in India exceed 25% of the banking system. RBI's conservative approach to financial liberalization has been criticized in the past. But given that India's banking system emerged unscathed from the 2007-08 financial crisis, such conservatism now seems to have paid off. If foreign banks can rise to the challenge, they will find that there are still opportunities to grow, even as the RBI works to ensure that such opportunities do not render the broader system unstable. 

—Mr. Ram Mohan is a professor of finance at the Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad.