David Sencer was a top public-health official behind the contentious 1976 program to vaccinate Americans against swine flu.

Dr. Sencer, who died Monday at age 86, was the longest-serving director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta, where he vastly expanded the agency's oversight in a decade-long tenure starting in 1966.

Dr. Sencer dealt with other high-profile disease outbreaks, including Legionnaire's disease, which first struck a group of veterans in 1976 at a convention in a Philadelphia hotel. Thirty-four victims died before a crash CDC investigation revealed that bacteria in the hotel's air-conditioning system was to blame. 

In the early 1980s, as New York City health commissioner, he was one of the first prominent public-health officials to confront the AIDS epidemic.

The swine-flu program had its beginnings in early 1976, when soldiers at Ft. Dix, N.J., were stricken with a flu strain thought to be similar to the one behind the 1918 flu pandemic—the deadliest in history.

Dr. Sencer, in consultation with the nation's top epidemiologists, feared the worst. He advised that the entire nation be vaccinated. A Ford administration official pronounced the memo "a gun to our head," but the proposal was approved.

Over a two-week period in the fall of 1976, 40 million Americans were vaccinated. Complications arose when some 30 people died after being inoculated and several hundred more developed Guillain-Barre syndrome, a neurological disease with symptoms including paralysis.

Vaccinations were suspended, the epidemic never happened, and Congress voted to indemnify vaccine makers.

President Jimmy Carter's secretary of Health and Human Services, Joseph Califano, dismissed Dr. Sencer, saying it was part of the normal turnover of staff when administrations change.

Born in Grand Rapids, Mich., Dr. Sencer studied medicine at the University of Michigan and at Harvard University. He decided on a career in public health after spending two years recovering from tuberculosis. He joined the U.S. Public Health Service in 1955 and the CDC in 1960.

Under Dr. Sencer's leadership, the CDC expanded to include family planning, tobacco control and occupational health. He also framed the guidelines for quarantining astronauts returning from the moon, which it was feared at the time might be a source of extraterrestrial pathogens.

Facing the nascent, mysterious AIDS epidemic n New York, Dr. Sencer advocated—unsuccessfully—for free clean needles for addicts and fought to keep gay bathhouses open, believing they were an ideal place to teach safe sex.

In a 2006 paper reflecting on the swine-flu campaign, Dr. Sencer defended the government's aggressive effort. "When lives are at stake, it is better to err on the side of overreaction than underreaction," he wrote. "In 1976, the federal government wisely opted to put protection of the public first."

—Email remembrances@wsj.com 