A celebrity Manhattan chef who judges many television cooking competitions has a new kitchen of his own, having just purchased a three-bedroom co-op at the Beresford, the famous limestone tower on Central Park West.

Marc Murphy and his wife, Pamela Schein Murphy, paid $16.5 million for the co-op on 15th floor of the wedding-cake-like building on the corner of East 81st Street on Monday, property records show. 

Mr. Murphy is the executive chef and owner of the Landmarc restaurants in TriBeCa and in the Time Warner Center, as well as Ditch Plains restaurants in the West Village and the Upper West Side. 

He frequently appears on TV to demonstrate favorite dishes and is a regular judge on "Chopped," a reality series on the Food Network in which chefs compete to produce dishes with unusual mixes of ingredients. 

Ms. Murphy is a co-owner of the restaurants and is in charge of public relations and marketing and oversees the business side. She declined to discuss the purchase and Mr. Murphy could not be reached.

The apartment has a 29-foot-long gallery, a 30-foot-long living room with a wood-burning fireplace and a private elevator entrance, according to the listing by Patrycia Harbison of Halstead Property. 

The co-op includes an 18-foot-long eat-in kitchen, and a separate 16-foot-long pantry. Ms. Harbison declined to comment on the transaction.

The Beresford, designed by Emery Roth in 1929, is 22 stories high and is topped by three separate towers. The building is regarded as one of the best addresses on Central Park West. 

The Murphy apartment is in the base of the southeast tower with windows in the dining room and living room facing toward the park, according to the listing. It sold at the same price at which it was listed in January.

Mr. Murphy, the son of a diplomat, worked in a series of well-known Manhattan restaurants, including Le Cirque and La Fourchette, before opening his first solo restaurant, the Landmarc in TriBeCa, in 2004.

 Write to  Josh Barbanel at josh.barbanel@wsj.com 