"To write a history of colonial America used to be easier," the Pulitzer Prize-winning historian Alan Taylor grumbled 10 years ago. "The human cast and the geographic stage were both considered so much smaller." My high-school U.S.-history textbook, written in the 1970s, was an example. After a few obligatory pages about "Indians," the Pilgrims land on Plymouth Rock. Soon boatloads of doughty Englishmen establish 13 colonies in a tidy row along the Atlantic coast, the heart of London's new empire. Almost at once—bud-a-bump! bud-a-bump!—Paul Revere gallops through every Middlesex village and farm to start the Revolutionary War. This once-over-lightly treatment of the first half of modern American history— the 250 years between 1526, the date of the first European attempt at permanent settlement in what is now the United States, and 1776, when the Continental Congress issued the Declaration of Independence—is still what many kids learn today.

Yet historians have spent the past 40 years concluding that things were more complicated—and more interesting. Contrary to what we were led to believe in school, the center of England's colonial enterprise was the Caribbean—everything from Florida north was a backwater. (In 1660, the sugar plantations of tiny Barbados were worth more than all other English colonies combined.) Nor was the proto-United States an English-language domain; Spain, France, Holland and even Sweden established beachheads; Pennsylvania was filled with Germans; and slaves from a dozen African cultures were scattered from Salem to St. Augustine. All these different people "eat drank cursed and swore together" with native people, as one Philadelphian put it in the 1750s. Given this chaotic, newly revealed canvas, how to discern a picture of what the United States was like before it was the United States? 

Alan Taylor provided one answer in his "American Colonies" (2001), a sweeping history arguing that the foundation of today's nation was the "unprecedented mixing of radically diverse peoples—African, European and Indian— under circumstances stressful for all." To capture this helter-skelter process, he structured his book as a sequence of regional histories, overlapping like a pile of plates in the sink. Mr. Taylor additionally emphasized the role of environmental change—how European ships carried not only hungry human colonists but novel diseases, plants and animals that played their own important roles in shaping the continent.

 By Daniel K. Richter  Harvard/Belknap Press, 502 pages, $35

His book provoked the highest academic compliment: argument. In a review, another distinguished historian, Daniel K. Richter, criticized it for obscuring any sense of an overarching conceptual scheme—of narrative, one might say. Mr. Richter, whose "Facing East From Indian Country" (also 2001) was an elegantly written attempt to see colonial America from the indigenous perspective, also felt that Mr. Taylor's emphasis on ecology removed the sense of human beings consciously acting in time—of what one could call character. Mr. Richter has now produced his own colonial history, "Before the Revolution: America's Ancient Pasts," that is all about narrative and character.

Note the plural in the subtitle's last word. In Mr. Richter's grand system, the continent's history comprises successive waves of adventurers, one atop another. Although the American Revolution "submerged these earlier strata," he argues that they nonetheless "remained beneath the surface to mold the nation's current contours." Walking atop the topmost strata, in other words, are thee and me, the terrain around us shaped by those who came first. The approach is bold, original and insightful; it is also not wholly successful. 

After prefatory chapters about "progenitors"—the peoples of medieval Europe (French, German) and North America (Pueblo, Mississippian)—Mr. Richter introduces his main characters: "conquistadores," "traders," "planters," "imperialists" and "Atlanteans." The approach allows Mr. Richter to compare groups from different cultures, sometimes to great effect. Many readers will be startled by his claims for the fundamental similarity of medieval Europe and medieval North America, each agricultural kingdoms with monumental religious structures (Gothic cathedrals, temple mounds) that served to concentrate political power. 

Still, Mr. Richter must admit that natives and newcomers had "spectacularly incompatible" notions of what political power meant. Consider the crown that the colonists in Jamestown, England's first long-lasting settlement, tried to present to the native emperor Powhatan in 1608. The Europeans viewed the shiny headgear as a symbol of feudal domination; Powhatan was supposed to kneel to accept it. Powhatan, by contrast, regarded it as a symbol of "the strong alliances that a leader could mobilize on behalf of his community." Far from representing subordination, it was an obligation owed by the English to him.

Such misunderstandings generated conflict. Conquistadores were warriors "who saw themselves as Christ-bearers." Columbus's goal for his voyages, as he repeatedly stated, was to furnish poor Spain with the funds to seize Jerusalem, crusader-style, from Islam. Protestant England was little different from Catholic Spain in this regard. "Profit is not the principal end of [colonizing Virginia]," thundered the powerful London minister William Crashaw in 1609. England would take the Americas, he said, for "plantation, of an English Church and Commonwealth, and consequently the conversion of heathen." Conquistadores did a lot of damage to native people. Their great weapon, though, was not the gun but the germ; European diseases killed between two-thirds and nine-tenths of the native people in the Americas during the time covered by "Before the Revolution."

These fervent and brutal but impractical dreamers were followed by hard-headed but less bellicose traders. Building on long-standing Indian trade patterns, they profitably exchanged iron pots, woolen blankets and guns for fur, leather and wood. Indians happily participated; they regarded the Europeans, who were willing to trade valuable iron pots for old deerskins, as ripe for the plucking. Americans like me, raised on tales of hapless Indians driven away by all-powerful Europeans, will be startled to learn that native peoples often moved their villages toward colonial settlements so as to take advantage of the new opportunities for enrichment. 

The traders were in time supplanted by a rush of "planters," pushed by population pressure and falling wages to seek farmland in North America. Like conquistadores, they sought to create a better, Christian world, but their focus was less on heaven than on earth. Unlike traders, who wanted Indian goods, planters wanted Indian land; Indians, who had different but very real systems for land ownership, resisted violently. In their turn, the planters found themselves in a struggle with the now-stronger nations in Europe, which wanted to exert ever more control over their colonies—"imperialists," as Mr. Richter calls them. And it is here that his masterly account begins to break down.

 The War That Made America by Fred Anderson (2005). Ignore the awful title; the book is a wide-ranging popular summary of the French and Indian War by one of its best historians. Mr. Anderson covers the full sprawl, but he focuses on its role in the conflicts that later resulted in the Revolution. 

 Ecological Imperialism by Alfred W. Crosby (1986). Written with a welcome dry wit, this classic study suggests that Europe's triumph was based on the often inadvertent refashioning of American ecosystems. The second edition (2004) has a characteristically punchy new introduction by the author. 

 Mosquito Empires  by J.R. McNeill (2010). Brilliant. Ranging freely across the "greater Caribbean"—the region between the Chesapeake Bay and the Guyanas—McNeill makes a riveting case that the primary driver in the colonial conflicts there was not political or economic but microbiological. Worth reading alone for the tale of malaria's role in the American Revolution. 

 American Slavery, American Freedom by Edmund S. Morgan (1975). Morgan, now 95 and still active, targets the great American paradox—that the planters of Virginia developed the nation's ideals of freedom even as they embraced slavery. Outdated in some ways but set down with elegance and power. 

 The Middle Ground by Richard White (1991). For 150 years Europeans and Indians formed what amounted to a conjoined society around the Great Lakes. Thought violent and unsettled, this mixed place represented, for a while, a different vision of this nation's future. Somewhat academic in tone but fascinating nonetheless.

 —Charles C. Mann  

The problem is not the sequence of strata: The conquistadore-begets-trader-begets-planter-begets-imperialist structure works. (College courses will be—and should be—structured around this sequence.) The problem is that the rise of Europe's empires was spurred by exactly the kind of impersonal, nonhuman forces that Mr. Richter criticized Alan Taylor for emphasizing. "Before the Revolution" has strikingly little discussion of economics. Indeed, Mr. Richter devotes only a single paragraph to the most important economic consequence of colonization: Spain's discovery, in Bolivia in 1545, of the globe's biggest silver deposits. Still more were found in Mexico a year later. The gush of silver more than doubled the world's supply of precious metal. It also abruptly transformed poor Christendom, "Beverly Hillbillies"-style, into rich Europe, financing the continent's innumerable wars and conquests. 

"Before the Revolution" does not even have an index entry for "potato," the American crop that, more than anything else, ended hunger in northern Europe after its adoption in the late 17th century (corn, another American import, played a similar role in southern Europe). Scholars have been debating the impact of the spud for decades—the celebrated historian William H. McNeill once claimed that "by feeding rapidly growing populations, it permitted a handful of European nations to assert domination over most of the world." But few would suggest, as Mr. Richter seems to, that American crops are not important enough to discuss.

Instead, Mr. Richter focuses on human actions—on character and narrative, on monarchs and military leaders—and in this way, if only in this way, "Before the Revolution" harks back to the sort of history in my long-ago textbook.

The book's final section concerns "Atlanteans," people who were neither "American," "European" nor "African" but some pan-Atlantic, 18th-century jumble of all three. From Mr. Richter's description, I expected a discussion of, for instance, the first wave of slaves. Called the "charter generation" by historian Ira Berlin, they were cosmopolitan Creoles who sought to manipulate the confusion of the time to build prosperity for themselves. Or Mr. Richter could have focused on the Indians of the Ohio River, who ingeniously played off Britain and France for more than a century. Instead, he inexplicably devotes many pages to a litany of brouhahas among Europe's competing empires for overseas influence.

Digression is inevitable in a book of this scope; Mr. Richter's breadth of knowledge almost requires it. But the omission of the charter generation is an example of his book's puzzling treatment of slavery. Mr. Richter doesn't whitewash it or minimize its presence. But his conceptual scheme doesn't allow much room for this critically important building block of American culture.

Obtaining labor was a central focus in every North American colony—there simply weren't enough English hands around to do all the things that new landowners wanted to do. About two-thirds of the European migrants to colonial North America were imported as indentured servants; upon landing, they were often treated as little more than slaves. Meanwhile, other colonists acquired actual slaves; by the time of the Revolution, more than 280,000 African captives had arrived in North America. Some slaves were Indian; colonists, mainly in Carolina, bought 25,000-50,000 Indians from native slave traders, reselling them from Massachusetts to Barbados. The trade faded away after 1715, when natives used the guns they had acquired by selling slaves to attack Carolina, nearly destroying it. 

Mr. Richter's Atlanteans were so entangled in buying, selling, managing and becoming unfree labor that I wondered whether he shouldn't have called his final, pre-revolutionary wave "slavers and slaves" and be done with it. Instead he closes with a superb, succinct summary of the French and Indian War. That war wiped out the Indians' ability to play off Britain and France, setting the groundwork for the American Revolution and much else. (Winston Churchill accurately called it the "first world war.") But it had little to do with the racial strife that is this nation's most perduring conflict.

"Before the Revolution" is a book that by its very boldness invites intelligent argument. Every few decades, historians develop a new way of looking at the past. I am not talking about "revisionism" but unifying conceptual schemes, the sort of mental framework that Frederick Jackson Turner created in his argument for the importance of the frontier to our history or that Bernard Bailyn established in his studies of the American Revolution's ideological origins. Historians debated Turner for a long time and continue to debate Mr. Bailyn. I wouldn't be surprised if they were arguing with Mr. Richter a decade from today. 

—Mr. Mann's new book, "1493: Uncovering the World That Columbus Created," will be published in August.