With nine players on his roster who have hit at least 20 home runs in a season, Yankees manager Joe Girardi understands he's sometimes going to have days like Sunday, when the team has a power surge and hits a handful of dingers. That's not what bugs him. 

What he'd rather do without is the maddening brand of on-again, off-again production he's seen through the first month of the season. "We've either been scoring a ton or none at all," he said after Sunday's 12-5 win in Texas. Indeed, before Sunday, the Yanks had scored more than five runs just three times over a two-week stretch of games.

While the squad has thrived off the long ball, having hit a major league-leading 54 home runs heading into Monday's games, the Yankees have a pedestrian .252 team batting average, placing them in the middle of the pack in the American League.

It's a foregone conclusion that the team needs its elder statesmen—Derek Jeter, 36, Alex Rodriguez, 35, and Jorge Posada, 39—to string together hits on a more-consistent basis. All three have struggled to find their stroke at one time or another early on this season.

Jeter, whose struggles have been the most heavily analyzed, appeared to turn the corner Sunday, with two home runs and four hits in the win. He lifted his average 20 points, from .256 to .276, by going 4-for-6. Teammates seemed elated by Jeter's breakout, knowing that his contributions as a leadoff man could yield dividends for the big bats in the middle of the order.

"That's huge. Obviously the guys at the top of our order ignite our offense," said Rodriguez, who's mired in a 7-for-39 funk in his past 10 games. He's had just one extra-base hit over that span—a double about a week and a half ago.

Before Sunday's game, Rodriguez looked at a half-hour worth of game film with hitting coach Kevin Long in hopes of correcting what Long said was a hitch in Rodriguez's approach. Long said Rodriguez was picking his left leg up too high before taking his swings. Both Long and Rodriguez, who's hitting .263, believe the slugger is on the cusp of a turnaround now that he's lowered his leg kick. 

Of course, despite all the heavy emphasis on the struggles of Jeter and Rodriguez, they're actually hitting a fair bit better than many of their teammates. "I think sometimes people are very quick to judge," Girardi said of Jeter and the talk of whether his struggles were a sign of diminishing skill. "When you look at the averages we have on our club, his is one of the better ones."

Neither Jeter nor Rodriguez has had problems like the ones Posada has had. The catcher-cum-DH has come away with just one hit in Arlington, dropping his average to .152, the lowest in the American League among regular starters. Perhaps most baffling is that the switch-hitting Posada has yet to record a hit against a left-hander in his 23 at-bats.

Posada, who moved to designated hitter this year, said on Friday that the slump is among the most frustrating of his career. He said he felt he was hitting the ball hard without reaping the rewards. "It's really frustrating," said Posada, who said he thanked Girardi for continuing to put him in the lineup despite the low average.

While Long spoke glowingly of the adjustments Jeter and Rodriguez had made, he said the hitting slumps take a toll on him as a coach. He specifically mentioned Posada.

"It wears on me," he said, citing Posada as an example. "His at-bats have been good for the last week to 10 days. But if you don't have anything to show for it...all of a sudden you're 1-for-18. And it's not fair."

 Write to  Chris Herring at chris.herring@wsj.com 