Intel Capital, the venture capital arm of  Intel Corp.
INTC


0.17
%




, started looking at opportunities in India in 1998 and has invested $285 million in 65 companies. The venture capital firm will invest aggressively in technology to promote a new ecosystem, said President  Arvind Sodhani and Managing Director  Sudheer Kumar Kuppam in a conversation with Deals India. Edited excerpts:

Deals India: What's your strategy in India?

Mr. Sodhani: The Indian venture capital market is quite active. We are [an] active strategic as well as venture investor. Last year, we invested $45 million in India.

The way Intel Capital has evolved the PC ecosystem… we want to continue doing that to the technology market all over the world. The only way you can nurture and promote technology is through strategic investments. Early-stage investment leads to very high risks, you actually have [to have] the stomach for taking that kind of risk.

Deals India: Are you looking at investing in green-technology companies?

Mr. Sodhani: We have one investment in India in the green-technology sector with KLG Systel. They are into transmission and delivery of energy through smart metering and related technology services. Smart meters allow consumers to figure out the electricity usage and thereby, avoid wastage. Very recently they also announced Intel atom-processor-based meter for water. We also are working actively with the government program that is trying to bring technology into energy generation, consumption and transmission.

We will invest in more clean-tech companies but most of it will be related to smart metering and related technologies. We are not interested in any solar investments in India. But if there is a clean technology in which we can make a strategic connection back to Intel, and Intel can expand our market and grow our business, we will definitely be interested.

Deals India: At what stage do you make your investments?

Mr. Kuppam: Of all the investments we announce the percentage of early-stage investments is very minimal. Most of our companies tend to be mid to later stage. While we are stage agnostic, we do not extend to incubation because it requires different set of skills as well as infrastructure presence. We have no incubation anywhere.

Deals India: Tell us a little more about the investments you just announced.

Mr. Kuppam: Many of the investments that we make do not have any influence. We have no commercial or contractual agreements with them to either adopt or use our products. Our focus is on encouraging innovation in technology, encouraging entrepreneurship in the tech world, and generally that helps us. For instance, PolicyBazaar.com is not going to use our product, adopt it or ask their customers to use our products. We make investments that indirectly help our business. We started it with Rediff.com, which was the first portal, and the only way to you could get to that portal was by using Intel processors.

Deals India: You have just entered the healthcare sector in India, are there other new sectors you plan to invest in?

Mr. Kuppam: We are looking to investment in cloud computing and data centers. As and when we get the opportunity we will look at investing in those areas.

Deals India: Would you say that you place your corporate priority over financial gains?

Mr. Kuppam: We are focused on both strategic investment as well as financial return. We have been in the business since the mid 1980s. We are the largest venture capital investor in the world in technology today. No organization like ours survives without providing financial returns to the shareholders. 

Deals India: Given the current climate, what exit routes do you see from your portfolio firms?

Mr. Kuppam: In India initial public offerings are mostly [used]. Our exits too have been IPOs. India has very attractive equity markets and investor appetites…we hope for more IPOs from India this year.