Syria's leading activists are going deep into hiding following a relentless and brutal crackdown by the regime, at a time when protest leaders were expected to be emerging into public view, as they did at this stage in Tunisia and Egypt.

"I have spent three days at a friend's house without being able to go outside and I may have to move again. We are prisoners in our own country," says one activist from outside Damascus, speaking by Skype to elude surveillance.

The military and security services continued a shoot-to-kill campaign on Sunday designed to crush antiregime protests after more than seven weeks. After the military siege of Deraa—the cradle of Syria's protest movement—tanks and troops have moved into other restive cities, as a pattern emerges among the regime's effort to simultaneously eliminate and silence dissent.

Despite the rising death toll from weeks of unrest, people across Syria continue to protest the government of President Bashar al-Assad. See events by day.

Track events day by day in the region.

Popular demonstrations in Tunisia toppled a president and spread to countries across the region. See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

On Sunday, the military targeted Homs, site of the largest protests and the bulk of casualties on Friday. Activists reported residents waking up to the sound of big explosions and helicopters overhead, after tanks and hundreds of additional troops rolled into the city overnight.

"We don't know what's going on," a resident reached by telephone said Sunday. "We're inside, but it sounds like a war outside."

Demonstrations broke out across the country on Friday, including in the business hub of Aleppo and in a district of the capital Damascus, resulting in the killing of at least 27 people, according to residents and activists. In many cases, they were demanding an end to the crackdown itself.

Six others were killed Saturday in a similar military deployment in Banias, including four women who ran outside to question the mass detention of men around the city. The army went door-to-door in the city rounding up men between the ages of 13 and 70, and handing them over to the security forces, who then checked whether their names were on a "wanted" list, one resident said by telephone. The detentions continued on Sunday.

In Homs, an all-girls elementary school was turned into a detention center, a rights activist said.

The regime's unrelenting efforts to kill, arrest and—human-rights groups say—torture, has driven activists underground and confined the action to rural and suburban areas. There, ethnic and tribal groups have more complaints and less to lose, and so need less encouragement to protest.

But while security forces have curbed the organizational capabilities of protesters against the 11-year rule of president Bashar al-Assad, it hasn't crushed dissent. Supported by Skype, the Internet and satellite phones smuggled into the country, many push forward, monitoring protests and sending out information. 

Generations of activists have sprung to action over the past seven weeks. Lawyers, activists and human-rights monitors such as Razan Zeitouneh, known in pro-democracy circles before the uprising, and Wissam Tarif, executive director of human-rights group Insan, both 35 years old—rare activists who use their own names—have monitored events from inside the country, and pushed them into public view. 

Ms. Zeitouneh was one of the first to go underground at the end of March, shortly after unrest broke out. "I started being followed and I realized that I had to hide if I wanted to continue my work," she said. "It is not easy being separated from people, but we have no choice."

Also in hiding is another of Syria's leading female activists, Suhair Atassi. From a politically active family, Ms. Atassi was locked up after a March 16 protest demanding political prisoners be freed. Shortly after being released in April, she went underground.

As arrests spread, even older figures previously viewed as untouchable have gone into hiding, including Haitham al-Maleh, a respected 80-year-old lawyer, who was released from jail in March. Others include doctor and opposition figure Walid al-Bunni, and writer and critic Yassin Haj-Saleh.

Security agents also have rounded up family members of those active inside and outside Syria, as well as detained ordinary citizens in mass, arbitrary detentions, according to reports. 

"My uncle and one of his sons were arrested from my hometown of Daraya; other members of my family have received threats," says Radwan Ziadeh, the U.S.-based head of the Damascus Center for Human Rights, who went into exile in late 2007.

Household raids have split up families, as members try to confuse intelligence agents. Ms. Zeitouneh's husband, Wael, fled to an undisclosed location separate from hers after security forces raided their house April 30 and arrested his 20-year-old brother. The family hasn't heard from him since.

The activist speaking by Skype added: "Myself, my wife and two children are split across three different places. My children are studying at home because we are afraid to let them go out; my wife still goes to work but we don't know how long that can last."

—Nour Malas in Abu Dhabi and a reporter in Damascus contributed to this article.