A long time ago, before hybrid cars, Jennifer Love Hewitt and even ESPN 2, a sharp-witted 19th century blogger named Mark Twain said "a lie can get halfway around the world before the truth can get its boots on."

To think: Mr. Twain didn't even have Twitter. Or a Tumblr account!

Technology prematurely buried an athlete on Sunday—Chicago Bears quarterback Jay Cutler, who was injured in the first half of the NFC Championship versus Green Bay. As Mr. Cutler stood by and watched backup Todd Collins and then third-stringer Caleb Hanie try and rally the Bears, his NFL brethren weighed in electronically from afar.

"When the going gets tough...quit," Tweeted the Jacksonville running back Maurice Jones-Drew.

"If he was my teammate I would look at him sideways," Tweeted the Philadelphia cornerback Asante Samuel.

Other Twitter condemnations followed, from current players and retirees like noted wallflower Deion Sanders, who told his army of 95,000-plus followers: "I never question a player's injury but I do question a player's heart."

The Bears wound up losing the NFC title game 21-14, despite a two-touchdown effort from Mr. Hanie, who before Sunday had thrown eight completions in his career.

In the postgame funk, Chicago linebacker Brian Urlacher defended Mr. Cutler. "Jay was hurt," he said. "I don't question his toughness. He's tough as hell."

Told of the Twitticism by NFL pros, Mr. Urlacher grew sharper: "It's easy to talk (bleep) about someone when you're sitting on your couch watching their game."

By Monday afternoon, truth had begun to rummage around in the closet for its boots. Mr. Cutler was reported to have a Grade II sprain of the medial collateral ligament of his left knee, an injury that could have kept him out of the Super Bowl had Chicago advanced.

"With a little more force, the next thing to go is the ACL," a physician named Neal ElAttrache told the Chicago Sun-Times, referring to the anterior cruciate ligament, the tearing of which can cause an athlete to miss months, or even end a career.

Of course, what does Mr. ElAttrache know? He's just some guy who reconstructed soon-to-be NFL MVP Tom Brady's knee.

Mr. Cutler's critics then pointed to the fact that Super Bowl MVP Drew Brees played this season with an MCL injury. But Mr. Brees said the severity of an MCL sprain could be wide-ranging, and it was unfair to rap the Bears quarterback.

"An MCL sprain means you tore your MCL to some degree," Mr. Brees told Yahoo! Sports. "I know players that have torn an MCL and been out six weeks...none of us know exactly what it is, except Jay Cutler and the Bears training staff. It's nothing any of us have the right to comment on, because we just don't know."

Denied again, the anti-Cutler pitchfork parade moved on to sideline behavior, arguing that the infamously moody quarterback should have been seen on television tutoring his understudy, Mr. Hanie.

But Mr. Hanie told a radio interviewer: "He encouraged me before I went in, when I came off the field, between every drive."

Oh, well. What's next?

Facts won't stand in the way of this macho parade. L'Affaire Cutler shows what the NFL is up against as it finally tries to confront the violence of the sport.

Brutality is hardwired into football—players get rewarded for it, coaches coach it, fans love it, television fetishizes it and pays billions for it—and playing hurt is the rule, not the exception. 

Reversing this culture often feels futile. After years of denial, the league has finally begun to address the consequences of head injuries.

But then an unpopular player gets hurt in a high-profile game and everyone's a leatherhead again. Sprained MCL? Just a flesh wound. The only way Mr. Cutler could have left with dignity was on a stretcher.

It's easy to talk tough in the moment when the long term is sadly glossed over. Every football career ends, but the pain lingers forever. A bad knee is getting off easy. There are 50-year-olds hobbled like 90-year-olds; traumatized former golden boys squinting in the dark with the shades drawn. One wonders what Mr. Cutler's critics would Tweet 20 years from now.

It might be something closer to the truth. 

 Write to  Jason Gay at jason.gay@wsj.com 