Samuel Curtis Upham, born in 1819, was in many respects the classic American success story. Raised in Montpelier, Vt., he tired of sleepy New England and set off for bigger and better things. After stints out West as a gold prospector, pickle vendor and newspaperman, he returned East. The first shots of the Civil War found him the proprietor of a prosperous Philadelphia stationery shop. 

There Upham might have passed the rest of his days in obscurity but for a surprising talent that he discovered early in 1862. Noticing widespread fascination with a picture of a Confederate bill printed in a local newspaper, Upham bought the engraved plate from the paper, commissioned a printer to run off 3,000 copies and started retailing them as mementoes of what, at the time, was expected to be a brief insurrection. Each note, at the bottom, proclaimed "Fac-simile," with Upham's name and address. But it was soon discovered that, by cutting the strip off, the bill would be accepted as genuine.

Suddenly Upham's mementoes started working their way South, carried by Union soldiers on the march and blockade-runners on the prowl. The notes served to undermine confidence in Confederate money, already weakened by Richmond's economic mismanagement and doubts about the prospects for the South's success in the war.

As Ben Tarnoff tells us in "Moneymakers," his portrait of three American counterfeiters, Upham was probably not the first Union patriot to try this form of economic warfare; he certainly wasn't the last. An enterprising New Yorker, Winthrop E. Hilton, was soon selling his customers fake Confederate notes with a higher face value for less Union money—a sign that even counterfeit Confederate bills were depreciating rapidly. Upham conceived of his own venture as a form of souvenir vending. Perhaps it was, but the scale was immense: By his own estimate (offered a decade later), he produced bills with a total face value of $15 million. If all of them found their way to the Confederacy, then a whopping 3% of the South's circulating money was printed by one man in Philadelphia.

Upham's narrative takes up what is the longest and most engrossing chapter in "Moneymakers," and rightly so. The details of his exploits are fascinating in themselves, including a blood-curdling voyage around Cape Horn to California. His counterfeiting motives also make him more sympathetic. Like the Southern leaders whom Mr. Tarnoff describes, we are made to see the North's Confederate moneymaking activity as "something more . . . than a handful of hustlers angling for a profit." Upham was fighting the Civil War by other means.

 By Ben Tarnoff  (The Penguin Press, 369 pages, $27.95)

Alas, Mr. Tarnoff's other subjects are less compelling, in part because they are mere hustlers angling for a profit. Owen Sullivan, active in the colonial era, was an Irishman of uncertain origins who set up a counterfeiting gang in a boggy slice of territory claimed by both New York and Connecticut. Eventually, his luck ran out, and he was hanged for his troubles in 1756. David Lewis (1788-1820), who never met a Pennsylvania jail he couldn't break out of, started out as a counterfeiter before converting to brigandage on country highways, ultimately dying of wounds sustained in a shoot-out with a posse assembled to arrest him.

Part of Mr. Tarnoff's problem is scant source material. We know as much as we do about Upham because his counterfeiting was more or less legal. But Sullivan and Lewis were criminals. Much of their activity occurred underground, and they had little interest in leaving behind accurate memoirs, let alone documentary evidence. For their narratives Mr. Tarnoff provides historical context but precious few biographical details.

Instead, he pads out his account with clumsy attempts to equate those rogues with the above-ground financiers in their own day and ours. He argues that the careers of his counterfeiters "mirrored the evolving confidence game of American capitalism, a machine that ran on various kinds of debt and deception" and that the counterfeiters' spirits can still be found "on the trading floors where speculators bet money they didn't have on a mercurial stock market." In reality, counterfeiting cuts at the foundations of commercial society by undermining public trust in the medium of exchange and store of value—one reason it was once a hanging offense.

Mr. Tarnoff is surely closer to the truth with his frequent reminders that Sullivan, Lewis and Upham thrived in periods of governmental monetary recklessness. Colonial governments were chronic mismanagers—in one four-year period, from 1744 to 1748, Massachusetts printed money so often that it suffered a stunning 50% devaluation of its notes. Lewis's life coincided with an ill-conceived explosion of government-granted bank charters allowing thousands of new institutions to issue bills for circulation. The Confederacy of Upham's day never could resist the siren song of the printing press.

Far from being the ne plus ultra of American capitalism, then, counterfeiters are deft imitators—or exploiters—of the government's own economy-wrecking policies. Nor should we tie counterfeiters conceptually to modern Wall Street, where, according to Mr. Tarnoff, "people wield complex financial instruments like magic wands, spinning false fortunes out of the ether of global capitalism." In the past decade, it was the Federal Reserve that, by holding interest rates too low for far too long, made possible a kind of financial recklessness of which Sullivan or Lewis could only dream and which the honest businessman Upham might have feared.

In our own day, Kim Jong Il's North Korea is said to have produced some $45 million in high-quality fake "supernotes" with which to undermine the U.S. economy. But the recent decline in the dollar's value, to less than one-1,300th of an ounce of gold, has nothing to do with a dictator's schemes and everything to do with Ben Bernanke's decision, at the Fed, to increase the official money supply by trillion-dollar increments. Not even Samuel Upham could have pulled that off.

 Mr. Sternberg is an editorial-page writer at The Wall Street Journal Asia. 