It's unlikely to wow guests, but as kitchen happiness goes, the salad spinner falls high on the list of bulky gadgets worthy of limited cupboard space. We canvassed the market and put bunch upon bunch of dripping wet greens through the wringer. We found construction and comfort were key to our five favorite workhorses that combat slick, droopy salads.

 Zyliss Easy Spin $25 // zylissusa.com  

 Plus: Once you get used to the pull-cord, the salad spins smoothly and the stop button brakes like a top-rated car. A flat top makes it easy to stack and the large bowl dries enough greens for a soiree.

 Minus: Tugging at the pull-cord reminds us of starting a lawnmower.

 Oxo Steel $50 // oxo.com  

 Plus: The pushdown knob is so effortless, it's almost surprising to open the lid and see that the water's gone. The solid rubber base keeps the spinner in place, while the quick built-in brake means dry greens that much faster. 

 Minus: It's bigger than its classmates and while stainless steel is nice, it's also not cheap.



 Oxo Good Grips $30 // oxo.com  

 Plus: Less flashy than its stainless steel sister (above), this clear plastic version spins salad just as effortlessly. 

 Minus: It's big, and the non-slip ring doesn't hold to surfaces as well as that of its fancier sibling.



 Progressive Collapsible $30 // progressiveintl.com  

 Plus: Smallest of the five, this pull-cord spinner collapses to less than three inches tall, leaving room for that extra kitchen toy.

 Minus: The pull-cord is jerky, making it hard to develop a consistent spin.

 Franke AK-200S $158 // frankeksd.com  

 Plus: Sleek, curvy design and strong metal physique make this spinner one that doubles as a showpiece. We liked playing with the smooth pull-cord and it's the only spinner we tested built as a colander, sending water directly down the drain instead of a messy retention bowl. 

 Minus: It holds fewer greens than its colleagues—you might have to dry your greens in batches. And it's no bargain. 