There's a profound pleasure in knowing a few works of art—or an entire genre—really well. But burrowing only into the familiar means missing out on quite a lot. And in New York, it's all too easy to ignore museums, performances or venues that happen to be "too far" across town.

So, in this season of resolutions, here's one that's intended to last just 31 days: Culture City is taking on January as a month of discovery. The art that has been languishing on the "to see" list is up for a visit. If it's new to me, I'm going. Couch potato no more, I will see that panorama at the Queens Museum of Art, no matter how many trains it takes to get there. 

But let's not get carried away just yet. To start things off, how about something a little closer to the office—like theater?

Prior to last week, I had never seen Tony Kushner's "Angels in America: A Gay Fantasia on National Themes." When this two-part play debuted on Broadway in 1993 and 1994, I was a college student—in Ohio. Maybe the national tour came our way, but it didn't register. The HBO mini-series aired in 2003, a year when my own life took priority over television. Now, almost 20 years later, so much has been written about this play (and with so much passion) that its central importance is clear even without seeing it.

Catching a reflection, though, is no substitute for watching the real thing—a nearly seven-hour stretch of theater for which Mr. Kushner won the Pulitzer Prize in 1993, plus Tony Awards for best play in 1993 and 1994. And with the Signature Theatre Company's revival, directed by Michael Greif, extended through March 27 at the Peter Norton Space on 42nd Street, the opportunity presented itself.

To add some context, I attended the performance with a theater buff who has an inexhaustible memory: Howard Sherman, executive director of the American Theater Wing. (Mr. Sherman had two conditions: that we watch both parts, "Millennium Approaches" and "Perestroika," in the same day—and no talk of Tony Awards 2011.) Our marathon day of theater began at 2 p.m. and ended around 11 p.m., with a break for dinner. My hope was that Mr. Sherman's perspective would add some depth to my own first-time viewing. As it turned out, that happened even before the show began.

In the lobby, Mr. Sherman was greeted by Broadway producer Richard Frankel and his wife, playwright Kathleen Clark. Mr. Frankel ("The Producers," "Hairspray") was part of the original team that presented "Angels" on Broadway. So was another matinee audience member: National Endowment for the Arts chair Rocco Landesman, who in the early '90s was president of Jujamcyn Theaters. It was your basic schmoozing, yes, but also a part of the show's history.

Settling in, we discussed the fact that "Angels" is so often described as "epic," and what that means at a time when day-into-night theater is all the rage. "In a way, 'Angels' is the grandfather of all that," Mr. Sherman said. "But while it is epic in scope and length, it only has eight actors playing multiple roles. It's not a 'big' show."

In 1987, Mr. Kushner was commissioned by San Francisco's Eureka Theater Company (then headed by Oskar Eustis, now artistic director of the Public Theater) to write a new play, but he had begun forming the essential ideas for "Angels in America" in around 1985. Its first performance was at Eureka in 1991. 

While the play's politics were deeply reactive to the Reagan era and the exploding AIDS crisis, it didn't arrive in York until 1993. "It was produced in San Francisco and London, then Broadway," Mr. Sherman said. "By the time it came to New York, it was during the Clinton administration." It was in that period, he noted, that the contentious "Don't ask, don't tell" policy was introduced to the military. Coincidentally, the play now returns to the city at the time of the policy's repeal.

The intervening years have also diminished the immediacy of Roy Cohn, who is represented prominently in the play, as a popular figure. We spent one of the "Perestroika" intermissions discussing how current audiences, who don't have the benefit of reading about Cohn in New York magazine every week, might take in his character. Maybe the personality type—so richly created, and so well portrayed here by Frank Wood—carries more weight than the historical figure? 

By the end, though, I thought about that role in different terms: This is a play about a moment in American history, and audiences have enough bandwidth to learn about Cohn, his presence in the McCarthy era, and his conflicted personal life. If not, he's another sputtering madman using old-fashioned phones. 

But it's not all ancient history: Republicans (particularly President Reagan) and Mormons are still socially acceptable punch lines. And that probably won't change in another two decades.

Over the years, "Angels" has been greeted with all manner of accolades, tributes and palm fronds, so watching it now comes with an element of self-consciousness about the expectations. Ultimately, though, the writing is so tight and sharp that I was completely absorbed. Cohn was a gripping character. Zachary Quinto delivered a feisty performance of his character's coffee-shop monologue. My attention was only really tested during the heaven sequence, late in "Perestroika." 

Walking out of the theater, I realized that, yes, I could have long ago read the play or watched the DVD. But seeing it live with Mr. Sherman's memories and context was thoroughly enriching—and an excellent start to what should be a month of new ideas.