David H. Stevens, who last week said he would step down as commissioner of the Federal Housing Administration, will be named the next chief executive of the Mortgage Bankers Association.

Mr. Stevens emerged as a key adviser on housing-finance policy during a two-year stint in the Obama administration. At the MBA, he will succeed John A. Courson, who is departing in an unexpected shake-up at a trade association that has been through a tumultuous period. 

Mr. Courson, a former mortgage banker, took the helm of the group in 2008. Mr. Stevens will assume the post in May.

The housing bust has hit the once-powerful trade association hard, with many lenders failing and others being absorbed by healthier rivals. Last year, the MBA sold its Washington, D.C., headquarters—a 10-story glass building bought at the height of the real-estate bubble—at a loss after it struggled to attract tenants. While membership has stabilized over the past year, the association has been forced to pare staff and has seen its lobbying clout diminishon Capitol Hill.

"This is an opportunity to provide leadership and a clear vision, a renewed sense of direction for the MBA and its members," Mr. Stevens said in an interview Tuesday.

Mr. Courson inherited many of the challenges facing the MBA when he took the top post and had his contract extended in the past few months, according to people familiar with the matter. He declined to comment through an MBA spokesman.

Mr. Stevens must shore up the group's relations with its largest members, some of which are said to be dissatisfied with the MBA's waning influence in Washington. He will also have to soothe smaller, independent banks that have grown concerned about a playing field they perceive as increasingly tilted in favor of the biggest few.

"The MBA is trying to find somebody that has stature to try to hold everybody together," said a mortgage-industry official. Others have expressed concern that the MBA has been frozen out of discussions in Washington because it has been associated with many of the problems that caused the housing bust.

Under the administration's ethics rules, Mr. Stevens won't personally be allowed to lobby former colleagues for at least two years. He will also take additional steps to recuse himself from any contact with the MBA or its members on government business until he departs the FHA at the end of the month, said a spokesman for the Department of Housing and Urban Development. "We think it's important to ensure that there's not even an appearance of conflict of interest," the spokesman said.

Mr. Stevens, 54 years old, formerly held top positions at Wells Fargo & Co. and Freddie Mac. At the FHA, he had a front-row seat on key debates about the future of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and the design of various mortgage-modification programs. 

He also has been involved in the administration's effort to forge a settlement between federal and state officials and the largest U.S. banks regarding alleged mortgage-servicing abuses.

Mr. Stevens said Tuesday that it was important for the organization to remind policy makers that the MBA supports an industry that finances American housing. Some critics have painted the industry "with a broad brush and it's important to restore balance," he said.

He also said he looked forward to advocating best practices and protocols that would rebuild trust and integrity within the industry. Over the past year, Mr. Stevens has repeatedly warned the MBA's members that they face a "trust deficit" and that they must do more to help troubled homeowners and to accept greater regulation from federal and state officials. "Washington doesn't trust this industry at all," he said at an MBA conference last spring.

At the FHA, Mr. Stevens inherited a government agency that was facing a dramatic surge both in market share and in souring loans. He pushed to eject lenders that weren't meeting the agency's lending standards and raised fees borrowers must pay in order to rebuild the agency's dwindling reserves. But he resisted more dramatic steps to increase borrowing costs for home buyers.

The new position could pit Mr. Stevens against his former administration on a number of policy debates. For example, the mortgage industry opposed efforts, backed by Democrats and the Obama administration, to allow judges to restructure mortgage debt through bankruptcy protection, a process dubbed "cramdown" by the industry. Currently, the industry is strongly resisting efforts that could require banks to write down mortgages as part of any settlement over foreclosure abuses. 

 Write to  Nick Timiraos at nick.timiraos@wsj.com 