In a city that turns casual entertainments into competitive sport (Have you been to John Dory? Did you see "Jerusalem"? Where are you vacationing?), the looming surfeit of Shakespeare productions this summer is sure to lead to one-upmanship masked as chatter: Do you have tickets to see Jacobi at BAM? Are you on line for Shakespeare in the Park? How many Royal Shakespeare productions are you seeing?

Let's review: Following a spring season that saw, among other things, dueling productions of "Merchant of Venice" and the ongoing Macbeth-based installation project "Sleep No More," the Brooklyn Academy of Music has just kicked off a run of "King Lear" starring Derek Jacobi. On June 6, Shakespeare in the Park begins its season of "Measure for Measure" and "All's Well That Ends Well" at the Delacorte Theater. And a month later, as part of Lincoln Center Festival, the Royal Shakespeare Company will present five plays ("Romeo and Juliet," "As You Like It," "Julius Caesar," "King Lear" and "The Winter's Tale") in a replica of its stage reconstructed inside the Park Avenue Armory. 

"It's a great time to be performing, studying, teaching and watching Shakespeare in New York City," said Michael Sexton, the artistic director of the Shakespeare Society. "It's the first time in a long time that I feel there are conversations between actors, audiences, young companies and more established New York theaters and schools about Shakespeare—what it is, how to do it, what it means." 

So, who's snapping up tickets to which plays? Culture City asked around the theater world for a few picks. While everyone had their favorites, almost everyone interviewed put Mr. Jacobi's "Lear" at top of their list. 

 John Douglas Thompson , actor 

Mr. Thompson, a recent Macbeth with Theatre for a New Audience, is headed to Shakespeare and Co., in Lenox, Mass., this summer. Although he is typically onstage, this season he will be in the audience for "Romeo and Juliet" and "As You Like It." Because of that, he's keen to see the RSC's versions, too. "It's good when we can see multiple productions of the same play—it expands our vocabulary of the plays," he said, adding that both Public Theater productions are on his list, too. "A lot of people don't do 'All's Well.'"

 Stephen Fried , free-lance director 

What's so tricky about "All's Well"? Mr. Fried, who directed it last year at the Shakespeare Theatre of New Jersey and expects to see all the productions at the RSC and Public, explains: "There are big structural challenges in the way that the narrative is laid out. The real focus of the plot doesn't click in until a third of the way in. Figuring out a way to make that work is a challenge. For me, it is principally a play about three young people going out into the world and realizing their understanding of what it means to pursue honor and love."

 Jessie Austrian, co-artistic director, Fiasco Theater 

Currently in "The Importance of Being Earnest" on Broadway, Ms. Austrian has one must-see this summer: "I've never seen 'All's Well That Ends Well.'"

She cautioned Americans about assuming that the Brits do Shakespeare better, but also recommended seeing more than one RSC production, because the ensemble casting allows actors to play sharply different roles from night to night. "Americans don't get to see that much. There are so few repertory companies, and so few of them run things in rep."

 Casey Biggs, The New School for Drama faculty member, director, actor 

This Juilliard-trained thespian advises his students to see everything they can. But his own picks are specific. "I'm much more interested in 'Measure for Measure,'" he said. "It has something to say about our moral state in the world today."

Of the RSC productions, he says: "I'm always a big fan of 'Romeo and Juliet.' And I would love to see what they are going to do with that space."

 Alison Frederick,  co-artistic director, Bama Theater Company 

Ms. Frederick and company brought a blues-inflected "As You Like It" to the 2010 Fringe Festival. For that reason, the RSC production is high on her list. "When you see a show that you've done, you see a whole different play," she said, though she has a favorite: "'Measure for Measure' is a play about love, power and the role of self-sacrifice on the road to salvation. It begs the question: What is truly a good deed?"

 Howard Sherman, executive director, American Theater Wing 

Mr. Sherman is stepping down in June, but he's got his summer plans ready: "While I always enjoy an evening at the Delacorte, I'm particularly excited to see the Royal Shakespeare Company's 'Winter's Tale.' Due to sheer circumstance and other commitments, I've never seen it onstage. At long last, I'll find out how 'Exit, pursued by a bear' actually fits in the play."

 Patrick Page, actor 

He's the Green Goblin in "Spider-Man: Turn Off the Dark," but this longtime Shakespearean is thinking lofty thoughts. "I'm kind of into 'Julius Caesar' right now," said Mr. Page, who has played Marc Antony, Decius and Brutus. "It's really about friendship. How does friendship impact big decisions? Is it ever OK to kill your friend—even if your friend is a tyrant?"

 Jack O'Brien, director 

Now at the helm of "Catch Me If You Can," Mr. O'Brien has directed Shakespeare for decades and can rattle off commentary on all the plays. When pressed to recommend just two, he chose a comedy, "As You Like It," and a tragedy, "King Lear," saying: "A little from column A and a little from column B!"

 Write to  Pia Catton at Pia.Catton@wsj.com 