LONDON—Eager to throw off the yoke of government ownership, the U.K.'s two partially state-owned banks have been quietly moving to stir investor interest in U.K. government holdings of their stocks. 

  Royal Bank of Scotland Group PLC and  Lloyds Banking Group PLC, which are 84% and 42% taxpayer owned, respectively, as well as other investment banks, have been encouraging investor interest in the two banks' stock to lay early groundwork for the sale of shares currently held by the U.K. Treasury, people close to the matter say. In some cases, these discussions involve sovereign-wealth funds in China and Singapore, they say.

The government invested £65.8 billion ($102.3 billion) in the two banks to keep them from collapsing amid the financial crisis. 

People close to the banks say they have been approaching investors with the tacit approval of U.K. Financial Investments Ltd., the U.K. government agency that independently manages the holdings for the government. 

Given the large amount of equity that will be sold, UKFI "hasn't discouraged the banks from selling their story far and wide," said one executive close to the discussions.

According to another person involved in the process, UKFI's message is that: "You need to find investors at some stage, so any groundwork you can do now is helpful."

Even as RBS and Lloyds approach investors on their own, the decision of when to sell—and to whom—belongs to UKFI. A sale of the U.K. government holdings isn't expected until the fourth quarter of the year at the earliest, people close to the matter say, and there is no certainty any sovereign-wealth fund will ultimately be a buyer.

In meetings with big institutions, the banks aren't explicitly asking investors to buy shares, which would be premature. Instead, the banks are helping the investors to "get up to speed" on the investment thesis behind each bank, said one of the people close to the talks, who said investor response has been polite but noncommittal.

A spokeswoman for UKFI said that agency hasn't encouraged the banks to court eventual buyers and doesn't interfere in banks' investor relations generally.

Last month, RBS Chief Executive  Stephen Hester said at a hearing before a parliamentary committee that a successful share of government stakes in RBS "would be a very important positive ... it would help the public purse; it would be symbol of RBS's recovery, and it would help all sides."

Mr. Hester, who is overseeing a huge reorganization of the bank, has said, however, that the timing is a matter for the government.

Some people close to the two banks said the investor talks are nothing more than business-as-usual investor-relations work and shouldn't be seen as a sign that the banks are taking extraordinary steps to recruit new institutional investors.

The British government's efforts to disentangle itself from the financial sector have lagged well behind the U.S., where the Treasury last year sold its stake in Citigroup Inc. and has laid the groundwork for returning American International Group Inc. to private hands. 

Unlike the shares of banks such as Citigroup, on which the U.S government turned a profit, the U.K. government's holdings of Lloyds and RBS are still in the red. As RBS slogs through a major restructuring and both banks grapple with their heavy exposures to troubled Ireland, RBS's share price has remained about 10 pence below the government's buy-in price of 50.2 pence, and Lloyds has been hovering just under the buy-in price of 73.6 pence for the past several weeks.

However, people close to both the banks and UKFI said they haven't ruled out an initial sale to an "anchor investor"—even if it means taking a loss. While it might be tough to spin publicly, the sale could boost interest in the banks and generate future sales if done at the right moment, these people say. 

That is in part because the government and investors are awaiting the results of a high-profile review of the banking sector to be published in the fall, which is examining radical ideas such as breaking off investment banks from commercial ones. 

The commission in charge of the review plans in March or April to publish an "options paper" with a short list of the proposals, which bankers say could clear up enough of the uncertainty surrounding British banks that investors might start tiptoeing back into bank stocks.

Many industry and government officials harbor concerns over the two banks' health. UKFI is wary of selling the shares too early—only to have the banks later come back to taxpayers for more money, said a person close to the situation. 

As the banks have been tentatively sounding out potential investors, the agency has been continuing its own meetings. Last fall, it hired former Bank of America Merrill Lynch investment banker  Jim O'Neil, an American, to arrange eventual sales. Mr. O'Neil has been holding meetings with bank executives, getting presentations about their finances and asking questions about strategy and other issues.

UKFI walks a fine line. When news breaks that the sale process is under way, the banks' shares could come under pressure as investors gear up for an influx of stock on the market, which in turn could eat into the government's take. Thus, it may be in UKFI's interest to keep a lid on such speculation until the last possible moment. At the same time, the government doesn't want the shares to fall following its initial sales, because that might scare away investors in future offerings. 

 Write to  Sara Schaefer Muñoz at sara.munoz@wsj.com, David Enrich at david.enrich@wsj.com and Dana Cimilluca at dana.cimilluca@wsj.com 