 China's trade surplus widened sharply in April, to $11.4 billion, as import growth slowed, which will likely add to the pressure on Beijing to allow faster yuan appreciation.  

 Greece likely will need nearly $86 billion in new financial aid to cover its financing needs stretching into 2013.  

 The CFTC intends to bring aiding and abetting, civil fraud and other charges against a Goldman division for its role as clearing broker for an SEC-registered broker-dealer.  

 Sony is still unable to say when it can restore partial service to its PlayStation Network online game system, likely adding to pressure from already frustrated customers who have seen their personal data jeopardized.  

 U.S.-based First Solar and China Power International plan to collaborate on projects in China, the U.S. and elsewhere, amid weak demand in Europe.  

 Apple and Google defended their privacy practices before U.S. lawmakers at a hearing on how the companies collect consumer data through their smartphones as location data emerges as a big treasure for business.  

 NEC posted a 36% drop in net profit in its fiscal fourth quarter and said it swung to a net loss for the full fiscal year, as the March 11 disaster squeezed results.  

 Ranbaxy posted a smaller-than-expected 68% drop in its first-quarter profit, with an analyst citing strong margins for the Indian firm from U.S. sales of a generic drug to treat Alzheimer's disease.  

 Suzuki fiscal-year net profit rose 56%, but the Japanese car maker warned of coming tough conditions following the March earthquake.  

 General Motors will disclose Tuesday plans to invest $2 billion in its U.S. factories by 2014 and expand its work force in anticipation of further sales gains.  

 SKS Microfinance used words such as "reinvent," "diversify" and "consolidate" to try to soothe investor fears. But it also said it expects more "pain" because it has to make higher provisions for bad loans.  

 Jaguar Land Rover has launched a £1 billion bond sale, making the luxury-car manufacturer the latest in a string of borrowers with Indian roots seeking cheap overseas funds.  

 Foster's was officially unshackled from its underperforming wine assets, but the market remained unconvinced that a takeover of the iconic Australian company is imminent.  

 U.S. stocks advanced as investors drew encouragement from Microsoft's deal for Skype and signs of economic strength. China and Japan led most Asian markets higher.  

 The euro seesawed against the dollar as traders remain cautious about a possible restructuring of Greek debt.  

 Syria is continuing military operations in three areas across the country, which rights activists said threaten to cripple Syria's seven-week uprising. EU sanctions took effect against President Bashar Al-Assad's brother, a military commander, and 12 other officials.  

 U.S. military officers in Afghanistan have drawn up preliminary proposals to withdraw as many as 5,000 troops from the country in July and as many as 5,000 more by the year's end.  

About 400 Taliban armed fighters launched a large-scale attack Tuesday against Afghan police checkpoints in a remote mountainous eastern province but failed to overrun the government positions.

Yemen has stopped producing oil because of internal strife, plunging a nation that is already the Arab world's poorest into further economic decline.