Real-estate investors in Japan spent recent months getting in position for what looked like a nascent recovery. They have spent recent days assessing damage and grappling with the long-term consequences of the destruction and a possible nuclear disaster. 

The area of northern Japan hardest hit by the earthquake and tsunami has little foreign and institutional ownership of real-estate, compared with places such as Tokyo and Osaka, investors say. International private-equity funds and companies that invest in Japanese real estate have reported mainly cosmetic damage—such as displaced ceiling tiles, cracked parking lots, and broken sprinkler pipes—to their assets, most of which were built to withstand earthquakes. 

But property values throughout the country could tumble, if economic repercussions result in lower demand for office space, stores and hotel rooms. The biggest worry on many minds on Tuesday was the extent of the damage to reactors at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear-power plant about 150 miles north of Tokyo, a situation that remained fluid as night fell in Japan. 

"Absent the nuclear uncertainty, I don't believe there would be any long-term negative impact to the Tokyo real-estate market," said  Jon-Paul Toppino, president of SCJ Investment Management. The firm notified clients in recent days that its employees were safe and that its $8.5 billion Japanese real-estate portfolio, which includes an office building in the harder-hit city of Sendai, was largely undamaged.

But Japan's publicly traded landlords have lost as much as 20% of their value since the earthquake struck, as fear rose Tuesday about the economic consequences of the disaster. Shares of  Mori Hills REIT Investment Corp. have fallen about 20% since Friday,  Nippon Building Fund Inc. has dropped 13%,  Japan Real Estate Investment Corp. is down 12% and  Global One Real Estate Investment Corp. is off 10%.  Japan Logistics Fund Inc. dropped 17%. 

Even Japanese construction companies such as  Kajima Corp.,  Shimizu Corp., and  Taisei Corp., which saw their shares jump on Monday on hope they would profit from rebuilding efforts, were hit by the broad selloff in Tokyo on Tuesday, where the benchmark Nikkei Stock Average tumbled 11%.

The earthquake hit at a time when Japan's real-estate market was showing signs of recovery, especially in Tokyo and a handful other cities popular with foreign investors. Japanese real-estate investment trusts have enjoyed more access to capital, especially since the Bank of Japan last fall started buying a range of financial assets, including J-REITs and exchange-traded funds. The Tokyo Stock Exchange's REIT Index climbed sharply, touching 1,107.70 last month, a 22% rise from a year ago. 

"We've gone through the major assets—the [earthquake] damage appears to be cosmetic, not structural," said  Scott Kelley, chief executive of private-equity firm Aetos Capital Asia, which has a $5 billion real-estate portfolio in Japan. "The big question is, 'Where does the economy go?' "

Many U.S.-based investment firms will be watching closely.  Morgan Stanley's real-estate unit bought three office buildings in Japan in August, according to Real Capital Analytics. Hedge-fund giant  Fortress Investment Group last summer made a $250 million investment in daVinci Holdings K.K. and said it had finished fund raising for an $800 million private-equity fund targeting real-estate debt in Japan. Morgan Stanley and Fortress didn't have immediate comment Tuesday morning in New York. 

For hotel companies, the disaster comes at a time of resurgence in global travel. Major operators, including  Starwood Hotels & Resorts and  Marriott International, haven't reported major structural damage in Japan or interruptions to their business operations, but they could be hurt if tourism and business travel drops. 

Japanese real estate, long attractive to U.S. investors, has lately drawn capital from other Asian countries as well. Investors from Hong Kong, Singapore, and other neighbors snapped up property last year, believing that real estate in Japanese cities was still attractive and undervalued. Land prices in Japan have plummeted for more than a decade.

Singapore-based Global Logistic Properties Ltd., one of Asia's largest warehouse owners, estimated less than $50 million in losses to its $6.3 billion portfolio in Japan. The company's shares on the Singapore stock exchange are off about 7% since Friday morning. Deputy Chairman  Jeff Schwartz, predicted an uptick in demand for modern distribution facilities from companies seeking to move out of older warehouses that are more prone to earthquake damage. 

"It's a horrible tragedy, but it will drive demand," said Mr. Schwartz, a former chief executive of warehouse giant  ProLogis.

Global Logistic, which went public in October, owns a portfolio of Asian assets bought from ProLogis by Government of Singapore Investment Corp. in December 2008. ProLogis said the Japan facilities it still owns largely resumed "some level of operations" on Monday, but that its Sendai industrial park sustained water damage on the first floor. 

—A.D. Pruitt contributed to this article.

 Write to  Anton Troianovski at anton.troianovski@wsj.com and Atsuko Fukase at atsuko.fukase@dowjones.com 