Austin Ligon: This is actually the modern analogy of "port cities": Why Amsterdam, London, New York, Singapore, Hong Kong, Goa, San Francisco and Zanzibar jumped far out ahead of the nations surrounding them 200 to 300 years ago, as they became the "Seatropolises" of their time. And the cleverest, like Hong Kong and Singapore, have signed on for a second act with air.

America pioneered not just the cargo hub but the "aerotropolis" itself in the '80s: Los Angeles, Dallas- Fort Worth, Chicago's O'Hare and Dulles are all surrounded by "new cities" of businesses and residences that were built to accommodate those who "lived" in the air, where the existence of the hub connecting them to the rest of America was the key to their location, not the city near them. 



Uriah Maynard: "Aerotropolises" may be where things are at now, but what happens when the recession comes back for round 2, driven by peak oil and the increasing demand spawned by all this growth? When oil is too expensive to use cargo planes for most things, and only the wealthiest travelers can afford to go by plane? The aerotropolises that have the most sea and railway linkages, and that are designed to best integrate public transit and walkable neighborhoods (as well as local food production and renewable energy resources), will be the success stories 50 years from now.

Fred B. Charatan: I'm a retired neuropsychiatrist, and I respectfully disagree with the title for Mr. Putnam's piece; a 20-minute session, rather than the several hours he spent, would easily establish the diagnosis of paranoid schizophrenia.

My reasons are as follows: The quality of Mr. Gadhafi's ideas are certainly megalomaniacal, but they are held absolutely tenaciously, and are impervious to challenge by his interlocutor. He shows a paranoid perception of any criticism ("he would not stand for disunity") and pathologic narcissism, given his "philosopher-king" self-styled, delusional title. Sadly, there are many persons suffering from paranoid schizophrenia, but one need not waste time challenging their delusions. Rather, they belong in a psychiatric hospital where they can undergo comprehensive treatment.

Malcolm Kyle: Prohibition of cocaine has engendered black-market profits that are obscenely huge. Remove this, and you remove the ability to bribe or threaten any government official or even whole governments. The argument that legalized regulation won't severely cripple organized crime is truly bizarre.