FLORHAM PARK, N.J.—Tom Brady took a shotgun snap late in the fourth quarter, and his situation was dire. The Patriots were trailing the Jets in Sunday's divisional playoff game, and Mr. Brady, the Patriots' all-everything quarterback, needed to pick up some yards on third-and-13. Easier said than done, of course.

Thanks to some innovative game-planning from coach Rex Ryan and his defensive coordinator, Mike Pettine, the Jets had confused Mr. Brady throughout by disguising their coverages in the secondary. And this particular play stuck to a familiar script: Mr. Brady fidgeting in the pocket, shuffling back and forth, surveying the field for open targets. He could find none.

Nine seconds—an eternity in football time—elapsed from the moment center Dan Koppen snapped the ball until Mr. Brady fired a pass at the feet of scatback Danny Woodhead, incomplete. On fourth down, Mr. Brady was more decisive but the ball rattled off wide receiver Deion Branch's hands.

The sequence essentially sealed the Jets' 28-21 victory at Gillette Stadium and launched them onward, upward, undaunted. The Jets (13-5) already have christened next Sunday's AFC Championship Game against the Pittsburgh Steelers (13-4) at Heinz Field: "Mission Impossible: III."

The first challenge was knocking off the Indianapolis Colts and quarterback Peyton Manning two weekends ago. Then came Mr. Brady. Now, the sixth-seeded Jets will hit the road once again to face the Steelers and quarterback Ben Roethlisberger. Manning, Brady, Roethlisberger: Seldom has an NFL team ever had to negotiate its way past such a high-octane triumvirate to reach the Super Bowl. The Jets' defense seems prepared.

The Jets flummoxed the Colts by backing off on their blitz packages and dropping defenders into coverage, and they drew on the same concepts against the Patriots—with some twists. One of the keys was playing more zone than usual, and several players said they also were able to make it appear before the snap that they were in man-to-man when they actually were in zone. And vice versa.

"He couldn't line up and say, 'OK, they're in man-to-man, I need to go here with the ball,'" safety Eric Smith said, referring to Mr. Brady. "He had to drop back, finish his drop and then figure out what we were in."

As a result, television viewers—Jets fans, in particular—were treated to images of Mr. Brady dancing in the pocket and looking uncertain. Jets running back LaDainian Tomlinson said he noticed how Mr. Brady kept patting the ball, patting the ball, a sort of S.O.S. signal for quarterbacks. 

The Jets' four-man front capitalized at times, with defensive end Shaun Ellis recording two of the team's five sacks. 

But largely, that pressure at the line of scrimmage was a direct result of what was going on downfield, out of camera view, the Jets' secondary blanketing the Patriots' receivers.

The Patriots had entered the game with the NFL's highest-scoring offense, with Mr. Brady accruing 36 touchdowns and just four interceptions. On Sunday, he still threw for 299 yards on 29 of 45 passing. But five of those completions, for 62 yards, came on a late meaningless drive. 

The Patriots labored without a deep downfield threat who could have opened things up underneath. (Randy Moss, please pick up the red courtesy phone.) As a result, Mr. Brady had no choice but to rely on underneath routes run by slot receiver Wes Welker, Mr. Woodhead and his tight ends. 

The Jets were able to negate those options. Rather than blitz, their linebackers often backpedaled at the snap and clogged the middle.

Such was the case in the first quarter—on Mr. Brady's fifth pass of the game, to be exact—when linebacker David Harris picked off a pass intended for Mr. Woodhead. That play, as much as any of the Jets' brash talk, made a statement. It was Mr. Brady's first interception in 340 pass attempts.

"Anytime you see him scrambling around like a chicken with his head cut off, it's shocking, because you don't see it very often," defensive lineman Trevor Pryce said. "The game plan was out of sight. We did some stuff I've never seen in pro football. But that's Rex."

The game plan seems sure to change this week. 

Mr. Roethlisberger is a different type of quarterback. At 6-foot-5 and 214 pounds, he has the size and strength to shed pressure—but he also has unusual quickness for a man so large. Unlike Messrs. Manning and Brady, who prefer to throw from their "spot" in the pocket, according to safety Dwight Lowery, Mr. Roethlisberger often makes some of his best throws on the move.

The Jets had some success against him in their 22-17 victory over the Steelers on Dec. 19, limiting him to 23 of 44 passing for 264 yards and one touchdown. 

But the scheme can never stay the same, Mr. Lowery said. 

Quarterbacks at this level—the Mannings, the Bradys, the Roethlisbergers—are too smart, too good.

So the Jets, who finished the regular season ranked seventh in total defense, switched things up against Mr. Brady, and now they plan to do the same against Mr. Roethlisberger. The pressure will be on him to solve the puzzle. 

 Write to  Scott Cacciola at scott.cacciola@wsj.com 