PHIL CAMPBELL, Ala. —Guys named Phil Campbell planned to come here from as far away as Australia in June to throw a party.

Now they're coming to rebuild.

Half the town was leveled by last week's tornadoes; 28 people were killed in the county, and 400 of its approximately 1,000 residents have been displaced. The twister damaged the high school, city hall and two public housing complexes. 

Phil Campbell, a writer in Brooklyn, N.Y. and organizer of the International Phil Campbell Convention 2011 decided to transform the whimsical convention into a relief effort.

Phil Campbell in Fayetteville, Ga., and a Phillip Campbell in Birmingham, Ala., plan to volunteer immediately, said Mr. Campbell of Brooklyn. Phil Campbell of Chattanooga, Tenn., is updating news about the damage and recovery by Facebook. 

Philip Campbell in Nottingham, England, is editing videos for a montage of clips of people saying, "Hi, I'm Phil Campbell, and I'm committed to helping the town of Phil Campbell." Phil Campbell in Bowral, Australia, has offered advice in emergency-response services.

Brooklyn's Mr. Campbell, who has 190 Facebook friends with some version of the name Phil Campbell, wants to attract corporate sponsorship and more Phil Campbells to the June event. "We need as many Phil Campbells as possible to come …, " he wrote in a note to the 19 Phil Campbells and one Phyllis Campbell who have registered to attend.

"We're just very appreciative of any help we can get," said Jerry Mays, mayor of Phil Campbell. 

Residents of Phil Campbell, named after a railroad engineer, are unsure whether their town will be rebuilt. Businesses are few. Tax revenues barely cover the town's costs. 

Mr. Mays drove around town on Saturday with Alabama Gov. Robert Bentley, who said he promised to tell President Barack Obama personally that the remote, rural town in northwestern Alabama has been as devastated as Tuscaloosa. Early damage estimates are around $30 million. But the town doesn't have the money to qualify for Federal Emergency Management Agency funds, meaning it must provide 25% of the amount for recovery, Mr. Mays said.

Residents knew of the storm hours in advance. Warning sirens blared half a dozen times. The tornado blasted a 39-mile path through Phil Campbell and surrounding Franklin and Lawrence counties. It packed winds of 175 miles per hour, the National Weather Service said.

Now the town is trying to pick up the pieces. More than 700 out-of-town volunteers registered to help this weekend, outnumbering the number of residents left in town, said John James, who is coordinating the relief efforts for Franklin County. 

LeKita Rice stood two blocks from the county command center insider her mother's store, Tan & Browse. Two bay windows had shattered. The roof was blown away. No relief agencies or volunteers had offered help, said Ms. Rice, 26 years old. 

"Instead of cleaning up trees, they should help with the buildings—this is our town," she said, tossing cracked, white dinner plates into a pile of shattered glass and tin roofing. 

Trees flattened the Rice house, sparing only the bathroom. Many of their neighbors died. The Rices, who were at the fire department where her husband,  Eric Rice is employed, don't have home insurance. If federal dollars are unavailable, they'll try to re-build with a personal loan, she said. 

After the Phil Campbell Convention was announced earlier this year, locals arranged to re-paint downtown buildings and pick up litter. Now, "the red carpet we were going to roll out—that's been destroyed," said Andrew Reed, a 23 year-old Phil Campbell native filming a documentary about the convention. 

A T-shirt logo for the event had already been designed. It features a Phil Campbell High School red-and-blue bobcat riding a train—a nod to the town's origins. The bobcat holds the school's former mascot, abandoned decades ago: a tornado.

—Sumathi Reddy contributed to this article.

 Write to  Timothy W. Martin at timothy.martin@wsj.com 