MONTCLAIR, N.J.--The superintendent of schools in this suburban town said school closings can be avoided with a number of cuts and a tax increase of less than 1%.

But the president of the appointed school board, which has ultimate control over the budget, warned that a shaky tax base could force higher property-tax increases if the district wants to keep all 11 schools open.

The district, known for its open-borders "magnet" system where students and parents can choose from among themed schools, had floated the idea of consolidating schools as a way to save money and put the district on a more stable financial course.

More than 100 people at the board meeting burst into applause when Superintendent  Frank Alvarez made his recommendation.

Mr. Alvarez suggested outsourcing teaching aides for a $2 million savings, cutting bus service for students who live within 1.5 miles of a school (up from the current one-mile cutoff) for $400,000 in savings, and charging high-school students about $150 a year to play sports, among other changes.

Parents gave suggestions for spending cuts, from turning down the heat in schools to outsourcing IT data storage, payroll administration and mechanics.

Montclair school officials fear they will lose $3.6 million in state funding while costs increase about $3.1 million because of salary and benefit-costs increases.

Parents, especially those with children in the targeted schools, reacted strongly, signed petitions and began raising money.

"We got the message," said  Shelly Lombard, president of the school board, asking people to stop contacting the superintendent's office and school board, because the deluge of requests for meetings was distracting and interrupting the work to fix the budget.

The school district won't be able to make final decisions until it gets firm numbers on the tax base and figures from the state on how much funding will filter down to local districts.

Local school subsidies takes up the biggest chunk of the state budget. More than $10 billion of the state's $29.4 billion budget goes to the state's more than 600 school districts to help offset property taxes. That includes about $820 million in cuts made by Gov. Chris Christie in his first budget. The biggest sources of state revenue are sales and income taxes.

Mr. Christie on Monday said his administration was working on a new formula to distribute school aid. Meanwhile, the state Supreme Court is weighing a lawsuit challenging his cuts.