 Oil prices rose sharply, inflaming worries about inflation and sending the stock market to its lowest close in a month. The Dow industrials fell 168.32 points, or 1.4%, to 12058.02 as oil futures jumped 2.7% to $99.63. Gold reached a new nominal record, Treasurys mostly rose and the dollar climbed. 

 Bernanke gave lawmakers a relatively upbeat view of the economy and said the Fed eventually will need to begin withdrawing stimulus once the recovery strengthens. 

 Manufacturing picked up steam in the U.S. and Europe in February. Meanwhile,suggesting the global recovery is gaining momentum output in Asia showed some welcome signs of cooling. 

 GM, Toyota and Nissan posted substantial jumps in U.S. sales for February, powering the industry to a 27% gain over a year earlier. 

 The SEC accused Rajat Gupta, a former director of Goldman Sachs and P&G, of passing inside information to Galleon's Raj Rajaratnam. 

 Christian Dior is firing designer John Galliano after a video apparently showing him making anti-Semitic remarks circulated on the Internet. 

 Yahoo has been in discussions to potentially unload its stake in Yahoo Japan, among many other options, although no deal is near.  

 The Supreme Court ruled personal-privacy rights don't apply to corporations under the Freedom of Information Act, in a defeat for AT&T. 

 Hollywood named ex-senator Christopher Dodd as its top Washington lobbyist, enlisting him in its fight against piracy and push for access to China. 

 The European Union's highest court declared illegal the widespread practice of charging men and women different rates for insurance. 

 Las Vegas Sands said U.S. authorities are investigating the casino company's Macau operations over compliance with antibribery laws. 

 AIG is accelerating plans to cash out of its entire stake in MetLife through public offerings that could raise more than $9 billion in proceeds. 

 PPL will buy the U.K.'s second-largest electricity distributor from Germany's E.ON for $5.6 billion in cash plus assumed debt. 

 A consulting firm founded by Nouriel Roubini is estimating there could be close to $100 billion of muni-bond defaults over the next five years. 

 HMV's shares fell 22% in London as the music and book retailer issued a profit warning, replaced its chairman and cited debt-load problems.  

 CBS's chief expressed hope that the sitcom "Two and a Half Men" can be saved.  