NEW YORK -- A former Guantanamo detainee didn't know the extent of -- or his role in -- a 1998 conspiracy to bomb two U.S. embassies in Africa until after he had left Tanzania, his lawyers said in documents unsealed Monday.

  Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani, 36 years old, is set to be sentenced Tuesday after he was convicted last year of a single count of conspiracy and acquitted of 281 other counts in the 1998 bombings of U.S. embassies in Tanzania and Kenya. Mr. Ghailani faces 20 years to life on the charge.

In court papers filed Jan. 7 and unsealed Monday, Mr. Ghailani's lawyers argued that Mr. Ghailani, a Tanzanian, was a pawn for the people planning the bombings and that he was deceived into carrying out acts that helped them accomplish "their heinous plot." They appeared to Mr. Ghailani to be sophisticated and assured businessmen who had traveled abroad, his lawyers said.

"Only after arriving in Pakistan did Mr. Ghailani learn the details and scope of the conspiracy, and to his horror, the enormity of how he had been used by those he considered his friends," said  Peter Quijano, one of Mr. Ghailani's lawyers.

At trial, federal prosecutors in Manhattan argued that Mr. Ghailani purchased a truck and other materials used in the Tanzanian bombing, including gas tanks containing pure oxygen and acetylene. Mr. Ghailani was charged with murder in the deaths of people at both embassies.

Prosecutors alleged that Mr. Ghailani traveled to Pakistan with co-conspirators shortly before the bombings. He later became a bodyguard to  Osama bin Laden, U.S. officials said.

Four others were convicted and received life sentences in a separate 2001 trial in New York stemming from the embassy bombings.

In his sentencing memorandum, Mr. Quijano said Mr. Ghailani was "devastated" when he learned of the bombings, but found himself "stranded in a strange land."

"Without any realistic options available to him -- no money, no means of survival, no place in the world where he could go -- he accompanied his companions to Afghanistan, in order to survive," Mr. Quijano said in the filing.

In the court filing, Mr. Ghailani's lawyers asked for leniency, saying he provided "vital national security intelligence" to U.S. officials and he was mistreated while in U.S. custody. Parts of the publicly filed sentencing memorandum were redacted for national security reasons.

While being held by the Central Intelligence Agency, Mr. Ghailani was subjected to so-called "enhanced interrogation techniques," which his lawyers have said equates to torture.

"It is evident that Mr. Ghailani still remains damaged by the aftereffects of such humiliating torture," Mr. Quijano said in the filing. 

Mr. Ghailani has been in U.S. custody since 2004. He was held at Guantanamo from 2006 to 2009 until he was brought to the U.S. to face trial.

Prosecutors are seeking a life sentence.

 Write to  Chad Bray at chad.bray@dowjones.com 