Does South Korea's merger market need a lifeguard? It's a question that's being asked in Seoul after ambitious takeover plans by Hyundai Group were thwarted last month. 

The conglomerate's $4.9 billion bid for a controlling stake in Hyundai Engineering & Construction last year raised eyebrows, and not just because Hyundai was offering roughly twice the target's market value. To finance it, the conglomerate issued shares of its listed affiliates and took on a $1 billion loan. 

Hyundai eventually lost the deal over concerns about whether it could afford it, but the ordeal prompted financial authorities to consider whether some restrictions might be in order. 

It's not just Hyundai. Kumho Asiana Group has been in turmoil since 2009 because of a financing arrangement for its $5.7 billion acquisition of Daewoo Engineering & Construction. In return for the financial backing of a group of investors, the conglomerate obligated itself to pay $3.8 billion for their Daewoo shares if the stock didn't perform well. 

Lacking the funds to honor its commitment, Kumho lost control of Daewoo, had to restructure the debt of group companies, and slash pay and benefits at all members of the conglomerate. Kumho affiliates, such as Asiana Airlines, continue to sell off assets to raise cash for the group. 

Like Kumho and Hyundai, buyers in Korea are most often conglomerates, called chaebols, which can have a wide-ranging impact on the national economy and capital markets. 

The trouble for advocates of restrictions on corporate-takeover financing is that they will be hard-pressed to find good precedents. Regulators typically focus only on a deal's impact on competition in an industry, leaving it to buyers and their advisers to decide how far they can go. 

But instead of imposing onerous restrictions, the authorities could take steps that would discourage unnecessary risk taking. Raising banks' reserve requirements on loans to highly leveraged companies is one, says  Brett W. King, a partner at law firm Paul, Hastings, Janofsky & Walker in Hong Kong. 

This might cool off Korea's hyper-competitive lending market, where domestic banks compete fiercely for finance deals. True, it would mean funding costs rise, but buyers with strong enough cash flow wouldn't have trouble coping. 

Meanwhile, better disclosure, such as of any contingent liabilities like the put-option Kumho granted, would go a long way toward making the risks clearer to minority shareholders and others trying to evaluate the deals. 

These are small steps, but Korea's eager buyers could use some reining in. 

 Write to  Se Young Lee at vincent.lee@dowjones.com 