WASHINGTON—The Obama Administration began to harden its tone toward embattled Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak amid rising clamor in the Middle East and the U.S. for a more forceful response to the turmoil sweeping the world's largest Arab country.

Secretary of State Hillary Clinton appeared on the major Sunday talk shows to call for an "orderly, peaceful transition" to a "real democracy" in Egypt, a position also taken by President Barack Obama in calls to the leaders of the U.K., Turkey, Israel and Saudi Arabia. White House officials said the president told world leaders he wants "an orderly transition to a government that is responsive to the aspirations of the Egyptian people."

Critics called the response timid because it lacked explicit demands—stark evidence of the bind the White House finds itself. Egypt has for years been a U.S. ally in the region, and Mr. Mubarak still clings to power. Moreover, officials in Washington are concerned that radical Islamists could emerge from the unrest with greater power. While the White House's tone has hardened, officials have stopped short of calling for Mr. Mubarak to step down.

Mrs. Clinton said the U.S. was ready to help with a transition that would lead to greater political and economic freedom.Though declining to say if she thought Mr. Mubarak should remain in office, Mrs. Clinton repeatedly said the "legitimate needs and grievances" of the protesters must be addressed.

Mohamed ElBaradei, a Nobel peace laureate and a leader of the Egyptian opposition, said Washington's continued support for the Egyptian president was causing it to "lose credibility by the day." Speaking from Cairo on CBS's "Face the Nation," he said: "On one hand you're talking about democracy, rule of law and human rights, and on the other hand you're still lending your support to a dictator that continues to oppress his people."

Elements of the administration are clinging to the "delusory" belief that Mr. Mubarak can hold on, said Robert Kagan, a foreign policy analyst at the Brookings Institution who has been a supporter of the president's foreign policy. "There are just so many experts who've been dealing with Mubarak's Egypt for so long, they just can't imagine change, and any change they can imagine is awful," he said Sunday.

The White House Sunday released a list of world leaders Mr. Obama spoke to over the weekend, signaling he was following developments closely. A White House official said, "The political system in Egypt must change." But officials chose their words carefully in part because of the difficulty of reading the situation. It remained unclear Sunday whether Mr. Mubarak could make enough concessions to appease the protesters. Some analysts say if the White House withdraws its support prematurely, other regional allies may conclude the U.S. can't be counted for support in a pinch.

The administration's handling of the Egyptian crisis echoed its cautious approach to street protests in Iran in 2009. As those protests grew, the Obama administration was criticized for not being more outspoken in support. The administration said it didn't want to give the regime in Tehran an opportunity to discredit the protest by saying it was orchestrated in Washington.

Critics on both the left and right have called on the administration to make more explicit demands on Mr. Mubarak. The Working Group on Egypt, a bipartisan group of analysts that includes Mr. Kagan—who initially supported the invasion of Iraq—and liberal Obama allies such as Brian Katulis of the Center for American Progress, urged the White House to demand Mr. Mubarak not stand for reelection, among other moves.

Elliot Abrams, a former Bush administration official and member of the working group and now a Middle East expert at the Council on Foreign Relations., said U.S. interests in Egypt would be served by moving toward an open democracy and Mr. Mubarak's departure.

Mrs. Clinton said one result of the protests will likely be that September's elections will be "free and fair." The administration hasn't made demands on the Egyptian government over how the next election should be held, deferring in the language of one senior White House official to "the people of Egypt."

However cautious, there were signs Sunday U.S. officials were moving toward a decision to try to force the Egyptian president to let go of his grip on power.

"We have been consistent across those three decades in arguing that real stability only comes from the kind of democratic participation that gives people a chance to feel that they are being heard," Mrs. Clinton said on ABC News, referring to the time Mr. Mubarak has been president.

"At this point the Mubarak regime can stay in power solely through force; it is no longer legitimate," said Mr. Abrams, now a Middle East expert at the Council on Foreign Relations. "So our interests do not now include Mubarak's survival."

—Keith Johnson and Adam Entous and Maya Jackson-Randall contributed to this article.

 Write to  Jonathan Weisman at jonathan.weisman@wsj.com 