WASHINGTON—U.S. Energy Secretary Steven Chu said Wednesday he believes a "partial meltdown" occurred at the Japanese nuclear-power plant damaged by explosions, malfunctions and radiation leaks following a 9.0-magnitude earthquake. 

Mr. Chu added, however, that Japan's Fukushima Daiichi nuclear-power plant has containment systems to prevent leaks and that a partial meltdown doesn't mean the "containment systems will fail." 

Speaking before a U.S. House Energy and Commerce subcommittee, Mr. Chu said he believed the events unfolding in Japan "actually appear to be more serious than" the 1979 partial core meltdown at Three Mile Island in Pennsylvania. 

Nuclear Regulatory Commission Chairman Gregory Jaczko called the incident in Japan a "very serious situation." Speaking at the same House energy committee hearing, Mr. Jaczko said the U.S. was monitoring at least four of the reactors at the Fukushima plant. The core cooling at the second unit "is not stable," but that the primary containment continues to function, he said.

At a third unit, Mr. Jaczko said he believes there could be a crack in the spent fuel pool, increasing the risk that water drains from the pool and leads to overheating.

At a fourth reactor, which was not operating at the time of the earthquake, Mr. Jaczko said there had been a hydrogen explosion and that the secondary containment "has been destroyed." The spent fuel pool at that unit has lost all or most of its water and radiation levels "are extremely high," Mr. Jaczko said.

Given the risks, Mr. Jaczko said the U.S. would recommend a "much larger radius" for evacuations than Japan had imposed. 

The comments come as Japanese officials struggled to extinguish smoldering spent fuel at the Fukushima Daiichi plant amid reports of high radiation levels. 

Meanwhile, the White House announced that U.S. citizens within 50 miles of Japanese reactors damaged during the disaster should evacuate. 

Mr. Jaczko made the recommendation to President Barack Obama in light of the "deteriorating" situation at Japanese nuclear reactors, White House Press Secretary Jay Carney said. 

U.S. citizens needing assistance to evacuate should contact the U.S. embassy in Japan, Mr. Carney said. 

Mr. Chu, at the House hearing, told the committee the U.S. is "trying to monitor very closely" and is sorting through conflicting reports. "There are several reactors that are now at risk. I would not want to speculate on exactly what will happen," he said. 

Both Mr. Chu and Mr. Jaczko said the U.S. government had sent experts and equipment to help the Japanese. The Energy Department has sent 39 staff to the country and deployed air and ground equipment to try to track radiation levels. The Nuclear Regulatory Commission has sent 11 staff.

Mr. Chu said the U.S. would analyze the events at Japan's Fukushima plan to determine whether existing U.S. facilities need upgrades and whether new standards should be adopted for future facilities.

"The American people should have full confidence that the United States has rigorous safety regulations in place," Mr. Chu said.

Mr. Chu was pressed about the Obama administration's support for nuclear energy, as pro-nuclear Republicans pressed him to clarify the White House's position. 

After repeated questioning from Rep. Joe Barton (R., Texas), Mr. Chu said the administration remains committed to building new nuclear-power plants. He said he wants Congress to approve an additional $36 billion in the 2012 budget to guarantee loans for new plant construction. 

The Obama administration has been a promoter of nuclear power, in part because it doesn't create carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases like coal-fired power plants. But the administration's support has been questioned in recent days as the disaster in Japan highlights risks posed by nuclear reactors. 

Mr. Chu's comments, however, didn't appear to represent a hearty endorsement of nuclear power. 

When first asked by Mr. Barton whether the administration still supports new nuclear-plant construction, Mr. Chu said, "I think the president and the administration believes that we have to be looking very, very closely at the events in Japan" and that "it would be premature to say anything other than we will use this opportunity to learn as best we can." 

When asked by Mr. Barton for a second time, Mr. Chu said, "The present budget is what it is. And we're asking for loan guarantees. The present budget is also calling for small modular reactors. That position has not been changed." 

It was only after Mr. Barton said, "So that's a yes?" that Mr. Chu replied, "That's a yes." 

 Write to  Tennille Tracy at tennille.tracy@dowjones.com 