HONG KONG—U.S. luggage maker Samsonite is accelerating its plans to list in Hong Kong, while Yuanda China Holdings Ltd. cut the size of its offering, in further signs that the city's IPO window might be narrowing.

Samsonite now says an initial public offering could come in June, a person familiar with the situation said Wednesday. Earlier, it had targeted a date in the second half of this year. 

The company, which makes suitcases, casual bags and travel products, filed an A1 Form, the first formal step in declaring its intent to list in Hong Kong, in April, the person said, adding the company plans to seek a listing approval from the Hong Kong stock exchange at the end of May. The listing could raise about $1 billion.

Meanwhile, Yuanda China now aims to raise $290 million, down from as much as $536 million, a person familiar with the situation said Wednesday, although the relaunched deal needs retail-investor approval. 

Some recent initial public offerings have performed poorly, even as Glencore International AG and other global brand names, including resource companies, a fashion house and a sports club, consider entering the swelling market in part because of its proximity to China. 

It isn't clear how long Hong Kong's resilience will last. Other companies have delayed or changed listing plans amid choppy markets and political turmoil.

Yuanda China plans to sell 1.5 billion shares, the same as before it shelved an original deal, at HK$1.50 a share, 46% below the high end of an original indicative price range of HK$1.92-HK$2.78 a share, the person said. The company plans to list on the Hong Kong stock exchange May 17, the person said. 

Yuanda China's retail investors need to agree to the new terms by signing a confirmation letter before the new deal goes ahead, the person said, adding the company will announce details of the relaunched terms later Wednesday. 

On April 29, Yuanda China, which was scheduled to list in Hong Kong on Friday, shelved a plan to raise as much as $536.2 million in a Hong Kong IPO and said it may relaunch the deal but raise less money. It didn't give a reason for the change, but people familiar with the situation blamed weak demand from investors for the real estate-linked company. 

Yuanda China makes curtain walls, the outer covering of a building in which the outer walls are nonstructural, as well as also metal roofs, shading systems and glass skylights. 

J.P. Morgan Chase & Co., Deutsche Bank AG, BOC International Holdings Ltd. and Standard Chartered Securities are joint bookrunners for its IPO.

Luxembourg-incorporated Samsonite, the world's largest luggage brand by revenue, now operates 36,000 sales outlets world-wide and 4,800 outlets in the fast-growing Asia region.  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.,
GS


0.14
%




 Morgan Stanley,
MS


-0.11
%




 HSBC Holdings PLC, Royal Bank of Scotland Group PLC and  UBS AG are the bankers of its deal, the person familiar with Samsonite's situation said. 

 Write to  Yvonne Lee at yvonne.lee@wsj.com 