Large sums of money paid to some consultants charged in the government's insider-trading case indicate they may have talked with dozens of hedge funds, suggesting the scope of the investigation could widen significantly, people familiar with the expert-network industry say.

The U.S. recently has filed criminal charges against seven consultants and employees at an expert-network firm as part of its insider-trading probe. These firms connect hedge funds and other investors looking for an edge with employees at U.S. companies in exchange for a fee.

These moonlighting consultants received as much as $200,000 each to provide information about technology companies that the government alleges included inside information, according to the government complaints. Investigators wiretapped at least two of the defendants' phones, so they could have eavesdropped on many of hundreds of conversations with hedge funds, people familiar with the situation say. 

The details of the pay arrangements underline how lucrative the expert-network business has become in recent years, and how it could have provided the incentive to pass along sensitive information. 

Many hedge funds and investors typically pay an hourly rate of $1,000 on average for calls with the consultants, people in the business say. Consultants typically receive $350 or more an hour, leaving the remainder of $650 or so an hour for the expert-network firms, people in the business say. At that rate, a consultant would have to make more than 500 calls with investors to receive $200,000.

The pay details come as more charges are expected as early as this week in the burgeoning insider-trading case, this time including hedge fund employees, according to people familiar with the matter. So far, the U.S. has charged five consultants and two employees at Primary Global Research LLC, a Mountain View, Calif., expert-network firm, with being involved with an alleged insider trading scheme. Primary Global declined to comment.

Manhattan U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara has called insider trading "pervasive" and has said such arrangements with consultants point to a "corrupt network" in which company insiders at technology companies "sold out their employers by stealing and then peddling" information. 

On Dec. 29, the government announced charges of securities fraud and conspiracy to commit securities fraud against Winifred Jiau, a California technology contractor. The complaint alleged that Ms. Jiau was paid $200,000 between September 2006 and December 2008 by hedge funds through Primary Global, in exchange for providing information about technology companies that the government alleges included inside information.

Ms. Jiau's consulting pay suggests she may have spoken with dozens of hedge funds, in hundreds of phone calls over the more than two-year period, people in the business say. 

Ms. Jiau also worked for expert-network firms Guidepoint Global Advisors and Vista Research, where she also spoke with a number of hedge funds, a person close to the situation says. It isn't clear when she worked for those firms. Vista was acquired by Guidepoint in 2009. Guidepoint declined to comment.

FBI agents had approached Ms. Jiau before her arrest and said that they wanted her to be a cooperating witness, according to a person familiar with the matter. 

Ms. Jiau, who is in a San Francisco Bay area jail, said in a telephone interview last week she was seeking a lawyer to help her get out and represent her. She declined to comment on her work with Primary Global. 

With an army of consultants making calls with its hedge fund and mutual-fund clients, Primary Global has boosted its income. The firm last year estimated its annual revenue at $20 million to $25 million, before inquiries into the company became public, a person familiar with the situation says.

That made Primary Global the No. 5 expert-network firm by revenue last year, according to Integrity Research Associates LLC, a New York firm that tracks independent research providers. Integrity estimates expert-network clients spent about $400 million on consultants last year.

Some hedge funds pay even steeper fees for the services through "subscription fees," which can run as high as $500,000 to $1 million a year for "premium" services. Such services can include extensive or unlimited access to calls and information from consultants, hedge fund managers say. 

One unnamed hedge fund the government alleges was a recipient of inside information paid Primary Global more than $310,000 in 2008 and 2009, according to a complaint against three consultants and one employee of Primary Global. 

Already, dozens of hedge funds and mutual funds have been asked to provide trading records in connection with the investigation, according to people familiar with the matter. 

One hedge fund raided by the FBI, Diamondback Capital Management LLC, told investors it put a portfolio manager on leave following the raid and later told clients that investigators, in a search warrant issued to the firm, appeared to be focused on that portfolio manager and a former employee who had worked under him.

The portfolio manager is Todd Newman, who oversaw technology investments, and the former employee is Jesse Tortora, according to people familiar with the matter. Mr. Tortora left Diamondback early last year, saying he was going to work on the West Coast, people familiar with the matter say. Diamondback declined to comment; Messrs. Newman and Tortora couldn't be reached. No charges have been brought against either of them.

Another consultant for Primary Global—Daniel DeVore, who has pleaded guilty to charges of wire fraud, and conspiracy to commit wire fraud and securities fraud in connection to the investigation—received $145,000 for talking with hedge funds about Dell and other companies, according to a charging document against him. 

A lawyer for Mr. DeVore, a former employee of Dell Inc., didn't return calls for comment. A Dell spokesman said the company's conduct code prohibits employees from disclosing confidential information, and Dell is cooperating with investigators.

In a hearing where he pleaded guilty before a federal judge on Dec. 10, Mr. DeVore said that his hourly rate from Primary Global was $250 to $300 an hour, according to the transcript.

Another consultant charged with wire fraud, and conspiracy to commit wire fraud and securities fraud in the case, Mark Anthony Longoria, was paid $700 for two calls in July 2009, right before Advanced Micro Devices Inc. announced earnings, according to the complaint against him, indicating he earned $350 an hour. Between January 2008 and March, 2010, Mr. Longoria was paid $200,000 by Primary Global for consultation services, the complaint says. Mr. Longoria's lawyer didn't return calls.

AMD has said it appears the company is a victim of the insider trading scheme and it is cooperating with investigators. 

Primary Global employees surveyed his work and found Mr. Longoria had made 40 calls in 60 days, with 12 out of 15 clients speaking to him more than once, according to the complaint. 