Giuseppe Tomasi di Lampedusa's "The Leopard" ("Il Gattopardo" in Italian), the greatest novel of the 19th century, came more than a half-century late—in 1958, a year after the death of its author, who was born in 1896. It was his only novel. Published by Feltrinelli, a relatively new house, "The Leopard" had been rejected by the more prestigious Mondadori and Einaudi. One sign of its greatness is that it was pilloried at the start by ideologues on the left and the right. It was, in other words, complex enough to offend Communists, monarchists, virtually anyone with an idea about the direction of modern Italian history and culture. Masterpieces do exactly this. And it remains timely today. Italy celebrated its sesquicentennial as a nation in March and yet it can still seem as factional and disunited as it did during the years of reunification, the years of Tomasi's work.

"The Leopard" mirrors many events, human situations and psyches. It takes place over a 50-year period and yet—at 279 pages in Archibald Colquhoun's translation—it's much shorter than its rivals among sprawling realist masterpieces, works like "Moby-Dick," "War and Peace," "The Red and the Black," and "Vanity Fair." For all its focus on worldly matters, politics, social and economic dynamics, and military life, it is really a lyric, elegiac lament for a lost world, a disappearing way of life. But it is an elegy with no tears, only a clear-headed acknowledgment that, in the novel's most famous epigrammatic nugget of wisdom, "If we want things to stay as they are, things will have to change."

Based on the decline of Tomasi's own aristocratic Sicilian family, "The Leopard" traces the falling fortunes of Don Fabrizio Corbera, the Prince of Salina. It opens in 1860—when Garibaldi and his patriotic troops land in Sicily, and the Risorgimento that will ultimately produce a unified Italy begins in earnest. An ancient way of life, the collaboration between landowning aristocrats and their peasant-tenants, is being undermined by the joint forces of political liberalism, antipapal secularism and a rising mercantile class.

Part of the story could be right out of Henry James. How do you maintain prestige in the face of falling wealth? You have the next generation marry into the upwardly mobile, although socially inept, vulgar middle classes. Which is what the Prince allows his handsome heir, his nephew Tancredi, to do. The youth attaches himself to the lovely Angelica Calogera, whose father has bad manners and a large fortune. You celebrate at a great party, whose pomp and finery have an aesthetic appeal as well as a sad taste of depravity. 

The years move on. The Prince dies in 1883 as one order yields to another. The novel ends in 1910, in the aftermath of great events, as the Prince's aged, unmarried and unfulfilled daughters live through their declining years with regrets and memories. Events are brought forward into the future through references to 20th-century warfare and technology. Thus, during the grand-ball scene, the narrator comments on a fresco overhead: "From the ceiling the gods, reclining on gilded couches, gazed down smiling and inexorable as a summer sky. They thought themselves eternal; but a bomb manufactured in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania was to prove the contrary in 1943."

The novel's tone is worldly wise, although a reader cannot help but feel sadness at the loss of a society, ages old, on an island that itself has always embodied historical and cultural cross-currents. Tomasi, and his spokesman the Prince, acknowledge the facts of mortality. The Prince represents his society as well as his author; he dies, but the society lingers a bit longer. Handsome, virile, leonine, he appears to us as his decline has begun. He keeps a mistress, remembers past conquests, and even imagines future ones although, in the novel's greatest scene, he also acknowledges his own irrelevance. He waltzes with his beautiful, soon-to-be-niece and heir, who then asks him to join her and Tancredi for supper at the ball. But he realizes that her kindness bespeaks good manners rather than desire: "Lovers want to be alone, or at least with strangers; never with older people, or worst of all with relatives."

Classes and generations mingle at the ball. We learn about a character's inner life through dialogue, and interior thoughts, but also through dress, food, décor, architecture and everything else that comes to us through the senses. Physical details reveal the soul. 


‘If we want things to stay as they are, things will have to change.’


The ball ends at dawn, and Don Fabrizio walks, rather than rides, home in order to take comfort in looking at the now fading stars. Both life and death move him: a donkey dragging a rubbish cart; a wagon with bulls recently slaughtered at the abbatoir. He glances at the sky: "There was Venus, wrapped in her turban of autumn mist. She was always faithful, always waiting for Don Fabrizio on his early morning outings, at Donnafugata before a shoot, now after a ball." If one mark of a great novelist is the ability to forgive everything by understanding everything, then Tomasi's only rivals are George Eliot, Tolstoy and Proust.

And "The Leopard" also bids fair to have inspired the greatest film adaptation of a great novel, Luchino Visconti's 1963 masterpiece of the same name, starring Burt Lancaster as the aging Prince, and Claudia Cardinale and Alain Delon as the gorgeous young lovers. Visconti picks up Tomasi's own alertness to the physicality of life; his film's images overwhelm us as ravishingly as Tomasi's words do.

Another sign of a masterpiece is its entry into the classroom. "The Leopard" has long been assured a place in the pantheon. Last summer, on an Italian train, I sat in a six-person compartment with an ethnic Chinese couple long resident in Italy, a university student, a priest and a woman of a certain age who spent most of the time on her cellphone. At one point, I—buried in my reading of Tomasi in English—looked up to see that the student across from me was reading "Il Gattopardo." "Ma," I said in my schoolboy Italian, "leggiamo lo stesso libro!" At which point everyone else joined in. The lady got off her cellphone, the priest turned from the soccer page of Corriere della Sera, and even the Chinese immigrants piped up. Everyone shared memories of having read the book.

We all loved it.

—Mr. Spiegelman is the Hughes Professor of English at Southern Methodist University.