Bangalore (Mint)--India's shipping ministry has asked Ennore Port Ltd, the country's only corporate port among the 13 controlled by the federal government, to issue 50 billion rupees worth of tax-free bonds to help raise funds for port projects. 

The Indian government is working on a 10-year plan to double capacity at ports, a top ministry official said on Wednesday.

"We have sent an offer to Ennore Port to act as the nodal agency for issuing the tax-free bonds on our behalf," said  Rakesh Srivastava, joint secretary in the ministry of shipping. "We are awaiting a formal letter from Ennore Port on whether it is willing to do the job or not."

The tax-free port bonds are part of the infrastructure bonds announced by Finance Minister  Pranab Mukherjee in his annual budget earlier this year.

India, Asia's third biggest economy, plans to spend as much as 3 trillion rupees on its ports over the 10-year period ending 2020 to expand capacity for loading up to 3.2 billion tons of cargo from the existing 1.01 billion tons, according to the maritime agenda for the decade announced by the shipping ministry in January.

Mr. Srivastava could not say whether the funds raised through tax-free bonds would be used only for financing projects in the 13 ports — known as major ports — or whether it could help pay for building new private ports in the country as well. 

"That is yet to be decided," he said.

Currently, 12 of the 13 major ports function as trusts under a law framed nearly four decades ago called the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963. Ennore Port located in Tamil Nadu is the only exception. Ennore port was formed as a company under the Companies Act, 1956, when it was opened in 2001.

The Ministry, earlier, had planned to set up a dedicated Indian Maritime Finance Corp. that would be vested with the rights to issue tax-free bonds for ports. The formation of a separate financing body for the ports sector was also part of the maritime agenda 2020. Mr. Srivastava could not say when the financing entity would be formed.