The struggle to restore order to the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear complex has spotlighted the risks of building dozens of reactors in an earthquake-prone land. But nuclear-power experts point to another finding: Japan could get by with far fewer of these reactors if it more efficiently utilized the ones it has. 

Although Japan is a major vendor of nuclear-power technology, its own reactors are surprisingly unproductive. By one important measure, its reactors have worked at about two-thirds of all-out capacity—a level on par with those in Armenia and Pakistan and far lower than levels in the U.S., France, Russia, U.K., Canada and Taiwan. 

Japan's underperformance reflects a regulatory approach that favors shutting plants down for frequent and extended maintenance periods, partly to reassure nearby residents that plants are being run safely. 

Such an approach has helped usher into existence multireactor facilities such as Fukushima Daiichi. Among the world's biggest nuclear complexes, it had six reactors—three operating, three shut down for maintenance—that were exposed to the March 11 earthquake and tsunami. Operator Tokyo Electric Power Co., or Tepco, had been planning to build two additional reactors on the Fukushima Daiiichi site, bringing it to eight, in part because of difficulties getting permits to build reactors on new sites. 

No nuclear plant in the U.S., by comparison, has more than three reactors.

"They have to add more nuclear units than they would need" if the plants were more productive, said Andrew Kadak, a former nuclear engineering professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who has studied Japan's plants.

Moreover, with higher-efficiency plants, Japan could reduce its tab for imported coal and natural gas for its conventional power plants. 

The U.S. is the world's biggest nuclear-power producer, with 104 licensed reactors. Japan's 54 reactors give it the world's third-biggest nuclear fleet, just behind France's 58. 

France, with roughly half the population and electricity demand of Japan, derives more than 75% of its electricity from nuclear power, the most of any nation, and is a net exporter of electricity, raking in more than €3 billion annually in power sales, according to the World Nuclear Association, an international organization promoting nuclear power. Japan generates just 29% of its energy needs from nuclear power and favors it because it otherwise must import natural gas or coal to make electricity.

When running, Japan's plants run well. The issue for the country is the amount of time its plants spend idle. 

One industry productivity measure, "capacity factor," compares the actual power a plant produces to the amount it could make, in theory, if it ran full-throttle around the clock. Between 2000 and 2009, the Japanese nuclear industry's annual capacity factor slumped to 66% from 82%. In the U.S., it exceeded 85% each year; in 2009, it was above 90%. 

Reactors in the U.S. typically operate 18 to 24 months between outages to take on fresh fuel. Japan's reactors must be taken out of service every 13 months for fresh fuel, inspections and repairs. 

In 2009, Japan's average shutdown lasted 193 days, according to data from the Japan Nuclear Safety Organization, a mostly government-funded research group. The U.S. average was about 45 days, the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission says.

Japan's shutdowns are longer in part because plant employees and government inspectors work only on weekdays. In the U.S., by contrast, maintenance typically proceeds around the clock until plants are back online. 

American operators also, unlike the Japanese, perform many routine maintenance tasks while the units are running. In the U.S., nuclear operators "are free to run until refueling needs force them to stop," says NRC spokesman Scott Burnell. 

Many in Japan are convinced their approach is safer. Japanese operators and regulators point to their low incidence of "scrams," emergency shutdowns that can result automatically when sensors detect equipment abnormalities. In the U.S., reactors had 0.36 scram per reactor in 2009. In Japan, the rate was 0.1 scram per reactor, meaning that a typical Japanese plant has one emergency shutdown every 10 years. 

Japanese operators strive to avoid such accidental shutdowns in part because they can give local officials a chance to intervene and delay a plant's restart, in a process that can become highly politicized. A Tepco official said the company often idles its reactors for longer than necessary for maintenance and repairs, in a bid to demonstrate to local residents that the company isn't rushing through repairs. 

Tepco had a capacity factor of just 53% in 2009, in part because four reactors at its Kashiwazaki-Kariwa plant weren't allowed to restart after a major earthquake struck in 2007. 

"Recently, prefectures have taken a much stronger stance to make sure local citizens are safe. There has been more willingness to exercise their authority, even if it means standing up to Tokyo," said Ken Brockman, a nuclear safety expert who previously worked for the International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna. 

In the U.S, local governments have no control over reactor operations. That is the exclusive jurisdiction of the NRC, which regulates all civilian use of nuclear fuel.

Despite differences in regulatory approaches, safety records for reactors have been similar in the U.S. and Japan—both of which have gone decades, until now, without major incidents.

A shortage of power may force Japan to re-examine its cautious tradition of shutting down reactors for long intervals. At least four of the Daiichi reactors, which provide power to Tokyo, are too badly damaged to be repaired. Some stalled units at its Kashiwazaki-Kariwa plant might be put back into service.

"Now that they're facing blackouts in Tokyo, will they finally try to increase the capacity factors? That's something we're wondering," said A.J. Sabatelle, utilities analyst for Moody's in New York.

Hidehiko Nishiyama, a senior official with Japan's Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency, said that if there's a better way to operate, "we should look at it." But he expressed skepticism that a better method exists.

—Norihiko Shirouzu in Tokyo contributed to this article.

 Write to  Rebecca Smith at rebecca.smith@wsj.com and Andrew Morse at andrew.morse@wsj.com 