In their first big move of the winter, the Yankees have signed elite reliever Rafael Soriano to set up Mariano Rivera, and to serve as the heir apparent when the ageless closer is ready to retire. The Yankees now boast perhaps the top bullpen in baseball, and certainly the most expensive. 

Yet the Yankees already had an heir presumptive for the closer's role, a young man who has now been obviously and awkwardly dumped from the line of succession. Joba Chamberlain, the onetime prince of New York, is now dangerously close to middle-relief irrelevance on this Yankee team. He doesn't need to be. 

The Yankees can take a shot to salvage the pitcher's career and spackle over their own weak spot in the process by moving Chamberlain back into the undermanned starting rotation. 

It would mean another cruel reversal for a pitcher who has been yanked back and forth between the rotation and the bullpen, put on pitch counts and inning limits, while becoming an overnight superstar and then a punch line at age 25. 

But New York badly needs more starting pitching, and it won't be found on the thin free- agent market. 

Indeed, until the Soriano deal came together Thursday evening, it appeared the Yankees might sit this winter out after failing to sign starter Cliff Lee. The rival Red Sox spent the offseason stocking up, but Yankee general manager Brian Cashman insisted last week that the post-Lee free agent class was so weak that he would not give up the team's first-round pick to sign any of the remaining players. Soriano requires surrendering a pick to sign. 

Now Soriano awaits only his physical to become a Yankee and become baseball's fourth-highest paid reliever by annual dollar value. That points to a potential difference of opinion between ownership and Cashman's baseball operations department. 

No matter who made the final call, Cashman or ownership, the Yankees will pay Soriano closer money: $35 million over three years. Soriano can opt out of the deal after both the first and second seasons. The former Tampa closer should assume the New York closer's mantle when Mr. Rivera's contract expires after the 2012 season. 

With Mr. Soriano in the fold, Mr. Chamberlain is now either the third or the fourth option in the bullpen, behind Mr. Rivera, Mr. Soriano, and likely reliever David Robertson, as well. Meanwhile, the starting rotation is crying out for a savior. 

Unfortunately, stalwart Andy Pettitte seems intent on spending his summers in Texas. That leaves the Yankees with a rotation of CC Sabathia, Phil Hughes, A.J. Burnett, young Ivan Nova, and journeyman Sergio Mitre. 

Mr Mitre owns a career 5.48 ERA in 64 games as a starter— most of that in the pitching-friendly National League. Although he was deemed a failure as a starter, at his worst Mr. Chamberlain posted numbers better than that, and did it pitching in the hellacious AL East. 

Perhaps Mr. Chamberlain deserves a second chance to start regardless of need. After debuting as a shutdown reliever in 2007, Mr. Chamberlain posted a 3-1 record and 2.76 ERA as a starter in 2008 before a shoulder injury sent him to the bullpen. He returned to the rotation in 2009.

The ugly final numbers from his 2009 stint are all that stick in memory, particularly his 4.75 ERA. But as of August 16 of that year, there was reason for hope —Mr. Chamberlain had shown flashes of excellence, and his ERA was still under 4.00.

 Shortly after, the Yankees brought back a tweaked version of the famed "Joba Rules,'' cutting off the pitcher's starts after a few innings to preserve his arm. Mr. Chamberlain's ERA then shot from 4.34 to its final resting place. 

Then Mr. Chamberlain was returned to the bullpen for the 2010 season. Mr. Cashman has argued that the pitcher's arsenal is more effective in short bullpen appearances. But Mr. Chamberlain's strikeout rate of 10.2 per nine innings during his 2008 starting stint was nearly as high as his career 10.7 rate as a reliever. And the pitcher's 2010 season in relief was worse than his 2009 starting. 

Mr. Chamberlain is running out of chances in New York, but he deserves this one—because no other scenario offers so much reward for so little risk. The Yankees could try to trade him, but unloading Mr. Chamberlain now with his value at its nadir would bring little in return. 

They could leave him in the bullpen, but seeing him blossom into a good middle reliever is middling consolation if he can also develop into an above-average starter. 

Adding Mr. Soriano has made the Yankee bullpen strong, but there will be no leads to protect if the starting pitching is weak. Mr. Chamberlain was the future, once. He could be again. 