 A powerful suicide-bomb blast at Russia's busiest airport killed at least 35 people just outside a high-security passenger-arrival zone. The blast at Moscow's Domodedovo Airport left the international arrivals hall splattered with blood and engulfed in smoke as rescue workers with flashlights searched for bodies strewn across the floor. 

Russian President Dmitry Medvedev termed the bombing a terrorist act. No group claimed responsibility, but security officials told Russian news agencies the bomber was almost certainly from the Caucasus, in Chechnya, an assessment shared by independent specialists on the impoverished, overwhelmingly Muslim region.

Authorities ordered 100% security screening of all passengers and visitors, as well as their baggage, at airports across the country. Security at rail and subway terminals was also tightened.

British fighter jets escorted a passenger plane to London's Stansted airport following a bomb threat made by a passenger onboard. Police said a 37-year-old British national was arrested after making threats on board an Etihad Airways jet on its way to Heathrow Airport from Abu Dhabi. 

 The euro zone's private sector grew at the fastest pace in six months in January, as a surge in Germany and solid growth in France more than offset weaker performers, a survey showed.  

Official data also showed Germany helping to drive a pickup in euro-zone factory orders in November, further evidence that the industrial sector expanded at a solid rate as 2010 drew to a close. 

Euro-zone governments could boost the effective lending capacity of the region's financial rescue fund to €440 billion ($599.06 billion), but not beyond, said Wolfgang Franz, who chairs Germany's council of independent economic experts. He added that this is not the time to revamp the European Financial Stability Facility to allow the EFSF to be used to buy back bonds issued by troubled member states. 

 The Spanish government will overhaul the country's bank regulations to allow the partial nationalization of its ailing savings banks and to enable the injection of fresh capital into them, Finance Minister Elena Salgado said. She said early estimates by the Bank of Spain on the capital needs of the country's banking sector are below €20 billion ($27.2 billion). 

Ireland's two main opposition parties called on the Fianna Fail-led minority government to fast-track legislation for the country's international bailout and to dissolve parliament by Friday to facilitate a general election in February. 

 French President Nicolas Sarkozy said the new global monetary order should reflect the growing role of emerging nations on the world's economic scene without undermining the role of the U.S. dollar, which will remain "prominent." 

The U.K. government needs to spell out a strategy for supporting economic growth, the head of a leading business lobby said, criticizing Prime Minister David Cameron's administration for "careless" policymaking that could endanger the recovery. that support growth." 

The Central Bank of Russia plans to buy from domestic banks 100 metric tons of gold a year in order to replenish the country's gold reserves, the bank's Deputy Head Georgy Luntovsky said. In 2010, Russia's gold reserve increased 23.9% to 790 tons, or 25.4 million troy ounces. 

Hungary raised its policy rate for the third time in three months, as expected by most analysts and market players, due to inflation worries. The 0.25 percentage point raise came before the ruling party-dominated parliament replaces most of the rate-setting Monetary Policy Council, which could risk a dovish monetary policy shift. 

NATO said its 10,000-strong peacekeeping force in Kosovo will be cut in half by March 1. Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen said security was stable and warranted the drawdown.

 An Illinois appeals court said Rahm Emanuel is not allowed to stay on Chicago's mayoral ballot, a blow to the former White House chief of staff who has already raised more than $10 million in his bid for mayor. The three-judge Illinois Appellate Court, which heard oral arguments last week in the case, issued a split decision saying that Emanuel is not eligible to run for mayor in the Feb. 22 election.  

Jared Loughner, the gunman accused of shooting 19 people in Tucson, Ariz., on Jan. 8—including U.S. Representative Gabrielle Giffords—pleaded not guilty to charges of attempted assassination and attempted murder of federal employees. 

The U.S. Treasury said an auction of more than 465.1 million warrants to purchase Citigroup common stock will begin Tuesday morning. The warrants will be sold through a method that sets a market price by allowing investors to submit bids above a minimum price specified for each auction. 

Vietnam's inflation posted another double-digit rise ahead of the Lunar New Year, adding pressure on authorities to raise interest rates to slow the nation's growth and curb pressure on its currency. 

Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan called for cooperation across the political spectrum in tackling the nation's debt crisis as he opened this year's parliamentary session, even as opposition lawmakers look to sharpen their attacks. In his policy speech at the opening of the session, he also emphasized his commitment to free trade and fiscal reconstruction. 

 Japan's government will soon reach formal agreement to settle a massive class-action lawsuit involving people who contracted hepatitis B through childhood vaccinations, expected to cost up to 3.2 trillion yen ($38.8 billion) in damages to compensate hundreds of thousands of victims.  

India's central bank said its dominant policy aim will be to contain inflation, even though inflation is led by choking supplies and a demand-supply mismatch. 

 Afghan President Hamid Karzai approved a deal to inaugurate parliament on Wednesday, in a significant concession to elected lawmakers, ending a four-month standoff that left the country without a legislature to check presidential powers. 

Two car bombs struck Shiite pilgrims in an Iraqi holy city, killing at least 18 people as crowds massed for religious rituals marking the end of a 40-day mourning period for the Islamic sect's most beloved saint. The blasts in Karbala were the latest in almost a week of attacks that have killed at least 159 people. 

 Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas and his top aides frantically defended their leadership of negotiations with Israel as Al Jazeera continued its gradual release of almost 1,700 leaked Palestinian documents that are likely to further complicate Middle East peace efforts. 

 Egyptian opposition groups are hoping to exploit Tunisia's momentum to agitate for political and economic reforms by holding protests in Cairo and other cities Tuesday. Activists from Egypt's Kifaya ("Enough") movement—a coalition of regime opponents—and the 6th of April Youth Movement, have organized protests over Facebook and Twitter to push for economic improvements and to demand wider political freedoms. 

 Tunisia's interim government is struggling to establish its control over an agitated nation amid sustained public protests and work strikes, adding to uncertainty about what so far has been a peaceful handover of power since the surprising ouster of former President Zine al-Abedine Ben Ali. 

 Moves by Ivory Coast's declared leader to ban cocoa exports propelled futures to one-year highs as political tensions in the world's top producer escalated. The surge comes after Ivory Coast's presidential claimant Alassane Ouattara called for a month-long ban on cocoa exports in a bid to squeeze the funding of rival Laurent Gbagbo.  

Residents of a string of towns in northwest Victoria state were evacuating their homes as flood defenses failed in the face of waters flowing toward the continent's largest river. 

The country's economic outlook cooled with the release of weaker than expected producer-price figures and a profit warning from one of Australia's largest food retailers—early signs of how the impact of Queensland state's flooding has spread to the wider economy. 

A further indication of the cost of the flooding came when the Insurance Council of Australia said policy holders had already filed 1.2 billion Australian dollars (US$1.19 billion) in claims for damage. 