More than 20 years of covering debate, denial and distortion about the federal budget—from the often-maligned, though successful, deficit-reduction deal George H. W. Bush struck with Democrats in 1990, to the looming showdown over the federal debt ceiling—leaves a journalist frustrated. Protagonists and the public too often treat facts as annoying, irrelevant details.

Budgets matter. Budgets are manifestations of a nation's priorities and the terms of one generation's compact with the next. Unlike manifestos, TV shouting matches and campaign ads, budgets have to add up—with a little leeway for accounting gimmickry. Before we get preoccupied with the politics, personalities and sideshows in this year's chapter in the long-running deficit drama, a few observations:



• One, the ceiling on the federal debt needs to be raised—even if the new Republican House majority delivers all the spending cuts it promises soon.

With revenues depressed (by the sluggish economy and tax cuts) and spending elevated (for all sorts of reasons), the government is spending about $100 billion a month more than it takes in, adding about $1.3 trillion to the federal debt this year. Right now, the government has room to borrow an additional $400 billion or so before it hits the $14.3 trillion ceiling. Even if Congress refused to spend a nickel on domestic appropriations after a temporary spending bill expires in March—wiping out everything from soap for prisons to the president's paycheck—that wouldn't avoid the ceiling.

Refusing to raise the debt ceiling won't cut spending or shrink the deficit. "As far as I am aware," former Reagan Treasury official Bruce Bartlett wrote recently, "no other country on Earth has the idiotic policy that the U.S. has of having a legal limit on…bonds the central government can issue. They correctly recognize that the deficit and the debt are simply residuals resulting from the government's tax and spending policies. It makes no sense to treat the debt as if it is an independent variable." 

In other words, if you favored extending expiring Bush tax cuts, you favored borrowing more.

So why the bluster? Some politicians are misinformed or pretending. Some want action-forcing deficit-reducing rules attached to a debt-ceiling bill. Some see a "no" vote as a symbolic protest, knowing others will vote to avoid default. In 2006, a senator from Illinois named Barack Obama opposed a debt-ceiling increase, calling it "a sign of leadership failure."

• Two, today's deficits are a political problem, tomorrow's an economic threat. 

The federal budget isn't a family budget. When families, businesses and state and local governments cut back and rushed to pay debts, the federal government spent more, taxed less and borrowed more to cushion the blow to the economy and slow the inevitable deleveraging. That's the textbook remedy. Federal borrowing grew by $3.9 trillion between the end of 2007 and the third quarter of 2010 without provoking an increase in interest rates because private and state and local government borrowingfell $4.3 trillion. If there are short-term economic costs today to all this federal spending and debt, they're hard to see.

The political costs are obvious. For all the government did, spent and borrowed, the public sees unemployment at 9.8% and wonders if it was all wasted. The case that "it could have been worse" is true, but unconvincing. Symbolic spending cuts, like the Republican move to slice 5% from House personnel spending, don't add up to much. But they may be a necessary step toward tougher votes to restrain spending on health and retirement benefits and raise taxes. Because tomorrow's deficits won't evaporate when the economy recovers. The problem isn't mainly the cost of recent economic-rescue efforts; it's that the government has promised to pay benefits that it cannot afford without raising taxes far higher than voters will tolerate.

The numbers here are too big to absorb. Here's just one: Although the government has borrowed heavily, its interest tab fell to $197 billion in 2010 from $253 billion in 2008 because interest rates were extraordinarily low. Even before Congress decided to borrow more to extend expiring tax cuts, the Congressional Budget Office was predicting a nearly fourfold increase in interest payments over the next 10 years to $778 billion by 2020. That's almost as much as the Pentagon is projected to spend. Every additional $100 billion borrowed this year adds $43 billion in interest over the next decade, and much of it will go to foreigners.



• Three, big tax increases or big spending cuts that took effect immediately could hurt the economy just as it appears to be regaining its footing, but there are good reasons to make decisions now that take effect when the economy is healthy. 

Money-saving changes to benefit programs take time to implement wisely. Waiting until political or financial pressure forces deficit reduction means relying more on tax increases and cuts to government spending on education, infrastructure and other things that foster economic growth. And if deficit-reduction steps taken today are credible and bipartisan (so they won't be repealed after the next election) they'll help avoid a crisis—a market-shaking plunge in the dollar or unwelcome spike in interest rates—that could result if it markets decide the U.S. government is becoming the world's largest subprime borrower.

 Corrections and Amplifications: The federal debt ceiling is $14.3 trillion. An earlier version of this column said the figure was $1.43 trillion.

 Write to  David Wessel at capital@wsj.com 