In May 2010 Californian auction house Gooding and Company oversaw the private sale of a Bugatti 57SC Atlantic. The pre-war coupe, one of three ever made, was bought by an anonymous collector for an undisclosed sum, believed to be around $30 million (€22 million). 

Read the complete  Wealth Adviser report .

This comfortably eclipsed the previous record paid for a classic car, in Italy a year earlier, where an early 1960s Ferrari 250 Testa Rossa sold at public auction for $12.2 million. Rare though such headline sales remain, classic car values at all levels appear to be growing exponentially. Once the preserve of a small band of enthusiasts, classic cars have become the ideal choice for any investor who wants a little more in return than just hard cash.

Vintage and post-war sports cars are increasingly regarded as astute and relatively safe investments. Even less iconic marques have been doubling and in some instances tripling in value over the past decade.  Chris Routledge, managing partner at London-based auctioneers Coys, explains the change. "The Russians, Indians and Chinese are now involved and have money to spend," he says. 

"So what you have is a market that is four times larger than it was 10 years ago but the number of cars is still finite." This new breed of investor has a very different approach to the market too, which Mr. Routledge suggests is further contributing to the rise in values. "The ownership of these cars has gone from the middle-class enthusiast to the super rich, and the one thing the super rich don't do is sell anything." So once a car is bought, it stays bought, leaving that finite market further bereft of opportunity.



Anyone interested in striking while the iron is hot needs firstly to establish exactly what their expectations are. The overwhelming majority of high end classics are seldom, if ever, driven. They tend to be mothballed as appreciating stock, stored at significant expense in dehumidified environments away from light and risk of damage where, nevertheless, they must be expertly maintained. As Mr. Routledge observes, "People are holding them and looking at them as they would the art on the walls of their country estate."

Those few that are driven incur the considerably higher costs of increased and more specialist maintenance. Accident damage, even relatively minor, is potentially ruinous.

So using a classic car with any regularity, although lauded by the more romantic enthusiast, is neither for the faint of heart nor the shallow of pocket.

Even for the lock-up-and-leave investor, however, the pitfalls remain myriad and confusing. Provenance is crucial, as is originality. A car must have matching engine and chassis numbers - it is not unheard of for cars to reach the market that are built entirely of original parts but that are not, strictly speaking, themselves original. 

Meanwhile a tatty but unmolested car is often worth far more than an identical model that has been insensitively or inaccurately restored. As for where to invest, there are obvious trends in motoring as there are in any similar field of collecting, but accurately forecasting the future value of a marque is haphazard. Certain 1960s Ferraris are commanding multiple millions of dollars or Euros, while their less favoured stable-mates can be picked up for the price of a modern mid-priced German saloon. 

Classic Aston Martins have enjoyed a modern renaissance, born out through successful new models and aggressive product placement in the James Bond film franchise. This has resulted in certain models from the 1960s tripling in value almost overnight. But such events are hard to predict, and to see a significant return on a modest outlay a shrewd investor will have to speculate and be patient. Great and rare cars of the recent past, such as limited edition Porsche 911s, are still relatively easy to find, and afford, and will only ever increase in value. 

At the other end of the market, where cash rich enthusiasts are buying up ultra-rare post-war European sports cars, scarcity and established desirability take the reins. Once a car is already recognized as an investment, with strong provenance and the right reputation, the current market suggests that the size of your investment will be correspondingly rewarded. 

"You can minimize the risks by sticking to well-trodden paths," suggests Mr. Routledge. Spend £12 million on a 1963 Ferrari 250 GTO for instance, as British media mogul  Chris Evans did last year, and you can be confident that the car's extreme rarity and provenance – it is one of only 36 ever made and has documented competition success – will guarantee your money is at least secure. 



But some industry knowledge can make even the prospector quietly confident. "We know that cars from the Eighties like Group B rally cars are going to do really well because it's a generational thing. It's also a nostalgia thing. There are loads of guys out there who remember these cars fondly and who have unlimited ability now to buy them."

Investing in modern cars is perhaps more haphazard, with tomorrow's value of even the most exclusive and desirable models impossible to predict. Perhaps the ultimate cautionary tale involves the Jaguar XJ220, an early 1990s supercar that was priced at £360,000. Wealthy speculators were scrabbling to put down their £50,000 deposits on a car that turned up three years late with half the advertised engine capacity, rear wheel drive instead of four wheel drive and terrible driving characteristics. No-one wanted them then and no-one does to this day.

The safest investments are in older, well-established marques. Invest here and there is no reason to believe that you will not see a tidy profit in years to come on an investment you can actively, albeit gently, appreciate while it accrues. Competition is proving unusually fierce however, and consequently there is now a very real danger of paying over the odds at auction. Some recent sales in the U.K. and Europe far outstripped dealer prices on equivalent cars. Stick to a budget, buy with a bit of heart as well as head, and investing in a piece of motoring history can be as fun as it is rewarding.



 Mr. Master is a car writer based in South West England. He regularly contributes to Top Gear magazine. He can be reached at reports@wsj.com. 