Back in the nineties, before Ireland's economic miracle/apocalypse, summer work was hard to find, and every June there was an exodus of students to Germany. It's hard to imagine now, but in those simpler times, the prospect of working for 10 weeks in a factory in Cologne seemed like a real adventure. 

My friend David and I set out full of excitement, eager to see the world and discover deep truths about ourselves. We booked into a campsite by the Rhine and as we dined on baked beans, looking out over the river, we imagined the big things that would happen this summer. 

Three weeks later, we were still there. The employment situation wasn't as promising as we'd expected, and our total inability to speak German didn't help. I had a reasonable grasp of buying train tickets but not much else; the people at the recruitment agencies spotted this pretty quickly, from the long, thoughtful silences that followed when they asked me, say, my name. To cheer ourselves up we bought crates of beer from Aldi and drank them outside our tent, until the woman running the campsite asked us to leave, as we were scaring the families. 

The new campsite was even further away from the city, and full of hairy men who worked on the roads and glared at our soft collegiate hands. We missed the first campsite. We missed home! We had found out a lot about ourselves, and it was all bad! 

Then one day a man drove up to our tent. In English he told us, I'm looking for tough boys. Are you boys tough? David and I looked at each other. We had lost a lot of weight from our beans-only diet. Our teeth were starting to feel sort of loose. Yes, we told him. Yes we are. 

As he drove us into the city, we knew there was only one reason he could want us. We told each other it wouldn't be that bad. Gay porn probably paid quite well. No one in Ireland would ever know. But inside we were tormented with images of the hairy men in the second campsite, dancing in leather trousers to German disco music.

Our new friend, however, was not trying to pimp us. Instead it seemed that Germany had run out of proper factory workers. We were given contracts and stout, manly workboots. The next day we left the campsite for a sublet in the suburbs. We got a cheap deal because the block was designated for senior citizens. 

The senior citizens did not like us. One evening, following a minor insect problem we had incurred after misplacing a chicken salad earlier that long, hot week, they arrived en masse at our door asking us to leave. "What, and go back to the second campsite?" we said, insects swarming around us. No way, baby. We were staying put.

After all, we were productive members of society now. I worked in a bread factory, on the sugar-frosting machine. It was very boring, and I passed the day in complicated daydreams—only to be roused by a disturbing grinding noise, and the foreman screaming, "Junge! Machine aus!" Aus, I thought, cycling through my very brief mental dictionary...hmm, I seemed to remember that meant go faster…? "Ne!" the overseer would howl, before he was eclipsed by a blizzard of sugar.

Ne, is how you say "no" in Cologne. See, we had learned a lot this summer! "Gebackene Bohnen" is "baked beans." And "Sie sind entlassen!" means "You're fired." 

—Mr. Murray lives in Dublin and is the author of "Skippy Dies," a finalist for the National Book Critics Circle 2011 award.