LONDON—In a deal that demonstrates the interest in secondary property markets in the United Kingdom, a fund operated by AEW Europe and Tristan Capital Partners has agreed to acquire a portfolio of three shopping centers for £145 million ($236.5 million).

The shopping centers are the Harvey Centre in Harlow, Charter Walk in Burnley and Queens Arcade in Cardiff. They are held in the Sapphire Retail Fund, which originally was a 50-50 joint venture between the Bank of Scotland and Aldersgate Investment Ltd, an investment firm owned by David Reuben and Simon Reuben.

The deal comes as investors in the U.K., as well as the U.S., are beginning to focus more on top properties in secondary markets. While the Sapphire centers aren't located in areas as big and as bustling as central London, they have dominant positions in their own markets.

The deal is vintage  Ric Lewis, a fund manager with a reputation for opportunistic investing, and it marks his 10th acquisition since he left AEW in 2009 to form Tristan Capital Partners. When he left, AEW took the unusual step of outsourcing to Tristan the management of two funds that Mr. Lewis had been running at AEW.

The European Property Investors Special Opportunities fund was launched in 2008 and matures in 2016. Tristan has begun raising financing for its first fund independent of AEW, called Curzon Capital Partners III LP.

Mr. Lewis said in an interview that the shopping-center properties have been undermanaged during the downturn, resulting in temporary leases, vacancies and the need for structural improvements. Mr. Lewis is betting the properties will sell for a handsome profit in about five years thanks, in part, to his firm's efforts at improving them.

He also expects the economy to strengthen. "We are buying these properties at a tough time in the cycle, but we think there is a lot of upside potential," said Mr. Lewis. "All of the properties have the potential for improvement."

The Sapphire fund's lenders—Nationwide Building Society, Lloyds Banking Group PLC and Deutsche Hypothekenbank AG—held loans for £255 million on the portfolio. They placed the fund in administrative receivership, the equivalent of bankruptcy protection in the U.S., in August 2010 after Sapphire Retail Fund defaulted on the loan. The property was put up for sale. The European property fund began negotiating with the receiver, Grant Thornton LLP, in December.

The net income of the Sapphire portfolio produces a capitalization rate, or annual return of income-producing properties, of 7.75% on the initial purchase price. That is an average of the yields of the three centers. Tristan's plan is to work together with Addington Capital, an asset manager, to cut operating costs, bring in higher-paying tenants on long leases and improve the physical premises.

According to Tristan's projections, the fund should be able to sell the properties in about five years at a capitalization rate of about 6.75%, which is what the Reuben brothers paid in 2001. However, Mr. Lewis said the deal is calculated so that the bulk of the expected returns will be generated through improvements in income generated from the centers rather than being dependent on a huge jump in the price of the property.

Mr. Lewis acknowledged, though, that much depends on the economy improving, as well as the properties' income.

"The question is if I improve the property, will it represent less risk to the next buyer and therefore attract a wider circle of institutional investors? If a property can't do that, investing in it is just Alice in Wonderland," he said.

The European property fund is putting nearly £70 million of equity into the shopping-center deal. The rest of the financing will be provided through a loan, which isn't finalized.

Mr. Lewis is negotiating a loan with two German banks, Deutsche Pfandbriefbank AG and  Deutsche Bank AG. Mr. Lewis said he can finance the deal with existing equity and available credit lines pending the outcome of financing negotiations.

Since launching Tristan, Mr. Lewis has invested about €500 million ($711 million) in equity for a total of about €1.5 billion, including debt. The eight-year, closed-end European property fund, for which Mr. Lewis raised €788 million in equity in 2008, is 61% invested and is on target to achieve a return of about 17%, Mr. Lewis said.

While profits cannot be counted until the fund's term expires in 2016, some of its early deals have looked promising. The first deal Mr. Lewis did after leaving AEW was the acquisition of City Place House on Basinghall Street, a prime office building in the City of London. He paid €73.2 million for the 181,681-square-foot office building in March 2009, representing a capitalization rate of 10.1%. Mr. Lewis was able to sell the building in May 2010 for €106.9 million, representing a cap rate of 7%.

Beginning with an acquisition in Spain last year and subsequent deals in Poland and the Czech Republic, Tristan now is doing deals outside the core European property markets.

"These markets are becoming more interesting because there is an adequate risk premium on these countries for the first time in three or four years," said Mr. Lewis.

 Write to  William Boston at newseditors@wsj.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications:  Sapphire Retail Fund, which was a 50-50 joint venture between Bank of Scotland and Aldersgate Investment Ltd., an investment firm owned by brothers David and Simon Reuben, defaulted on certain loans backed by a portfolio of three shopping centers in 2010. An earlier version of this article incorrectly said that the fund was owned by the Reuben brothers through their Motcomb Estates investment vehicle and incorrectly said that the brothers defaulted on the loan. 