TOKYO—Workers toiling to fix the stricken Fukushima Daiichi nuclear-power plant now have something to look forward to—fresh meals and more frequent showers. 

Starting soon, workers will be served fresh food packed in bento lunchboxes, a significant improvement on their current diet of pouch-packed food, bread and instant noodles, supplemented by vegetable juice. In the immediate aftermath of the March 11 disasters, problems in getting meals to the site meant workers subsisted on crackers and freeze-dried food. 

Living quarters also will improve. Freeing the workers from sleeping bags and simple mats laid out on a floor, Tepco will bring in bunk beds for 240 people to the gym at the nearby Fukushima Daini nuclear plant that serves as temporary housing quarters for many workers. After mid-May, shower stalls will be also set up in the gym, and at another sleeping facility nearby. In subsequent weeks, prefabricated homes will be built to house the workers. 

The moves by plant operator  Tokyo Electric Power Co.
9501


0.14
%




, known as Tepco, are aimed at keeping morale high amid expectations that bringing Japan's worst-ever nuclear accident under control will take many more months.

Separately, Tepco officials said that work to install the primary section of a permanent cooling system for the plant's No. 1 reactor will start May 16. If carried out on schedule, that would mark the first time workers will enter the building since March 11, when four of the six reactor facilities at the plant were heavily damaged by a magnitude-9 earthquake and ensuing tsunami. 

Restoring permanent cooling functions is a key step in Tepco's plan to end the crisis at the plant by bringing the overheating reactors to what is called cold shutdown. Workers are currently pumping water in to cool the reactors, but the new system would eventually allow them to recirculate the water and make it more effective in cooling. 

The primary cooling system will be restored inside the No. 1 reactor building, where levels of radiation remain high. Tepco said it will begin cleaning the air inside the building on Monday using fans equipped with special filters. 

Work on the second part of the cooling system, to be located outside the reactor building where radiation levels are lower, will start sooner, on Sunday, Tepco said. 

The company said it plans to install similar cooling systems for other damaged reactors at the plant, but didn't say when work would begin. 

Goshi Hosono, a senior aide to Prime Minister Naoto Kan, said that nearly two months after the onset of the crisis, the time had come to take better care of workers. He and Tepco officials were speaking at a news conference. 

"I hope this will allow workers to refresh themselves and devote themselves to the hard task in hand," said Mr. Hosono, who is representing the premier at a joint disaster headquarters with Tepco. 

"Until now, we haven't paid enough attention to conditions for workers, as we have focused squarely on containing the accident," he said. "It has also been hard for Tepco to improve conditions for its own workers, given the hardships faced by evacuees forced out of their own homes." 