BUDAPEST—Hungary's government, under pressure from capital markets and European Union budget monitors, pledged to sharply shrink its deficit and slash public debt over the next three years, but investors reacted coolly, with many saying the plans were too short on specifics.

The overall size of spending reductions laid out Tuesday appeared larger than many had expected, but that failed to generate much enthusiasm in skeptical markets, which had been looking for a detailed program of long-term cuts to state welfare programs and other government outlays.

Hungary's currency, the forint, slipped against the euro after the budget plans were announced, government bond values fell and the Budapest stock exchange closed down.

"The headline figures look impressive," said  Neil Shearing, an emerging markets economist at Capital Economics in London. "But so much is still so uncertain in terms of actual concrete measures to back this all up. In the long-term, the fiscal picture still looks fragile."

That isn't the response Budapest had been hoping for. Hungary's populist leaders—who rode to power promising not to impose more austerity measures on the country's struggling families—were looking to regain investor confidence by undertaking billions of dollars in cuts.

Under the budget plan, the government of Prime Minister Viktor Orban also said it would reduce public debt to between 65% and 70% of annual gross domestic product by the end of 2014, from its current level of about 80%—the highest in Central Europe.

"We need to reduce debt," said Hungary's deputy prime minister, Tibor Navracsics. "We need to create conditions to give sustainable stamina to the Hungarian economy."

In the long run, the government said it believes public debt must be pushed lower than 50% of GDP. That would allow Hungary to regain "its true independence, as well as financial and economic elbow room," the government budget report says.

A substantial part of the initial debt reduction is to be achieved using pension money returned to state coffers from privately-managed funds. Critics say that the move will increase the government's pension liabilities in the long run.

After criticism from the International Monetary Fund and the EU—which have said Hungary was relying too heavily on temporary revenue-raising measures to meet its deficit targets—Mr. Orban's administration is cutting spending and promising to discontinue windfall taxes.

Under the plans announced Tuesday, the government will cut salaries of senior officials by 15%, revamp the system for disability payments, reduce subsidies on medicines and public transport, forbid early retirement and undertake a reorganization of the money-losing state railway.

Those steps and others will close the budget gap by 550 billion forints, or about $2.75 billion, this year, and by 900 billion forints annually in 2012 and 2013. That will result in budget deficits of 2.9% this year, 2.5% in 2012 and 2.2% in 2013.

That would give Hungary one of the lowest government deficits in the EU. Without the huge costs of servicing its large debt outstanding, the government budget would already be in surplus.



 Write to  Gordon Fairclough at gordon.fairclough@wsj.com and Margit Feher at margit.feher@dowjones.com 