WASHINGTON—President Barack Obama led the nation in a moment of silence Monday for victims of the Arizona shooting rampage and made plans to travel to Tucson on Wednesday to mark the national tragedy.

In Tucson, the president and First Lady Michelle Obama will attend a memorial event at the University of Arizona. White House aides wouldn't say what Mr. Obama will discuss in his remarks. But earlier in the day officials said he was looking to address the larger discussion, prompted by the shootings, about civility in the nation's political discourse.

"It's going to be important…to feel as if we are speaking directly to our sense of loss, but also speaking to our hopes for the future and how out of this tragedy we can come together as a stronger nation," Mr. Obama told reporters.

The moment of silence was marked in Tucson, as crime scene investigators paused from their work to honor the victims, including Rep. Gabrielle Giffords (D., Ariz.), who was gravely wounded in the rampage Saturday and who authorities said was its target.

The moment of silence also was recognized on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange and in Boston, where lawmakers were shaken by the violent attack on a legislator thousands of miles away.

Earlier in the morning, those at the North American International Auto Show in Detroit paused as well.

And on the International Space Station, commander Scott Kelly led NASA in a moment of silence for his sister-in-law, Ms. Giffords, who is married to his identical-twin brother. Flight controllers in Houston were silent as Scott Kelly spoke via radio from space. "We have a unique vantage point here aboard the International Space Station," he said. "As I look out the window, I see a very beautiful planet that seems very inviting and peaceful. Unfortunately, it is not.…We're better than this. We must do better."

Killed in the assault were one of Ms. Giffords's aides, a federal judge and four others at a public event held by the congresswoman. 

Authorities have given no motive for the accused gunman, Jared Lee Loughner, 22, but the incident has prompted some lawmakers to call for a re-examination of heated political rhetoric.

The White House said that the president had continued placing calls to those affected by the tragedy, including the families of several of the victims, and Arizona's two Republican senators, John McCain and Jon Ky. 

The president and first lady marked the moment of silence on the south lawn on the White House, bowing their heads and standing silently for about a minute. A bell chimed three times at the start of the ceremony, a standard military protocol. The only other sounds were of cameras clicking and a rope thumping against a flagpole, where the American flag flew at half-staff to honor the victims. 

The moment was also observed on Capitol Hill, where an estimated 500 congressional staff members gathered on steps on the east side of the Capitol Building. The group was led in prayer by Rep.  Emanuel Cleaver II (D., Mo.), a pastor. "Help us move from this dark place to a place of sunshine and hope," he said.

Also Monday, members of Congress and their staff held an interfaith prayer service in the sprawling Cannon Caucus Room, in one of the House office buildings.

House Speaker John Boehner (R., Ohio) and Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D., Calif.).also placed two books in the Cannon Rotunda. In one, well-wishers offered their condolences to the victims and their families. In the other, they wrote encouraging notes to those recovering.

—Patrick O'Connor contributed to this article.

 Write to  Laura Meckler at laura.meckler@wsj.com and Danny Yadron at danny.yadron@wsj.com 