Revelers danced, waved flags, tipped bottles, stoked cigars and shouted themselves hoarse through the early morning hours Monday. A decade after the 9/11 attacks, its architect, Osama bin Laden, the man who changed America and made terror a commonplace word, was finally taken down.

By dawn, the thrill and relief unleashed in cities around the U.S. was tempered by the memory of loss that remained shortchanged by revenge. 

"That's not bringing anyone back," said New York Fire Lt. Jim Dillon, who had seven buddies from his firehouse as well as several friends from his hometown in Long Island die at the World Trade Center. He said he felt the elation of justice served, along with the emptiness he presumed a murder victim's family feels after a guilty verdict.

"I still wake up at 3 a.m. with planes crashing into buildings," said Eric LaBorie, whose wife Kathryn Yancey LaBorie died working as a flight attendant on United Airlines Flight 175. "It never goes away. I thought it would but it doesn't. It sits there and haunts me."

Joe Holland, a member of the New York City Retired Firefighters Chapter 343 in Spring Hill, Fla. lost his son Joey, who worked at a commodities trading firm in the World Trade Center at the time of the attack.

 News updates and reactions from around the world. 



Two years ago, Mr. Holland and other members of the firefighters group created a 9/11 memorial at a local VFW Hall that included a piece of iron from the World Trade Center and a tile from the Pentagon. 

The men gathered there Monday for a moment of silence and to pray. Afterward, they toasted with black Sambuca and peppermint Schnapps. The mood was "solemn in the sense that all those people lost their lives," said Mr. Holland. "But it was jubilant because one's down and a lot more to go."

Nick Swope said he wasn't ashamed to admit that when he heard the president's announcement, he wept. Then he went outside to hang an American flag from his front porch in Highlands Ranch, Colo., a suburb of Denver. 

"I feel great," he said. "This is truly a sigh of relief. Such an evil man—he had no place in this world. We go to bed safer now, that's for sure."

Mr. Swope, a 19-year-old college student, was watching the Phillies-Mets game on TV, and when the news broke during the ninth inning, he said, "the fans weren't out there cheering for one team or another. They were chanting, 'USA, USA.' We were one nation. It was pretty powerful."

Americans also turned to the Internet to share their feelings. Crimson Hexagon Inc., a company that measures online sentiment, said 22% of the conversations about the killing of bin Laden on Twitter were celebratory; 12% noted remembrances of lives lost; 10% discussed fears of terrorism. 

On Facebook, a page titled "Osama Bin Laden is DEAD" quickly attracted more than 385,000 "likes."

At the U.S. Naval base in Coronado, near San Diego, where the Navy Seals begin their training, Navy Lt. Cate Wallace was low-key Monday about the elite unit credited with killing bin Laden. "We're very happy for the American people," she said, "but it's business as usual."

In Dallas, home to former President George W. Bush, well-wishers decorated the gate to his neighborhood with flags, bunting and balloons. A sign read, "President Obama forgot to say......THANK YOU PRESIDENT BUSH!"

Diagram shows where raid took place.

Meanwhile, in Dearborn, Mich., home to one of the largest Arab-American populations in the U.S., about a dozen people gathered Monday at City Hall to chant "no more bin Laden" while waving U.S. and Iraqi flags. "Bin Laden is no Muslim," said Ajmy Alsaidi, one of the demonstrators. "He was a terrorist."

The Muslim Public Affairs Council "greeted the news of the death of Osama bin Laden with an immense sense of relief," the organization said in a statement. 

Musa Agil said Monday he was "selling Coke and gas" at his family's Masonboro Country Store in Wilmington, N.C., when he heard the news, just as he was on the morning of 9/11. 

"I'm relieved like all Americans," said Mr. Agil, who is the chairman of the Wilmington Islamic Learning Center. "As Muslims, we felt during the attack on Sept. 11 that our religion had been hijacked that day."

Mr. Agil, 57 years old, said he has been treated with respect and understanding by customers since 9/11, though not quite in the same way as before. "People always ask you now, 'Where are you from?'" he said. "It changed so many things."

Toner Bower, a plumber in Port Matilda, Pa., woke up Monday and his wife, Bonnie, said, "We need to go to Shanksville," the site where 40 passengers and crew members were killed on Flight 93. 

The Bowers arrived and walked along a chain link fence that borders the rural patch of land where the airliner crashed. Small American flags snapped in the wind. Caterpillar bulldozers gouged into a nearby hill that is being leveled to make it easier for visitors to see. 

Flight 93 was en route from Newark, N.J., to San Francisco when passengers and crew members fought the hijackers, who had plotted to crash the aircraft into the Capitol in Washington. 

Mr. Bower pulled a spool of fishing line from his pocket and carefully knotted a copy of his local newspaper, the Centre Daily Times, to the fence. "Bin Laden dead," the headline announced. 

  CONTINUOUS UPDATES: News, Reactions, More  