  Activision Blizzard Inc.
ATVI


-1.27
%




 said its net income jumped 32% in the first quarter, but the videogame maker also expressed concerns about the impact of an outage at  Sony Corp.'s online game network.

Activision, maker of the hit "Call of Duty" and "World of Warcraft" game franchises, saw a shift in sales to more profitable Internet-based sources of revenue. "Call of Duty" is typically the most commonly played online game from consoles.

The Santa Monica, Calif., company said the outage of Sony's PlayStation Network—the online game service Sony shut down over two weeks ago after a major theft of customer data—is beginning to hurt satisfaction among players of Activision's games, though the outage hasn't yet had a material financial impact on the company. 

While PlayStation 3 gamers can still play "Call of Duty" by themselves, the outage has prevented them, since April 20, from playing against others over the Internet. "We're really concerned about it," said  Bobby Kotick, Activision's chief executive, in an interview. "People are really disappointed."

A spokesman for Sony said, we know the attack on the PlayStation Network "has caused our customers frustration and concern, and we're doing everything possible to restore their trust in our services." On Sunday, Sony missed a previous deadline for restoring service for the PlayStation Network by the end of the week, and hasn't provided a new estimate for bringing it back online.

Activision's profits got a lift in the first quarter ended March 31 from "digital" sources of revenue, including a $15 "add-on pack" for Activision's "Call of Duty: Black Ops" game that allows players to fight in new territories not included in the original $60 game. Digital sources of revenue carry a higher profit margin than traditional retail-sold games, though Activision declines to disclose how much higher. 

Activision said net income jumped to $503 million, or 42 cents a share, from $381 million, or 30 cents a share, in the same period a year earlier—better than the 28 cents a share the company had previously forecast. 

Revenue rose 11% to $1.45 billion from $1.31 billion a year ago and higher than the $1.28 billion Activision had previously forecast. Activision's revenue from digital sources rose to $428 million, or 30% of total revenue, from $330 million, or 25% of total revenue, a year ago. 

Major games publishers like EA and Activision are pushing to get more of their revenue over the Internet, in part because consumers are gravitating toward the convenience of online game purchases and the social appeal of multiplayer gaming.

Retail sales of game products, meanwhile, have suffered through a stretch of sales declines over the past year, falling 4% to $1.53 billion this March in U.S. stores from the same month the prior year, according to NPD Group Inc. 

Activision raised its financial outlook for the full year, predicting earnings of 61 cents a share on revenue of $4.05 billion, compared with an earlier forecast of 56 cents a share in earnings and $3.95 billion in revenue. 

 Write to  Nick Wingfield at nick.wingfield@wsj.com 