When air travel plunged following the global recession in 2008, Spanish air-traffic controllers suffered little impact: They were earning, on average, a half a million dollars apiece. 

Last year, as the Spanish government tried cutting those payouts to below $300,000—still 10 times Spain's average salary—controllers protested by staging wildcat strikes during December holidays. 

Socialist Prime Minister José Luis Zapatero, normally a friend of organized labor, called in the army to force controllers back to work before Christmas.

Spain's fight with its air traffic controllers is just one of many hurdles Europe faces in removing national boundaries in its skies. On the ground, the European Union erased most borders to movement of people and goods more than a decade ago. In the air, 50 years of rhetoric and 10 years of planning have yielded little progress.

Now, the EU is making another big push for what it calls the Single European Sky. Starting next January, Brussels aims to create the equivalent of aviation expressways and sweep away needless air-traffic bureaucracy. But this means shattering cozy fiefdoms, forcing national aviation agencies to cooperate and compelling controllers to work more efficiently—all without compromising safety. Controllers and managers at the national agencies are putting up a fight.

The battle for Europe's skies—which directly affects every traveler, economy and air force across the continent—is a microcosm of the EU's larger struggle to pull down national barriers and improve the region's competitiveness. As in the euro zone's protracted financial crisis, logic calls for a Europe-wide solution, but is trumped by domestic politics.

At the center of the sky war is Europe's model of social protection, which has allowed controllers not just to win rich pay and favorable conditions, but also in some cases, to dictate how their organizations are run.

EU officials promise their Single Sky plan will end abuses and slash delays while cutting fuel consumption and pollution.

"Without radical reform, we cannot develop the airline business and reduce carbon emissions," said EU Transport Commissioner Siim Kallas, the plan's chief proponent, in an interview. Failure, he added, means disorganization will worsen, costing airlines and passengers billions more.

Airlines, while applauding Mr. Kallas's efforts, see insufficient progress. "The Single Sky is the right concept and has the right elements, but it hasn't yet shown it can deliver," says Ulrich Schulte-Strathaus, secretary general of the Association of European Airlines, a trade group.

Controllers argue the Single Sky endangers fliers because controllers will handle more flights under tighter budget constraints. "There's nothing in it for safety," says Volker Dick, president of ATCEUC, an organization of national labor unions representing 13,000 controllers across Europe. EU officials say the plan stresses safety.

Action is needed. European air traffic grew less than 1% last year over 2009, while delays jumped 34% according to Eurocontrol, an umbrella organization covering 39 countries.

The continental U.S., in contrast, is a market of similar area that handled around 70% more flights last year, with 7% fewer controllers. The U.S. has one air-traffic agency—the Federal Aviation Administration—with 20 control centers. 

In 39 European countries, there are 39 national agencies plus Eurocontrol, with 64 control centers. Europe carries twice as many bureaucrats and support staff as the U.S. European air-traffic agencies' operating costs per flight are 75% higher than the FAA's, largely because of labor costs.

The U.S., meanwhile, is reassessing limits of its efficiency after several FAA controllers fell asleep on the job at major facilities, creating potentially dangerous situations.

The drawbacks of Europe's fragmented skies became obvious last April amid chaos caused by dust clouds from Iceland's volcanic eruption. Resulting airspace closures cost economies world-wide billions of dollars. Lacking a single regulator to impose common standards, Mr. Kallas argued, "Europe was operating with one hand tied behind its back." 

Mr. Kallas seized on the crisis to re-energize the decade-old Single Sky plan. EU governments, eager to show they were acting, quickly endorsed his push. But enthusiasm waned once the crisis passed.

"You couldn't have had a more compelling case for air-traffic management reform" than the volcano and delays of 2010, says Jeff Poole, a director of the International Air Transport Association, a global trade group. "Yet we're still in this political and institutional quagmire."

Efforts to unify European air traffic began in the 1950s, alongside political consolidation that led to the EU itself. In 1960, six countries established Eurocontrol in Brussels as a multinational air-traffic agency designed eventually to replace national offices.

The national agencies and militaries quickly resisted unification, arguing the plan undermined sovereignty. Eurocontrol, which functions today as a largely powerless coordinator of airline flight plans, survived and grew to employ roughly 2,500 people.

Europe's economic reforms of the 1990s—including airline deregulation modeled on liberalization in the U.S.—caused traffic to balloon, producing an aviation crunch. Delays in 1999 hit unprecedented levels. In reaction, the European Commission developed the Single Sky concept and declared the plan "one of its priority actions," in a Commission report in 2000.

But the plan received a similar reception to Eurocontrol 40 years earlier: Controllers feared job cuts and staged protests. Bureaucrats in the national agencies, concerned Brussels would usurp their powers, resisted the plan. Military officials fiercely defended their right to shut huge chunks of airspace for training and maneuvers.

Like many EU projects—including the single currency and the removal of internal border controls—the Single Sky advanced largely because technocrats chipped away at obstacles raised by national governments. To advocates of European integration, these planners were tenacious visionaries. To critics, they were unelected, power-hungry functionaries.

In 2004, national governments granted the Commission authority in principle to oversee air traffic under the Single Sky. EU officials then spent another five years developing plans to reorganize and regulate national operations.

In 2009, the EU presented a detailed program that would group 32 national agencies into nine larger units, called airspace blocks, which would then each break down internal barriers and unify operations for greater efficiency. It would impose the first common set of tough standards for all air-traffic agencies. Advanced technologies were envisioned to improve productivity and safety.

A new regulator would set ambitious targets for national agencies to cut fees to airlines. Laggards would be named and potentially punished. Eurocontrol, which is not part of the EU, would finally get real responsibility managing the whole network. Implementation was—and still is—envisioned to begin in 2012 and take several years.

But support among governments remained tepid. "Time for reflection is over," Mr. Kallas exhorted senior officials at a meeting in Madrid, soon after taking office in February 2010.

At the same time, Europe's financial crisis prompted many countries to start tackling their own high air-traffic costs. The prospect of being embarrassed by EU-wide efficiency benchmarks gave extra incentive to streamline.

Few countries faced a bigger problem than Spain. Years of government penny-pinching had cut the training of new air-traffic controllers, creating frequent shortages. Controllers exploited the situation to boost their pay and sweeten contract terms. Government overseers, who feared crippling strikes, caved to controllers' demands.

By 2005, only two-thirds of Spanish controllers' annual hours were on standard salary. The rest was on overtime, paid at triple-time rates. In 2009, some controllers earned more than $1 million, according to Aeropuertos Españoles y Navegación Aérea, or AENA, the state aviation agency. Early retirement was allowed at age 52.

As Mr. Kallas called for action in Madrid early last year, the government there moved to cut staff costs. Controllers reacted by staging work-to-rule protests and strikes. Controllers in France, Italy, Belgium and Greece launched similar actions against their governments' austerity or efficiency proposals.

Then Iceland's Eyjafjallajökull volcano erupted on April 14. Aviation regulators closed roughly 80% of European airspace during the Easter holiday, stranding millions of people and upending global commerce. Airlines and passengers fumed at governments' haphazard reactions, with some allowing flights while others forbade them. The EU pushed a common solution but was powerless to impose it.

The Single Sky "would have enabled a more nimble response," Mr. Kallas said once airspace reopened. On May 4, he won unanimous approval to accelerate work on the project from the EU's 27 national transportation ministers.

Controllers' protests mounted. During summer, traffic rose by 3% over summer 2009, while delays more than doubled. 

Tensions between Brussels and EU countries also rose. The national agencies slammed EU efficiency proposals as "unrealistic" in a statement issued by Canso, their trade group. EU officials, meanwhile, groused that governments were sending their air-traffic officials as representatives to Single Sky planning meetings, rather than transportation ministers and officials who have political power. The switch meant the agencies would be setting the regulatory policies governing their own operations—not a recipe for radical change.

"I got very upset," says former EU director of air transport Daniel Calleja, who was then Mr. Kallas' top aviation deputy.

Tensions boiled over at a meeting in Brussels on Oct. 25, when Mr. Calleja asked governments to endorse strict efficiency targets. Officials from several countries said the goals were too ambitious. "They realized that by adopting the targets, they were signing up" for stricter discipline, says Mr. Calleja.

Lacking agreement, Mr. Calleja yanked the proposal and threatened to go over the technocrats' heads to their political masters.

"The implementation of the Single European Sky is at risk," Mr. Kallas warned the next day.

Officials who had blocked the targets dismissed Mr. Kallas' concerns. "We must not make a storm of a little wind," said Patrick Gandil, France's director-general of civil aviation, who had opposed the EU proposal one day earlier. He denied that national agencies were against tight regulation. "Our goal is fix reasonable objectives," he said.

Mr. Kallas' staff spent the next two months negotiating a deal with national governments to meet a year-end deadline. They struck a bargain on Dec. 3, setting efficiency targets that the national agencies deemed demanding and airlines dismissed as insufficient.

The same day in Spain, two-thirds of air-traffic controllers called in sick, escalating their domestic battle. The country faced chaos over a holiday weekend.

Leaders of the Spanish controllers' labor group accused the government of forcing controllers to work extra hours, violating laws and safety standards. José Blanco, Spain's minister for public works and the politician responsible for transportation, called the walkout "out-of-control blackmail."

Prime Minister Zapatero declared a state of emergency, a limited form of martial law not used since the days of Fascist dictator Francisco Franco. In justifying the extraordinary move to parliament, Mr. Zapatero cited a Spanish court ruling from May that said controllers had essentially wrested control of the "organization, planning, direction, management, supervision and control" of air traffic. "[C]ollective bargaining has been used to defraud the law," he said, citing the ruling.

ATCEUC, the pan-European controllers' group, fired back that "the Spanish state has chosen to decline to an almost medieval age." The International Federation of Air Traffic Controllers' Associations, a global trade group, accused the government of "resorting to totalitarian and dictatorial measures."

For six weeks, Spanish controllers worked under military supervision. In March, the controllers union signed a new contract that slashes overtime pay and streamlines staffing, largely on government terms. Spain still has some of Europe's highest air-traffic fees to airlines, however.

In Brussels, officials are scrambling to prepare for the Single Sky's official kickoff next January. But mounting congestion poses immediate concerns.

"We are really worried about delays this summer," Mr. Kallas told a recent gathering. "We have no other option but to reform, or there will be serious harm for passengers."

—Ana Garcia contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Daniel Michaels at daniel.michaels@wsj.com 