WASHINGTON—The U.S. military is using a high-flying surveillance drone aircraft to survey the damaged Japanese nuclear complex, and has dispatched a specialized military team to aid the Japanese government in the crisis, a Pentagon spokesman said Thursday.

A pilotless U.S. surveillance aircraft known as a Global Hawk has flown missions over Japan to survey damage, Pentagon spokesman Col. David Lapan confirmed Thursday morning. Col. Lapan was unable to provide additional details. 

U.S. officials Wednesday, in comments Wednesday, indicated they were no longer relying solely on information from the Japanese government or Tokyo Electric Power Co., the operator of the stricken Fukushima Daiichi nuclear complex.

The head of the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission said that based on his agency's analysis of conditions at the plant, Americans within 50 miles of the complex should leave the area—contradicting a Japanese government directive that established an evacuation zone of 12 miles around the facility.

Energy Secretary Steven Chu on Wednesday said the situation at the Fukushima plant was more serious than the 1979 Three Mile Island partial core meltdown in Pennsylvania. 

A Global Hawk drone flew similar missions over Haiti last year after a major earthquake hit the island nation. The Department of Defense took the unusual step of distributing high-resolution images shot by the Global Hawk to the public to assist first responders. The Air Force recently created a Global Hawk base on Guam.

The U.S. Department of Defense has also sent a nine-member "consequence management assessment team" that would arrive soon in Japan to begin assisting the Japanese military and government with the response to the nuclear disaster, Col. Lapan said. 

The team, said Col. Lapan, will recommend whether additional U.S. military forces are needed beyond the forces that have already deployed for tsunami and earthquake relief.

A U.S. Forces Japan directive issued March 15 has ordered U.S. military to remain clear of a 50-mile zone around the damaged Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant, a much wider "no go" zone than set previously by Japanese authorities. 

Meanwhile, the U.S. Military humanitarian response continues to build. A U.S. Marine convoy, escorted by the Japanese military, has headed for a humanitarian assistance center established at Yamagata Airport. The convoy included six seven-ton trucks, 11 Humvees, and communications trucks, according to a Marine Corps news release.

Two Okinawa-based KC-130J transport aircraft departed today for Naval Air Station Atsugi, loaded with pallets of packaged meals, cots and other equipment.

A U.S. Navy carrier strike group, led by the aircraft carrier USS Ronald Reagan, is currently operating off the east coast of Japan. The 31st Marine Expeditionary Unit, aboard ships of Amphibious Squadron 11, is positioned off the west coast. 