STOCKHOLM—Sweden's gross domestic product surged in the fourth quarter of 2010, rising the most since records began, easily beating forecasts and offering further support to the Riksbank's plans to raise interest rates during 2011. 

Economic output in Sweden grew 7.3% in the three months to Dec. 31 compared with the same period in 2009, beating economists' estimates of 6.9%, and expanded 1.2% compared with the third quarter against forecasts of 0.9%, Statistics Sweden said. 

GDP growth of 7.3% was the biggest quarterly rise year-on-year since Statistics Sweden started measuring such figures in 1970, said Per Ericson, an analyst at the agency. However, the size of the rise reflects the depth of the economic dip in 2009, Mr. Ericson added. 

"If we take this high level of growth at the end of 2010 and then look at sentiment indicators which remain at record levels, the outlook for growth this year is very good,"  Olle Holmgren at SEB bank said. 

In the third quarter, GDP grew 6.9% in annual terms and 2.1% compared with the three months to June 30. 

The Riksbank has said it will raise interest rates in 2011 as it seeks to manage inflation pressure, which it sees rising as Sweden's economy bounces back strongly after the financial crisis. The central bank forecasts an average repo rate of 2.5% in the first quarter of 2012, up from a current level of 1.5%. 

"Today's growth numbers support our view of continued rate hikes at all meetings at least until late 2011,"  Anna Raman at Handelsbanken said. 

In the minutes of its latest monetary policy meeting released Monday, Deputy Governor Svante Öberg said higher inflation than expected could mean the repo rate would need to be raised more quickly than the Riksbank's forecasts show. In this case, Mr. Oberg said, the Riksbank may need to increase the rate by more than 0.25 percentage point at one or more meetings and to increase the repo rate to 4% by next year, according to the minutes. 

The Swedish krona strengthened slightly after the GDP figures. The euro recently traded at 8.7091 kronor, up from 8.7214 kronor before the data was released. The currency had risen steadily following Monday's Riksbank's minutes, which were more hawkish than expected. 

The pick-up in the fourth quarter was "broad-based," said  Ben May at Capital Economics. Household spending and investment expanded on the quarter by 1.0% and 1.7% respectively, "suggesting that past interest rate hikes have had little impact on domestic spending," Mr. May said. 

This, along with the buoyant indicators of business sentiment and rising oil and commodity prices, could mean the Riksbank's stance "may turn more hawkish before too long, prompting the krona to climb higher still," he said. 

