NEW DELHI –India's food inflation rate eased for the fourth consecutive week as vegetable prices continued to cool, calming worries of more rapid monetary tightening by the central bank. 

The wholesale price index for food articles fell 1.6% to 179.5 in the week ended Feb. 19 from 182.4 in the previous week, according to data issued Thursday by the Ministry of Commerce and Industry. The annual food inflation rate was lower as well, coming in at 10.39%, compared with 11.49% the week before. 

The data will strengthen expectations that food prices are in a downtrend, increasing the likelihood of a quick moderation in overall prices which have mounted pressure on the central bank to raise policy rates. 

Bond prices rose following the data, with the most-traded 8.08% bond maturing in 2022 rising to 100 rupees ($2.23) from 99.95 rupees. 

  Anjali Verma, an economist at MF Global India, said food prices are correcting as supplies are improving. However, the fall won't last too long as demand pressures remain. 

"Supplies are improving as the winter crop output comes to the market, but you will not see [food] prices continuing to fall the way they have fallen," she said. 

Food inflation in Asia's third-largest economy has been high for well over a year--despite a series of rate increases by the Reserve Bank of India--due to rising demand and choked supplies following unseasonal rainfall last year, which damaged some crops. 

Food inflation accelerated to more than 18% late December, but has cooled after the government took a slew of measures such as banning exports of onions and arranging for their imports to boost market supplies. 

Latest data shows that vegetable prices fell 6% on-week while prices of onions, which were driving up food inflation, were down about 16%. 

Chief Economic Adviser  Kaushik Basu said food prices are still at uncomfortably high levels, and strong fiscal discipline is key to controlling overall inflation. 

The government, in its federal budget for the year that will begin April 1, projected that it would cut the fiscal deficit to 4.6% of gross domestic product from 5.1%. 

Economists believe the narrower deficit, if achieved, will help control general inflation, which the government expects to ease to 7% by March from 8.23% in January. 

Thursday's data also showed the index of primary articles, which comprises food and non-food articles as well as minerals, fell 1.2% to 187.2 in the week to Feb. 19. It was up 14.85% from a year earlier, after climbing 15.77% in the week ended Feb. 12. 

 Write to  Anant Vijay Kala at anant.kala@dowjones.com 