On the opening night of New York Fashion Week, PETA didn't picket or throw paint. It threw a party. 

People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals, the animal rights group known by its acronym, hosted a crowd of industry types at  Stella McCartney's boutique in Manhattan's Meatpacking District. With photographers, glasses of wine and a few celebrities, the event seemed a typical fashion gathering, albeit one with a video about rabbit and fox slaughtering in the fur trade.

Narrating the video was Tim Gunn, chief creative officer of  Liz Claiborne Inc. and well-known personality on reality TV show "Project Runway." 

The party "was like a big group hug," Mr. Gunn says.

PETA, known for its graphic stunts with bleeding carcasses and naked models, is shifting its strategy. Its new approach is less about disrupting events from the outside and more about educating the fashion industry from the inside, says  Dan Mathews, PETA senior vice president of campaigns.

PETA's move comes at a time when the high-end fashion industry is pushing fur heavily. A parade of pelts strutted down the runways of New York, Milan and Paris in recent weeks. Coats, dresses, bags, and shoes with fur accents were seen at brands of all sizes, from small Italian label Luca Luca to luxury powerhouse Michael Kors.

PETA's Mr. Mathews shrugged off the fur on the runways, saying it would take time for PETA to make inroads into the fashion houses. "When we're trying to appeal to the style-obsessed, we realized that they're going to respond better to a stylish image or something that seems like it's part of the in-crowd than they will from an angry protester," says Mr. Mathews, who has been with the nonprofit organization for 26 years.

That said, some designers find it easier to dismiss PETA now. Pamella DeVos, designer of eveningwear label Pamella Roland, says she used to think about anti-fur activists when creating her runway collection but no longer does. "I haven't seen them at all. I don't know where they went," she says. Ms. DeVos showed fur at her recent show as she has in every collection since her label began in 2002.

One influence helping spread fur among designers is Saga Furs, a Denmark-based marketing group that represents 2,500 European furriers. Saga gives designers fur for runway looks, and sometimes a nominal incentive fee, in a program it calls "cost-based sponsorship." Saga's hope is that the fur clothing will eventually be made commercially and it will be a beneficiary of the sales.

As many as three dozen designers who showed real fur on the runway this past New York Fashion Week did so with the help of Saga, says Saga Chief Executive  Jan Erik Carlson. Saga says the pelts it offers are from animals bred humanely. 

PETA says it opposes all fur, including Saga's. PETA says it does a lot more than just protest fur. It also promotes vegan lifestyle and speaks out against animal testing. 

Animal rights activists have new tactics in their war against fur on the ruways, writes the Journal's Elizabeth Holmes. Still, fur was on display this season.

In 2001, a group of PETA protesters hurled tofu pies at  Karl Lagerfeld during a red carpet appearance. (The pies missed Mr. Lagerfeld and mistakenly hit Calvin Klein instead.)

PETA's gradual path from pie-throwing to party-throwing began around that time when Mr. Mathews reached out to Peter Arnold, then-president of the Council of Fashion Designers of America, to discuss tactics for working with the fashion industry. Mr. Arnold introduced Mr. Mathews to Mr. Gunn. 

"The in-your-face thing—clearly it got them a lot of press. But I'm not so sure it advanced their cause," Mr. Arnold says of PETA.

Mr. Gunn, who was then-chairman of the department of fashion design at New York's Parsons the New School for Design invited PETA to speak to students. He says he wanted young designers to make an informed decision about the materials they used. 

"I can't even tell you how many dozens of calls I received from people in the industry saying, 'Don't do this. This is a big mistake. They are going to brainwash the students. There's nothing wrong with fur'," Mr. Gunn says. 

Mr. Gunn gathered a couple hundred students, as well as the faculty, for a presentation by Mr. Mathews and another PETA representative. 

As Mr. Gunn's prominence in the fashion world has grown since then, PETA has benefited. After Parsons, Mr. Gunn appeared on "Project Runway" and then became chief creative officer of Liz Claiborne. He serves as an unofficial spokesman for PETA and is not compensated for his participation.

"Do I believe that we shouldn't wear fur? Yes," Mr. Gunn says. "Do I hurl insults at people wearing fur? No."

PETA's evolution continued in 2002, when it co-hosted an animal-free fashion show with the CFDA. In 2006, PETA held an awards event for animal enthusiasts during New York Fashion Week. 

Its new tactics attracted well-connected fashion publicist Kelly Cutrone, who says she wasn't interested in picketing shows but was happy to throw the party at Stella McCartney for PETA. She says she did the work free.

 U.S. fur sales totaled $1.3 billion in 2010, up slightly from 2009 but still down from a pre-recession high of $1.8 billion in 2005, according to the Fur Information Council of America, a California-based trade association that promotes the use of fur. 

Christian Cota, a relative fashion newcomer, used fur for the first time in his recent show. Mr. Cota had been hesitant to use the material due to ethical concerns, he says, but changed his mind after Saga Furs approached him. Saga showed him photos of how animals are raised, Mr. Cota says.

He was also interested in Saga's new techniques for using fur, such as weaving it with other materials or different ways of shaving it. "They kind of allowed me to use all of their technologies and things that maybe as a young designer I wouldn't be able to afford," Mr. Cota says.

As for PETA, Mr. Cota says, "I respect a lot of what they're doing." He says he is also against the use of fur that is "not ethical." 

PETA, which began in 1980, received $32 million in contributions for its most recent fiscal year, ended July 31. Merchandise sales and investment interest brought its revenue to nearly $36 million. PETA says it has not received funding from designers who use fur.

PETA, of course, still plans public protests, which it says are a way to reach a more mass audience. It tends to target big labels that produce fur-laden items in sizeable quantities. It recently blasted the noise of screaming rabbits outside  Donna Karan's New York headquarters to protest the designer's use of rabbit fur. A spokeswoman for Donna Karan declined to comment. 

It also continues to create ads featuring naked female celebrities—Taraji P. Henson is the latest—paired with slogans such as "Fur? I'd Rather Go Naked." PETA doesn't promote the use of faux fur, because it encourages the fur aesthetic.

Not all of the fur shown on the runway ends up on the retail racks. An oversized knee-length silver fox coat at Michael Kors from Saga pelts will go into production, as will a similar style from  Derek Lam, representatives from both brands said. The brightly colored fur chokers at Thakoon will not. A Thakoon spokeswoman says, "They were for styling only."

 Write to  Elizabeth Holmes at elizabeth.holmes@wsj.com 