WASHINGTON—The Justice Department said Wednesday it took several steps to disable a network of computers infected by a virus that steals private and financial information from unsuspecting computer users. 

The department said more than two million computers have been infected with a malicious program called Coreflood, allegedly used by cybercriminals to steal individuals' online banking credentials and passwords. 

Law-enforcement officials said they have seized five "command and control" computer servers that remotely controlled hundreds of thousands of infected computers, as well as 29 Internet domain names used as part of the Coreflood network. 

Prosecutors said unknown defendants, believed to be foreign nationals, used the stolen data to direct fraudulent wire transfers from victims' bank accounts. 

They said victims included a real-estate company in Michigan, an investment company in North Carolina and a defense contractor in Tennessee. 

The full extent of the financial losses caused by Coreflood is unknown, the Justice Department said. 

Prosecutors filed civil wire fraud and bank fraud charges against 13 unknown defendants, listed in the legal complaint as John Does. The Justice Department also said it obtained a temporary restraining order that will allow a government-hosted server to send commands to infected computers that will temporarily stop the Coreflood software from running on those computers. 

"The actions announced today are part of a comprehensive effort by the department to disable an international botnet, while at the same time giving consumers the ability to take necessary steps to protect themselves from this harmful malware," U.S. Assistant Attorney General Lanny Breuer said in a statement. 

Officials with the Federal Bureau of Investigation said the actions being used to temporarily disable the virus on individual computers are the first of their kind in the U.S. 

An FBI official, who requested anonymity because the investigation is ongoing, said the agency believed the Coreflood network has now been disabled, but didn't rule out the possibility that another iteration could pop up. 

Law-enforcement officials said Coreflood installed itself on computers by exploiting a vulnerability in machines running Microsoft Windows operating systems. 

The FBI official said the agency worked with  Microsoft Corp.
MSFT


0.18
%




 as it moved to shutdown the Coreflood network. 

A Microsoft spokesperson could not immediately be reached for comment. 

 Write to  Brent Kendall at brent.kendall@dowjones.com 