Depending on how you look at it, the collapse of the Soviet Union signaled either the tragic failure of Mikhail Gorbachev's reformist agenda or the welcome collapse of the evil empire. A second dividing line concerns what happened next. Do you blame Western penny-pinching and hypocrisy for Boris Yeltsin's failures and Vladimir Putin's bad temper? Or do you see Mr. Putin as the front-man for a bunch of xenophobic crooks who seized power by duping Russians weary of the corruption and chaos of the 1990s?

Daniel Treisman tries to be fair—perhaps too fair—as he assesses such matters in "The Return: Russia's Journey From Gorbachev to Medvedev," but they are too big for such fence-sitting. He is at his best on less-fraught subjects—the chapter on the economic history of modern Russia should be required reading. Mr. Treisman explains clearly and in an evenhanded way the dilemmas faced by policy makers, and he demolishes the fashionable but ill-grounded idea that Russia should have been "more gradualist" in its economic transformation or that an even more radical approach would have been more successful. The author's many visits to Russia provide agreeable cultural and linguistic texture: Readers will be pleased to know that the Russian equivalent of "carrot and stick" is "whip and gingerbread."

Readers may be less pleased by Mr. Treisman's occasional ventures into passing judgment. For instance, he sympathizes with Mr. Gorbachev's professed attempts to make the Soviet Union into a humane and tolerant multinational state, and he mourns their failure. Yet he skates over the central feature of the Soviet Union: It was a totalitarian empire grounded on lies and the mass murder of millions.

 By Daniel Treisman  Free Press, 523 pages, $30

That truth was fatal to the Gorbachev project. The failure of the post-Stalin Soviet Union to deal with the dictator's legacy made the state inherently unstable and probably unreformable. Imagine that World War II had ended inconclusively and that the Third Reich had staggered on for another few decades: Few would discuss the complexities of post-Nazi economic and ethnic policies as solemnly and respectfully as Mr. Treisman treats those of the Soviet Union when he tries to puzzle out the fate of Mr. Gorbachev's reforms.

Another problem is that the author's lens is not just Russia-focused but Kremlin-centered. His use of the phrase "radical nationalists" to describe the freedom-fighters of captive nations such as Georgia and the Baltic states echoes the Moscow line. These rebels' efforts to undermine Soviet rule and anchor their reborn countries in the West deserve praise, not the disdain that Mr. Treisman implies.

Worse is his insistence that Russia gets a raw deal in outsiders' assessments. For all the country's flaws, he believes, Russia is no worse than many other messily run middle-income countries (he mentions Argentina, Turkey and Mexico). Russia is "often singled out for its 'crony capitalism,' dominated by powerful tycoons," he writes. "But the unattractive features of Russia's business world are typical of middle-income capitalist systems."

Similarly, Mr. Treisman says that corruption in Russia is also unexceptional—and Mr. Treisman has a graph labeled "Frequency of bribery around the world, 2004-2009" to prove it. "The best data to assess this come from surveys that ask businessmen and citizens resident in the country whether they or their acquaintances have recently been asked to pay bribes," he explains. That may be true, but such surveys do not capture the corruption and cronyism that really plague Russia, in the highest reaches of public life.

Marveling at Russia's supposed middle-income status today, Mr. Treisman says: "Given Russia's starting point, to become normal in this way in the course of two decades is quite an achievement."

Normal? Unlike Argentina, Turkey, Mexico and other countries in the middle-leagues, Russia has signed on to numerous European conventions and charters but blithely flouts them. The regime in Moscow murders its critics at home and abroad. It has stolen colossal sums of money from its own people and launders these billions in the Western financial system. It proclaims, in the words of President Dmitry Medvedev, a "privileged sphere of interest" in its former imperial demesne. That is rightly cause for alarm, outrage and precaution.

At times, Mr. Treisman seems to lean toward the explanation that the country is now run by a ruthless criminal syndicate. He acknowledges that one bleak scenario for the future would see Russia's leaders "destroy all that they have built and, giving up on respectability, try to turn their country into a snowy version of Robert Mugabe's Zimbabwe." Yet somehow the West shares the blame for Russia's precarious state and will bear responsibility if it goes off the rails. "Does it really serve the West's long-run interests to assume some unproven imperial agenda, to exaggerate the authoritarian features of the current regime, to demonize those in the Kremlin and romanticize its liberal opponents . . . and to publicly patronize leaders whose help we need in world affairs?"

Mr. Treisman is prey to the neurotic but common misconception of seeing the West's failures as excuses for Russian misrule. Western policies in Iraq, Kosovo or Ukraine may well have been botched or hypocritical, as he suggests. But such mistakes are subject to independent scrutiny and the verdict of voters in real elections, unlike the Russia of Messrs. Putin and Medvedev.

 Mr. Lucas is the international editor of the Economist and the author of "The New Cold War: Putin's Russia and the Threat to the West." 