 New York 

Born 25 years ago in Long Island, N.Y., Paul Cornell Stearns has been known since childhood as Cory Stearns. He's now also known, since his promotion in January, as a principal dancer with American Ballet Theatre. Standing nearly six feet and one inch tall, the handsome and lean young man may have been dancing leading roles at ABT with extraordinary finesse and art since 2008, when he was still a member of the company's corps de ballet, but his new featured status has a different ring for him.

"It's a very big deal," Mr. Stearns says, as the company's eight-week spring season is about to begin Monday at the Metropolitan Opera House. "I was going to say there'd be more pressure, but I think I've gotten over that pressure. It'll be different because I expect a new level from myself, and not so much [from] feeling the pressure from the audience."

Having allowed me to attend two of his recent rehearsals, Mr. Stearns, now dressed in sweats and looking calm and cool between working sessions, speaks openly and thoughtfully in conversation at ABT's downtown headquarters. Referring specifically to his recently rehearsed roles as an impassioned, romantic Armand in "The Lady of the Camellias" and the quick-witted barber Basil in "Don Quixote," Mr. Stearns says he identifies most readily with the former. "That's very natural for me," he says without hesitation. "I know how to look at a woman and see her as a beautiful thing."

Mr. Stearns credits his schoolteacher mother with introducing him to ballet at age 5. His older brother and sister were already attending a ballet school in St. James, N.Y. "My mother wanted us to experience something that was very professional; she felt dance would culture us and that my relationship with women would develop in a different way than if I didn't do dance, because I'd be around women so much."

The school was the Seiskaya Ballet School, run by Valia Sieskaya and her husband Dimitri Papadakos. Mr. Stearns says Mr. Papadakos, the school's administrative director, played a key role in preparing him for the decorous and challenging art of ballet partnering he now practices so impressively. Mr. Stearns points out that although he wasn't a dancer, Mr. Papadakos, a former football player, instilled lessons in the 10-year-old Mr. Stearns that continue to distinguish and highlight his career today.

"He was very tough and after class he would work with me," says Mr. Stearns. It helped that Mr. Stearns was at times the only male student in his classes. "I would take this partner that I had a crush on and when she would jump, [Mr. Papadakos] would say, 'now! now!'" to identify the timing needed to execute successful lifts and related supporting tasks in the budding cavalier, or ballet partner.

Partnering, inherently part of ballet, never strikes Mr. Stearns as grunt work. George Balanchine once said that the man in ballet is there to serve the woman; Mr. Stearns replies that "Even though he says we're serving the woman, we have an integral part in producing what he wants to see." Of the varied works, both classical and contemporary, in ABT's repertory, Mr. Stearns says, "I could never leave either out. I have to do both," before adding: "But I do prefer classical ballet. That's who I am."

Among the old-world standards, Mr. Stearns separates the princely heroes from what he calls the "hooligans" in comedic works such as "Don Quixote." "I'm very specific about not looking like a fool on stage. I want it to be very subtle but funny." He stresses that ABT's artistic director, Kevin McKenzie, a favorite coach of his, "can be [effortlessly] goofy sometimes. I can't; that's not who I am at all, and so I have to interpret it and find a way."

Classical-ballet princes are matter-of-factly costumed in body-defining tights and tunics. Mr. Stearns says that while he was teased as a youngster for studying ballet, he no longer suffers many "men in tights" jokes. He thinks some popular entertainments featuring ballet can have a positive effect. He feels "Billy Elliot," both the movie and the Broadway production, have helped the cause of ballet—especially from a male point of view—mostly because of "the way they described it; because it was more about the emotion involved."

When I bring up the corrida-like tone of television shows like "Dancing With the Stars," and in particular the recent appearance on that program of ABT's Jose Manuel Carreño (who early on represented for Mr. Stearns the ultimate in ballet's art for male dancers), performing in pants rather than tights, he reflects: "I thought he was going to do classical ballet and then when I heard that [he wasn't going to be wearing tights] I thought, 'what is he going to do?' He ended up kind of doing classical ballet, but it was more partnering." He sounds politely puzzled when he recalls that: "I was told through other dancers that [the pants rather than tights costuming] was because of the viewing audiences, that they didn't think it would be appropriate."

Mr. Stearns stresses that he reached his present plateau at ABT, widely known for the strengths of its male dancers, in good measure because "I'm very athletic, so I have a certain coordination. I know how to approach things. I have a very good work ethic, because I'm determined and competitive with myself. I will not stop doing something until I get it. But," he adds, "in terms of flexibility and my feet and my turnout, I have to think about that stuff constantly. That's difficult for me."

"Actually, something I'm proud of is that anybody who says anything to me I respect completely. And I think about it," he states, referring to both the company's mentoring coaches as well as his fellow dancers. "I have a lot of friends in the corps [de ballet] that correct me. The reason I respect their word is because of their drive. That's very important to me. If ballet means a lot to them and they do class all the time and they want to go further, that's what means something to me."

Mr. Stearns says he's stopped reading what's written about him, especially in the wake of the sometimes bitter and negative commentary that can so easily appear on the web, often behind screen names, but that he hasn't stopped working toward perfecting his art: "I see a lot of problems with my dancing but I understand that it's a process. I don't want to think that I'm out on stage developing myself—people have paid to see a beautiful ballet—but it has to be a process, and it takes time and hopefully, eventually, I'll get to a point where I can really give the audience something beautiful."

 Mr. Greskovic writes about dance for the Journal. 