Euro-zone manufacturing sector activity increased more rapidly than first estimated in December, with factories in Spain and Ireland starting to catch up with those in Germany and France. 

 The European Union is investigating the special taxes Hungary levied on three sectors to meet budget-deficit targets, and wants to see taxes end as planned in 2013, the European Commission said. Major foreign companies operating in Hungary have been seeking EU support to make Hungary reverse the taxes it levied on energy, telecommunications and retail firms in 2010 for a three-year period. 

 China supports Spain's economic reforms and will continue buying its government debt, Chinese Vice Premier Li Keqiang wrote in a newspaper editorial on the eve of a visit to Spain. Li will visit Spain Jan. 4 to Jan. 6 and will meet with King Juan Carlos, Prime Minister José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero, Finance Minister Elena Salgado and Foreign Minister Trinidad Jimenez.  

After his visit to Spain, Li will travel to Germany Jan. 6 to Jan. 9 and the U.K. Jan. 9 to Jan.12. 

 Europe's mergers-and-acquisitions market continued its slow recovery in the fourth quarter, and most investment bankers predict a continued improvement in 2011 despite persistent concerns over Europe's financial health. There were $228 billion of takeover deals with a European target announced in the quarter through Dec. 30, up 11% from the same period a year earlier, according to Dealogic.  

A Belgian foster home asked potential victims of sexual abuse to come forward after a man said nuns had abused him there as a child in the 1960s. The anonymous Belgian, now in his fifties, told local media he was abused by nuns for several years from the age of five while he lived at the Stella Maris home in the town of Kortrijk, western Flanders. 

The new governor of Norges Bank, which is responsible for monetary policy and manages Norway's foreign-exchange reserves and the government's pension fund, started his six-year tenure by outlining some of the challenges the country's economy faces from domestic factors, such as rising house prices, as well as from the global economy. 

Belarus freed one of five opposition presidential candidates it has held since a violent crackdown on demonstrators following an election two weeks ago. Police said they expected soon to release most of the remaining detainees held since they broke up protest demonstrations on the night of the Dec. 19 election. About 200 out of 650 detainees are thought to still be jailed.

The Christian Democratic Party said its leader and presidential candidate, Vitaly Rymashevsky, had been released by the KGB security service after submitting "a written explanation to [President Alexander] Lukashenko." It gave no further details.

 The Republican majority that takes over the House of Representatives this week plans an ambitious drive to slash government spending by tens of billions of dollars in the next few months, a strategy that ensures that the U.S. capital soon will be consumed by intense debate over how and where to reduce the size of government. 

Delaware police are investigating the slaying of a man who served in several Republican presidential administrations whose body was found at a landfill. The body of 66-year-old John Wheeler III was discovered on New Year's Eve as a garbage truck emptied its contents. His death has been ruled a homicide. He had a long career in Washington and led the committee that oversaw construction of the Vietnam Veterans memorial there.

Onie Ponder, Florida's oldest resident and one of the oldest people in the world, has died, her son said. She was 112. She died Friday morning at an Ocala hospice after a brief bout with pneumonia, said Carswell Ponder, 74, of Ocala. According to the Gerontology Research Group, she had been the oldest person in Florida and one of the 25 oldest people in the world. 

In India, a senior Hero Group executive has been arrested for allegedly receiving a part of more than 3 billion rupees ($67 million) believed to have been misappropriated at a Citigroup bank branch on the outskirts of New Delhi, a police official said. The executive, Sanjay Gupta, allegedly got about 200 million rupees, said the assistant commissioner of police. 

 The government of Pakistan President Asif Ali Zardari appeared set to hang on to power despite a disintegration of the ruling coalition, following signs that a key opposition party is unlikely to force a no-confidence vote. But the government's shaky standing will limit its ability to take unpopular steps, including a tax overhaul, that foreign donors say are needed to avert an economic meltdown. 

 Afghanistan's Supreme Court said it will investigate more than 400 cases of alleged fraud in the country's September parliamentary elections, a move that likely will affect the poll's results and could complicate the appointment of a new Parliament. The announcement comes just two weeks before the deadline to inaugurate the new Parliament.  

Sri Lanka has decided to remove all remaining references to its British colonial name Ceylon from state institutions. Ceylon gained independence from Britain in 1948 and changed its name to Sri Lanka when it became a republic in 1972. Many state institutions, however, have continued to use the name. The government did not announce a date for the name change.

The new chairman of South Korea's financial regulator, Kim Seok-dong, said the government will act sternly against financial-market disruptions or distortions and ensure systemic stability. The comments come as Seoul takes steps to protect the domestic market from risks posed by rapid foreign capital flows into and out of the country. 

South Korea's manufacturing-sector activity accelerated in December to its fastest rate in seven months, propelled by an increase in new orders, according to data released in HSBC's Purchasing Managers' Index.

North Korea's authoritarian regime took a more strident tone against South Korea in its annual New Year's message, always one of its longest statements and a rare routine that gives analysts something to gauge the direction of the reclusive country.

South Korean President Lee Myung-bak used his own New Year's message to reiterate that he won't tolerate North Korea's threats to South Korea, which increased last year with two military attacks that killed 50 South Koreans.

 Israel looks set to push through a sharp hike in oil and gas taxes after a committee of experts recommended nearly doubling the state's share of future oil and gas revenue. 

Yemen's Interior Ministry says two boats carrying more than 80 African migrants have capsized off the Yemeni coast. Most of the passengers are feared drowned.

South African police say seven people from neighboring families were killed in a lightning strike in Eshowe, located in KwaZulu-Natal province. A police spokesman said the victims were members of two families in adjacent homes. Among the dead were four children, including two toddlers.

In neighboring Eastern Cape province, four others were killed and 20 injured in a New Year's Day lightning strike.

 The military began rushing supplies to a town slowly being swamped by floodwaters as authorities warned that floods devastating large parts of Queensland state are set to worsen in some areas. Floods affecting an area the size of France and Germany combined have forced thousands of residents to flee their homes, affecting as many as 200,000 people. 