A grand jury concluded that the Philadelphia abortion doctor charged this week with eight murders, including those of seven babies born alive, was allowed to deliver care for years because oversight agencies ignored reports and failed to stop the activities at his clinic.

Several agencies "stumbled upon and should have shut down"  Dr. Kermit Gosnell long ago but didn't do so, even after a patient died of an anesthesia overdose, according to the Philadelphia grand jury that recommended charges against the doctor.

Dr. Gosnell, 69 years old, was charged Wednesday with eight murders—those of the woman who was overdosed and of seven babies whose spinal cords were severed with scissors after they were born alive at the Women's Medical Society in Philadelphia. He also was charged with drug violations, infanticide, abortion at 24 or more weeks, racketeering and other offenses. 

His now-closed clinic, staffed with unlicensed employees, drew mostly poor, minority women as patients and performed late-term abortions, according to the grand jury, which said agents who raided the facility last year as part of a drug investigation found a gruesome scene including bags and jars with discarded fetuses. 

Dr. Gosnell was arraigned Thursday and was being held without bail.  William Brennan, the lawyer tapped last year to provide pre-indictment services for the doctor, said he hadn't yet been retained as defense attorney. He said he expected to hear from Dr. Gosnell soon and knew of no other lawyer representing him. 

Several staff members also were arrested on various charges, including four accused of murder. 

"In the end, Gosnell was only caught by accident, when police raided his offices to seize evidence of his illegal prescription selling. Once law enforcement agents went in, they couldn't help noticing the disgusting conditions, the dazed patients, the discarded fetuses. That is why the complete regulatory collapse here is so inexcusable. It should have taken only one look," the grand jury report said.

The grand jury condemned Pennsylvania's departments of Health and State for failing to shut down the clinic. The two departments failed to act in spite of receiving numerous reports about troubling events at the clinic, the grand jury said.

Although the state health department found violations during site reviews in 1989, 1992 and 1993, it failed to ensure they were corrected, the grand jury report said. A representative of the Pennsylvania Department of Health didn't return calls to comment, and the Department of State referred calls to a spokesman for newly installed Gov.  Tom Corbett, a Republican. The governor's spokesman didn't respond to messages for comment.

After 1993, there were no more inspections because the Pennsylvania health department "abruptly decided, for political reasons, to stop inspecting abortion clinics at all," the grand jury reported. There was supposed to be an exception for "complaints dumped directly on the department's doorstep," yet the Women's Medical Society wasn't inspected in spite of repeated complaints about Dr. Gosnell, the report said.

In many ways the Department of State "had more damning information than anyone else," the grand jury said, since nearly 10 years ago, a former employee of the doctor's presented the Board of Medicine with a complaint "that laid out the whole scope of his operation: the unclean, unsterile conditions; the unlicensed workers; the unsupervised sedation; the underage abortion patients; even the over-prescribing of pain pills with high resale value on the street."

The state department dismissed the complaint after an investigator interviewed the doctor offsite and never inspected the facility, questioned other employees or reviewed records, the grand jury said. 

The grand jury outlined other complaints that the state department also dismissed. It suspended Dr. Gosnell's license only after newscoverage of the clinic last year, the grand jury said. 

 Write to  Dinah Wisenberg Brin at dinah.brin@dowjones.com 