HONG KONG—Chinese developer  Shimao Property Holdings Ltd.
0813


-0.42
%




 said Tuesday its 2010 net profit rose 33%, supported by robust sales in China's booming property market and revaluation gains.

Net profit for the year rose to 4.67 billion Chinese yuan (about $713 million) from 3.51 billion yuan. 

Shimao's underlying profit rose to 4 billion yuan from 2.8 billion yuan, higher than the average 3.56 billion yuan forecast of 13 analysts polled by Thomson Reuters. Analysts generally use underlying profit rather than net profit to gauge the performance of Hong Kong property companies because their earnings tend to be distorted by regular revaluations of investment properties. 

The developer, which now focuses on residential property, plans to diversify its businesses to reduce risk, Shimao Chairman  Hui Wing-mau said in a statement. 

China imposed further tightening measures on the country's residential property market in late January, including more limits on home purchases and another increase in down-payments for second home purchases, highlighting Beijing's determination to rein in overly fast property price rises. 

Mr. Hui said he expects the government to introduce more stringent austerity measures this year. "Real estate developers might face another huge challenge in financing," he said. 

The chairman said the company will expand its commercial and tourism property businesses in the coming years to diversify its operations. It will also explore opportunities to develop ecological housing and properties for high-tech firms, he added. 

The developer's 2010 revenue rose 28% to 21.79 billion yuan from 17.03 billion yuan. 

Revenue from property sales rose 26% to 20.45 billion yuan from 16.28 billion yuan, because prices soared in China's residential property market and because the company sold more projects in the country's second- and third-tier cities. 

Revaluation gains on investment properties soared to 2.34 billion yuan from 214 million yuan, largely because of the completion of five commercial property projects last year. 

The group's revenue from hotel operations rose 52% to 974 million yuan from 642 million yuan, boosted by the Shanghai World Expo. 