 Scottsdale, Ariz. 

Is it OK to get excited about Monday night's college-football championship between Oregon and Auburn?

We were beginning to wonder. Oregon-Auburn has the potential to be a dazzling, high-velocity game, but this has been a queasy season for big-time college football—even by big-time-college-football standards. There have been allegations serious and picayune; investigations and suspensions; the forfeiture of a past Heisman and queries about a new one. Of course, there's also the predictable yelping about the absence of a playoff and the ever-baffling Bowl Conference Series system, especially with the 13-0 Horned Frogs of TCU marinating on the sideline.

College football has a rich history of arguing, but lately the arguments have become more woebegone than entertaining. The allegations and disruptions and coaching intrigues are now only numbing; is anyone surprised by a scandal anymore? Recently we read a thoughtful comment on an Internet message board in which the writer wondered whether the state of college football is more accurately described as a Superfund site or an "open cesspool." It was an honest question.

Then there's the fact that this genuinely interesting BCS championship is on Jan. 10, which feels like opening up a Christmas present on Dec. 30. It follows a bleak barrage of mostly neutered and meaningless games, including the epochal Beef 'O' Brady's Bowl.

Still, these concerns feel small in Arizona right now. On Saturday, as Oregon was amid a practice at a local high school, the shocking news arrived that Arizona Rep. Gabrielle Giffords and 19 others had been shot in a rampage in Tucson. With our colleague Darren Everson, we drove down from Phoenix and spent the afternoon and evening speaking to eyewitnesses. 

It was jarring. In another, placid universe, the floppy Seahawks were upsetting the Saints, and the Jets were stunning Indianapolis. That night, we found ourselves in the dimly lit driveway of a Tucson doctor named Steven Rayle, who had been waiting in line to meet the congresswoman when the mayhem erupted.

In a low voice in the cold desert quiet, the tall Dr. Rayle—a former ER physician—calmly recalled the horror of that morning. He described how he saw the suspect approach and shoot Ms. Giffords. The doctor said he ducked behind a concrete pillar and played dead, and then later helped hold down the suspect after others had heroically tackled him to the ground.

"It wasn't chaos," Dr. Rayle said softly. "It was a very small group—and most of the people were shot."

It's stupefyingly trite to suggest that a tragedy like this puts football in perspective. Walking out your front door should put football in perspective. There's no real perspective to be found, anyway. Not right now. Arizona has only begun to process what happened.

But there's a game Monday night near Phoenix, and it'll be played, after a moment of silence for those who were killed and those continuing to battle for life.

Sunday afternoon, the BCS championship party center—the Scottsdale Waterfront—was a cheery contrast. Auburn and Oregon fans packed the shopping area for pep rallies. Young women from the Auburn Flag Line in blue-and-orange track suits shouted the "War Eagle" cry as an outdoor speaker cranked "Sweet Home Alabama." Oregon fans strutted confidently in their Nike neon gear, which looks designed by Rafael Nadal in conjunction with Barbarella.

Monday's joust between the undefeated Oregon and Auburn could be as fluorescent as those retina-scorching Duck cleats. Both teams possess wild, highly caffeinated offenses and fluctuating success on defense. Twitchy optimists hope it be a sugary, touchdown-filled extravaganza; an ADD bowl that will thrill the casual fan. It should also be a showcase for superstars, among them Oregon's LaMichael James, the nation's top running back at 153 yards a game; and, of course, Cam Newton, Auburn's dynamic Heisman trophy-winning quarterback.

Mr. Newton is a national title away from an unusual 360-degree college-football experience. During the season he was investigated by the NCAA after allegations that his father had solicited payments from Mississippi State. But the NCAA concluded that Mr. Newton was unaware of his father's actions, and he was allowed to continue to play at Auburn, where he somehow compartmentalized the distractions to be the nation's most dominant collegiate player.

Oregon is only worried about Mr. Newton's on-field distractions. Much comedy has been made of the fact that Mr. Newton outsizes nearly the entire Duck defense, and that Oregon could hardly replicate a 6-foot-6, 250-pound QB in its practices. But these Ducks thrive on being underestimated.

ESPN is telecasting Monday's game, and it has promoted it with customary fever. (We're happy to see Brent Musburger will be beamed in from Planet Musburger.) But even as the sports world locks its attention on Glendale, many media trucks are driving south to Tucson.

Oregon-Auburn feels like a brief, agreeable distraction. It has been a tumultuous weekend and season and a long wait for a conclusion. Speaking to reporters on Sunday morning, Oregon head coach Chip Kelly sounded tired of discussing the contest anymore. "Haven't heard enough?" Mr. Kelly said. "Game is [Monday] night. Let's go play."

Absolutely. Let's go.

 Write to  Jason Gay at Jason.Gay@wsj.com 