The rapidly rebounding art market faces a critical test next week in New York, when auction houses will try to sell a mix of Impressionist, modern and contemporary works valued at nearly $1 billion. A dozen works are each priced near $20 million. In the 2009 spring sales, when the art market was limping along, not a single piece fetched that benchmark price.

Just as the stock market is setting new postcrash highs, the art market has largely recovered from the recession. Sales peaked in 2007, when Christie's and Sotheby's collectively sold $11.3 billion worth of art, a total that plunged to $4.8 billion in 2009. Yet, with a speed surprising both collectors and dealers, the market regained much of its momentum last year, with the two houses combining for sales of $9.8 billion. 

Each run-up has its own character, and the current one is informed by the experience of collectors during the recession, when some were badly scalded. Those who lost fortunes when contemporary-art values plummeted are treading carefully now, no longer afraid to walk away if a trendy name seems overpriced. Others took heart when the values of their ancient vases or medieval manuscripts held up better than other alternative assets. 

But plenty more, flush and giddy, are just now joining in and paying little attention to prices. As a result, the art market's current state, while off from peak levels, still feels slightly breathless. Record prices are being paid for individual favorites like Pablo Picasso, whose "Nude, Green Leaves and Bust" sold at Christie's last May for $106.5 million, the most ever paid at auction for a work of art.

Next week, nothing is expected to dethrone Picasso as the reigning price champ, but Sotheby's expects to get at least $25 million for Picasso's "Women Reading," a 1934 view of the same mistress, Marie-Thérèse Walter, who showed up in the artist's record-setting "Nude." Rival Christie's is asking $20 million or more for Claude Monet's "Poplars," a work it sold for $7 million just over a decade ago. 

The role Asia is playing in the market's recovery cannot be overstated: China's art spending in auctions and galleries has nearly quadrupled over the past five years, to $10.9 billion, says Artvest Partners, a New York art-finance firm. China now outsells European art hubs like Britain, the European Fine Art Foundation says. 

What's selling overall? Auction houses say newcomers are asking for large-scale pieces—possibly wanting to get their money's worth on an inch-by-inch basis. So Christie's, in marketing its major Impressionist and modern sale on Wednesday, has played up the fact that one of its star lots, Monet's "Mauve Irises," is one of the artist's tallest works, around 6 feet 5 inches. Asking price: at least $15 million. Sotheby's has also created a symbol, a miniature pavilion, to signal "monumental" pieces in its catalog.

Brightly colored art also seems to be attracting extra attention this season, from the saturated palettes of Picasso and Andy Warhol to cheery-colored Chinese vases to diamonds in intense shades of pink and blue.

Subject matters that are universally understood—love, death, family, pretty scenery—are also outperforming the artistically cryptic or obscure. Dealers say collectors are seeking to buy works that might be easier to resell later to a global audience. That partly explains why demand is rising for Roman marble depictions of Venus, the goddess of love, or why some mainland Chinese buyers are seeking out crisp, lush Victorian-era portraits of beautiful women. 

"The speed of the art market's recovery is astonishing, but it's a differently revived market," said Michael Plummer, a principal of Artvest. "The lesson of the crash was to do your homework. Collectors feel wiser for the experience."

Overview: The market's most speculative sector spans art made between 1945 and today, from the emotive testosterone of Abstract Expressionists such as Mark Rothko to the distilled quiet of Minimalism to Roy Lichtenstein's Pop and beyond. Skeptics felt affirmed during the recession when contemporary-art prices fell by as much as 66% for some artists, but prices for well-known living artists, including Gerhard Richter and Jeff Koons, have been slowly rebuilding for over a year now, buttressed by international buyers and the cachet that still comes with buying new art. 

Outlook: Expect auction houses to continue recalibrating asking prices upward. Three years ago, Mr. Koons's shiny sculptures were selling at auction for as much as $25.7 million, but they rarely topped $6 million during the recession; on May 10, Sotheby's will ask at least $20 million for Mr. Koons's 1988 porcelain sculpture "Pink Panther," which depicts the animated character embracing a mermaid. 

Favored Nation: Americans have long bought the lion's share of postwar and contemporary art, and coming sales will test their clout against a global landscape. Robert Rauschenberg's "The Tower," a rare example of the artist's mixed-media "combines" from 1957, is tailor-made for American tastes. Aficionados may also pay a premium for this jumble of tin cans and light bulbs topped by an opened umbrella because the work was once owned by illustrious collectors Victor and Sally Ganz. Rauschenberg's silkscreen collages have fetched as much as $14.6 million at auction; Christie's has priced this work to sell for between $12 million and $18 million.

Artist to watch:From 2005 to 2008, eight works of British painter Francis Bacon sold for more than $30 million apiece, including a triptych for $86.3 million. His works disappeared during the recession, but in November Sotheby's sold his "Figure in Movement" for $14 million, over its $10 million estimate. On May 11, Christie's will try to sell "Three Studies for Self-Portrait" for about $25 million.

One-Man Show:Warhol still rules this market. A piece of his sold for $72 million in 2007. Last May Sotheby's sold his purple self-portrait from 1986 for $32.5 million, doubling its estimate; Christie's got $17.3 million for another Warhol self-portrait two months ago. So it's no surprise that Christie's will offer three self-portraits on May 11, including San Francisco collectors Norman and Norah Stone's red version from 1986, priced at $30 million or more.

Overview: Collectors chasing trophies head to this brand-name segment of the market, which includes the Impressionists and ends in the World War II era. Last year, 35 works from this group sold for more than $10 million at auction, up from 11 in 2009, according to art-market research firm Art Research Technologies. Battles to claim the priciest sculptures are also waged here; this time around, Sotheby's will offer Paul Gauguin's "Young Tahitian" wooden bust of 1893 for at least $10 million. 

Outlook: Next week, expect international bidders to stick with instantly recognizable artists like Joan Miró, Monet and Picasso. On Tuesday, Sotheby's will ask at least $25 million for Picasso's 1934 "Women Reading," a rainbow-hued portrait of the mistress he painted in that record-setting "Nude."

Market mover: Hedge-fund manager Steven Cohen is wagering heavily on the market's strength by asking Christie's to help him sell Maurice de Vlaminck's brightly colored Fauve painting from 1905, "Suburban Landscape," for at least $18 million. (Mr. Cohen also wants Phillips de Pury to sell his Andy Warhol "Liz #5" for at least $20 million on May 12.)

Off-radar: Sotheby's is offering 10 Picassos in its May 3 evening sale, and new collectors will likely glom onto his early "Blue Period" works from the early 1900s or his sinuous portraits from the 1930s. His surrealist period from 1928 to 1931 remains overlooked, experts say, with prices for these works still hovering around $2.5 million apiece. On Tuesday, Sotheby's wants at least $3 million for Picasso's bony-looking 1930 portrait of his first wife, Olga, "Woman."

Artist to watch: Barcelona-born sculptor Julio González helped teach compatriot Picasso how to weld, but prices for González's own gladiator-style iron masks rarely surpassed $2 million until Sotheby's in London sold a pair in February for $7.5 million and $4.3 million. On May 4, Christie's will offer his circa-1929 iron "Couple" for at least $350,000.

Fallen man:Last year, the art of thin-man sculptor Alberto Giacometti sold for $235 million combined at auction, according to Art Research Technologies. But three pieces failed to sell this spring, and next week, Sotheby's wants only $4 million or more on May 3 for "Portrait of Maurice Lefebvre-Foinet." Sotheby's specialist Simon Shaw says, "People want to see something new." 

Overview: Asian art encompasses at least 6,000 years of history, seven major regions, and types of art varying from palm-sized jade figurines to calligraphy-covered scrolls to wall-size contemporary paintings. For centuries, Western collectors got first dibs; today, China's wealthy have turned the tables.

Outlook: If the going rate for a masterpiece by Henri Matisse is $20 million, Chinese collectors feel justified paying as much or more for marquee examples by their own historical greats, so expect prices for 20th-century Chinese modernists like Zao-Wou Ki to keep soaring. Christie's wants $1.2 million for his abstract "2.11.59" during its May 28 sales in Hong Kong.

Game-changers: Around 200 mainland Chinese collectors, including high-ranking members of the nation's Communist Party, have emerged as dominant players. When they zero in on a category like wine or imperial porcelain, prices skyrocket. A few also seek Picassos and certain Old Masters.

Next test: At Sotheby's last month, its star porcelain lot, an 18th-century Qing Dynasty vase decorated with golden pheasants, was priced to sell for close to $23 million, but stalled at $21.8 million and had to be sold privately afterward, the auction house said. So all eyes will be on Christie's next month when it tries to get $25 million for a rotating vase-within-a-vase from the same dynasty.

Overview: Kings and merchant princes have long turned to this hard asset, since it's more portable than real estate and easier to sell off in parts. During the recession, collectors did the same. That helped buffer auction prices of blue-chip diamond rings and tiaras. Last year, Christie's auctioned $426 million of jewels, up 56% from the year before and besting the $395 million it got during the market's peak in 2007.

Outlook: Collectors still pay a premium at auction for colored diamonds—particularly in shades of pink and blue. Ties to past European royalty—say, the Duchess of Windsor—also help.

Market Mover: Recently, London jeweler Laurence Graff has bid heavily on some pricey auction offerings, paying Sotheby's a record $46.1 million last November for a 24.7-carat "fancy intense" pink-diamond ring. That boosted pink-diamond prices. Sotheby's renamed the diamond the Graff Pink.

Favored Nation: India's wealthy are poised to take over from once-dominant Mideast buyers in the next five years, Sotheby's specialist David Bennett says. Indian bidding has helped push up prices for Kashmir sapphires. 

Buyer beware: Demand is up this year for rubies from Myanmar, but a trade embargo prevents Americans from importing these gems. Asians are buying heavily, though. Last November, an Asian collector paid Christie's $2.5 million for a seven-carat ruby ring from Myanmar, or $421,893 per carat.

Object to watch: On May 17, Sotheby's in Geneva will try to get at least $5 million for an emerald-and-diamond tiara from around 1900, once owned by Princess Katharina Henckel von Donnersmarck.

Overview:This European category spanning the 14th to 19th centuries is in flux following several strong seasons when wary collectors felt their money might be safer in a Rembrandt than a Rothko. Now, demand is scaling back for some artists like Canaletto and Nicolas Poussin—Sotheby's in New York only sold 66.8% of its Old Masters offerings in January. 

The bright news is that bidders from Russia and China, who weren't paying attention to this market during the recession, are discovering obscure French and Delft painters whose works depict colorful rugs, costumes or mysterious religious scenes. In January, a bidder paid Sotheby's $3 million, nearly twice the high estimate, for Willem Willemsz. van der Vliet's 1627 "A Scholar in His Study With Figures With Masks, Possibly an Allegory." 

Charging ahead: A pair of seashore scenes by French 18th-century artist Claude Joseph Vernet soared past their asking prices at Sotheby's in January, including "A Grand View of the Sea Shore Enriched with Buildings, Shipping and Figures." Priced to sell for up to $2 million, the 1776 work ultimately sold for $7 million. Twenty bidders dueled for that 8-foot-long scene, and a private American buyer won it.

Lagging behind: Sales have dragged lately for small Dutch portraits, and last December, Christie's also failed to find a buyer for 17th- century French painter Poussin's "Ordination," priced to sell for at least $23.4 million. 

Favored nations: Both houses say around a dozen collectors from Hungary, Poland and Russia recently entered the Old Masters market. By and large, Christie's specialist Nicholas Hall says they want iconic Leonardo da Vinci, but with those works scarce, they're bidding up "quirky" examples by da Vinci's followers.

Artist to watch:One follower is known as the Master of the Parrot. On June 8, Christie's in New York will offer the painter's 16th-century "Saint Mary Magdalene Before a Cloth of Honor..." for at least $600,000. "If it says 'After Leonardo,' they bid," Mr. Hall said. "Even rank copies of the 'Mona Lisa' are selling like crazy."

Overview: With supply dwindling, antiquities are shrinking as a slice of the overall art market. Buyers are also wary they might have to fork over their ancient vases if government authorities deem those objects illegally excavated loot. (A few years ago, the Getty Museum and the Metropolitan Museum of Art both had to return marquee examples to Italy after Italian authorities found evidence those pieces had been looted years before.)

Outlook: Expect collectors to compete hard for pieces with proven ownership histories.

Game-changer: Dealers took notice when Christie's sold fashion designer Yves Saint Laurent's group of 14 Roman marble torsos and Greek vases in the "Attic" style for roughly $5.6 million combined in February 2009, arguably the art market's toughest season. Selling well: Roman marble nudes of Venus and burly men.

Object to watch: Black-and-red figured "Attic" pottery from the sixth century B.C. Greece is increasingly scarce, so collectors are going to later versions. On June 8 in New York, Sotheby's will offer a fifth-century-B.C. water vessel made in Athens to suit southern Italian tastes, down to figures of women sporting yellow globules evoking pearl necklaces. It's priced to sell for at least $70,000.