TOKYO—U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates left Beijing Wednesday for Tokyo, where he is expected to push for Japan to more actively involve itself in regional defense in order to ease tension on the Korean peninsula and counterbalance the rapid buildup of China's military capability, highlighted by China's bold move to test fly its new stealth fighter during his visit.

As security dynamics in East Asia rapidly realign, the U.S. has stepped up the heat on Tokyo to share the peacekeeping burden in the region. Japan, still among the region's wealthiest economies despite its struggles, has been asked to establish stronger military ties with South Korea as Washington and Seoul try to rein in North Korea's aggression. 

Mr. Gates, who pronounced his China visit a success despite the stealth fighter test, which came years earlier than many expected, suggested Tuesday he would make a case for Japan's purchase of a new generation of fighter jets, the first public comments by a U.S. official pushing for such a deal. Mr. Gates didn't name a specific fighter but if the Japanese want a stealth capability they would need to buy F-35s, developed by an international consortium led by  Lockheed Martin 
LMT


0.59
%




Corp.

But Mr. Gates faces a high hurdle in persuading Japan to embrace such requests wholeheartedly. A deadlock over relocating a U.S. military base in Okinawa continues to hinder the expansion of bilateral security ties after Japan and the U.S. marked the 50th anniversary of their military alliance last year.

The government of Prime Minister Naoto Kan has promised to implement a U.S.-Japan agreement signed in 2006 to build a new facility in Okinawa, but voters and officials on the island—including its governor, whose support is essential—oppose the plan.

Mr. Gates said Wednesday that the disputes over moving the Okinawa military base shouldn't influence talks over a joint vision statement for the bilateral alliance, to be signed during Mr. Kan's planned trip to Washington in the spring.

"It has been since 2005 when there was last a joint vision statement and a lot has happened in the last six years including the fact we have a new president and Japan has a new government," he said before leaving Beijing Wednesday. "A lot has happened in the last six years and so it is timely to look at the alliance, and update it if you will, going forward. The one thing that continues, is the strength of the alliance."

Some blame Mr. Gates for contributing to the escalation of the Okinawa base contention during his last visit in late 2009, when he urged Japan it was "time to move on" with the unpopular plan to build a new base in Okinawa in exchange for the return of other facilities in the island's crowded urban areas.

The two sides are making efforts to avoid such friction this time.

On the middle stop of his whirlwind tour of Asia, that began in China Sunday and will include a stop in South Korea Friday, Mr. Gates is spending nearly two full days in Japan, despite there being no urgent military tension. He is attending a wreath-laying ceremony to commemorate fallen soldiers of Japan's Self-Defense Forces. He will also speak to university students about the future of bilateral cooperation.

Mr. Kan's government, for its part, is escalating efforts to persuade Okinawans to support its plan for the military base by putting together a large package of economic stimulus steps aimed at helping the local economy. 

In addition to broader regional security issues, the topics of discussions between Mr. Gates and Japanese Defense Minister Toshimi Kitazawa are expected to include moving part of the air force drills conducted in Okinawa to elsewhere in Japan and to U.S. facilities in Guam. 

Still, experts say solving the base issue—on its own a relatively small matter in the context of the broader bilateral relations—is a prerequisite for further military cooperation between the two allies. The Japanese government, weakened by a divided parliament and falling popular support, needs to come up with bold and creative solutions to convince the Okinawans to drop their opposition to the new base. The U.S. needs to help Tokyo by showing flexibility in implementing the relocation plan and reducing the impact of the hefty military presence on the local community. 

The inability of the two nations to solve the problem has "corrosive effect on the alliance, both internally...and for the third parties, the Chinese and the Russians," said Kent Calder, director of Japan studies at Johns Hopkins' School of Advanced International Studies. "It was part of the reason why they are thumbing their nose at Japan in the way they have."

Before leaving Beijing, Mr. Gates visited the headquarters of the People's Liberation Army's Second Artillery Corps, which commands China's nuclear missile force and said he discussed nuclear strategy with military leaders there.

"I felt it was a pretty wide-ranging conversation and pretty open," Mr. Gates said. He said Gen. Jing Zhiyuan, commander of China's nuclear arms, had accepted his invitation to visit U.S. Strategic Command in Omaha, Neb., which oversees American nuclear weapons. U.S. officials say such visits are important to prevent dangerous misunderstandings.

China's foreign and defense ministries didn't respond to requests to comment. 

Mr. Gates said he had expected evolutionary progress in building U.S.-China military ties, rather than headline-grabbing breakthroughs.

His visit also exposed divisions in the Chinese government about pursuing closer relations with the Pentagon. The Chinese military's test flight of the J-20 stealth fighter just hours before Mr. Gates met with Chinese President Hu Jintao on Tuesday was a brash display of military might that fueled doubts about the extent of Mr. Hu's authority just a week before his state visit to the U.S.

Mr. Gates on Wednesday confirmed the earlier account of a U.S. defense official that China's civilian leadership didn't seem to know about the J-20 test before he asked Mr. Hu about it in Tuesday's meeting. "The civilian leadership seemed surprised by the test and assured me it had nothing to do with my visit," Mr. Gates said.

China's state media had largely sidestepped reports of runway tests of the J-20 over the past several few weeks, but on Wednesday they gave prominent coverage to the test flight. China Central Television aired photos of the J-20 in flight, and carried the first public comments by China's military on the episode. Gen. Guan Youfei, deputy director of the foreign affairs office of the Ministry of National Defense, echoed Mr. Hu's remarks that the test flight wasn't aimed at any country and wasn't related to Mr. Gates's visit. Mr. Guan said the test was part of a "normal working schedule."

In Washington Wednesday, Adm. Mike Mullen, the chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, said he was not surprised by China's test of the J-20 fighter, and acknowledged that the plane appears to give the Chinese a "significant capability."

Adm. Mullen said China is investing in "very high-end, very high-tech capabilities." Beyond the new stealth fighter, he pointed to Beijing's development of antisatellite and antiship technologies, which could affect U.S. forces.

"Many of these capabilities seem to be focused very specifically on the United States," Adm. Mullen said.

 Corrections & Amplifications  This version correctly states that Robert Gates will visit South Korea on Friday.

—Adam Entous in Washington contributed to this article.