The Florida Keys, an archipelago of 4,500 islands that begins 15 miles south of Miami and ends southwestwardly in Key West, has its share of signature dishes, from conch fritters to grilled pink shrimp. But the concoction that truly epitomizes the region's laid-back lifestyle is the Key lime pie, the beloved dessert filled with citrus-y custard wrapped in buttery graham cracker crust. 

Florida Keys tourists, often mythologizing the dessert to unattainable expectations, demand it and expect it—often before even looking at their menus. "It's like having water. You got to have Key lime pie if you're a restaurant in the Keys," said Barbara Maddox, co-owner of Porky's Bayside BBQ in Marathon, the Middle Keys's main island. 



And a gimmick doesn't hurt. When the Jacksonville transplant and her then-husband bought the marina-front space that would become Porky's in 2001, they were urged by locals to create a hook to stand out in the feeding frenzy. The owners came up with deep-fried Key lime pie: hot crusty exterior, cool custard interior. "People return yearly here just to get a slice of it," Ms. Maddox said.

The original love many local outfits had for Key lime pie has worn thin. Greed, economics and a resigned acceptance that, good or bad, if you make it, they will eat it, have taken a toll on Key lime pie quality.

 Today, cutting corners is nearly the norm with a large percentage of Key lime pie-hawkers throughout the Keys. And purist mom-and-pop shops, while still to be found, are becoming the minority. Most larger pie purveyors use premade crusts and bottled juice concentrate rather than costlier (and less available) Key limes.

Several original Key lime pie shops have opened spinoff franchises, inadvertently creating pie-war casualties. Weeks after winning a Travel Channel "Food Wars" bake-off, the Key West icon Blond Giraffe Key Lime Pie Factory abruptly shuttered its five locations last year, having spread itself too thin. It's making it tougher by the year for road-tripping seekers of real-deal Key lime pies to find them on the dessert's own home turf. 

But they're out there—and worth the search. The genius of a true Key lime pie is elementary: It lies more in the usage of all-natural ingredients than any form of culinary ingenuity. A homemade Key lime pie takes about 30 minutes to prepare, 10 to bake. More tart than sweet, the light-yellow custard is made with egg yolks, sweetened condensed milk and Key lime juice. 

The pie crusts are made from butter and crushed graham cracker crumbs. Many Key West natives assert that tradition dictates a high-topped meringue, made with egg whites and sugar. Yet unadorned is common: "It has to hold up stark naked," said Steve Tarpin of Steve's Authentic Key Lime Pies in Brooklyn, N.Y. 

"The whole concept is that it not be fancy," said Georgia Chase, a Key West pastry cook and caterer who makes the pies weekly. "You have to try really hard to screw up a Key lime pie," said David Sloan, a Key West baker and author of "The Ultimate Key Lime Pie Cookbook," due out this fall. 

Five Key lime pie outposts of note beyond Florida's borders

•New York | Steve's Authentic Key Lime Pies:  To many foodies, this is the most "purist" version in the U.S. (and it's straight outta' Brooklyn). Ex-Miami boy Steve Tarpin uses in-house-squeezed Key limes, egg yolks and sweetened condensed milk for his filling; for his homemade crust, grahams and butter. The result: more tart than sweet, simple perfection (8-inch, $15; 10-inch, $25). stevesauthentic.com 

• Los Angeles | Susina Bakery & Café: So-Cal stronghold makes Florida-style pie with Key limes and a buttery graham crust ($28 a pie, available seasonally). susinabakery.com

 • Chicago | Sweet Mandy B's Cupcake Emporium:does homemade graham crust and reportedly squeezes its own lime juice (9-inch pie, $20); slices available. sweetmandybs.com

 • Charleston | Hank's Seafood Restaurant: This classic fish house makes homemade pie with graham cracker crust and raspberry coulis. ($7.25 per slice). hanksseafoodrestaurant.com

• Houston | Tony Mandola's Gulf Coast Kitchen: The Cajun cafe's banana version still abides using Key lime juice and graham cracker crust, topped with banana slices (slice, $6). tonymandolas.com

Key limes, distinctly sour in taste, are mottled-yellow-brown in color and the size of ping-pong balls. They sprout from thorny-branched trees. Hurricanes, citrus canker and real-estate booms, from the 1920s (and on), are largely blamed for wiping out South Florida's original Key lime plantations. By the mid-1900s, most remaining Key lime groves were gone, or had been replaced with the larger, more resilient, green Persian limes, easier to pick, and yielding more juice.

Key limes are most commonly believed to originate from Malaysia, with the Spaniards having brought them to Florida in the 1500s. Most Key limes today are imported from Mexico, which grows the same variety (Citrus aurantifolia) that once thrived in Florida.

State historians theorize the first Key lime pies were concocted following the 1856 invention of sweetened condensed milk. A Key West cook named Aunt Sally is often said to have made the first Key lime pie, in the late 1800s, taking cues from a more primitive version of it made by local spongers. 

Early this month, we set out on a three-day road trip spanning the Keys, and tried as many types of Key lime pie as we could manage (somebody's got to do it). Here, some trustworthy slices of the right stuff: a few done straight up, a few others, a bit off the map, but tasty enough, too.

 The Classic 

This family-owned Miami Beach institution began making Key lime pies in 1961, and the recipe hasn't wavered. For the past 17 years, one man, Larry Fisher, has made all the pies from scratch inside his very own in-house kitchen, squeezing the limes—both Key limes (tart) and Persian green limes (sweet)—breaking the eggs, crumbling the graham crackers and baking away. It's paid off: Key lime pie is Joe's enduring No. 1 dessert, with up to 400 pies sold in the restaurant a day. Puckery-tart and firm in consistency, the classic Key lime pie, said general manager Brian Johnson, "should be a palate cleanser, the texture and flavor should be light, not filling." (Pie: $22; slice: $7.) Next-door Joe's Take Away slice is served slightly frozen (for travel); give it a few.  11 Washington Ave., Miami Beach,  joesstonecrab.com 

 The Shore Thing 

With seating right on the Florida Bay sands, this breezy upscale-casual bar may have some of the reggae-infused trappings of island resorts. But when it comes to perfect frozen margaritas (loose and strong) and freshly made Key lime pie, it's the real deal. With a spot-on graham crust, it's mellow-tart, as soothing as Morada's flapping palm fronds. The fresh berries are a lovely touch, not so much the artsy coulis. ($7 per slice.) 81600 Overseas Hwy.,  Islamorada, moradabay-restaurant.com 

 The Road Warrior 

When charter-fishing parties and weary highway travelers (with a local color bent) are looking to fill a super-size appetite, this ramshackle roadside bar is the place. And one slice of the Wreck's wedding-cake-size Key lime pie may just do the trick. While purists will find the cheesecake-like texture and more-sweet-than-tart taste (let alone its size) just too much, they'll appreciate that it's homemade and has the natural Key lime hue and graham crust. Tuesdays is "All-U-Can-Peel-N-Eat-Shrimp" ($24 per person). And the mega-slice? "That'll be $975,000," said our wise-guy barkeep. It's actually $6. Take it to the balmy side patio. 58835  Overseas Hwy., Grassy Key, 305-743-8282 

 The Performance Artist 

An easy moving target for pie purists, showman and ex-Marylander Kermit Carpenter's tourist-and-cruise-ship port of call in Old Town hawks 120 Key-lime-related products (moisturizers and BBQ sauces, anyone?). But the guy in the green floppy hat remains a traditionalist at heart (aside from using bottled lime juice). It's a light, pure and simple white-yellow slice—made with egg yolks, sweetened condensed milk and graham crust—that has pucker, moist crust and just-right portion. No wonder he maintains a solid local following. And the original shop's garden seating (fronted by Key lime-bearing trees and trickling with a waterfall and koi pond) is also a slice of bliss. Main Shop: 200-A Elizabeth St., Key West, keylimeshop.com 

 The Natural Beauty 

Nestled away on a side street off the main drag, within a lush outdoor enclave, this 19-year-old local favorite has, aptly, garnered culinary accolades. Its copacetic-vibed patio cafe-bar serves Caribbean-influenced fare, and pastry chef-proud Key lime pie. While known for its homemade meringue bouffant and graham crust, the slice's filling is exquisitely tart. One pie: $30; slices, $8 (day)-$9.50 (dinner). 729 Thomas St., Key West, blueheavenkw.com 

 The Fried-and-True 

An acquired taste, Porky's Key lime pie is deep-fried in oil (changed "frequently" according to its owners). It's served with a warm, crispy outer crust, and cool, slightly sweet filling. (Tell them to hold the raspberry drizzle.) "I mean this innocently, but it's a party in your mouth," said co-owner Barbara Maddox. "Most people like it, but one British gentleman…it wasn't his cup of tea." Across the highway on a mangrove-lined canal, Burdines Chiki Tiki Bar and Grille also serves their version of fried (order the regular, with a crushed-nuts custard). 1410 Overseas Hwy., Marathon, porkysbaysidebbq.com 

"You have to try really hard to screw up a Key lime pie," said David Sloan, a Key West baker and author of "The Ultimate Key Lime Pie Cookbook," out this fall. Here's his recipe for Jalapeno Key Lime Pie.

 Boca Chica Chili Pepper Crust 

1 ¾ cups crushed Graham crackers  1 tsp crushed red pepper  a pinch of cayenne pepper (more to taste)  7 tbsp unsalted sweet cream butter  ¼ cup sugar

1. Combine Graham crackers, red pepper and sugar in a medium bowl.

2. Melt butter and infuse with cayenne pepper

3. Slowly add butter to other ingredients and mix by hand until ingredients are evenly coated.

4. Press into a 9" pie pan.

5. Refrigerate for at least 30 minutes.

 Fleming Street Flamer Filling 

5 egg yolks  1 14 oz can sweetened condensed milk  ½ cup Key Lime juice  ¼ cup pureed pickled jalapenos

1. Beat egg yolks for several minutes.

2. Add sweetened condensed milk and continue to mix for 6 minutes.

3. Remove liquid from jalapenos with by pressing with a paper towel. Add and continue mixing.

4. Add Key Lime juice. Mix for one minute.

5. Pour mixture into pie crust.

6. Bake at 350 degrees for 8-10 minutes

7. Let cool.

8. Freeze for at least 3 hours. Remove from freezer 20 minutes before serving.

 Tabasco Whipped Cream 

8 oz. Heavy Whipping Cream  1 tsp Tabasco Sauce

1. Chill bowl and whisk in freezer

2. Whip cream until fluffy

3. Add Tabasco to taste and continue to whip

4. Top pie. Garnish with jalapeno slices and sprinkle with cayenne pepper. 

5. Enjoy.