LONDON—Luxury-goods stocks fell Monday as investors worried that the earthquake in Japan would hurt demand for leather handbags and designer dresses in one of the largest luxury-goods markets in the world. 

U.K.-listed  Burberry
BURBY


-2.85
%




 PLC, known for its trenchcoats and iconic check, fell more than 5% in morning trade, while other major European luxury firms, including  LVMH Möet Hennessy Louis Vuitton SA, Gucci owner  PPR SA, Hermes International SCA and  Cie. Financière Richemont, the maker of Cartier watches, also declined. 

Japan represents around 23% of the world market for hard and soft luxury goods, compared with the U.S. and Europe at 25% each and China at 13%, according to research by the brokerage MF Global. 

"Weaker consumer sentiment, and the psychological impact of conspicuous consumption, is likely to affect luxury good sales, clothing and jewelry retailers and prestige-cosmetics companies," MF Global said in a note to clients. "A number of department stores and apparel retailers may also be out of action as a result of damage or lack of electricity," 

Burberry's shares have been hit hardest because although Japan accounts for a small proportion of Burberry's sales, the country is generates a much greater amount of profit for the company. Under Burberry's licensing business, the company collects royalties from Burberry-branded products, such as perfume and sunglasses, that are made and sold by licensees. Nearly all the revenue from that business translates into profit. In fiscal 2010, Burberry reported licensing sales of £97.5 million ($156.8 million), which generated £82.2 million of operating profit, around two-thirds of which came from Japan. 

RBS analyst  John Guy estimated that Japan accounts for around 18% to 20% of Burberry's earnings before interest and taxes. Burberry wasn't immediately available to comment. 

Japan accounts for around 19% of sales at silk and leather-goods specialist Hermès and at jeweler  Bulgari, and 9% for LVMH, according to MF Global. Several Bulgari stores remain closed in Japan, a company spokesperson said.  Luxottica, the world's largest maker of eyewear, said Japan wasn't material to its business. 

In Switzerland, watchmakers are still assessing the situation as Japan, despite the country's past economic difficulties, remains one of the most important single markets for  Swatch Group AG
SWGAY


-1.41
%




 and Richemont. 

Swatch, the world's largest watch maker by sales with brands such as Breguet, Blancpain and Omega, generates around 5% of its annual revenue of 6.44 billion Swiss francs ($6.94 billion) in Japan, according to market estimates. 

Watch and luxury-goods maker Richemont, which generates around 12% of its revenue in Japan, said the company's "first concern at this time is for our staff," adding that its employees were safe, "which is a major relief." 

Richemont, which owns watch brands such  Vacheron Constantin and Piaget, said it was too early to provide estimates about the impact on its business. "It is simply speculation to try to assess what the problems there will mean for the economy and business," the company said in an emailed statement. 

"The Japanese are resilient and resourceful people and can be expected to set about recovery and rebuilding in a very organized manner. How long the process will take will depend on the scale of the damage to infrastructure, which cannot be assessed at this time," the company said. 

Swatch shares were recently down 0.9% at 372.80 Swiss francs and Richemont was down 3.1% at 50.55 francs in a lower Swiss market. In London, Burberry shares were down 5.3% at 1112 pence while in France LVMH shares were down 4% at €105.60 and PPR shares were down 1.9% at €106.40 

—  Anita Greil and  Goran Mijuk in Zurich, Sofia Celeste in Rome and Amelie Baubeau in Paris contributed to this article. 