  Q: I am looking for a used convertible, seats four and standard shift. I could be talked into a muscle car or luxury, if it exists. Live in Ohio and I would garage the car, only driving it for fun, therefore I would like a car that doesn't lose its value like a falling brick.  

—Gary Stroud, Columbus, Ohio

 A: There are few convertibles models out there today that have manual transmissions. The Saab 9-3 of a few years ago is among my favorites. The Ford Mustang is a nice deal in terms of styling and fun. The BMW 3 Series is also a joy to drive and has room for four.

  Q: My wife and I both drive Camrys (hers a 2005 w/30K miles and mine a 2002 w/86k miles). We now both average 7,500 to 8,000 miles per year with about an even mix of city and highway driving. We use Mobil 1 oil which is 100% synthetic. Currently I have the oil changed every six months. Can I safely go a year? 

—Bob Morrison, Houston

 A: Yes, I think you should be able to drive for a year between oil changes with synthetic oil. It would be a good idea to have your oil analyzed after six months or so to make sure it is in good, uncontaminated condition. Since oil is critical to an engine's health, you should avoid stretching its life span. But the 7,500 to 8,000 miles you drive in a year should be well within synthetic oil's capability.

 Q: How do car manufacturers determine the right tire pressure for our cars tires? On one of my cars the front tires are supposed to be at 35 lbs and the rear at 32 lbs. Yet my other car says 33 lbs for the front tires and 32 for the rear tires. How are these recommendations arrived at? 

—Robert Apter, Ardsley, N.Y.

 A: Tire pressure recommendations are based on the tire's design as well as the vehicle's size and weight, how it is expected to be driven. Will it be carrying heavy loads or towing a trailer? Many cars, especially sport models, have wider tires in back that in front, which can result in a different pressure recommendation from front to rear.

  Q:  A friend has lost her job, and to reduce expenses is selling her 2006 Porsche Cayenne Titanium Edition. Due to the nature or her former job, the Cayenne has 72,000 miles, mostly long-distance driving. Her asking price is within the parameters of book value. We are interested in buying it to replace our 2002 Lexus RX300, which has 112,000 miles, is in good condition and fully maintained. Is the Porsche a wise purchase considering the high mileage, or would we be taking on a vehicle that is reaching high-cost maintenance levels? Obviously, the Cayenne is much more fun to drive than the Lexus, which is a consideration. 

—Cassandra de la Rosa, Olympia, Wash.

 A: Have a mechanic familiar with the model give it a thorough inspection before you buy. The mileage is high but if it has mainly been accumulated on long trips the vehicle should still be in good shape. Another thing you should consider is the potential hassle of buying from a friend. You should go through with the deal only if you feel you can handle any potential problems with the vehicle without feeling resentment toward the seller.

—Email mecar@wsj.com 