As Hu Jintao wraps up his U.S. visit this week, many Americans are looking at him as the leader of the world's dominant economy. And, at first glance, yesterday's economic data give Mr. Hu reason to be confident about such an image. China clocked 9.8% growth in the last three months of 2010, and 10.3% for the full year. Standard Chartered estimates 20 million jobs were created in the year and manufacturing wages increased some 15% during the year. So why does Mr. Hu, and more broadly the government in Beijing, evince signs of economic paranoia at the same time?

Because plenty of potential problems lurk beneath the headline numbers. China's central bankers have expressed concern about inflation. House prices in Beijing and Shanghai have risen at least 50% in the past couple of years. In November, consumer price inflation (CPI) hit a record by increasing 5.1% year-on-year. Thursday's official data show that in December, CPI rose 4.6%, though many analysts doubt this is an accurate gauge.

Unofficially, inflation could be far worse. CPI doesn't capture housing rents well; rapidly rising education and health-care costs aren't accurately depicted either. As a result consumer confidence, surveyed by Ezi Data, an independent agency, slumped in the October-December quarter as higher prices ate into real incomes. With food prices rising faster than 10% on an annual basis, poorer households are hit the hardest.

Compounding the confusion—and headaches—for policy makers, China's economy is not emitting the obvious signs of overheating that it did in 2007. The Purchasing Managers Index that indicates manufacturing activity is expanding, but is not bubbling the mercury. 

Moreover, housing construction is expected to slow down this year. But if the supply of housing is about to go down, housing prices may shoot up even more than they have in the past two years. Demand in this fast-growing economy isn't slowing down (consider that mortgage rates are still low), but if supply is, consumers aren't going to be happy. So instead of a bubble that will pop at any time—a prime concern back in 2007—the worry becomes that high prices could stifle broader consumption. 

This inflation puts Beijing in a policy-making bind. The government has been hesitant to tighten money by raising interest rates. The central bank, People's Bank of China, is able to get permission to tighten monetary policy only when inflation nears 5%, so in every cycle it is behind the curve—including this one. Instead, the central bank has been trying to make sure commercial banks keep within their lending targets, which banks habitually exceed. So worried has the PBoC become that it is now calibrating individual banks' reserve requirements based on their compliance with lending caps.

Meanwhile, Beijing is enthusiastically putting administrative controls over a number of markets. For instance, there are now a myriad restrictions on the price of basic foods. Makers of cooking oil have been told to freeze their prices. Banks and local governments have also made it more difficult for ordinary Chinese to buy a second or third apartment.

And yet none of this is likely to be enough in the short run. Although December CPI fell a bit from November, inflation is likely to push up again over the next three months. Despite the best efforts of regulators and monetary authorities, the three months of 2010 saw a reacceleration of credit growth—it hit 1.7 trillion yuan last quarter from 1.6 trillion yuan the quarter before. 

Grain prices have pushed up by 15% year-on-year. Imported inflation, particularly oil, is heading up again. And every businessman in China seems concerned that hot money—courtesy of the U.S. Federal Reserve's quantitative easing program—will flood the economy. If China wants to push back on these extra inflationary pressures, it will have to up its administrative-control ante.

All this raise a fundamental question: All other things being equal, if China's 10.3% growth comes with such aches and worries, what is its worry-free growth rate—if there is one? Mr. Hu and his successors are sure to be racked by the question of how fast China can sustainably grow.

This figure may have been as high as 10% to 11% in recent years. In the manufacturing and infrastructure sectors, supply is front-run—sometimes with abandon—so China faces fewer of the bottlenecks that regularly hit India and Brazil. But China's labor force is growing more slowly, and getting older, and most studies suggest broader productivity growth has slowed. The service sector suffers from monopolies, and the tax burden is rising. All this eats into the potential of the economy to grow. 

Because of some of these factors—labor and productivity could be a structural change—China will soon manage only 7% to 8% growth. It could get worse. One risk is that if Beijing doesn't continue with reform—such as opening up the service sector to competition as the next area of the economy ripe for investment and expansion—the growth rate could be less than 7%. That may still be impressive by Western standards, but the danger is that it's insufficient to keep pace with Chinese people's aspirations for higher incomes. The other risk is that if Beijing tries to achieve its traditionally high growth rates by pouring ever more investment into the same sectors, that would be a recipe for more inflation and a bigger asset bubble.

 Mr. Green heads Standard Chartered Bank's Greater China research team. 