"Before I Go to Sleep," a psychological thriller by debut novelist S.J. Watson, has no serial killers, chase scenes or hot young investigators. Its protagonist is a 47-year-old married woman, and the plot hinges on a well-worn narrative trope: memory loss. Most of the action takes place in the narrator's head as she struggles to recover her identity after a traumatic event. 

Though it has the texture of a quiet, domestic novel, filled with references to washing dishes and doing laundry, "Before I Go to Sleep" has emerged as one of the most hotly anticipated thrillers of the summer. The novel, due out in the U.S. next month, is a best seller in England and has had enthusiastic prepublication reviews here. Rights have been sold in 37 countries. Ridley Scott has optioned movie rights and hired Rowan Joffe ("The American") to write and direct.

In the book's opening scene, a woman wakes up in an unfamiliar bedroom next to a stranger, and assumes she's had a one-night stand. She stares in the bathroom mirror, shocked to find she's 20 years older than she thought. The plot lurches forward as the narrator, Christine, attempts to piece together her past, relying on a doctor and a journal she keeps. Each night, she forgets her life since the accident. She begins to suspect her husband isn't telling her everything.

The novel has landed big-name endorsements from both mystery writers and literary novelists, including Dennis Lehane and Lionel Shriver. "It's a natural crossover book," Ms. Shriver said in an interview. 

 The author's agent and publisher have been cultivating an air of mystery around the book by forgoing a book-jacket photo and using the initials "S.J." Many early readers of the novel found the female narrator so convincing that they assumed Mr. Watson (S stands for Steve) was a woman, says Clare Conville, Mr. Watson's literary agent. Some foreign publishers even demanded photographic proof once they learned his identity, Mr. Watson says.

"Ninety percent of the publishers and 90% of the people who read it think he's a woman," Ms. Conville says.

Mr. Watson, a 40-year-old audiologist for the British National Health Service, has dabbled in fiction for years but has never published before. He started roughly 20 other novels but had abandoned previous drafts "after the initial excitement wore off." He got the idea for a novel about an amnesiac after he read an obituary of "patient H.M." H.M., or Henry Gustav Molaison, was a famous amnesiac who lost the ability to form new long-term memories after a brain operation in 1953. Some of his pre-1953 memories were intact, but he couldn't remember the doctor who visited him regularly. 

Initially, Mr. Watson planned a more meditative novel exploring themes of "memory and identity and love," he says.

"I hadn't realized it was a thriller until my agent read it," he says.

In later drafts, Mr. Watson amplified the suspense by streamlining the plot, cutting extraneous characters and back story and deleting some scenes of Christine doing laundry.

Mr. Watson's editor at Harper, Claire Wachtel, says she expects "Before I Go to Sleep" will hit a nerve because it tackles prosaic but fundamental fears of mental decline, aging and loss of identity.

"It's not like a bubonic plague or vampires," Ms. Wachtel says. "It's something that can happen to anybody."

 Write to  Alexandra Alter at alexandra.alter@wsj.com 