In the 1980s, arbitrager  Ivan Boesky used the lavish lobby of New York's Plaza Hotel to exchange cash for tips in what would become the most famous insider-trading scheme of the era. 

In the Galleon Group case, the rendezvous points were much more pedestrian: Starbucks coffee shops, where at least two important meetings took place. 

"The Oak Room at the Plaza is now passé," says white-collar lawyer  Ira Lee Sorkin. "It's now lattes at Starbucks the government should be focusing on."

In the days after  Raj Rajaratnam's October 2009 arrest, his brother,  Rengan met with former Galleon portfolio manager  Adam Smith at a Starbucks in midtown Manhattan to discuss how to cover their tracks, according to prosecutors.

Mr. Smith had seen Rengan "dramatically" walk into Mr. Rajaratnam's office on the morning of his arrest and remove notebooks that contained handwritten information about stocks, according to notes from a Federal Bureau of Investigation interview filed by the defense during the trial as part of a memo arguing the notes shouldn't be introduced during the trial.

Outside a bustling Starbucks on Park Avenue, between 48th and 49th streets, Rengan Rajaratnam discussed the notebooks in a way that left Mr. Smith with the impression Rengan "wanted to confirm that [he] was not going to say anything about the notebooks" and to get their stories straight, according to the FBI notes. 

On Wednesday, Mr. Rajaratnam was found guilty on 14 counts of securities fraud and conspiracy in his insider-trading trial. He was placed on home detention with electronic monitoring until sentencing. 

During the trial, a meeting at another Starbucks played an earlier starring role in the Galleon case. FBI agent  David Makol chose a Starbucks frequented by  Gautham Shankar as the location in June 2008 to approach the trader, whom he hoped to recruit as a cooperator with the government's investigation.

Mr. Makol, who has a reputation for his skill in "flipping," or gaining the cooperation of individuals suspected of criminal activity, introduced himself to Mr. Shankar and confronted him with alleged evidence of his trading on inside information. 

Soon after he left the coffee shop, Mr. Shankar agreed to cooperate with the government in the insider-trading investigation. It is unclear what additional evidence Mr. Shankar's cooperation has produced for the government in Galleon and related cases.

A lawyer for Mr. Shankar didn't return calls for comment. A spokesman for the FBI declined to comment.  Starbucks Corp.
SBUX


-0.74
%




 didn't return a request for comment.

Starbucks offers the kind of bustling environment that can provide cover for individuals during their interactions, lawyers say. As a result, it offers a forum for more than just socializing and the occasional insider-trading-related activity.  Anna Chapman, the Russian who admitted to working as spy in the U.S., used a Manhattan Starbucks for covert communications on a closed wireless network with a consular official from Russia. 

As an FBI agent watched, Ms. Chapman sat by a window in the shop at 47th Street and Eighth Avenue, messaging with the Russian official, who was outside in a minivan, according to a criminal complaint. Ms. Chapman has since been deported and has launched a modeling career.  Robert Baum, her lawyer, says she probably used Starbucks to transact her business because it is a "popular spot." 

Others alleged to have committed crimes have used Starbucks as a rendezvous point. In October 2010, an undercover agent with the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency set up two meetings at a Starbucks in Bellingham, Wash., with alleged drug dealer  Harjinder Brar, who was offering for sale as many as 400,000 tablets of the drug known as ecstasy, according to the complaint. 

After the second meeting, the undercover agent arrested Mr. Brar and an accomplice in the case, which alleged that the two men possessed ecstasy with the intent to distribute the drug. A lawyer for Mr. Brar declined to comment. 

Inside the van used by Mr. Brar's accomplice, the agents found a piece of paper with a message that included the word "Starbucks." 

 Write to  Susan Pulliam at susan.pulliam@wsj.com and Michael Rothfeld at michael.rothfeld@wsj.com 