MUMBAI -- Investment bankers will have to make more disclosures to avoid conflicts of interest, especially if they choose to manage share sales of state-controlled firms.

The Department of Disinvestment will change certain clauses and contract language when it invites bids from investment banks to manage share sales of state-owned companies, said Sumit Bose, the department's secretary at a press conference, while announcing the share sale of Power Finance Corp, the lender to state-run power companies.

"To ensure what happened with the Steel Authority of India issue does not happen again, we will increase the reporting and disclosures for the investment banks," he said.

In January, there were allegations of conflicts of interest when four investment banks -- Kotak Mahindra Capital Co, HSBC Bank, Capital Markets Ltd made up of Deutsche Equities India and State Bank of India – asked to handle the state-controlled steelmaker's share sale also got the mandate to manage private manufacturer Tata Steel's stock sale.

The Tata Steel share sale opened for subscription in January before the state steelmaker's proposed stock sale the following month. The government objected to this, arguing that a private sector share sale ahead of it would affect its performance. SAIL's share sale was delayed, and a new date is to be announced in July.

The mandates for the Tata Steel issue was awarded after SAIL announced its bankers in October. The investment banks had signed on to SAIL's offer for near-zero fees and without a mandate to buy the stock in case the sale wasn't fully subscribed by the public.

The Ministry, at that time, asked the four investment banks to pledge that they would not handle any private sector assignments in te same industry before SAIL share sale is completed.

"After due legal advise, we are updating the language in our documents and it will come into effect from our next request for proposal," Mr. Bose said.

Investment banks have criticized the new norms, which also is called blockage policy.

"The blockage policy will have serious commercial impact on the investment banks as earlier the low-fee government mandates were compensated by private sector share-sale assignments," said an executive at a leading local investment bank.

The next request for proposal that is expected is for Hindustan Copper, Mr. Bose said. This year, the government plans to raise 400 billion rupees by selling stake in eight state-owned companies in the current financial year.

The other companies which have received cabinet approval for stock sale include MMTC, National Buildings Construction Corp. and Rashtriya Ispat Nigam.