WASHINGTON—The White House on Wednesday called on leaders of both parties to join intensive budget negotiations, to be led by Vice President Joseph Biden, in an attempt to avoid a government shutdown.

The high-profile move inserts the White House in an aggressive way into the battles over federal spending, following criticism from both parties that President Barack Obama has not been sufficiently involved.

The talks are expected to start as early as Thursday. While Republicans did not immediately respond to the White House call for talks, some GOP lawmakers said they would presumably accept. "I think it's great if they want to talk," said Rep. Steven LaTourette (R., Ohio). 

Earlier Wednesday, the Senate joined the House in passing legislation to fund government operations for two additional weeks, giving the two sides until March 18 to reach a deal on a funding plan for the 6 ½ months remaining in the fiscal year that ends Sept. 30. Mr. Obama signed the measure into law on Wednesday afternoon.

Without that short-term legislation, many government operations would have suspended after Friday, the day that legislation currently funding the government expires.

The Senate vote of 91-9 on the two-week measure, which also cuts $4 billion in spending, highlights the challenges facing the talks on the longer-term budget. Five Republicans opposed the short-term measure because they felt it cut too little in federal spending, and four Democrats rejected it because they said it cut too much.

The GOP-led House has passed a measure cutting $61 billion for the current fiscal year. Democrats want to cut far less.

"This agreement should be bipartisan, it should be free of any party's social or political agenda, and it should be reached without delay," Mr. Obama said in a statement calling for the talks. 

The discussion also could encompass a broader array of fiscal issues, such as whether to raise the government's debt ceiling in several weeks. "As far as we're concerned, everything is on the table," said Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D., Nev.).

Republicans stressed that while the GOP-led House has passed a bill calling for broad spending cuts this year, Senate Democrats have yet to outline a plan. 

"How do you start a conversation where one house has spoken and the other side hasn't?" said House Speaker John Boehner (R., Ohio). 

Democrats said they have suggestions for spending cuts and will forward them to the White House for incorporation into a single Democratic plan.

The spending debate so far has mostly involved the parties sniping at each other publicly. Now, senior officials from both parties are likely to gather for intensive talks with a tight deadline. White House chief of staff William Daley and budget director Jacob Lew will also attend the meetings. 

Mr. Obama and other Democrats urgently want to avoid passing another short-term extension, which they fear could become an ongoing distraction.

Mr. Obama's invitation Wednesday came after some Democrats became concerned that the White House was keeping a low profile in the battle to stave off what they call extreme spending cuts backed by the GOP.

Still, there is little evidence that Republicans and Democrats are coming together in their fight over spending. Republicans continue to lambaste Democrats for ostensibly being deaf to voters' pleas for fiscal restraint, and Democrats portray the GOP-backed cuts as heartless and reckless.

In a speech to the Credit Union National Association Wednesday, Mr. Boehner directly challenged Mr. Reid. 

"I'm not sure whether Sen. Reid has a plan to cut spending and keep the government running," Mr. Boehner said. "If he does, I think the American people would be interested in seeing it. If he doesn't, I think he owes the American people an explanation."

Sen. Richard Durbin (D., Ill.) said he was disappointed in such comments. "I know John, and that's not his style," Mr. Durbin said. "I sense that he's facing a firestorm in his own caucus from the tea party members who are demanding that he show his teeth in this relationship."

—Laura Meckler and Janet Hook contributed to this article.

 Write to  Naftali Bendavid at naftali.bendavid@wsj.com 