  Jay Hatfield was a third-year associate at Morgan Stanley when he decided he was settled enough and had time for volunteering.

He asked the company's foundation to recommend organizations in the New York area. He'd previously volunteered at a homeless shelter and wanted to get involved with a group that served at-risk populations.

Mr. Hatfield was referred to Greenhope Services for Women, an East Harlem nonprofit for women that houses parolees, women referred by the courts for alternative treatment and those with substance-abuse problems.

After an informal meeting in the organization's basement, Mr. Hatfield joined the board and signed on to analyze Greenhope's budget. That was 17 years ago. He's still on the board and the organization remains one of his primary philanthropic interests.

"At the time, it was a relatively small organization that was growing and so they needed board members more than more established organizations," says Mr. Hatfield. "It was really a perfect fit."

Mr. Hatfield, 51 years old, lives in Manhattan and is the president and chief executive of Infrastructure Capital Management, an investment firm. 

Over the years, he's given through his family's foundation roughly $90,000 to build the organization's endowment and ensure its future. 

"The power of organizations is in their surplus, savings and reserves," says Mr. Hatfield, who has mainly focused his board service on the organization's fiscal health.

Mr. Hatfield's recent gift of $25,000 honors the opening of Kandake House, Greenhope's new home and building on East 119th Street. The organization will celebrate the opening of the building on May 19. Greenhope, founded in 1975, serves about 200 women annually. 

A key component of the organization is its "very needed and very rare woman-centered" treatment, says Anne Elliott, executive director of the organization. 

There will be an ambulatory care facility for the outpatient substance-abuse program, a classroom, nursery, professional kitchen and cafeteria, greenhouse and playground inside the new building. 

Women have access to GED and vocational training, counseling, creative arts and yoga. The facility houses 72 women, a third of whom have children. 

"The key leap forward is being able to serve families versus just the mothers," says Mr. Hatfield. "The challenge was to serve them and yet still try to reconnect with their family, and now they can do that directly in the facility."

 Write to  Melanie Grayce West at melanie.west@wsj.com 