A couple of weeks ago I wrote a story about sledding in Central Park and about the hill on the west side of the park where I sledded as a kid. In the course of doing the voluminous research that goes into every column I consulted maps of the park, at least one or two of them, to see what my beloved hill was named. 

My assumption was that pretty much every feature in Central Park has a name, from fountains and statues to rock outcropping and benches, anointed if not by Messrs. Olmsted and Vaux when they designed the park, than by the Central Park Conservancy after high rollers (with a complimentary plaque) who have ponied up to pay for their backyard's maintenance.

When I couldn't find the name of the hill—located just inside and south of the 72nd Street and Central Park West entrance—I emailed the Parks Department and asked if they knew.  Vickie Karp, one of the city's speediest and most talented press officers, was unable to provide an answer within a few minutes, which was uncharacteristic. So I emailed her again, assuming she was looking under every rock (pun only partially intended) and told her not to worry about it. 

She replied, suggesting I might want to take a crack at naming the hill myself. Was she serious or just pulling my leg? Of course my first impulse, as any self-respecting narcissist's would be, was to start daydreaming about naming it after myself. Ralph David Gardner Jr. Hill. If Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis had an entire reservoir named after her was it such a stretch to think I could have a measly hill named after me?

Fortunately, it only took me a few seconds to come to my senses and my better, more eleemosynary angels to take over. If I was going to be handed this solemn responsibility, and it wasn't going to cost me $10 million, I wanted to select a name that would resonate with all New Yorkers; that would capture the experience for past, present and future generations of sledding down that overlooked but thrilling hill; that would stand both the test of time and have any chance of passing muster with the Mayor or whoever has final say over such matters.

So Ralph Hill was out. As well as Gardner and Junior. If one wanted to go the literal route you could call it Sledding Hill, or Kids' Hill, or in recognition of it's most impressive feature—a rock outcropping on top of the hill that allows you to launch your Flexible Flyer, the momentum carrying across a brief plane and to the lip of the main hill where your true supersonic descent begins—Double Dip Hill. 

Or in deference to the delighted terror the plunge plants in the heart of any five-year-old the first time he attempts it—Devil's Castle. 

Or if I felt like transferring the naming rights to one of the swells whose four-bedroom overlooks the park in the hope he'll contribute 15 minutes of syndication royalties or hedge fund profits to the park, how about something lyrical like Seinfeld Summit, Madonna Mountain, or David Koch Bowl, after the sweet way the ride peters into a field at the bottom of the hill.

Of course, if the goal was to have my spot become a destination for busloads of German and Italian tourists, which I'm not sure it is, I'd piggy-back off Strawberry Fields, just over the next hill as you head north. Perhaps Sergeant Pepper's Peak? How about Octopus's Garden? Or Bungalow Bill's Buff? I can already see the street guitarists heading in that direction.

Certainly, nothing happens in Central Park these days without the Central Park Conservancy's blessing. So I made an appointment with  Doug Blonsky, head of the organization, to visit the site, to bring him into the loop. It would have been great if we could have gone sledding together, so that he could share in the adventure. Unfortunately, much of the previous week's snow had turned to slush by then. Nonetheless, he solemnly studied the landscape. "We've always called this the Spruce Bowl," he said as he pointed to a stand of evergreens at the bottom of the run. 

I made it clear "Spruce Bowl" was unacceptable to me for a couple of reasons. First, for us serious sledders the trees are nothing but an obstacle, a hazard, an eyesore complicating our ride. Second, and this is way more important: The trees didn't even exist when I was a kid. Mr. Blonsky got on his cellphone and called a colleague who confirmed that the trees weren't even planted until St. Patrick's Day 1985, years after I christened the hill with my amazing sledding technique. 

Mr. Blonsky pointed to the perilous schist rock outcropping that lends the hill its fascination for serious sledders. "I'd go with that," he said. "It's the oldest thing in the park. Manhattan schist."

Mr. Blonsky's suggestion: "Schist Hill." I don't think so.

As it turns out, no matter what the conservancy president or I come up with, we won't have the final say. "Official naming goes through the City Council," he explained. "Like the Jacqueline Onassis Reservoir."

Indeed, he reported that the park's most famous sledding hills—Cedar and Pilgrim—got their names through popular usage, or as Mr. Blonsky put it, the "folklore" of the name. There was no official process or proclamation or naming ceremony designating them as such. "We really can't do an official name," he said gently.

But perceiving my extreme disappointment, he added that I could take heart from other famous Central Park fixtures, such as the Conservatory Water, whose name never caught on and is better known these days as the Model Boat Pond. "You've got to get the people who use it to start using the name and once they start using it it becomes the name," he suggested. "You need to put together a campaign on this. It's kind of like viral marketing."

So I am. If you care about your park, especially if you or your kids use the hill to go sledding, I ask you to go there, scope it out, come up with a few names that capture the beauty, the exhilaration, the joy of childhood sledding in Central Park with the snow falling, the windows on apartment buildings on Central Park West starting to glow like embers as dusk creeps across the landscape, and a warm bath beckons. Not that I'm trying to put words in anybody's mouth.

I'll tabulate the results, and report them in a future column.

— ralph.gardner@wsj.com 