Random House Inc., the publishing industry's last major holdout against the "agency" pricing model championed by  Apple Inc.,
AAPL


1.06
%




 said Monday that it is reversing course and will begin offering its digital books in the U.S. under the new pricing system, in a bid to broaden its e-book distribution.

The agency model calls for publishers to set the retail prices of their digital titles, with the retailer taking 30% of the sale and the publisher receiving the remainder. Agency pricing effectively eliminates discounting and assures retailers of a profit on each digital book they sell. 

Some consumers have blamed the approach for higher e-book prices.

Five of the country's six largest publishers switched to agency pricing last year when Apple introduced its iPad tablet. Publishers believed the iPad would sharply expand sales of e-books and challenge  Amazon.com Inc.
AMZN


-0.43
%




's popular Kindle e-reader. Apple is hosting a news conference Wednesday and is expected to unveil a new version of the iPad.

Random House, the nation's largest publisher of consumer books, had declined to change its digital strategy, sticking with traditional wholesale pricing. As a result, its digital titles haven't been available for sale directly from Apple's iBookstore, but are available for purchase from various retail bookstore apps on the iPad. 

A spokesman for Random House, a unit of Bertelsmann AG, declined to say whether the publisher's 17,000-plus U.S. digital titles will soon be sold directly via the iBookstore. However, a press release issued by the publisher noted that the switch, which is effective March 1, gives "us the opportunity to forge new retail relationships." 

A spokesman for Apple declined to comment on Random House's move.

  Stuart Applebaum, the Random House spokesman, said that the publisher made the decision in December and has been "wrapping up" contractual issues with its retail partners since then. 

"Many of them indicated to us that they hoped we'd change our terms of sale for digital books," he said. "We hope to increase the volume of our e-book sales and broaden the digital reading experience for consumers." 

A spokeswoman for  Barnes & Noble Inc.,
BKS


-0.87
%




 which recently claimed to have 25% of the U.S. digital-book market, declined to comment. 

Random House will continue to sell its physical books via the traditional model in which it sells its books to retailers at a wholesale price, and they determine the retail price. The publishing house already sells its digital books in Germany via the agency model. 

 Write to  Jeffrey A. Trachtenberg at jeffrey.trachtenberg@wsj.com 