 The Kitchen 

512 W. 19th St., (212) 255-5793

 March 8 

As winter melts into spring, the nomadic urban-movie happening Cinema 16 brings its floating avant garde-arama to the Kitchen, that bastion of experimental arts in the now-trendy Meat Packing District. 

It's a big way to lead off a new year of programs, the first of several increasingly ambitious (if yet to be announced) events that curator Molly Surno has planned for 2011. The line-up of five short films made between 1953 and 2009 centers on themes at once carnal and ethereal, as well as other extremes. "It's like that pendulum swinging between melting and freezing," Ms. Surno said, "and it has much to do with the body, and there's a very physical progression in the films." 

A certain highlight is Ron Rice's 1964 "Chumlum," made the same year that the filmmaker died in Mexico at age 29. What Ms. Surno describes as an "ornate, lush, gorgeous orgy" is a 29-minute phantasmagoria. The film's star, Jack Smith, was a filmmaker and magical thinker in his own right—his "Flaming Creatures" defined the same sort of pansexual, hallucinogenic spree the year before. "Once, someone told me that they had never seen a show at the Kitchen without some nude bodies," Ms. Surno said. "I always wanted to be part of that."

Cinema 16 bases its mission on that of its namesake, an earlier institution formed in 1947 by Austrian film historian Amos Vogel and his wife as a pioneering showcase for experimental and avant-garde film at the Provincetown Playhouse, at 133 MacDougal St. It ran until 1963. These days, most of the modern programs are filled with revivals of what now often are forgotten gems of the American independent-cinema movement. This edition includes John E Schmitz's "The Voices" (1953), and Beryl Sokoloff and Crita Grauer's "Necromancia" (late 1950s). But there's also more recent work, like Raymonde Carasco's "Gradiva Sketch I" (1978) and Lichter Peter's "Light Sleep" (2009). 

Each time out, Ms. Surno commissions an original score from a New York-based band, which performs the music live while the films are projected (either digitally, or on film). The Brooklyn-based band Psychic Ills takes the floor this time, featuring Elizabeth Hart (bass), Brian Tamborello (drums) and Tres Warren (guitar, vocal, synthesizer). With recordings such as "Astral Occurrence" and "Telesthetic Tape," the group plays deep-dish psychedelic rock with a hypnotic whirl, its occult aura sure to accentuate the trippy, alchemical spirit of films like Mr. Rice's "Chumlum."

IFC Film Center 

323 Sixth Ave., (212) 924-7771 

 Monday 

A film once deemed "grievously offensive to Christian and traditional standards of morality and decency" by the Catholic Legion of Decency, Elia Kazan's "Baby Doll" (1956) still has the humid air of forbidden (or absurdly regressive, at least) sexuality about it a half-century later. The dark farce bubbles over with deep Southern stereotypes, not least Karl Malden's racist cotton-gin owner, whose overripe sexpot teen bride (Carroll Baker) must remain a virgin until her 20th birthday. Until then, she sleeps in a crib, wearing a skimpy nightie. French director Catherine Breillat will introduce the film, which she considers a favorite.

 Museum of Modern Art 

11 W. 53rd St., (212) 708-9400

 Through March 10 

Here's another installment of films related to the ongoing gallery exhibit series "Looking at Music," with a focus on New York City in the 1980s and '90s. The selections comprise a hit-parade of experimental and documentary work, and not a little nostalgia. "Making the Scene," directed by Sonic Youth bassist Kim Gordon and shot by artist Tony Oursler, is a glance back at the halcyon days of Danceteria. The 1989 documentary "Put Blood in the Music," from Charles Atlas, is a quirky, talking-headsy survey of the era's wistfully regarded downtown music scene, when disco, noise, hip-hop and free jazz collided. There's also a pair of Jem Cohen revivals ("Instrument," on the DIY punk band Fugazi, and "This Is a History of New York"), as well as Sadie Benning's Pixelvision-shot reverie "Jollies" and the Sonic Youth-Chris Habib-Rita Ackerman collaborative short "Puppet Show."

 Film Society of Lincoln Center 

165 65th St., (212) 875-5601

 Through March 13 

Another season of new and classic French film presents 21 features, an autobiographical documentary by Claude Lelouch, programs of short and experimental works, and a conversation with director Bertrand Tavernier on the movies in his life. The series, now in its 16th year, includes American premieres of new films by François Ozon ("Potiche"), Alain Corneau ("Love Crime"), René Féret ("Mozart's Sister"), Catherine Breillat ("The Sleeping Beauty"), Benoît Jacquot ("Deep in the Woods") and Mr. Tavernier ("The Princess of Montpensier"). Look also for promising debuts, such as "Love Like Poison." Katell Quillévéré's coming-of-age drama, inspired by a Serge Gainsbourg song, won this year's Jean Vigo Award in France. Many of the directors and stars will be in town for the screenings, which also will be hosted by BAMcinématek, IFC Center, the French Institute Alliance Francaise and the Paris.

 reRun Gastropub Theater 

147 Front St., Brooklyn, (212) 797-2322

 Friday-March 10 

If you stumble out of "Ex-Drummer" in disgust, then Flemish director Koen Mortier has achieved his goal. Never distributed in the United States, the 2007 film gets an unexpected theatrical run in Brooklyn this week, where its aggressive bad taste will likely find an appreciative, beer-consuming, late-night audience. It's the tale of three disabled punk rockers and their ploy to hire a famous novelist to join them in a battle of the bands, playing Devo's "Mongoloid"—what else? The first 15 minutes or so are alarming and fresh, then it's a relentless wallow in nihilism, violence and graphic everything. This isn't a cute mash-up of "This Is Spinal Tap" and "Trainspotting." It's just plain nasty. But if Mr. Mortier's misanthropic mosh pit isn't for everyone, even its bleakest moments are possessed of a bile-streaked conviction.