Defense Secretary Robert Gates said Libya's civil conflict wasn't a vital national interest of the United States, even as he and Secretary of State Hillary Clinton sought to defend U.S. military action there.

"I don't think it's a vital interest of the United States, but we clearly have an interest there," Mr. Gates said in an appearance on the NBC News program, "Meet the Press" as part of a round of appearances on Sunday morning talk shows.

He made a similar comment on ABC's "This Week," noting that Libya's turmoil could further destabilize its neighbors Egypt and Tunisia, one of several factors that he said justified U.S. action even though Libya itself wasn't a vital national interest.

President Barack Obama will address the public Monday night to discuss the U.S. role in Libya, amid questions from many in Congress about U.S. objectives, control of the mission and the future of Libyan strongman Moammar Gadhafi.

Mr. Gates' comments on Sunday could provoke more questioning from Capitol Hill.

"I was startled to hear Secretary Gates say that Libya was not in our vital interest," said Sen. Richard Lugar of Indiana, the ranking Republican on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. "I personally don't think we should be engaged in a Libyan civil war."

Appearing with Mr. Gates, Ms. Clinton defended the U.S. role in Libya, which included ground strikes that helped to arrest the march of government forces against Libyan rebels. She said that NATO forces had stood by U.S. forces in Afghanistan, and the U.S. now had a duty to work with allies such as the U.K. and France, which were urging action in Libya.

Mr. Gates said he couldn't be sure if the U.S. would complete its mission in Libya before the end of the year, saying, "I don't think anybody knows that." But he and Ms. Clinton sought to emphasize the progress that the U.S. had already made there.

"We have prevented the large-scale slaughter that was beginning to take place, has taken place in some places," Mr. Gates said. He and Ms. Clinton added that the main U.S. role of establishing a no-fly-zone had already been accomplished and that the U.S. had begun handing control of international military operations in Libya over to NATO. Mr. Gates said planning had begun in the Pentagon for a reduced U.S. role.