NEW DELHI -- Hotel Leelaventure Ltd. plans to raise 6 billion rupees ($134 million) after September by selling shares as part of its plan to trim its debt by about a fourth in the next four years, said a senior executive at the Indian hotel chain operator.

The company also plans to raise 2.5 billion rupees in the next three to four months by selling land in the southern city of Chennai, Vice Chairman and Managing Director  Vivek Nair told Dow Jones Newswires late Thursday.

"Our shareholders had approved raising money through a number of instruments and we are looking to raise 6 billion rupees by issuing shares to sovereign wealth funds or any such investment bodies," Mr. Nair said. "The funds will be used to repay debt."

In January last year, the board of Hotel Leelaventure, which operates seven luxury hotels under the Leela Palace and  Leela Kempinski brands, approved raising up to $130 million through a share sale or a bond issue.

"This plan was later approved by shareholders at the annual general meeting," Mr. Nair said.

Hotel Leelaventure, Indian Hotels Co. Ltd. and other hotel chains from India and overseas are rushing to build new properties in the country, where an expanding economy, growth in businesses and a steady rise in tourist arrivals has led to a shortage of hotel rooms. A total of 5.58 million foreign tourists visited India in 2010, a growth of 9.3%, according to the tourism ministry.

Hotel Leelaventure inaugurated its first hotel in the Indian capital in February. It also plans to start another hotel in Chennai in September.

Mr. Nair said the proposed sale of shares is expected to reduce the founders' holding in Hotel Leelaventure by 2%-3%. Founders currently hold 54.61% in Hotel Leelaventure.

He said the company has debt of 39 billion rupees, which it aims to cut to 10 billion rupees over the next four years.

"In addition to fund-raising plans and land sales, we will have cash flow from our hotels, which will help us in repaying debt," Mr. Nair said.

Hotel Leelaventure also expects to get 7 billion rupees in the next two years by selling luxury apartments at Hyderabad in southern India and Pune in the west.

It has tied up with local property developers for the two residential projects, Mr. Nair said.

Mr. Nair said Hotel Leelaventure will also invest between 8 billion rupees and 10 billion rupees to build three new hotels over the next four years.

The company plans to build hotels at Agra in the northern state of Uttar Pradesh, Jaipur in the northwestern state of Rajasthan and Lake Ashtamudi in the southern state of Kerala.

"The Delhi and the Chennai properties will stabilize in two years and we expect cash flows from our existing hotels to pay for future development work," Mr. Nair said.

He said the average tariff per room for the company has been improving and that should help the company post 17%-18% growth in revenue in the current financial year through March.

Hotel Leelaventure had a net profit of 410.2 million rupees on sales of 4.36 billion rupees in the last financial year.

"Average tariff for us has improved to 9,600 rupees per room and we should touch a peak of 13,000 rupees per room in the next two years," Mr. Nair said.

Mr. Nair said the company's average tariff per room was the highest during 2006-2007, but the global economic slowdown and a terrorist strike at India's financial capital Mumbai in November 2008 hit tourist arrivals, forcing hotel operators to offer discounts to fill vacant rooms.

"Occupancy has improved since to 80%-85%," he added.

Mr. Nair said earnings margin before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda, is also expected to improve to 44% in the current financial year from 35% last year.

 Write to  Nikhil Gulati at nikhil.gulati@dowjones.com 