Under threat of losing his job amid deteriorating popularity, Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan is winning public support from one prominent critic: his wife.

"It's one thing to go down with the ship after you've done everything else possible, but to simply give up because you're subjected to a great deal of criticism or bullying is not something that I can condone or can possibly let happen. I don't want that to happen," said Nobuko Kan, Japan's 65-year-old first lady, at a press conference Wednesday. 

One might expect the spouse of an unpopular leader to offer unconditional support, but Mrs. Kan has shown an unusual willingness to criticize her husband in public. She questioned his ability to lead in her book titled "What on Earth Will Change in Japan Now That Your Are Prime Minister?" It was released a month after he took office in June. 

In her book, she lists her husband's shortcomings and revealed she packed only her summer clothing when she moved into the prime minister's official residence, saying she was uncertain how long Mr. Kan would remain leader of Japan. 

"My husband sometimes says to me, 'I really hate going to the Diet because everyone is so mean and critical, but it's a lot easier being subjected to this criticism at the Diet than fighting at home with you,'" said Mrs. Kan, referring to Japan's parliament. "That's a way to get him out of the house and go to the Diet, so maybe that's the way I can support him."

While her public appearance at the Foreign Correspondence Club of Japan was scheduled in December, it comes as Mr. Kan looks for ways to shore up his deteriorating public support. Support for Mr. Kan's cabinet has fallen to 26%, according to a poll published by the Nikkei business daily just a week before the new year. A split with party heavyweight Ichiro Ozawa has raised questions from political watchers as to how long his Democratic Party of Japan will continue to back him. 

In response, on Thursday Mr. Kan said he would make a long-expected shake-up of his cabinet Friday. Last week, he became the first sitting Japanese prime minister to address questions from the public via a webcast.

Mrs. Kan said the burden of Japan's ballooning debt, sluggish growth and shrinking labor force shouldn't necessarily fall wholesale on Mr. Kan. Instead, she said the problems afflicting Japan have been foreseen for the past two decades, implicitly placing blame on former leaders.

"It's not simply because my husband became prime minister that Japan has found itself in a grave situation. I think many people saw this coming," she said.

Mrs. Kan is the second Japanese first lady in a row to break the staid tradition of predecessors. The last one, Miyuki Hatoyama, wife of former Prime Minister Yukio Hatoyama, has said she traveled to Venus and met actor Tom Cruise in a previous life. Mrs. Kan is also Mr. Kan's first cousin—in her book, Mrs. Kan says that her mother and Mr. Kan's father are siblings—though the relationship has raised few eyebrows in Japan.

Their 40-year marriage has been grabbing headlines for more than a decade. In 1998, Mr. Kan faced accusations in the Japanese media that he had had an affair. He never admitted to the allegations but said publicly that his wife admonished him, telling Japanese media that she called him "an idiot." 

"I'm not someone who is known for being supportive or encouraging. I basically scold, scold, scold," said Mrs. Kan Wednesday. She added, "When I think I've said too much and have been too severe. I pull back a little bit … That's about the extent of my support."

But Mrs. Kan has also been credited with helping her husband to success. She persuaded the former grassroots activist to take up the health minister's post in 1996 and investigate the government's role in a scandal in which it was discovered that the use of tainted blood products had infected thousands of hemophilia patients in Japan with HIV. Uncovering the scandal launched Mr. Kan to national fame.

Despite the marriage's endurance, Mrs. Kan said without pause Wednesday that if given a choice she would not marry the prime minister again. "I would not marry him again if I were to be born again because I've experienced this one life already and I don't simply want to repeat it again for my next life," she said. "I would do something completely different."