BANGALORE -- Aurobindo Pharma Ltd. Tuesday said it has agreed to sell its Chinese manufacturing unit as part of the Indian company's efforts to improve profitability by reducing its dependence on drug ingredients manufacturing.

The company has entered into a pact to sell Aurobindo (Datong) Bio Pharma Co. Ltd., or ADBPL, to China National Pharmaceutical Group Corp., or Sinopharm.

Over the past several years Aurobindo Pharma has been transforming itself from a supplier of low-margin drug ingredients to a maker of high-margin finished drugs. It currently has two lucrative pacts to supply generic drugs to  AstraZeneca PLC and  Pfizer Inc.
PFE


0.75
%




 meant mostly for sale in emerging markets.

A spokesman for Aurobindo Pharma said the company expects to realize $48 million-$50 million from the transaction. This includes Sinopharm repaying a $23 million loan that Aurobindo Pharma had given to the ADBPL unit, the payment for the initial 51% stake that Sinopharm is buying and the Chinese company assuming other loan liabilities of ADBPL.

Aurobindo Pharma shares rose on the news and were trading 2.0% higher at 1,314.25 rupees on the Bombay Stock Exchange at 0800 GMT, outperforming the benchmark Sensex, which was up 0.7%.

"Though the deal is unlikely to be too material to Aurobindo's financials, it's positive as it's in line with the company's strategy of sourcing drug ingredients from outside while focussing on the finished drugs business,"  Ranvir Singh, pharmaceuticals analyst at BRICS Securities Ltd., said.

Sinopharm will acquire the stake in ADBPL through its Sinopharm Weiqida Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd. unit. It will subsequently increase its stake in ADBPL to 80.5%, Aurobindo said in a statement.

ADBPL, which manufactures an intermediate product used for manufacturing derivatives of penicillin-based antibiotics, has been incurring losses, the statement said.

Aurobindo Pharma will retain a strategic 19.5% stake in ADBPL to ensure uninterrupted supply of raw materials at competitive prices.

 Write to  Rumman Ahmed at rumman.ahmed@dowjones.com 