It's about 50 degrees and sunny on a Saturday afternoon at about 2 p.m. — a beautiful spring day in Manhattan — but 15 men hustling up the sidewalks have one mission: get inside. Because in an hour, the Tout Wars Mixed League auction will kick off.

Each year, 40 of the nation's top experts gather to compose their teams in what is considered the most intense fantasy baseball competition in the world. Strategies are closely guarded, lists of sleepers tucked away beyond the gaze of the other experts. If the process of inception weren't wholly fictional, these fantasy experts would waste fortunes hiring dream-hijacking crews to go into the minds of their competitors and plant the idea that Luis Castillo is worth $11 in an auction.

Instead, for five hours, they pore over lists and hunch over laptops, trying to determine when to nominate Jarrod Saltalamacchia and if it's worth it to go an extra dollar on Adam Lind. Have you ever heard of Lonnie Chisenhall? Everyone is this room has, and they all have an opinion on exactly when Cleveland might call him up to the majors, how many at-bats he might get, and how many home runs he will contribute to this figurative team they are creating. Chisenhall is eventually selected in the reserve round of the Mixed League auction by MLB.com's Dave Feldman. By September, the move will either be hailed as predictive genius or it will be long forgotten.

This isn't a fun little time with friends, where beer and pizza are passed around. This is pure business. Reputations and even livelihoods are made with title wins. Poor choices linger in conversations for years. This season, 15 baseball writers—myself included—are participating in the mixed league with one goal: bringing down last year's victor, Andy Behrens of Yahoo.

Tout Wars aims to gather the best of the best—from ESPN's Matthew Berry to Baseball HQ's Paul Petera—and have them battle it out in marathon auctions to fill a dual purpose: crown a champion, while providing a guide for other fantasy players to go by when doing their drafts. The competition is split up into three leagues: American League-only, National League-only and mixed. The amount of depth and knowledge needed to compete in any of these three leagues is intimidating. Andrew Brackman, for instance, is probably known by four groups right now: his family, New York Yankees officials, minor-league baseball superfans and Tout Warriors. In two minor-league seasons reaching as high as Double-A ball, he has compiled a 4.77 ERA. Three days before the auction, he was optioned to the minors. Yet Ron Shandler of Baseball HQ drafted him in the AL-only reserve round.

Every year following Tout Wars, the participants take part in the time-honored tradition of recapping their teams and analyzing why they did what they did. That's not going to happen here. My team is stellar, if I do say so myself, but no one wants to hear me drone on about it. Fantasy players are more likely to benefit from these guidelines gleaned from inside the auction (which was not open to the public this year), from chic picks to draft etiquette. Keep in mind that prices in single-league auctions will be higher than mixed because of relative player scarcity.

 J.J. Hardy is not as deep a sleeper as you may think. The Baltimore Orioles re-loaded their offense over the winter, adding Vladimir Guerrero, Derrek Lee and Hardy. Hardy is a shortstop who in his two healthy seasons hit an average of 25 home runs, most recently in 2008. He's currently the 318th player being taken in mock drafts on MockDraftCentral.com. He's ranked 267th overall on Yahoo. But Ron Shandler bought him for $18 in the AL-only league, and KFFL.com's Nick Minnix paid $6 for him in mixed.

 Alexi Ogando is a name you should probably get to know. From the same people who were hip to unlikely closers John Axford and Joakim Soria before they blew up, we now introduce Texas reliever Alexi Ogando, who was drafted in both mixed and AL-only. Even though Neftali Feliz was not moved to the rotation and will retain the closer role, it might be a good idea to keep a close eye on Ogando, who would be the favorite to take over as closer if Feliz is injured or stretched out mid-season to join the rotation. Ogando had 39 strikeouts in 41 2/3 innings pitched last year, along with a 4-1 record and 1.30 ERA.

 If Edwin Encarnacion has a breakout year, MLB.com's Cory Schwartz is on record as having called it over five years ago. The co-host of MLB's "Fantasy 411" has been touting the Toronto third baseman for years, only to be rewarded with a series of sub-par seasons sprinkled with teases of greatness. Schwartz took part in Tout's NL-only competition, so he wasn't able to draft Encarnacion for his own team. But he was in the draft room for mixed as an official observer and cheered on Fanball's Seth Trachtman as he bought him for $6. Encarnacion hit 21 home runs in just 332 at-bats last season, so he could be an incredible bargain if he manages to pull off a Jose Bautista this year. 

 The Draft Etiquette Barometer (from least annoying to most annoying): 

Calling out the name of a player who has already been drafted.

Doing it a second time.

Doing it a third time.

Flipping through sheets when it's your turn to draft and holding everything up.

 The best draft guide most people have never heard of: Gene McCaffrey's Wise Guy Baseball. McCaffrey defines old school—he drafted with a suit jacket on and was one of the few owners not using a laptop as a draft aid. His guide, which looks like it was bound at his local copy shop and printed with no pictures or fancy graphics, is geared towards high-stakes and regular fantasy leagues alike, but the copy is concise, lucid and smart. His take on Carlos Beltran—laying out all the pros and cons and letting the reader decide what he wants to do with that information—is everything you want from a fantasy analyst on a tough call like the Mets outfielder. 

 Russell Martin went for a surprisingly low price. It's hard to believe that the Yankees' new catcher ($5 AL-only, $4 mixed) has fallen this far, this fast. He never had eye-popping power numbers—his career high in home runs was 19—but he has some speed for a catcher, will play his home games this year in an extremely power-friendly park and is only 28 years old.

 Ranking the Lees: 

 Cliff Lee ($23 mixed; $26 NL-only)

 Carlos Lee ($12 mixed; $21 NL-only)

 Derrek Lee ($8 mixed; $14 NL-only)

…but remember: Carlos Lee will be eligible at first base and outfield this year, giving him a bit of a bump in value. 

 Chase Utley is to Tout Warriors as Jason Voorhees is to camp counselors. Utley and his mysterious knee ailment went to ESPN's Tristan Cockcroft for $13 in NL-only and to yours truly for $11 in mixed. A healthy Utley should be worth about $30, so his knee ailment is definitely scaring off the experts. A risk like this could probably mean the difference between a title and a third-place finish if Utley is healthy. If he misses the entire season, it hurts much less than if we had paid $20 to $25 for him, so the downside is somewhat mitigated. It's not exactly a no-lose situation, but it's close.

 The White Sox 3B battle will be won by… Brent Morel, if the Tout Wars prices were any indication. Morel went for $10 to MLB's Mike Siano, while Dean Peterson of STATS, Inc. bought Mark Teahen for $5. As of press time, the job was still up for grabs.