 Village Vanguard  178 Seventh Ave. South, (212) 255-4037  Through Sunday

After 30 albums as a leader and at least 25 years in the spotlight, it's clear that Joe Lovano is more than a dominant figure in jazz. In fact, he's jazz's answer to George Clooney or Jeff Bridges, a vibrant player who can be counted on to deliver an award-worthy performance every time out. This week the saxophonist launched his new album, "Bird Songs," on which he and his quintet Us Five (featuring star bassist Esmeralda Spalding) address the music of Charlie Parker in a decidedly contemporary context, with a week at the Vanguard. The major difference between Mr. Lovano and his Hollywood equivalents is that he never disappoints, and has yet to get stuck in something like "Men Who Stare at Tron."

One of the advantages of having a personality as strong and secure as Mr. Lovano's is that you're not afraid to immerse yourself in the idiom of some of the more Olympian figures in the musical pantheon. He's participated in tributes to, among others, John Coltrane and Frank Sinatra, Lee Morgan and even Enrico Caruso. Most of these projects, especially the new "Bird Songs," illustrate the difference between re-creation and interpretation. Mr. Lovano's approach, as he says in the album's notes, is to imagine how Parker might have continued to develop his music had he been able to keep going as long as, say, his collaborator Dizzy Gillespie. 

Both the album and the late set begin with one of the rarer Parker tunes, "Passport." Ostensibly this is one of the many early bebop variations on "I Got Rhythm," but, much the way Parker himself started with George Gershwin's basic foundation and built on it, Mr. Lovano keeps right on adding to Parker's construction and moving the piece generationally forward. At the Vanguard, earlier this week, he played long sections emphasizing the line as distinct from the chords, teasing out the melody and toying with it, like Ornette Coleman—but he also added a Sonny Rollins calypso beat, making the tune a passport to somewhere exotic. Then, too, there were passages when he ran the changes and projected an intense barrage of notes in the classic Parker style.

Mr. Lovano's Us Five band, introduced on his previous album, "Folk Art," makes the largely unprecedented move of using two drummers—not adding a Latin percussionist, mind you, but two North American-style "trap" drum kits, played by Otis Brown III and Matt Wilson. Surely Parker would have experimented with different instrumentation, Mr. Lovano is telling us, and different horns, too. On the album, he plays "Bird Yard" (a variation on "Yardbird Suite") on the alochrome, a recent French invention that looks and sounds like two sopranos playing at once; at the Vanguard, he played it on the G mezzo soprano (a horn so new that the serial number on Mr. Lovano's model is "2"), pitched a minor third lower than the traditional B-flat instrument. The G soprano actually has a deeper, richer, and more mellow sound than the occasionally whiney B-flat soprano, as Mr. Lovano demonstrated on a "collage" of four different Parker melodies on the blues.

At the Vanguard, Mr. Lovano's stand-out ballad was "Laura," which brought out the romantic side of bebop; the tune is not on the new album, alas, but the Tuesday late-night set did include a probing, tranquil reading of "Donna Lee" that combined elements of Lee Konitz's more meditative playing with Mr. Lovano's bel canto Italian soul. He finished with Parker's Caribbean-flavored "Barbados," thus concluding the journey begun with "Passport." On the whole, Joe Lovano playing Charlie Parker is even better than Jeff Bridges playing John Wayne—and I really liked the new "True Grit."

 Dizzy's Club Coca-Cola  Broadway at 60th Street, (212) 258-9595  Through Sunday

It was an extremely loose second set on Tuesday night: The snowstorm was well under way, and the NEA concert crowd, which normally would have headed into Dizzy's, instead hopped on the A train home. For virtually the only occasion in memory, the room was only half full, and the Los Angeles-based Clayton brothers seemed inspired by the panoramic view of the blizzard unfolding behind them to play even more euphorically than usual. (Between the clean-headed frontline of saxophonist Jeff Clayton and trumpeter Terrell Stafford, and the dreadlocked pianist Gerald Clayton, this band is already fun to look at.) With "Terrell's Song," a lovely ballad for the trumpeter, and the partylicious "Jive Samba," the whole room, drinking or not, was feeling no pain. I was hoping that the newest NEA Masters -- the five musical Marsalises -- would drop by, seeing as how the Claytons are among the few clans that could challenge them to a real family feud.

 Carnegie Hall  57th Street & Seventh Avenue, (212) 247-7800  Sunday

The only less-than-magical moments at a Keith Jarrett concert--whether solo or with his long-running, high-flying trio--are when the pianist launches into one of his infamous on-stage diatribes. But though he may talk like a devil, he plays like an angel: Mr. Jarrett is perhaps the most awe-inspiring jazz keyboardist working today, a fact that comes to the fore even more readily in his evening-length solo improvisations. For example, the recording of his 2005 Carnegie set is two hours of keyboard creations that draw on jazz, classical, gospel, the great standards, and other genres even while resisting every attempt at categorization. (There are some familiar melodies and chords astutely encoded in their DNA, but only the closer, "Time on My Hands," fully qualifies as something other than a Jarrett original.) One thing is for certain: Every piano player in town will be in the house--even those who had to turn down paying gigs to be there.

 Cafe Carlyle  35 E 76th St, (212) 744-1600  Through Jan. 29

Christine Ebersole's biggest triumph on Broadway thus far is "Grey Gardens," in which she played two roles. Yet that pales compared to the multiverse of identities she assumes in her latest one-woman show: a long suffering spouse in "Can't Help Lovin' Dat Man," a munchkin on Swing Street in "Ding Dong the Witch Is Dead," and a victim of the TSA on "You Forgot Your Gloves" (a bit of topicality from 1931). She devotes a bit too much of her stage patter to self-deprecation, telling us repeatedly how old and vain she is, yet wins us over much more readily by showing all the ways the human heart can love: romantic on "Blame It on My Youth," maternal on "Tender Shepherd," and spiritual on "How Can I Keep from Singing?" In "When the World Was Young," she laments the loss of innocence, but answers, but in another waltz, "Young at Heart" reveals the secret of eternal youth.