TOKYO—Still reeling from ceding its spot as Japan's second biggest auto maker, Honda Motor Co. said its net profit shrank for the first time in five quarters in the three months ending Dec. 31, dropping 40% from a year earlier under the pressure of a strong yen and slack domestic sales.



But the company also lifted its full-year net-profit forecast by 6% to 530 billion yen ($6.4 billion), which would make it by far the most profitable of the country's major auto makers. Nissan Motor Co. and Toyota Motor Corp., which will announce their quarterly earnings next week, have forecast annual net profits of 270 billion yen and 350 billion yen, respectively.

Demand for Honda's Pilot sport-utility vehicle and newly remodeled Odyssey minivan pulled U.S. sales higher by 20,000 units to 364,000 vehicles in the three-month period, the biggest year-to-year increase and largest absolute number of autos sold in any of Honda's key regional markets. Sales of its motorcycles and scooters in Asia outside of Japan also were robust, accounting for the bulk of a 21% rise in Honda's quarterly unit sales of two-wheel vehicles.

"It's significant that Honda's sales in emerging markets were strong and its North America business seems to have recovered," said Mitsushige Akino, general manager at Ichiyoshi Investment Management in Tokyo. "That helped it to partially absorb the impact of the strong yen."

But Honda blamed the poor quarterly earnings on yen's appreciation against the dollar and euro over the past 12 months and the September phase-out of a government rebate for Japanese car buyers who traded in older models for more fuel-efficient vehicles. The Tokyo-based company said foreign exchange-related losses reduced operating profit by 44.5 billion yen during the quarter, even as domestic auto sales slid by 59,000 vehicles to 118,000 units.

"The impact of the withdrawal of government rebates was bigger than we had anticipated," Honda executive vice president Koichi Kondo told reporters at a press conference following the earnings release. The results were announced after the close of trading on the Tokyo Stock Exchange, where Honda's shares finished Monday down 1.4% to 3,475 yen ($42.28).

The weakness at home poses a challenge for Honda and other Japanese car companies facing tough competition globally from Asian rivals such as South Korea's Hyundai Motor Co. Seoul-based Hyundai last week reported a nearly 50% jump in its net profit for the fourth quarter. Honda's earnings are usually seen as a barometer for the rest of Japan's auto sector as they tend to come before other major companies in the industry.

Toyota will release its October-December-quarter earnings on Tuesday of next week, while Nissan will report the following day.

Nissan has been on a roll recently, having surpassed Honda in global sales during 2010 to become Japan's second-largest auto maker for the first time in decades. Nissan sold 4.08 million vehicles in 2010, nearly 22% more than in 2009. Honda sold 3.56 million units.

The new No. 2 intends to stay ahead of Honda as part of a strategic objective to be one of the top two auto makers in Japan, company chief financial officer Joseph Peter told The Wall Street Journal in an interview on Monday. "Honda is a good company, but we like where we're positioned to be in terms of our product" line-up, he said.

For the three months ended in December, Honda posted a net profit of 81.1 billion yen, down from 134.6 billion yen in the same quarter in the previous year and the first decline from a year earlier since the July-September 2009 quarter. That result undershot by 13% the average 93 billion yen profit forecast from a survey of nine analysts compiled by the Nikkei.

The Tokyo-based auto maker's sales fell 5.8% to 2.1 trillion yen in the three-month period, while operating profit sagged 29% to 125.6 billion yen.

Yet Honda expects the pain to be relatively short-lived. It forecast strong sales in the rest of Asia, especially for its two-wheeled operations, and said that cost-cutting and an improved mix of cars in key markets like the U.S. should allow it to post a healthy profit for the full year. Honda is the world's largest motorcycle maker by volume.

For the current fiscal year through March, Honda now expects an operating profit of 620 billion yen, up from its previous projection of 500 billion yen. While that shows positive momentum, the estimate is still 35% below its record operating profit level of 953.1 billion yen posted in the fiscal year ended March 2008. The company lowered its sales forecast for the full year to 8.9 trillion yen, down from a previous estimate of 9 trillion.

Honda, which reports its earnings under U.S. accounting standards, said its outlook is based on an assumption that the dollar will average 80 yen and the euro 105 yen during the current quarter, which ends March 31.

Mr. Kondo, Honda's executive vice president, told reporters that the company is continuing to investigate suspected fraudulent transactions at one of its trading company subsidiaries that cost it some 15 billion yen in the October-December quarter. Honda expects to announce the results of an internal investigation into the alleged improprieties within the unit's fishery product section by mid-February, he said.

 Write to  Yoshio Takahashi at yoshio.takahashi@dowjones.com 