In Congress's fight over federal spending, money is just half the battle. 

Republicans and Democrats, more than $50 billion apart on how much to cut spending this year, are also at odds over health care and regulatory policies anathema to tea party activists.

The House has passed a spending-cut bill that includes provisions designed to block implementation of the new health-care law, environmental rules and other top Obama administration policies 

For conservative Republicans, these provisions are important steps toward their goal of reining in federal power. Democrats say these "defunding" provisions will succeed only in prompting a presidential veto.

The policy disputes loom in the background even as the Senate struggles to reach agreement on basic spending questions. Senate leaders prepared Monday to stage test votes as early as Tuesday on the two parties' competing spending plans for the remainder of the fiscal year. 

According to a new Congressional Budget Office analysis, the Republican bill passed by the House would cut about $57 billion from current spending levels of $1.08 trillion for discretionary programs; the Democratic alternative unveiled Friday would cut less than $5 billion. 

Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D., Nev.), in a Senate floor speech Monday, derided the GOP bill as a "Tea Party plan" that would not pass. But he conceded his party's alternative wouldn't, either. Votes on the alternatives are expected to be staged Tuesday or Wednesday to lay the groundwork for negotiations on a compromise. 

Republicans bridled at weekend comments from Sen. Richard Durbin (D., Ill.), who said he wanted no further domestic-spending cuts because the Democrats' alternative had already "pushed this to the limit." The White House has tried to signal more openness to compromise.

Democratic lawmakers say the GOP policy riders—such as proposals to kill federal funding for the Planned Parenthood Federation of America and to defund Environmental Protection Agency rules to curb emissions linked to climate change—have no place in the spending bill. 

"We should legislate like we always have legislated," said Mr. Reid. "If they have something they want to change in the law, run it through their committees, pass it."

House Speaker John Boehner (R., Ohio) declined to say whether he would insist on the riders in the end. "I can't sit here and get into a 'what if' game," he said in an interview late last week. "I'd be negotiating with myself. Why would I want to do that?"

In the short-term extension that Congress just passed, Republicans dropped the policy riders and Democrats accepted $4 billion in cuts. Some Republican aides predict that the most contentious riders would be dropped if agreement could be reached on funding levels. But GOP leaders will have to contend with tea party activists and other conservatives if they make that accommodation. 

"The real No. 1 issue is to make sure that Obamacare is not funded," said Rep. Michelle Bachmann (R., Minn.), a tea party favorite, referring to language defunding the health-care law.

Mark Meckler, national coordinator of the Tea Party Patriots, said Republicans were under particular pressure to keep the riders because many Tea Party activists are angry they did not cut more.

"These are promises that were made," Mr. Meckler said. "Republicans didn't say, 'We're going to do these things someday.' They said, 'This is what we are going to deliver if we win a majority.' "

Both sides note that even if Republicans agree to take out the policy provisions, they could still append them to other legislation or introduce stand-alone bills.

 Write to  Naftali Bendavid at naftali.bendavid@wsj.com 