WASHINGTON—The U.S. has lost track of many former Guantanamo detainees who had been sent home to the Middle East and North Africa, a sign that unrest in the region is disrupting critical terror-fighting relationships America has built up since the Sept. 11 attacks, U.S. officials say.

The flow of information from Libya, Yemen and other governments in the region about the whereabouts and activities of the former Guantanamo detainees, along with other Islamists released from local prisons, has slowed or even stopped, the officials say. U.S. officials say they fear that former detainees will re-join al Qaeda and other Islamist groups.

"Could they go back to the central al Qaeda cadre in Pakistan and add to the global jihad?" asked a senior U.S. intelligence official. "Yes, they could do that. Or they could stay where they are and work on behalf of al Qaeda to penetrate the opposition. Or they could join the opposition. None of those outcomes is particularly encouraging." 

For nearly a decade, the U.S. has conducted a major cloak-and-missile campaign against al Qaeda, teaming up with friendly Arab leaders to swap intelligence, interrogate suspects, train commandos or carry out military strikes from Morocco to Iraq. The value of these partnerships was evident last fall when Saudi Arabia tipped off U.S. and European intelligence agencies about an imminent plot to blow up U.S.-bound cargo planes by al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, the terror group's affiliate in Yemen.

Now popular movements sweeping the region have knocked some counterterrorism allies from power, and left others too distracted or politically vulnerable to risk open cooperation with the U.S. Intelligence-sharing has already slowed in some areas as the U.S. struggles to identify reliable counterparts in reshuffled governments.

"It's difficult to share information when you don't know who the players are," said another U.S. official.

The upheaval has upended U.S. foreign policy in the region, with old friends shaken or gone and the allegiance of emerging leaders uncertain. The effects on counterterrorism efforts are one of the aftershocks that worry the intelligence community the most.

A U.S. counterterrorism official acknowledged the reduced cooperation in some countries, but noted that not all intelligence partnerships were affected. "While cooperation may be curtailed for obvious reasons in some countries in the Middle East and North Africa, that's certainly not universally true across the region," the official said.

In Yemen, U.S. and European officials are increasingly concerned that former Guantanamo detainees are no longer under much, if any, government surveillance. At the same time, they have detected an uptick in activity by al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula. Another senior counterterrorism official said the group is "very actively" plotting new strikes against the U.S. during the lull in American and Yemeni counterterrorism operations. Military strikes by American fighter jets and cruise missiles have been on hold since last May. The current unrest means Yemen is unlikely to allow them to resume anytime soon.

The fear, according to senior U.S. officials, is that al Qaeda plots that would normally be thwarted could now slip through the intelligence-collection cracks.

A Yemeni official said counterterrorism cooperation continues and that the forces dealing with the protesters are different from those dealing with al Qaeda. The official said U.S. questions about the whereabouts of Guantanamo detainees have been longstanding and are being addressed. 

Publicly, the Obama administration has embraced the democratic tide, arguing that political freedoms will diminish the standing of al Qaeda in the Middle East and beyond. Defense Secretary Robert Gates has said the pro-democracy protests "give the lie" to al Qaeda's message that change is possible only through violence. The revolts, he said, "are an extraordinary setback for al Qaeda."

Privately, counterterrorism officials in the U.S. and Europe are watching the sweeping changes with a mixture of alarm and dread. In addition to their concerns about Yemen, U.S. officials are worried that the level of cooperation from security services in Tunisia and Egypt, longtime partners, will decline as new leaders distance themselves from past abuses. Officials at the Egyptian and Tunisian embassies in Washington did not return calls and emails seeking comment.

"There are more vulnerabilities in our system today," a senior counterterrorism official said. 

Before this year's revolts, the secret police in authoritarian countries like Egypt and Tunisia had far more leeway than the U.S. and its European allies to hold detainees indefinitely and use interrogation methods widely regarded by human-rights groups as torture to try to extract information.

The Central Intelligence Agency got access to detainees and much of the intelligence collected, and that information was used to try to thwart plots and locate other al Qaeda leaders so they could be killed or captured.

By far the most important counterterrorism partner for the U.S. over the last decade has been Egypt, American intelligence officers say.

Egypt secretly held and interrogated Islamist militants who had been captured by the CIA and the U.S. military under a practice known as rendition, widely condemned by human-rights groups.

Much of the close cooperation with Cairo was driven by the desire of former President Hosni Mubarak and his longtime intelligence chief, Omar Suleiman, to work with the U.S. to counter Muslim extremism. Now both are out of power.

"Obviously, our most important relationship over the last decade has been Egypt," said the senior U.S. intelligence official. "And clearly that is in line for significant change. We won't re-create the relationship we had with Mubarak."

The same may be true in Tunisia after the fall of President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali in January. This month, the interim government disbanded the feared state-security apparatus, a partner with the CIA.

Tunisia has worked with the U.S. to combat al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb, which has targeted France and other European countries. In December, Tunisian intelligence helped European authorities disrupt a plot to mount a "Mumbai style" attack on the Danish newspaper that published satirical cartoons of the Prophet Muhammad in 2005, officials say.

U.S. officials said Tunisia's new leadership remains cooperative and has updated the U.S. on the whereabouts of the two former Guantanamo detainees there. But officials say the level of cooperation is uncertain in other areas, and that it will take time to rebuild relationships. 

Senior intelligence officials said they believe the upheaval sweeping the region will continue and that the question of how to restore counterterrorism partnerships will remain murky in the months to come.

"Certainly one of the bad things, one of the scary short-term things, is that the relationships we have relied on for 10 years or longer to fight terrorism are changing," said the senior intelligence official.

In Libya, the U.S. has been completely cut off. In 2006, the U.S. transferred to Libya two Guantanamo detainees accused of being al Qaeda associates. Since then, U.S. officials have paid multiple visits to the men in Libyan prisons. But once the uprising in Libya boiled over into a full-blown rebellion and the U.S. called for Col. Moammar Gadhafi to step down, American officials lost track of the two men.

"It's dead with Gadhafi. We don't know the status of the people," said an Obama administration official.

Officials at the Libyan embassy in Washington couldn't be reached for comment.

Although long an international pariah and a sponsor of terrorism, in recent years Libya has been an important source of information on North African-based al Qaeda cells—an "especially productive" counterterrorism relationship, according to a senior U.S. official.

Even U.S. allies who have seen relatively minor protests, such as Morocco and Jordan, feel public pressure, making it harder for them to cooperate against Islamist groups, according to U.S. and Israeli officials. Israel is concerned that its two Arab peace partners, Egypt and Jordan, while steadfast against al Qaeda, will have a harder time reining in Hamas and Hezbollah—two groups with strong grassroots support.

"It won't be as it was before," a former senior Israeli intelligence officer said. "They will have to take into consideration what the Arab street wants."

Although U.S. ties with monarchs and dictators in the region have been tight, the broader Arab public is largely suspicious of cooperation with American counterterrorism efforts. Arab public perceptions remain colored by images of Muslim prisoners held at the military base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and of abuse of Iraqi detainees by American guards at the Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq.

One country that hasn't curtailed intelligence-sharing is Saudi Arabia, U.S. officials said. The Saudis provide the U.S. with regular intelligence about al Qaeda, in particular militants working in Yemen. But a rift has opened. The Saudis were upset when Washington backed the ouster of Mr. Mubarak, and this week, the kingdom acted against U.S. wishes by sending its forces into neighboring Bahrain to aid the beleaguered king.

Over the long term, senior U.S. officials said, democracy movements may be good for American counterterrorism efforts, especially if al Qaeda is seen as irrelevant and new elected governments share their predecessors' hostility to Islamic radicals.

In the near future, however, many intelligence and military officials worry that al Qaeda will try to exploit the chaos—and in no place is the threat more serious than in Yemen.

Outside of Pakistan, Yemen remains America's most active covert battlefield. Militants affiliated with al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula were responsible for the failed plot to blow up a U.S.-bound passenger jet on Christmas Day in 2009.

American special-operation forces train Yemeni commandos to fight al Qaeda, and the U.S. has had an on-again, off-again campaign of air strikes against militants in the country.

A senior U.S. defense official said al Qaeda has been using the unrest in Yemen to attempt to "disrupt and eliminate" the Yemen government as well as intimidate tribal leaders who form the backbone of the opposition. Al Qaeda's goal, said officials, is to replace Yemen President Ali Abdullah Saleh with an Islamist regime.

Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula killed several Yemen soldiers this month, although U.S. officials noted that such attacks were common before the protest movement took hold, as well.

Congressional aides have raised concerns with military and intelligence officials that Mr. Saleh is so distracted by the protests that he no longer uses all of his U.S.-trained counterterrorism forces against al Qaeda, an allegation the Yemeni official denied.

Officials said Mr. Saleh's record of monitoring former detainees was never good, but now his government has even less ability to track them, leaving the U.S. blind to their whereabouts and activities.

Officials fear some Guantanamo detainees who were not held in detention facilities after returning to Yemen may join local militants. The deputy leader of al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, Said Ali al-Shihri, is a former Guantanamo detainee. U.S. officials believe he may be hiding in Yemen's remote tribal regions.

The U.S. has limited room to maneuver against al Qaeda in Yemen because of the unrest. U.S. officials believe any action seen as orchestrated by the U.S. would further undercut Mr. Saleh's standing, and increase the risk that his regime would be replaced by one less friendly to U.S. interests.

Still, defense and intelligence officials said the U.S. remains prepared to act unilaterally in Yemen if American intelligence gets wind of an impending attack or if the opportunity arises to strike an al Qaeda leader, such as Anwar al-Awlaki, a radical American-born cleric hiding in Yemen.

"If Osama bin Laden turns up in the middle of San'a [Yemen's capital], you think we're going to just chill?" one defense official said.