WASHINGTON—In the latest move by the White House to repair relations with U.S. business leaders, President Barack Obama will address the U.S. Chamber of Commerce next month to talk about jobs and the economy, an administration official said.

The Feb. 7 speech marks a significant overture by the president to the Chamber, the capital's biggest, richest business lobby. The Chamber and its president, Thomas Donohue, have tangled with the Obama White House over health care, industry regulations and tax policy. 

Relations reached a low ebb this fall, when Mr. Obama raised questions about the Chamber's funding of Republican congressional candidates, joining other White House officials in suggesting that the organization was using foreign money channeled by its overseas affiliates to fund campaigns. That would be a federal crime, and the White House backed off after Mr. Donohue denied the charges and demanded proof. 

Since Democrats lost control of the House in November, Mr. Obama has redoubled efforts to seek business leaders' ideas on job growth. The biggest U.S. companies are sitting on $2 trillion in cash and liquid assets, which the administration would like them to plow into expansion and hiring. 

Two weeks ago, Mr. Obama hosted a group of U.S. chief executives at the White House to gather their ideas on the economy, and the Chamber appearance is expected to be an extension of that effort.

Mr. Obama will use his visit to the Chamber's headquarters, located a short walk from the White House, to "discuss his commitment to growing the economy and making America more competitive, and the importance of working together to create jobs," said White House spokeswoman Jennifer Psaki. 

"We look forward to hosting the president next month to discuss jobs and the economy. This remains the top priority of the Chamber and the business community, and we're committed to working together to put Americans back to work," said Tom Collamore, the Chamber's senior vice president of communications. 

The White House and Chamber have been working together for several weeks to find a mutually agreeable date for the address, which was originally planned for January, around the time of the president's State of the Union address. 

 Write to  Elizabeth Williamson at elizabeth.williamson@wsj.com 