Nicollette Sheridan, who played Edie Britt on the ABC dramedy "Desperate Housewives" from 2004 to 2009, is accusing the network and the show's producer of murder—the murder of her character, that is. She claims that after she had a spat with the show's creator and honcho, Marc Cherry, he wrote her character into a fatal car crash. Talk about being terminated. And so last year Ms. Sheridan sued. A judge ruled this week that the question of whether Edie was lawfully killed can go to trial before a jury.

What did Ms. Sheridan expect in the world of soap opera—even if the soap in question is a prime-time one? Soaps are notorious for contriving the demise of any character played by an actor who displeases. And that displeasure can take many forms. The most obvious is a dispute over pay. Soap actress Tina Sloan recounts in her memoir, "Changing Shoes," that back in her "Search for Tomorrow" days there was an episode in which the script called for her and her "daughter" to kill some poor sap. She can't remember the details of the storyline, but she knows what was driving the plot: "Most likely the someone we were murdering was asking for too much money in his contract."

Of course, death is a little dark for situation comedy, and so when Suzanne Somers demanded a huge hike in her "Three's Company" compensation, the writers got her off the set by having her character move to Fresno, Calif. (Insert your own joke here.)

Salary isn't the only motive for the untimely demise of players. In 1972, death started stalking character Liz Stewart on the set of "As the World Turns." Legend has it that the prim soap-opera impresario Irna Phillips was outraged that Jane House, who portrayed Liz, was also appearing on Broadway as the stripper-wife of Lenny Bruce. For that breach of propriety, Miss Phillips sharpened her pencil and signed Liz's death warrant.

Such shenanigans aren't limited to television's realm. Consider the fate of "Peter Clemenza" in "The Godfather Part II." Richard Castellano, who played Clemenza in the original film, insisted on veto power over his dialogue in the sequel. So Francis Ford Coppola had Clemenza sleep with the fishes, ridding himself of a production headache. 

It's hardly a new phenomenon. There's reason to believe that no less a dramatist than Shakespeare knew how to write inconvenient actors off the stage. The star comedian of Shakespeare's troupe was Will Kemp, whose quick-witted buffoonery was as famous as his rowdy dancing. It was Kemp who introduced audiences to John Falstaff, and those audiences clamored for more of the scoundrel. 

Maybe the success went to Kemp's head, but he seems to have had a falling out with the man penning his lines. No one quite knows why Kemp left the company, but the comedian was later known to gripe bitterly about "Shakerags." Shakespeare scholar James Shapiro argues that this "points to a rift between the company's most popular performer and its talented playwright." At the end of the "Henry IV" plays, Kemp had taken the stage and in an epilogue proclaimed "our humble author will continue the story, with Sir John in it." But come "Henry V," Falstaff is nowhere to be seen, and we hear about how he has died, a death that, conveniently, takes place offstage.

I suspect authors have been offing characters played by troublesome actors as long as there have been troublesome actors (which is to say, actors). My guess is that whoever was playing Clytemnestra in the Oresteia trilogy was asking for a bigger piece of the gate or started telling Aeschylus how to write dialogue.

Authors give their characters life, and have long been willing to take it away for reasons having nothing to do with plot. Anthony Trollope was working on a novel in a library one morning when he overheard two clergymen grumbling about how Trollope was always reintroducing the same tired old characters into his books. They were particularly annoyed by the ever-recurring Mrs. Proudie. Trollope swallowed his pride and walked over to the men. Introducing himself, he promised "I will go home and kill her before the week is over." And so poor old Mrs. Proudie met her end.

But are we now going to litigate disputes over plotlines and characterizations we don't like? Ms. Sheridan isn't claiming she had a contractual right to determine Edie's fate. And so, in a way, she's asking a jury to assume the mantle of Annie Wilkes, the mad fan in Stephen King's "Misery" who punished an author who dared to deep-six her favorite character. 

Not that there isn't some appeal to the idea of taking wayward directors and producers to court. They could be sued for killing off good characters, and for penning bad ones too. Why should dramatists be able to collect good money for bad scripts? Audiences might well launch a class-action suit against George Lucas for the whole "Star Wars" prequel business (and I suspect that any right-thinking judge would take one look at Jar Jar Binks and award punitive damages).

Still, it's all an awful idea. There are enough fictional claims made in courts these days that we don't need to add disputes over fiction itself.

—Mr. Felten is the author of the new book "Loyalty: The Vexing Virtue." Write to him at EricFelten@WSJPostmodern.com 