The states cutting public workers' pay and benefits aren't just moving to balance their budgets. They are also embarking on a project that will reshape the economic climate of the nation.

Short-term, at least, most economists see such cuts as a net positive for state economies. They allow states to avoid layoffs and tax increases. By saving money now, states also reduce future borrowing costs and pension liabilities. 

But there are long-term unknowns. Government workers make up a large slice of middle-class consumers in most states—and about 15% on average nationally—so trimming their paychecks and pushing up their out-of-pocket costs for health care and other benefits could curb spending on other goods and services. 

Public-sector unions, backed by many Democratic state officials and lawmakers, argue that there are further intangible consequences. They say that lower salaries could drive some skilled public workers into private-sector jobs—earning more money but diminishing the quality of government service in the process. 

Evaluating the overall long-term impact can be tricky, said Dan White, an economist at Moody's Analytics in West Chester, Pa. Cutbacks have clear and quick benefits for budgets. Potential costs are much harder, even impossible, to quantify. If the state wasn't getting the savings from cuts, Mr. White said, they'd have to either lay people off or raise taxes. 

Wisconsin expects to save about $150 million a year by having state employees pick up the tab for more of their benefit costs. The move will save even more at the local level, helping the state close its $3.6 billion budget gap. If the state had chosen to close the gap by raising income or property taxes, it would have cost a family of four in the state more than $2,400 a year, according to Republican Gov. Scott Walker. 

Moreover, the budget cuts potentially bolster the state's favorable borrowing position. Wisconsin, which has a double-A credit rating, is considered very creditworthy, and the governor's budget plan reinforces that standing. Rating agency Moody's in March described the governor's budget as "credit positive," by "bringing the state's finances closer to structural budgetary balance." 

Cutbacks might do even more on the local level to lower borrowing costs, said some municipal-finance experts. Public-employee labor costs, driven by pension and health benefits, are often 50% to 60% of local budgets, compared with about 20% for the state. Legislation to cut benefits is "really providing a lifeline to local government agencies," said  Joshua Zeitz, municipal finance analyst at MF Global Inc. 

Saving on labor costs at the local level also will lessen the effects of slated cuts in state funding. For example, Wisconsin is paring funding to Milwaukee by $14.3 million in the governor's 2012 budget, but the city will save $19.5 million in benefits costs as a result of higher employee contributions to pension and health benefits, according to a state estimate. Similarly, the state projects that the Milwaukee school district will come out ahead in the 2012 budget by $7.2 million, when savings on fringe benefits and state cuts are added up.

Overall, Wisconsin's local governments and school districts would see $700 million a year in benefits cost savings, compared with more than $530 million in state funding cuts, the state estimates. 

Ohio, one of the states that has legislated cutbacks, will save $1 billion in the first year of implementing a new law that avoids automatic pay increases for public employees, according to the state's Department of Administrative Services. An additional $100 million in savings would come from requiring public employees to pay 15% of their health-care premiums, instead of the government picking up much of that tab, the department estimates. That is money that the state, which is facing an $8 billion deficit, won't have to borrow. 

But there remain a host of economic questions that will bear watching, many involving consumer spending. Michael Brown, an economist at Wells Fargo, predicts that sales-tax revenue in both Wisconsin and Ohio, the two states where cutbacks have been legislated, will be hit by state workers taking home less pay. "In general you're looking at harming the personal income of these employees. That will have a somewhat negative effect on consumption," Mr. Brown said. 

Wisconsin's more than 300,000 state workers represent about 14% of the state's work force. They will experience the equivalent of a 7.7% cut in take-home pay due to a provision requiring them to pay for pensions and pay more for health care, according to Steven Deller, an economist at the University of Wisconsin at Madison. 

Additionally, many economists predict lower sales-tax returns due to cuts in government pay, though consumer spending is hard to predict and subject to factors such as confidence about the job market and rising gasoline and food prices. 

It's also clear that some workers will get hit harder than others. The changes will have the greatest effect on the lowest-paid public workers, Mr. Deller said. Health-care premiums for a typical family plan for government workers in Wisconsin, for instance, will be $210 a month after the changes, up from $90 a month, "no matter how much money you make," he said. A state worker making $20,000 might effectively see a 13% cut in take-home pay while a teacher making $51,000 would see his paycheck shrink 7%, according to Mr. Deller. 

The measures in Wisconsin and Ohio have yet to be enacted. The former faces legal challenges and the latter a potential ballot referendum. But economists expect other states facing structural deficits could follow their lead, especially if revenue continues to falter. 