From now on, Chairman Bernanke will communicate more openly and frequently.

The Chairman will hold quarterly news conferences and appear regularly at professional conventions, working breakfasts, political debates, "house parties," monster-car rallies and family interventions. 

Mr. Bernanke will participate not only in global economic conferences and academic symposia but also in TED, Burning Man and some seances. He respects those who communicate with the spirit world and wants the Federal Reserve's own communications with its inhabitants to be as clear as possible, particularly on the often misunderstood Treasury's purchase plan. Chairman Bernanke will appear in periodic Fed videos, nationally broadcast public service announcements, ecstatic visions and your living room. That's him now, in the dark suit. He wouldn't say no to a cookie. 

A skilled trombonist, Mr. Bernanke will be communicating complex sets of money supply data (M7) symphonically and, when the numbers are good, in Sousa marches. The Chairman will explain any significant changes in monetary policy through a hand puppet, Zag, and has already gotten so good at it you can hardly see his lips move. He will attend depressing meetings with your financial planner and heart-to-heart talks with your sister. He will appear at your book group, stroking his beard and commenting on "The Dressmaker of Khair Khana," and at your poignant midlife tryst. He will linger with you at that funny little boite in Arlington over a glass of wine and a volume of Keynes, unable to say "goodbye," lest someone read it as deflationary. He will freely tell you what is in the beige book and what is in his heart. He will blog.

The Chairman will be less guarded than before, more emotionally available. He understands it was hurtful that he shared more with Congress than with you, and is telling you now: Congress means nothing to him. Mr. Bernanke sees, too, how frustrating it must have been to labor in confusion over his intimations and cryptograms. What was he trying to say?? Not just with the sworn testimony, but with the casual remarks made over a Cobb salad at the Geithners', the atavistic courtside grunts at a Wizards game, the patter of Ben Bernanke the gracious dinner guest. It had reached the point where the Chairman would declare, "Yes, I believe I will have another piece of that extraordinary Tuscan quiche," and you would all race for the bathroom to speed-dial your brokers. A bronchial cough could flatten the long end of the curve.

That's all over. Starting April 7, Chairman Bernanke will shoot from the hip. Expect less "Capacity utilization at factories should trend toward a sustainable level congruent with a steady increase in the employment-to-population ratio" and more "Uh-oh."

Chairman Bernanke will communicate inflation and employment policy in plain language, on Twitter and in his latest country western ballad, "I've Had a Hell of a Heartache (Since You Said I Don't Care 'bout Gas)." The Chairman will speak in the U.S. and abroad, in times of economic expansion and recession, in English and in Spanish, and in tongues. Already this quarter he has twice collapsed on his knees and characterized the employment outlook as "SHEBBA SHEBBA DADADA HOO!!"

The Chairman's new communication policy is available at www.federalreserve.gov/moretalk. Or he could drop by and explain it to you.

 Write to  Peter Jeffrey at peter.jeffrey@wsj.com 