WASHINGTON—The Obama administration's envoy to the Middle East, George Mitchell, will resign, the White House said, a further sign that the Middle East peace process is stalled, with Israelis and Palestinians no closer to a peace agreement than when President Barack Obama took office.

His resignation will take effect May 20, the same day Mr. Obama meets at the White House with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and the day after he gives a major policy address on the Mideast.

The president said David Hale, a career foreign service officer, would serve as acting envoy to the region. Mr. Hale is a former ambassador to Jordan, but doesn't have the stature of Mr. Mitchell.

In his letter of resignation, Mr. Mitchell gave no reason for stepping down, other than saying he hadn't intended to serve in this post for more than two years. 

In a statement, Mr. Obama praised his "tireless work" toward a resolution of the conflict and a "proud legacy of public service."

"As a nation, we remain committed to peace in the Middle East and to building on George's hard work and progress toward achieving this goal," Mr. Obama said.

Mr. Obama's speech on Thursday won't include an extensive section on negotiations, and the president doesn't intend the address as a launching pad for a new round of talks, a senior administration official said.

There had been speculation that the White House would try to capitalize on the democratic uprisings across the Middle East and North Africa to try and jumpstart the Israeli-Palestinian talks, which have been moribund since September.

Rather, the speech will focus on the Arab Spring uprisings and will put the killing of al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden in context of the movement, said White House spokesman Jay Carney. 

Mr. Carney, describing the address as "fairly sweeping and comprehensive," said the president would call on governments in the region to respond to demands for a peaceful dialogue.

Next week also features another round of talks with Middle East leaders. Mr. Obama sits down at the White House on Tuesday with King Abdullah of Jordan and on Friday with Mr. Netanyahu. 

Mr. Mitchell, 77 years old, a veteran mediator and longtime senator from Maine, brokered the Northern Ireland peace accord in 1998. He is leaving his current post with less to show from more than two years of shuttle diplomacy among Israel, the Palestinian territories and Arab nations.

The peace process was complicated by the ousting of Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, a key partner, in February. 

In recent weeks, the process has been clouded further by a unification of Palestinian factions Fatah and Hamas, the militant group that the U.S. and Israel consider a terrorist organization.

"The basic reality is you have a nonexistent peace process," said Aaron Miller, a former Middle East negotiator now at the Wilson Center, a think tank. "Why would you require the services of a very talented, credible negotiator?"

—Carol E. Lee and Jay Solomon contributed to this article

 Write to  Laura Meckler at laura.meckler@wsj.com 