WASHINGTON—Congressional Republicans Monday threatened to block votes on key administration nominations until President Barack Obama submits trade deals with Colombia and Panama to Congress for passage. 

The move is the latest in a GOP-led effort to force the White House to ratify the two Latin American agreements on a similar timeline as a trade opening deal with South Korea that the White House is eager to see passed. 

In a letter signed by 44 Senate Republicans, including Republican leader Mitch McConnell of Kentucky and GOP whip Jon Kyl of Arizona, the legislators pledged to "use all the tools at our disposal to force action, including withholding support for any nominee for Commerce Secretary and any trade-related nominees." 

Last week, Mr. Obama appointed Commerce Secretary Gary Locke to be his ambassador to China. The search for his successor has begun, administration officials say.

"The President's goal is the passage of all three agreements," said Carol Guthrie, a spokeswoman for the U.S. Trade Representative's office. 

 The Democratic chairman of the Senate committee with jurisdiction over trade deals condemned the Republican move. "Approving these agreements will boost U.S. exports, improve our economy and create jobs here at home, but this tactic is a diversion from our goal and is simply not the way to ensure their passage," said Sen. Max Baucus, chairman of the Senate Finance Committee. 

House Ways and Means Chairman Dave Camp (R., Mich.) and Trade Subcommittee Chairman Kevin Brady (R., Texas) issued a statement supporting the Republican senators' move. 

The White House hasn't nominated anyone to fill a number of top economic posts. The Federal Housing Finance Agency, which regulates Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, which regulates national banks, are being run by "acting directors" who haven't been confirmed by the Senate. 

The White House also hasn't nominated anyone for two of the posts created by the recent Dodd-Frank financial overhaul law: the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau and a new Office of Financial Research within the Treasury Department. A top job in the Treasury Department monitoring financial institutions has been empty since last year, and Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. Chairman Sheila Bair is supposed to step down in a few months after her five-year term expires.

Both sides give different reasons for the growing number of vacancies, with administration officials complaining that Republicans are being obstructionist while Republicans say the White House won't put qualified people up for the posts. 

Mr. Obama has said passage of the long-stalled Korea, Colombia and Panama trade agreements is vital for realizing his goal of doubling U.S. exports by the end of 2014. 

Some Democrats say they are reluctant to back the Colombia deal without revisions that address reports of violence against trade-union organizers there. Trade officials say the Panama deal awaits passage of legislation by that country's government that would change its tax code and end its reputation as a tax haven. 

Administration trade officials met with their Colombian counterparts in Washington last week, and say they have made significant progress on revising the Latin American pacts. The two sides will meet again in two weeks. U.S. Trade Representative Ron Kirk told the Senate Finance Committee last week that negotiators will reach a deal on the Colombia and Panama agreements this year, and send them to Congress for approval immediately thereafter. 

Republicans say they want to pass all three agreements by July 1, when a European Union agreement with South Korea takes force. Delay, they say, gives foreign companies an edge that would be hard for U.S. exporters to overcome. 

 Write to  Elizabeth Williamson at elizabeth.williamson@wsj.com and Damian Paletta at damian.paletta@wsj.com 