Every day, it seems, my 14-year-old son has a new request to spend money on golf.

If he's not asking me to take him to the driving range to hit balls for $7, he's asking his mom to take him to a local shop for a new club or a $20 box of balls.

On one level, as I've written, I'm ecstatic he has found a passion to pursue. I've never seen him as motivated as he is about golf.

But his passion has a pretty hefty price. Golf clearly demands an outlay of cash that far exceeds what my wife, Amy, and I used to spend when soccer was my son's sport of choice.

And that brings me to the point of this column. To a kid, golf vs. soccer is a meaningless equation; they're both sports. But to a parent, the difference is measurable. And that difference raises a whole host of questions -- involving priorities, fairness, sibling rivalry and more.

* * *

"You're one to question any of this," Amy said when I told her about this topic. She's known me since my earliest days in college and has seen me run through all manner of sports and hobbies -- from lacrosse to a brief fascination with bonsai trees.

But, as I reminded her, there is a significant difference: I paid for all of those pursuits with my own cash.

Our young teenager, on the other hand, lacks an income source to fund his own golf habit.

To be clear, I understand that children can't simply pursue any sport or hobby they find alluring. And each family has to decide for itself what it can and can't afford. We're lucky enough that we can afford his golf passion (up to a point, anyway). If he were suddenly into polo, we wouldn't be having this discussion at all.

Still, even if a family can theoretically afford a particular sport, that doesn't mean it should. When you structure your budget with one activity in mind, as I've done with my son's soccer expenses, a child's switch to a far-pricier endeavor necessarily imposes a financial impact that you have to account for -- and that can have effects elsewhere in the family.

For instance, does the money for the new sport come out of a family trip? Out of family dinners and movies? Or what if you have more than one child, as we do? One kid's activity can consume so much of the family's discretionary budget that it affects how much you can spend on the other kids. But is that fair? Should my daughter, for instance, just take one for the team if her brother's golf expenses limit what we can afford for her?

One of my longtime friends notes that his daughter was into horseback riding when she was younger, which, he says, "was enormously expensive." His other two kids pursued far-cheaper activities, like softball, track and soccer.

"The others resented all the money spent on their sister, even if the money wouldn't necessarily have gone to them," he says. "It seemed unfair in a way that was hard to get your arms around."

That hasn't yet happened in my house because my daughter, at 7 years old, is too young to gauge costs. But I see the likelihood of it happening as she gets older and becomes more sensitive to issues of fairness.

What's more, this isn't purely about affordability. There is a principle involved. All kids have to learn the concept of priorities and trade-offs, especially when it comes to spending. And that's where parents can play a big role.

* * *

A large part of me wants to disregard any question of cost because of the joy I know my son gets from playing golf. And I hesitate to even say anything negative about golf right now, because I don't want him to feel guilty and possibly back away from a positive influence in his life.

Still, he does need to understand that if you want something beyond your means, you need to work harder, or make sacrifices, to get it. Spending, he must learn, is about priorities. It's about the ability to turn away from some desires so you can have other things that are more important to you.

So Amy and I are trying to determine the best way to teach him that lesson. Additional chores are an obvious possibility. My friend with the horse-riding daughter says that as his daughter aged, "one of her chores was to work a lot more at the barn." That also reduced the sibling rivalry: When his older kids watched their sister clean out stalls, they weren't so jealous.

I'm reluctant to pursue that path, though. I know my son well enough to dread the endless negotiations and procrastination that will ensue. He'll argue that he should get paid for routine chores he does now for nothing. I'd rather not start down that path.

No, the option we like best is pushing him to find a part-time job, such as working as a caddy at a nearby country club or as a soccer referee. Neither job will be drudgery. But either will be hard enough to drive home the point about the need to work for what you want.

Because he's in school -- and about to enter a rigorous high school -- Amy and I would only allow him to ref on weekends, and only when he has no homework or projects due. Limiting his hours will take him longer to fund some of his golf-related desires. But that isn't such a bad thing, teaching him the importance of delayed gratification, as well as forcing him to prioritize his immediate wants.

I've already started explaining to him how many buckets of balls he could hit at the golf range from refereeing just two games on the weekend...and I saw a twinkle of recognition in his eyes.

Maybe my golfing son will soon be able to afford his own pricey passion.

—Jeff D. Opdyke writes about investing and finance from Baton Rouge, La. Email: lovemoney@wsj.com 