A suspect dubbed the "Holiday Bandit" by the Federal Bureau of Investigation is being sought after pulling his third bank robbery in the city over the past three weeks, authorities said.

This past Thursday just before 3:30 p.m., a man wearing a black baseball hat, black ear muffs, sunglasses, a black coat and dark blue jeans showed a black handgun to a teller inside the Sovereign Bank on Jackson Avenue in Long Island City and demanded money. After obtaining cash, the man left the bank.

Through video surveillance camera footage, FBI agents have linked the man to two other bank robberies.

On Dec. 23, the man robbed the Ridgewood Savings Bank on Third Avenue in the Bay Ridge section of Brooklyn, FBI officials said. And on Dec. 9, the robber, who FBI officials say is a white man in his 30s, about 6-feet to 6-feet-2-inches tall and weighing an estimated 200 pounds, hit the Sovereign Bank on Broadway in Astoria, Queens.

"This is no way to ring in the New Year,"  Diego Rodriguez, the special agent in charge of the FBI's New York field office, said in a statement. "This repeat offender needs to be caught after committing such a dangerous and violent crime. Someone, somewhere knows something and we need them to speak up."

FBI officials said that there is a cash reward available to anyone who provides information that leads to an arrest in the case and ask people to call 212-384-1000 with any information on the robber. According to FBI spokesman  Jim Margolin, total bank robberies in the city were up by four this past year compared with 2009, 222 to 218. Of the bank robberies in 2010, 26 involved the suspects showing weapons, and the rest were "note jobs," in which no weapon was shown, Mr. Margolin said. In 2009, there were 35 armed bank robberies, he said. 

FBI officials dubbed him the "Holiday Bandit" because of the time frame when the crimes occurred. The "Holiday Bandit" is one of several robbery suspects to earn colorful nicknames this past year. 

Earlier in December the NYPD released surveillance video of the so-called "Ice-Pick Bandit," who was wanted in at least six ice-pick-point robberies in a month.  John Martinez, 39 years old, was later arrested in that robbery pattern. In July, a man who tried to rob banks by obscuring his face with flowers became known as the "Bouquet Bandit." There was also the "Cat Woman" robber, who is alleged to have pulled one stickup of a shoe store in a cat mask.

  John Daniel Stolarz, a 69-year-old with a penchant for sunglasses who was arrested for trying to rob a bank near Penn Station in October one day after his release from federal prison for a string of bank robberies, came with a tabloid-ready nickname of his own. "Johnny Shades" is listed on his arrest record as one of his aliases.

 Write to  Sean Gardiner at sean.gardiner@wsj.com 