Before the current conflict in Libya, analysts estimated the strength of Col. Gadhafi's elite forces at as many as 12,000. It isn't clear how many forces he currently commands, and how much of his arsenal of tanks, armored personnel carriers and other weaponry remains in his control after rebels seized armories in the east. 

However, Col. Gadhafi appears to have kept the most sophisticated equipment close to the capital.

Gary Li, an analyst at the International Institute for Strategic Studies in London, said that while rebels have aircraft and antiaircraft batteries, as well as air bases and ammunition dumps in the territory they control, they didn't appear to have the associated infrastructure, such as radars, or the expertise to operate the more-advanced weapons.

However, he said the ability of troops loyal to Col. Gadhafi to take the fight to the rebels will weaken as they move away from the capital. Col. Gadhafi may also be wary that emptying Tripoli of soldiers to fight rebels outside would risk sparking opposition attacks inside the capital, Mr. Li said.

Before the conflict began, the Libyan government had, on paper, a robust military. But much of the equipment, such Col. Gadhafi's 800 tanks, is thought to be inoperable, either because he couldn't get replacement parts or because of poor maintenance.

Still, his inventory, before fighting began, included some 2,400 artillery pieces, and nearly 2,000 armored infantry fighting vehicles or carriers. The Air Force includes 35 attack helicopter and 90 reconnaissance or transport helicopters. He has, in theory, more than 360 fighter planes, but only a fraction are believed by Western officials to be operational. Because Libyan pilots have proved to be poorly trained, the jets pose a much less serious threat to the rebels than transport and attack helicopters, officials said.

European diplomats say that the longer the stalemate remains, the greater the pressure will be for international action, such as a no-fly zone, to tip the military balance in favor of the rebels. Ivo Daalder, the U.S. ambassador to NATO, said this week that ground operations and helicopter movements would be largely unaffected by a no-fly zone. However, he said "perhaps the talk of a no-fly zone" had helped limit air attacks by the regime. 

—Stephen Fidler and Julian E. Barnes

 Write to  Stephen Fidler at stephen.fidler@wsj.com 