ALBANY—Men with bayonets, muskets and tomahawks peered down at Gov. Andrew Cuomo on Saturday as he delivered his inaugural address in a chamber of the Capitol known as the War Room.

The combat-themed ceiling murals seemed a fitting firmament over a leader whose early governorship will be defined by a clash of warring impulses.

One such tension emerged when Mr. Cuomo spoke of a "financial reinvention" of Albany and a "blueprint for change." He vowed to bury "long-entrenched patterns of behavior." 

Tugging against that soaring rhetoric is the gravity of state government. The unraveling of the Spitzer administration is a tale of the folly of ambition and limits of change, and it is one that looms over the Cuomo administration. 

Undoubtedly, Mr. Cuomo has a keener sense of the inertia that grips the political system. What he has revealed of his agenda reflects that caution.

He's called on lawmakers to limit the growth in local property taxes through a mandatory cap. But he has been less urgent about reducing the mandates at the root of local spending. 

He wants to contain the Medicaid budget, but apparently through a brokered agreement with the hospital industry and the health-care union. He aims to freeze state workers' salaries and alleviate the burden of pension costs but has not signaled plans for a fundamental overhaul of retirement benefits.

Within his speech, as well, the themes of power and authority bumped up against his demand for austerity. "A governor's inherent power is limited. A governor's potential power is limitless," Mr. Cuomo said. 

Clearly, the state's new governor wants to expand the reach of the executive. Both allies and critics say he has a shrewd understanding of the levers of control. But history suggests that the empowering of the governor doesn't always lead to efficiency.

"The major development in the 20th century in New York was the centralization of power inside the governor's office, culminating, really, with the Rockefeller administration," said  Bennett Liebman, director of the Government Law Center at Albany Law School. It was the Rockefeller era, Mr. Liebman noted, that spawned the archipelago of public authorities and splurge in borrowing that Mr. Cuomo points to as a source of dysfunction.

In making the case for an energetic government as a force of good, Mr. Cuomo spoke of the "majesty" of the state's Capitol Building, calling it a "beautiful monument to democracy." But the construction of the building, spread over 32 years in the 19th century, was plagued by cost overruns, delays and legislative squabbles.



The second-floor War Room is a fitting symbol of Albany—but not the way Mr. Cuomo may have intended it. In 1921, the state commissioned William de Leftwich Dodge to paint the ceiling murals at a cost of $42,000. Originally, the paintings were supposed to be viewed from the first-floor Flag Room as part of a "monumental space." But a lack of funding scuttled those renovation plans, and the second floor still stands in awkward proximity to the murals.

Toward the end of his speech, Mr. Cuomo asked: "Where are the people? Where are the people in Albany? Where are the people in the Capitol?" A void of public engagement, he said, has been filled with lobbyists and special interests. Meanwhile, observers of the inauguration couldn't help but notice that the governor chose to perform his oath of office not outdoors, but in a closed space occupied by a small and exclusive crowd of friends, family members and colleagues, some of whom have known and worked with Mr. Cuomo since the days of his father's administration.

Mr. Cuomo's decisions to invite members of the public to watch his State of the State speech, to open the Hall of Governors (known around the Capitol as "Fort Pataki") and to remove the concrete barriers on  State Street
STT


0.41
%




 weren't merely tokens of transparency. The barriers he removed had created an impression of a bunker.

The question, though, is whether Mr. Cuomo is able to sustain an openness that many felt was missing from his tenure as attorney general, when he shunned public appearances and conducted press conferences through conference calls.

These tensions are not unusual for a new administration in such tough times. But how they're reconciled could determine whether Mr. Cuomo's political path terminates in Albany or winds its way back to Washington. 

In many ways, the "battle to recapture Albany," as he put it on Saturday, will be fought from within.

 Write to  Jacob Gershman at jacob.gershman@wsj.com 