CLEARWATER, Fla.—It's funny sometimes how a young athlete views himself. Talk for a few minutes to 23-year-old Phil Hughes—the Yankees' No. 3 starter, per manager Joe Girardi's designation Saturday—and he projects a strong self-insight, a sense of knowing exactly what he must do to improve as a major-league pitcher. In some ways, he is very, very right. In others, he might need to take a longer, more detailed look at himself.

Hughes went 18-8 with a 4.19 earned-run average last year, but it was as if he were two pitchers—one excellent, one far from it. Before the All-Star break, this was Hughes: an 11-2 record, a 3.65 ERA, ratios of 8.1 strikeouts per nine innings and 3.14 strikeouts per walk. After the All-Star break, though, his record was 7-6, his ERA 4.90. His strikeout ratios dropped, and hitters grew more comfortable against him. Over 101 pre-break innings, he gave up 11 home runs. Over 75 1/3 post-break innings, he gave up 14.

He was quite aware of the discrepancy, in part because his final two starts of 2010 highlighted how poorly he had been pitching since the middle of the summer. He lost both of his starts in the American League Championship Series; the Texas Rangers hammered him for 14 hits and 11 earned runs in 8 2/3 innings. "My second half as a whole was disappointing," he said Sunday.

In an attempt to iron out that inconsistency, Hughes plans to make it a point to pitch better early in games this season. "Last year, I gave up a lot of runs in the first couple of innings," he said. "I want to get better at that. I want to make sure that I go into inning one and I'm already prepared and settled down."

There's just one problem with that analysis: Hughes is wrong. He was an above-average early-game pitcher last year. Major-league pitchers had an overall 4.38 first-inning ERA in 2010, according to Stats Inc., a firm that tracks numerical trends in sports; Hughes' was 3.41. In fact, neither the second inning nor the third was his biggest trouble spot. It was in the sixth that he struggled most: His ERA was 8.86 over the sixth innings he threw last year, and opposing hitters batted .315 against him, according to Baseball-Reference.com.

To become an elite starter, then, Hughes has to take a step that most young pitchers have to take: figuring out how to get hitters out after those hitters have become familiar with his pitches and patterns over two or three at-bats. In light of the development Hughes still has to make, it at first might not be surprising that Girardi would announce that A.J. Burnett, not Hughes, would be the team's No. 2 starter behind CC Sabathia.

Yet part of Girardi's motivation is to boost the confidence of the enigmatic Burnett, who is coming off the worst season of his 12-year career (10-15, 5.26 ERA). While in the midst of a generally solid spring training, Burnett had a roller-coaster of a start Saturday against Toronto, throwing two wild pitches and giving up four runs and five hits over four innings.

That Girardi felt the need to make this move is, by implication, an indication that he considers Hughes to be relatively reliable. After all, Girardi shuffled the rotation to accommodate the 34-year-old Burnett, not Hughes, who is about to begin only his second season as a full-time starter.

For his part, Hughes said he didn't care whether he was the No. 2 starter, the No. 3 starter or the No. 5 starter. He doesn't evaluate himself based on such labels, he said.

"Am I being a better pitcher overall?" he said. "Savvy would be where I'm advancing as a pitcher. As far as winning games, ERA, strikeouts, that comes when everything is going well for you.''

 Write to  Mike Sielski at mike.sielski@wsj.com 