The Nets' 96-94 upset of the Chicago Bulls on Jan. 5 was supposed to be about Nets rookie Derrick Favors. The third overall pick of the 2010 draft was making his first NBA start against Chicago's Carlos Boozer, one of the league's premier power forwards.

 But instead of an intergenerational clash of big men, the Prudential Center crowd was treated to 38 minutes of Kris Humphries—the man whose starting job Mr. Favors now occupies. 

In what's rapidly becoming a typical performance for Mr. Humphries, he outran, outmuscled, and outworked both players to finish with 20 points and 11 rebounds. Mr. Favors played only nine foul-plagued minutes, while Boozer—who started ahead of Mr. Humphries for two years in Utah—was benched for the entire fourth quarter.

He may have lost his starting job, but Mr. Humphries will continue to finish games now that he's found his niche in the NBA. In his seventh season, the 6-foot-9 power forward has moved his focus from scoring to rebounding and defense. In so doing, he became a Most Improved Player candidate and one of the few bright spots in an unrelentingly bleak season for the Nets. 

"Anytime you're on a team you have to figure out where the team needs you and how the team needs you to play," Mr. Humphries said. "That's how I got on the court—doing things that they needed me to do. ''

Mr. Humphries's growing reputation as a gritty, high-energy player is a far cry from his NBA beginnings. He was taken by the Jazz in the 2004 NBA Draft Lottery after leading the Big 10 in scoring and rebounding as a freshman at Minnesota.

 "He was the number one and two option on that team," said Nets point guard and former Wisconsin Badger Devin Harris, who narrowly lost the Big 10 scoring title to Humphries in 2004. 

But despite high expectations, Mr. Humphries's first six NBA seasons were eminently forgettable. He bounced from Utah to Toronto and Dallas without ever averaging more than 14 minutes per game. In fact, the trade that brought him to New Jersey—which was completed a year ago—had very little to do with him at all. The real motivation for the Nets was to shed the remaining years of Eduardo Najera's contract. 

The son of a former Minnesota Golden Gopher football player, Mr. Humphries was an elite swimmer in his youth who competed against future Olympic gold medalist Michael Phelps. That athleticism translated to the hardwood, where he's become an elite rebounder thanks to his 36-inch vertical leap. 

But what really has made Mr. Humphries stand out this season is the way he defends the pick and roll. "It's huge because that's what everybody's doing," Mr. Harris said. 

Mr. Humphries leads the Nets with 9.2 rebounds per game and ranks fifth in the NBA in rebounding rate (percentage of missed shots that a player rebounds). Somewhat curiously, he has improved dramatically in every area except offense, which was originally his ticket to the NBA. 

"I told him we want him to take his 14-, 16-foot shots if he's wide, wide open," coach Avery Johnson said. "He has a nice little post move there on the right box.…When he tries to get into his Hakeem Olajuwon spins and all that other stuff, he gets in trouble."

But even as Mr. Humphries's star rises, Nets assistant general manager Bobby Marks says he is still "the same person we got back in January" and credits him for being "very respectful."

That demeanor has helped him in his current situation with the 10-27 Nets. "I've played on a team that lost a ton of games. Teams like that, no one benefits in the end," said Mr. Humphries, who has increased his value as he prepares to become a free agent this summer. "Winning is the cure-all. It's the best thing for everyone's careers."