Giants coach Tom Coughlin kept little emotion in check on Monday morning on Sirius NFL radio in discussing the Sunday killing of Osama bin Laden.

"One of the things that does put goosebumps on top of my goosebumps is the reaction of all Americans to this news,'' Coughlin said. "You think of the patriotism and the sacrifices that have been made by our servicemen and women who have put their lives on the line every day, who need our tremendous support and will always get it from me and many, many Americans.''

Such unequivocal support is not a surprise coming from Coughlin. In the Giants' 2007 Super Bowl season, he installed Lt. Col. Greg Gadson, who lost two legs in Iraq, as an inspirational constant on the team's sideline. Ray Odierno, the Commander of the U.S. Joint Forces, is a regular visitor of Coughlin's at the Giants' complex.

The Giants coach made a U.S.O. tour to the Persian Gulf in 2009 and his oldest son Tim, then a bond trader working in the World Trade Center, escaped the burning building on the morning of Sept. 11, 2001. 



—Aditi Kinkhabwala 

First, the good news: Yankee pitcher Phil Hughes does not have Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, a rare condition that would have required season-ending surgery. "All tests negative for circulatory and vascular issues," said a Yankee PR staffer. 

Now, the bad news: The Yankees still don't know what's wrong with the 24-year-old pitcher, whose velocity has mysteriously disappeared this season. Hughes was examined Monday in St. Louis by a specialist after initial tests turned up hints at Thoracic Outlet Syndrome, a condition where the nerves and blood vessels running through the shoulder are pinched. He should rejoin the team Tuesday. 



—Daniel Barbarisi

Lockout or not, the Giants are making sure their fans are thinking about football. The team opened a contest Monday, inviting fans to offer their photo and a personal story about their Giants fandom. The team will cull their favorite 20, then starting May 18, fans will have the opportunity to vote for their favorite story on Facebook.com/NewYorkGiants.

 Each of the 10 winners will have her or his name, image and/or likeness appear on the tickets for one of the two preseason and eight regular-season home games during the 2011 season.



—A.K. 