BRUSSELS—The European Union agreed upon a significant extension of its sanctions on Libya on Monday even while member states continued to express differences over military action in the North African country.

The EU also announced it was slapping an asset freeze on former Egyptian President  Hosni Mubarak and 18 other officials of his regime.

Following a meeting of EU foreign ministers, the 27-nation bloc agreed to extend the asset freeze and travel ban on Libya to 11 extra people and nine more entities in Libya.

It's the second time in just over a week that the EU has broadened its sanctions. On March 11, the bloc added one person and five entities, including Libya's central bank and sovereign wealth fund, to the list of 26 people named in the initial sanctions last month.

The details of who will be affected will be published in the official bulletin Tuesday, which is when the sanctions will take effect.

The EU also announced it was imposing an asset freeze on "all funds and economic resources owned or controlled by persons identified as responsible for the misappropriation of Egyptian state funds." 

Speaking at a press conference after the meeting, the EU's High Representative for foreign affairs, Catherine Ashton, said the EU stands behind the implementation of last week's United Nations Security Council resolution on Libya.

 "Everything that we do has one objective—and that is to help the people of Libya," Ms. Ashton said.

However, EU foreign ministers expressed divisions on the Libyan military intervention.

German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle said he still sees considerable "risks" from the intervention, and defended the country's decision not to join with its traditional allies in the military operation. 

"We calculated the risks and if we see that three days after this intervention began, the Arab League [has] already criticized this intervention, I think we had good reasons," Mr. Westerwelle said. 

However, he said his country fully supports widening sanctions so that Col. Gadhafi "does not get fresh money so he can finance new soldiers and new troops."

Italian Foreign Minister Franco Frattini told reporters his country wants to bring about a "national reconciliation" within Libya as soon as possible and said his government doesn't want the military action to go "at all beyond" what was agreed in the United Nations Security Council resolution last week approving the enforcement of a no-fly zone over the north African country. 

Cypriot Foreign Minister Markos Kyprianou warned that the international community must be "careful" not to take measures that will make an end to the fighting harder to achieve. 

"Everybody should stop shooting," he told reporters, 

A minister from the U.K., which along with France pushed for the U.N. no-fly zone resolution, said the military operations will continue until there is clear evidence that Gadhafi's regime has stopped firing on civilians.

"We have already had one declaration of a cease-fire that turned out to be false," said Europe Minister  David Lidington. "We're going to judge him by his deeds and not just by his words." 

Finnish Foreign Minister Alexander Stubb also said the military action to impose a no-fly-zone were right. He said there is "no question" that this is a broadly approved international operation which aims to "protect human lives" in Libya. 

"I think everyone stands behind it, Mr. Stubb said. 

In addition to the Libya and Egypt sanctions, the EU also said it was extending its current asset freeze and travel ban on 19 additional Belarus officials. 

Speaking after the meeting, Ms. Ashton said the bloc would look at "further targeted measures" on Belarus officials.

Ms. Ashton also called for the governments in Yemen and Bahrain to engage with the opposition and to desist from any violence against civilians. She condemned what she called stepped up "systematic repression" by Iran's government of the opposition.