MUMBAI – SKS Microfinance Ltd. said India's top court has agreed to hear its plea to stay the tight regulations imposed on microlenders by the Andhra Pradesh government, which have crippled loan recoveries and hurt revenue and profits. 

"A [Supreme Court] bench admitted the matter and notice was issued to the Andhra Pradesh government to reply by the third week of July 2011," SKS said in a release issued late Thursday. 

Andhra Pradesh government officials couldn't immediately be reached for comment. 

SKS, India's largest microfinance company by revenue, has been hit hard in recent quarters after the state of Andhra Pradesh--the company's largest market--introduced tough regulations on microlenders following allegations they overcharged customers and used coercive recovery methods. 

The tough laws and subsequent political movement dismantled the repayment cycle. 

Companies in the microfinance industry borrow funds from banks and offer loans of about $200 to the poor to help them start or expand small businesses. Borrowers--who are located mainly in rural areas and don't have bank accounts--typically pay higher interest rates. 

The regulations have crippled SKS's recoveries in Andhra Pradesh to about 10%, compared to 98% in the other 18 markets in which the company operates,  Vikram Akula, founder and chairman, said earlier this week. 

As a result, the company--which made one of the country's most high-profile stock market debuts last year--swung to a net loss of 697.7 million rupees ($15.5 million) in the fourth quarter ended March 31 due to higher provisioning against mounting bad loans in Andhra Pradesh, where it is based. 

India's central bank has also stepped in, issuing guidelines that cap the interest rates microlenders can charge at 26% and their margin at 12%. SKS has been positive about the guidelines, saying only that they are good for larger players like itself, but not so much for smaller players. 

The Reserve Bank of India earlier this month also broadly adopted the recommendation of a panel that suggested a regulatory structure for the industry. The central bank is now speaking with the Andhra Pradesh government to have only one set of guidelines regulating the sector. 

SKS's stock has been battered after its weak results and after its target price was cut drastically by two foreign brokerages. The shares are down nearly 27% in the past month, but are currently trading at their daily upper limit, or 5% higher, at 378.35 rupees in a flat broader market. 

 Write to  Romit Guha at romit.guha@dowjones.com 