HONG KONG—American expatriate Nancy Kissel faces life in prison after a jury here found her guilty of murdering her investment-banker husband in 2003.



The ruling dashes Ms. Kissel's chances of securing a release through a retrial after Hong Kong's highest court early last year threw out her 2005 murder conviction, citing procedural flaws in what became widely known as the "milkshake murder" trial.

The thin, frail-looking mother of three was silent and calm as the verdict was read out. Her family said they haven't decided whether or not to appeal the ruling. 

The case became a grim sensation for the peek it offered into the lives of a wealthy, elite expat couple who many testified appeared to be the picture of a perfect marriage. 

At the start of the retrial Jan. 11, Ms. Kissel pleaded guilty to manslaughter and not guilty to murder. Her attorneys argued that although she admitted to killing her husband, she did so while suffering from a major depressive disorder that diminished her responsibility for her actions. 

A manslaughter conviction would likely have led to her eventual release from prison. In Hong Kong, a murder conviction carries a mandatory sentence of life in prison.

Prosecutors charged the 46-year-old Ms. Kissel with killing her husband in cold blood, saying she drugged him with a sedative-laced milkshake before bludgeoning him to death with a heavy lead ornament. She engaged in a "cleanup and disposal operation," prosecutors said, rolling the body up in a carpet and hiring movers to stow the bundle in a storage room near the couple's apartment on the southern half of Hong Kong island.

The jury of seven women and two men returned a verdict after 47 days of trial and 10 ½ hours of deliberation. 

Judge Andrew Macrae praised them, saying he's "never seen a more conscientious, punctual, attentive jury." 

On the stand, Ms. Kissel said she took responsibility for her husband's death, but failed to remember details of the event, including putting drugs in the milkshake. Mental-health experts gave evidence attributing Ms. Kissel's memory lapses, among other things, to post-traumatic stress disorder that arose from years of physical and sexual abuse by her husband. 

Further, the defense argued Ms. Kissel was provoked by her husband, who Ms. Kissel says was wielding a baseball bat and threatening to take custody of their children in a divorce. Ms. Kissel testified that her husband became increasingly violent and controlling over time, and that he often demanded oral and anal sex against her will. 

One expert psychology witness, Lenore Walker, testified that Ms. Kissel exhibited symptoms consistent with battered-wife syndrome.

Lead prosecutor David Perry, however, accused Ms. Kissel of lying about the abuse and depression and remembering only the details that suit her defense. Rather than a frenzied, sudden act of violence, he said, the killing and cover-up were planned weeks in advance, amid an ongoing affair with an electrician who lived near the Kissels' Vermont vacation home.

Ms. Kissel appeared to be in poor health. She has reached what her lawyers called a life-threatening weight, around 85 pounds, and can't walk or stand without assistance from prison guards. 

Ms. Kissel's mother, Jean McGlothlin, who said she was "stunned" by the verdict Friday, said the family's first priority was to make sure her daughter received medical and psychological help "because she won't survive if she doesn't."

She added that despite her huge disappointment at the verdict, she was relieved for her daughter that "the intense pressure of the trial is behind her and she can get some rest."

The Kissel family said in a statement released by its lawyers: "We believe that justice has been done today with an unanimous verdict of murder, for the second time." The statement added, "The past few years have been a painful process of recovery, especially for the children, and now that the trial is concluded we shall continue to help rebuild their lives." The children reside in the U.S. with Mr. Kissel's sister, Jane Clayton. 

Ms. Kissel's five-day testimony was frequently interrupted by episodes in which she broke down into tears and at times appeared to hallucinate seeing her dead husband. 

The outbursts drew a mixed reaction from the jury, some of whom looked concerned and others appeared unfazed. 

Central to the prosecution's argument was that Ms. Kissel couldn't show conclusive evidence of the alleged abuse because she never told anyone about it until after she was facing the charge of murder. While she sought treatment for injuries she now claims were inflicted by Mr. Kissel, she didn't tell her doctors—nor her friends or family—they were the result of forced sex. 

Police discovered Mr. Kissel's body on Nov. 6, 2003, four days after he was killed, while investigating a missing person's report filed a colleague at Merrill Lynch, where Mr. Kissel was the head of the distressed debt team. Ms. Kissel was arrested and charged with his murder soon after the body was found.

Immediately after the killing, evidence showed, Mr. Kissel's body remained in the master bedroom for three days while Ms. Kissel arranged for its disposal, buying new household items to replace blood-soaked ones and sending her two domestic helpers out on errands. She stuffed his body into a sleeping bag that had belonged to their oldest daughter, wrapped that in plastic, and then rolled it up in the living-room carpet. Once she'd secured the bundle with rope and tape, she hired movers to remove it and place it in a rented storage unit. 

The cleanup, according to the defense, was "frenzied," unplanned and inconsistent with the prosecution's claim that she was a calculating, conniving murderer. Rather, Mr. Fitzgerald argued, it was a frantic reaction by an emotionally unstable woman with no prior history of violence.

An autopsy showed trace amounts of hypnotic drugs, including sleeping pills and so-called date-rape drugs, in Mr. Kissel's stomach and liver, but it was impossible for investigators to establish the dosage, or gauge their effect on Mr. Kissel.