Some business schools are working harder to incorporate employers' wishes into their curriculum, as the job market for M.B.A. graduates remains tough.

Business schools for years have sought to prepare students for real-world challenges. Now, amid an ultracompetitive job market, some are responding more aggressively to feedback from recruiters about graduates' shortcomings and adjusting their courses accordingly.

  Nicole Hall, president of the M.B.A. Career Services Council, an industry group for b-schools' career-services associates, says schools have been more proactive in maintaining and improving relationships with recruiters by inviting top companies to high-profile campus events and having executives mingle with business schools' top administrators. "The downturn gave a lot of [curriculum] changes a sense of urgency," she says.

According to the most recent employer survey conducted by the Graduate Management Admission Council, 64% of employers expect to hire new M.B.A. graduates in 2011. At the end of 2007, 70% of employers said they expected to hire new b-school grads.

"We've had to be more sensitive to companies' needs," says  Rich Lyons, dean of University of California-Berkeley's Haas School of Business.

Mr. Lyons made it a priority to solicit feedback from recruiters and company executives when he stepped into his job in 2008. He sought out companies that Haas hadn't worked with before and tried to maximize contact with powerful alumni and major recruiters. "Because of the horrific job downturn and competition for positions, we've had to work even harder to get our graduates in front of employers," he says.

After hearing recruiting executives complain that some M.B.A. graduates weren't innovative or creative enough in strategizing, Haas added a new course, required for all first-year students. Called "Problem Finding, Problem Solving," the class has no textbook or traditional problem sets and focuses on out-of-the-box thinking.

  Ralph Bahna, chairman at travel and hospitality companies  Priceline.com Inc.
PCLN


0.00
%




 and Club Quarters, was one of the executives Mr. Lyons solicited for feedback. "I think M.B.A.'s tendency has been to see quick financial gain by pleasing the boss and harvesting cash," says Mr. Bahna, who earned his M.B.A. at Haas. "But they don't spend enough time just thinking."

The University of San Francisco's School of Business and Professional Studies has also been more aggressively soliciting feedback from local companies—even ones that don't traditionally hire M.B.A. graduates. Area biotechnology employers said they wanted graduates to have a better understanding of the marketing and development of drugs, rather than just general business knowledge, says  Mike Duffy, dean of the school.

"When the school came to us for feedback, we told them that every little bit of expertise helps," says  Paul Hastings, president and chief executive officer of OncoMed Pharmaceuticals, Inc., a cancer-treatment research firm in Redwood City, Calif., that says it currently isn't looking to hire any M.B.A. graduates."The more experience, the more practical coursework, and the more they know about what it's actually like to work in a biotechnology firm, the more competitive they will be."

So the school created a four-course sequence that focuses on developing, financing and marketing new drugs, starting last spring. Students are also traveling to London this month to meet with international biotech firms and talk with executives.

"After the recession, a lot of traditional M.B.A. jobs evaporated, but biotechnology is growing, both at large and small firms," says Mr. Duffy.Northeastern University's College of Business Administration made several changes to its program this fall in response to employers' feedback and the competitive job market. The school hosted 50 executive luncheons last year to boost relationships with, and get feedback from, recruiters.

After employers said they found some students' writing too wordy, the school started having a writing instructor grade students' papers in some courses, in addition to the regular professor's grade.

The school asked students to write a cover letter as part of a writing exam during orientation. Students who don't score highly enough get additional writing instruction.

Before the improved focus on writing and communication, Northeastern M.B.A. students were too long-winded and timid during presentations and even when writing emails, says  Ralph Miller, director of corporate information management at Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Inc., a nonprofit insurance company. After the school ramped up its writing training, Mr. Miller, who was who was among the executives the school tapped for feedback, noticed improvement. The firm hired three Northeastern M.B.A. students in 2010. Typically it just takes one; it also increased the number of interns it brings in from the school.

"The school has been very proactive about getting companies involved in improving the curriculum," he says. "Especially with the job market being what it is."