BANGALORE— Infosys Technologies Ltd. posted a quarterly profit that fell short of expectations and cautioned that a slow economic recovery and currency fluctuations could derail growth in India's outsourcing sector this year. 

The Nasdaq-listed technology bellwether raised its forecast for the fiscal year on hopes of sustained demand for outsourcing services, but that forecast also came in below analysts' expectations, weighing on the company's shares. Infosys shares closed down 4.8% at 3212.3 rupees ($71) on the Bombay Stock Exchange.

Infosys is the country's second-largest software exporter by revenue after Tata Consultancy Services Ltd. 

As the first major Indian company to report its earnings, Infosys's results are seen as an indicator of the technology sector's health. Sector leader Tata Consultancy is slated to report its earnings on Jan. 17, while third-ranked  Wipro Ltd. reports on Jan. 21. 

"Today we are living in a volatile environment. All of the developed economies are still challenged," which could create greater currency volatility in the near future, Infosys Chief Financial Officer  V. Balakrishnan said Thursday. 

The comments come as a surprise as many analysts expected Infosys to be bullish about the future of the outsourcing sector, given that the Bangalore-based software exporter has been one of many Indian outsourcing companies benefiting from a global uptick in spending on technology services by banks and insurance companies. 

With a skilled, English-speaking work force, India remains one of the preferred technology outsourcing destinations for clients in developed markets still recovering from the economic slowdown. Research firm Gartner Inc. recently raised its expectations of global spending on information technology to $3.6 trillion in 2011, up 5.1% from 2010 from 3.5% growth it forecast earlier. Gartner cited favorable U.S. dollar exchange rates for raising its view but also flagged continued macroeconomic uncertainty and a slow global economic recovery. 

"Not only in Europe but also in the U.S., the sovereign debt issue could be a big issue in the near term," Mr. Balakrishnan said. 

For the quarter ended Dec. 31, Infosys posted consolidated net profit of 17.8 billion rupees, or 31.15 rupees a share, compared with 15.59 billion rupees, or 27.33 rupees a share, a year earlier.

Revenue rose 24% to 71.06 billion rupees from 57.41 billion rupees. The figures are based on international accounting standards. 

  IRT: Will Infosys Win Back Investors' Hearts 

  Heard: The Cost of Doubting Infosys 

Analysts were expecting a net profit of 18.21 billion rupees on revenue of 71.76 billion rupees, according to a Dow Jones Newswires poll of 26 analysts. 

"Typically, third and fourth quarters are relatively soft quarters. The December quarter has more holidays and is the last quarter of the budgeting year for clients," Mr. Balakrishnan said. 

A 3.5% average rise in the rupee against the dollar restricted operating margins at 30.2%, unchanged from the previous quarter, he said. Infosys receives nearly 65% of its revenue from North America and about 22% from Europe. The company, like most of its local peers, converts its non-dollar foreign currency revenue into the dollar and then into the Indian rupee. 

Mr. Balakrishnan expects margins in the current January-March quarter to also be flat from the fiscal third quarter due to the rupee effect. 

Infosys said it expects dollar revenue in the current fiscal year to rise 25.7% to 26.1% from the previous year, higher than its previous estimate given in October. Morgan Stanley expected Infosys to revise its outlook for growth of 27%-28% from a year earlier. 

The company's forecast of a 1% to 2% sequential growth in dollar terms for the current quarter was also below brokerage CLSA's guidance of 2% to 4% growth. 

Analysts, however, are upbeat about the fact that Infosys maintained its hiring outlook of 40,000 staff for the fiscal year ending March 31, noting that the company did expect business volume growth to continue. Average billing rates in the fiscal third quarter rose 1.6% sequentially. The company added 40 new customers in the October-December time frame. 

"Clients' IT budgets will be flat to higher, but won't go down," Mr. Balakrishnan said. "Clients will spend, but on short term projects." 

Infosys and its units ended the quarter with 127,779 employees. It expects to hire about 5,000 employees in the current quarter. 

 Write to  Dhanya Ann Thoppil at dhanya.thoppil@dowjones.com and Romit Guha at romit.guha@dowjones.com 