HONG KONG—Blue-chip developer  China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd.
0683


0.88
%




 said Thursday its 2010 net profit rose 66% due to record property sales, revaluation gains and disposals of assets. 

China Overseas Land, the largest Hong Kong-listed mainland developer by market capitalization, said its net profit for the year ended Dec. 31 rose to HK$12.37 billion (US$1.59 billion) from HK$7.47 billion a year earlier. Revenue rose 19% to HK$44.31 billion from HK$37.32 billion. 

It didn't report underlying profit, which is what analysts generally use to gauge the performance of Hong Kong property companies, because their earnings tend to be distorted by regular revaluations of investment properties. 

Chairman  Kong Qingping said the company expected that China's property market would be increasingly volatile following the government's various measures to rein in real-estate prices, including higher down-payment requirements and home purchase limits. 

But he said the company remained optimistic about the long-term growth of the market and had set ambitious targets for land acquisitions, property sales, and strategic partnerships this year. 

"The fact is there will always be a strong demand in the market. Whether government policies are tight or lax really doesn't make any difference," he said at a news conference, adding that rapid urbanization in the country will help boost demand. 

Despite government tightening measures, investment in real-estate development and sales of commercial and residential properties rose 35.2% to 425 billion yuan ($) in the January-February period from a year earlier, according to China's National Bureau of Statistics. 

Mr. Kong said the company planned to raise funds in Hong Kong in the first-half of this year by taking advantage of the city's role as a yuan settlement center. But he declined to disclose the scale of the fund-raising and ruled out any plan for a yuan-denominated IPO in Hong Kong. 

China Overseas Land's sales in mainland China rose 42% last year to a record HK$66.78 billion. The group recorded a net gain of HK$1.10 billion from the revaluation of its investment properties. 

The developer said it will expand its development scale through joint ventures and mergers and acquisitions, and expand into new cities in China this year. It said it is targeting total sales measured by gross floor area of at least 6.3 million square meters this year, up from 5.3 million square meters last year. 

China Overseas Land said it would also work toward increasing the profit contribution from its investment properties from about 12% last year to at least 20% of total profit to achieve stable long-term returns. 

The group, which has a total land reserve of 35.95 million square meters in 23 mainland cities, Hong Kong and Macau, said it aimed to acquire at least 7.2 million square meter of land in terms of gross floor area. Mr. Kong said the company would be interested in taking part in the Hong Kong government's land sales scheduled for this year. 

Separately,  Henderson Land Development Co.
HLDCY


1.18
%




 said its net profit last year rose 11% to HK$15.82 billion from HK$14.28 billion a year earlier, mainly due to disposal of assets. 

The developer, headed by tycoon  Lee Shau-kee, said its underlying profit for the period totaled HK$5.04 billion, up 9% from HK$4.63 billion a year earlier. 

Henderson said it was bullish about the development of its residential projects in China, which are concentrated in the second- and third-tier cities, on the back of strong demand from first-time home buyers. 

"It is believed that such huge purchasing power that has accumulated would be released to the market once flexibility is allowed in the execution of the [housing and credit] policies," Mr. Lee said in a statement. 

Mid-size Hong Kong property developer  Kerry Properties Ltd.
0683


0.88
%




 said its net profit last year rose 44% to HK$6.31 billion from HK$4.38 billion a year earlier because of gains from revaluation of properties. 

Excluding property revaluation gains, Kerry Properties' underlying net profit rose 59% to HK$3.41 billion from HK$2.14 billion. 