Every time I visit Paris, I see impossibly chic young women on the streets and I wonder: Where do these mademoiselles get their clothes? 

One of these women is Gaia Repossi, the petite 25-year-old artistic director of her family's eponymous 86-year-old jewelry brand. A front- row regular whose jewelry designs have been featured in the pages of French and American Vogue and are regularly worn by designer Karl Lagerfeld, Ms. Repossi takes her vintage clothing collection seriously. "It is part of my identity," said Ms. Repossi, whose mother got married in a white Yves Saint Laurent coat from 1974. She's taken in her father's Italian bespoke three-piece suits from the late 1960s—"he was very skinny when he was my age," she said—and they are now a regular part of her wardrobe. 

When creating a jewelry collection, Ms. Repossi said she often looks at vintage clothing and accessories to channel a "vibe, a spirit, a shape." Which means she's always on the hunt for Yves Saint Laurent and Chanel pieces, but she also likes things from as far back as the 1930s, like a brown lace dress with a simple ruffle around the hem. To create her personal style, which she described as "strict," she often mixes vintage and more current designer pieces, many of them menswear-inspired, a practice that has made her a favorite on fashion-centric websites like GaranceDore.fr and WhoWhatWear.com.



"I don't like anything too glamorous—it's just not me," said Ms. Repossi, who gamely agreed to take me on a shopping expedition to some of her favorite vintage shops during the Paris collections last week.

Ms. Repossi arrived at our meeting looking like a modern Annie Hall, in baggy men's jeans, Hermès oxfords from the 1970s and a well-cut plaid blazer by one of her favorite brands, Céline. She was clutching a shopping bag containing two dresses from the 1930s. Pulling a black lace dress out of the bag, she laughed, explaining that the delicate fabric had simply ripped apart when she sat down at a dinner party, and she needed to get it fixed. Lucky for her, it had a built-in slip.

 28, rue du Mont Thabor 33-1-42-96-88-70  Ms. Repossi started shopping at Neila a couple of years ago after she discovered it on her way to her office on the Place Vendôme. Owner Neila Jaziri is known for housing a well-edited collection, including cast-offs from Parisian clotheshorses like Catherine Deneuve. The museum-like store had a glass case containing a blue quilted handbag formerly owned by Ms. Deneuve, from one of Coco Chanel's last collections.

At €2,100 ($2,941) and in perfect condition, "it's not so expensive for what it is," said Ms. Repossi as she tried on the purse. "Some vintage shops just raise the price because they know you can't find it anywhere else. They don't do that here."

Because Ms. Repossi is such a good client, Ms. Jaziri often holds things especially for her. When we arrived, Ms. Jaziri disappeared for 10 minutes to retrieve a black Chanel haute couture skirt from 1985 (€2,500) and a mustard colored silk tied Chanel blouse (€1,600) from the 1970s that she had ferreted away especially for Ms. Repossi.

Walking around in the look, Ms. Repossi said it reminded her of a wedding ensemble that Mr. Lagerfeld sent down the Chanel runway about 10 years ago. "It was a skirt with a shirt, and I thought, 'Hmm, that could be my wedding dress.'" She bought both pieces.

 20, Galerie de Montpensier (prêt-à-porter) 24, Galerie de Montpensier (couture) 33-1-42-96-06-56  Ms. Repossi first became aware of Didier Ludot a few years ago, when her friend found a vintage Christian Dior couture wedding dress at the shop. 

Known for his vast assortment of French designer wares, particularly from the 1960s and '70s, Didier Ludot opened his first vintage ready-to-wear shop in 1975 in the Galerie Montpensier, which now also contains Marc Jacobs and Stella McCartney boutiques. He added a location especially for couture in the same area a decade later, and more recently, opened a third on the square called La Petite Robe Noire, which specializes in little black dresses.

At the haute couture store, Ms. Repossi saw a black Chloé dress from 1969 and tried it on. She admired the silver beading around the neck and sleeves, and deemed the price, 800 Euro, to be excellent for a dress in such pristine condition. Her eye also gravitated toward a trumpet-shaped camel coat (€1,000) by Philippe Venet, a 1960s couturier who made clothing for Jacqueline Kennedy.

But the pièce de résistance was a black YSL dress from the late 1960s, when Mr. Saint Laurent launched his Rive Gauche collection. When she asked about the price, Mr. Ludot, sporting a pair of pink metallic oxfords, said he refused to sell the dress at any price, even to Mr. Saint Laurent's longtime partner Pierre Bergé. Ms. Repossi asked him if she could borrow the dress for a dinner the following night. He said, "Oui."

Ms. Repossi also looked at some accessories, such as a Hermès Kelly bag in red alligator, but dismissed it as "too perfect" for her taste. She preferred a similar style in beige canvas with navy leather detailing. She left the store with the borrowed YSL dress, and bought the Venet coat and the Chloé frock.

 23, rue de l'Échaudé 33-1-45-77-80-28  At Ragtime, a slightly disheveled looking shop in the Saint Germain neighborhood, Ms. Repossi said she likes the thrill of hunting down gems amid the mess. She once found a lynx jacket there from the 1970s that the elderly, chain-smoking shop owner, Françoise Auguet, told her belonged to the actress Jeanne Moreau. "It is super '70s," Ms. Repossi said of the jacket. "I imagine she wore it to go skiing."

The small shop is jam-packed with clothing, ranging from lace prairie dresses from the 1910s to 1980s couture, worn by mannequins with spooky cat-head masks. After pointing to a brown 1920s kimono hanging from the ceiling, Ms. Auguet grabbed a metal rod to take it down. Ms. Repossi retreated to the back of the shop to try it on, and emerged wearing the jacket over her jeans, which formed a cocoon shape around her body.

"Where would you wear that?" I asked.

"Oh, over a dress, of course!" she said.

Inspired by Ms. Repossi's daring, I searched through the racks for something similarly je ne sais quoi. I found a cream-colored macramé frock from the 1960s. It had no label, cost €160 and reeked of smoke. Perfect!

"I always dry clean everything I buy here before wearing it," said Ms. Repossi, an ardent vegetarian, practitioner of ashtanga yoga and nonsmoker. When I got home, that's exactly what I did.

 Write to  Rachel Dodes at rachel.dodes@wsj.com 