  Sony Corp.'s scramble to minimize fallout from its online security breach, casts a spotlight on  Kazuo Hirai, the head of the company's videogames division and front-runner to become Sony's next chief executive.

Mr. Hirai, 51 years old, is facing the biggest crisis of his career. The games division he helped turn around after four years of losses is grappling with the theft of information from more than 100 million accounts on its online networks. His handling of the situation will likely affect his position as heir apparent to CEO  Howard Stringer.

Bilingual and equally at ease in Japan and the U.S., Mr. Hirai has been the point man in dealing with this crisis, people at the company say. He participates in nearly every meeting about the breach: speaking in English with the technical teams in California, using Japanese with Chief Information Officer  Shinji Hasejima in Tokyo, and working with global teams on legal matters and general business plans. 

A few people at Sony say they are "surprised" by how hands-on Mr. Hirai has been, given his lack of experience in crisis management and his propensity to delegate responsibilities to his executives.

"What happened is not good for Sony, but it's a fantastic opportunity for him to prove his leadership," says  Atul Goyal, an analyst at brokerage firm CLSA. "If he fumbles it, it will weaken his case to be CEO. If he does well, he proves himself a capable successor."

Messrs. Hirai and Stringer weren't available to comment for this article.

Sony has been under attack by politicians and Internet-privacy advocates who say the company should have informed its users sooner about the breach and done more to protect the personal information of its customers. 

Sony says a hacker gained access to the personal information of 77 million user accounts on the PlayStation Network, which allows console users to play together over the Internet and to download games, movies and television shows. Data for 24.6 million customer accounts on Sony Online Entertainment, the company's multiplayer platform for personal-computer games, also were breached.

U.S. lawmakers on Wednesday released a letter in which Sony said it found a taunting message left for the company during the attack, but that Sony still doesn't know who was responsible. 

When Sony apologized before Japanese media on Sunday, in the company's first briefing about the situation, Mr. Hirai was the highest-ranking executive to bow. 

He has been the public face of Sony during the crisis, overshadowing Mr. Stringer, who hasn't made a public appearance since the data breach came to light. Working from Sony's New York office, Mr. Stringer has played a behind-the-scenes role. Sony says he speaks with Mr. Hirai every few hours and stays in touch with Sony's general counsel, finance chief and head of corporate communications a few times a day.

But Mr. Stringer generally has put the breach in the hands of Mr. Hirai, who has taken an unlikely path to top leadership at Sony. He has almost no experience working with the company's flagship consumer-electronics businesses, unlike most top-level managers at the company.

He does have the most experience dealing with online services, however. The PlayStation Network started in 2006 and its success has been used as a blueprint—technically and strategically—for how Sony plans to integrate services with its traditional consumer-electronics products.

When Sony promoted Mr. Hirai in March to executive deputy president, Mr. Stringer, 69, said the logic was "inescapable" that Mr. Hirai was the leading candidate to be the company's next CEO.

Mr. Hirai, who grew up in Japan, the U.S. and Canada, started his career in 1984 at Sony's music joint venture with  CBS Corp.
CBS.A


0.12
%




 He joined Sony Computer Entertainment in 1995—where he was a loyal deputy of  Ken Kutaragi, the executive credited with creating the PlayStation—and helped to build the game business in the U.S. When Mr. Kutaragi stepped down in 2007, Mr. Hirai succeeded him as CEO of the videogame unit. Mr. Hirai's background is in marketing, whereas Mr. Kutaragi trained as an engineer.

Mr. Hirai is known as a good listener, rarely loses his temper and is generous with credit. The people who work with him say he has almost no ego and is quick to delegate responsibilities to people with greater expertise.

Mr. Hirai's appointment at Sony Computer Entertainment four years ago came at a rough time for the games division. Its PlayStation 3 console had been released a year later than  Microsoft Corp.'s
MSFT


0.28
%




 Xbox 360 and was more than twice the price of  Nintendo Co.
NTDOY


1.94
%




's Wii game system. The division also was beginning four straight years of generating red ink.

Under Mr. Hirai, Sony brought down prices of the PS3 to drive demand and cut manufacturing costs to avoid losing money on each console. The PS3's fortunes began to improve.

The videogame business, which made up 11% of the company's revenue for the first three quarters of the fiscal year that ran through March, has been profitable for five straight quarters. Sony forecasts the division will post a profit for fiscal 2011 when the company reports earnings May 26. 

—Juro Osawa contributed to this article.

 Write to  Daisuke Wakabayashi at Daisuke.Wakabayashi@wsj.com 