By Yuri Modin (1994)

While studying at Cambridge University in the 1930s, Guy Burgess, Donald Maclean, Kim Philby, John Cairncross and Anthony Blunt were recruited as spies by the Soviet Union. Over the course of the next 50 years, they were gradually exposed, but not before they had reached positions of eminence in the diplomatic and intelligence services and handed vast amounts of classified information to Moscow. Yuri Modin was their KGB "controller" in London until 1955. His memoir, "My Five Cambridge Friends," offers fascinating details about KGB countersurveillance techniques as well as compelling insights into the personalities of the Cambridge Five. We learn that Blunt hated to be looked directly in the eyes. Burgess "could be an unmitigated bastard if he thought he was being treated without the respect he felt was due him." Cairncross had "a sizeable chip on his shoulder." Maclean "gathered the political, economic and scientific intelligence that guided the strategy of our leaders for over ten years." On Philby, Modin is curiously ambivalent. "In the end," he writes, "I suspect that [Philby] made a mockery of everyone, particularly ourselves."

By Chapman Pincher (1981)

The sequential exposure of the Cambridge Five from the 1950s to the late 1970s traumatized British intelligence. In 1979, the Thatcher government generated a furor by revealing that Anthony Blunt, a well-connected art historian, had confessed—in exchange for immunity—to working for the Soviets during World War II. During this period of shock and paranoia, Chapman Pincher published "Their Trade Is Treachery," which made the astonishing allegation that Sir Roger Hollis, the head of the domestic intelligence service, MI5, had been a Soviet mole. Much of Pincher's information came from Peter Wright, the disgruntled former intelligence officer who repeated the Hollis allegation in his memoir, "Spycatcher." Pincher's work is no hatchet job. He was a respected journalist and a thorn in the side of successive British governments. His argument is coherent and compelling—but it has never been proved. Unsurprisingly, the authorized history of MI5, "Defend the Realm," published last year, categorically states that Hollis never worked for Moscow.

By Robert Harris (1998)

The collapse of the Soviet Union was a godsend to historians, who flocked to Russia to scour the archives. The collapse was also rich in possibilities for novelists. In Robert Harris's marvelous thriller "Archangel," Christopher "Fluke" Kelso, a hard-drinking British academic, attends a conference in Moscow and discovers that Stalin kept a secret diary, now hidden somewhere in the city. The opening of the novel is a tour de force, a dizzying blend of first- and third- person narration that moves between the present day and the Stalin era. Some critics have suggested that the story's ending is far-fetched. Suffice it to say that Stalin's son, the spitting image of his father, strides onto the scene; Harris clearly understands the curious and unsettling Russian nostalgia for Koba the Dread.

By Daniel Johnson (2007)

In 'hot' wars, nations come to blows—they fight, they bomb, they settle their differences. In "cold" wars, by definition, not much happens. For more than 40 years, the Western powers and the Soviet bloc were engaged in a potentially annihilating nuclear stand-off. Daniel Johnson's thesis in "White King and Red Queen" is simple and engaging: that the tension between the two competing sides was alleviated across, of all things, a chessboard. "Chess offered a demilitarized, purely abstract equivalent of war," he argues. "A battlefield that was genuinely global could be represented by sixty-four squares." In the immediate postwar era, the great Soviet grandmasters—Mikhail Botvinnik, Viktor Korchnoi, Boris Spassky—were dominant. Then came America's Bobby Fischer, and the balance of power, in chess and beyond, changed forever.

By Anna Funder (2003)

'If you want a pictureof the future, imagine a boot stomping on a human face forever." George Orwell's dystopian vision became terrifying reality in Cold War East Germany, a surveillance state, controlled by the dreaded Stasi, in which neighbor spied on neighbor, spouse spied on spouse. In "Stasiland," Anna Funder interviews a transfixing cast of characters from the country's horrifying past. We meet an ex-Stasi officer who laments the collapse of communist East Germany, another who is now a guide at the Berlin Wall. One woman, imprisoned after a failed defection, was given her freedom—and then saw her husband arrested soon afterward as punishment for having applied to live in the West. It will only be a matter of time before similar books emerge from 21st-century police states: What horrors will be told of life in Tunisia, in Egypt, in Libya?

—Mr. Cumming's latest spy novel, "The Trinity Six," has just been published by St. Martin's Press.