Mexican President Felipe Calderón warned Thursday of the dangers of currency manipulation by emerging economies, saying his government had no plans to join the growing trend.

He also pledged he wouldn't back down from a crackdown on drug traffickers that has sharply raised the country's murder rate.

In an interview with The Wall Street Journal at a meeting of the World Economic Forum in Davos, Mr. Calderón said Mexico respected market judgments and wouldn't intervene to try to depress the value of its currency. 

Countries including China, Brazil and Turkey have taken measures to keep their currency values lower or to stop capital inflows.

"We are not intervening, we are not establishing taxes to do this, we are not manipulating the currency," he said.

He said he had concerns about the growing number of countries intervening in this way. 

"Of course we have a concern.…In my opinion, the state interventions in currency markets sooner or later become too dangerous for a country," he said.



The Mexican peso has appreciated against other currencies, but the authorities haven't faced the waves of capital experienced by countries such as Brazil and Turkey.

One reason is that Mexico's interest rates of about 4% are roughly the same level as inflation, and are lower than many other emerging economies.

Mr. Calderón pledged he wouldn't let up on a crackdown on drug traffickers that has led to a sharp jump in homicides, to more than 15,000 last year.

He said he believed the country had passed an "inflection point" in 2010, with drug-related killings beginning to fall from the middle of the year.

This followed a pattern seen when traffickers were confronted in Colombia—but in much less time, he said.

Twenty out of 37 drug kingpins had been imprisoned or killed since the government put out a "Most Wanted" poster two years ago. 

He said this had caused instability and violence within drug gangs.

"The gangs are becoming weaker, they are losing capacity of maneuver, and losing capacity of leadership. That's part of my duty. Of course, I'd like to do the duty without the secondary impact" of a high murder rate, he said.

"For me, there is no choice. The duty is to fight crime particularly organized crime, otherwise they will take control of the important parts of the government or important parts of the country. So we'll act on time to fix the problem. The alternative doesn't exist," he added.

Homicides were in localized areas and most victims were other criminals, he said, adding that some Mexican cities had lower crime rates than U.S. cities such as Washington, Pittsburgh and New Orleans.

Asked about immigration, the touchiest topic in U.S.-Mexican relations, the president said he hoped there would be a renewed effort to find a solution for the millions of Mexican immigrants "who are providing services to the American economy."

Anti-immigrant sentiment stemmed from the economic crisis, he said, but Congress and the American people needed to be convinced that immigration was positive on an economic basis.

"The right solution is to create job opportunities for Mexican people in Mexico. And we are doing exactly that," he said.

However, he suggested the political climate may still not be ideal for new U.S. legislation, describing it as "very radical, very aggressive, I don't want to say very violent."

 Write to  Stephen Fidler at stephen.fidler@wsj.com 