The typically placid municipal-bond market was thrown into tumult in the final months of 2010, pushing yields to their highest levels since early 2009 while investors pulled record amounts from muni-bond mutual funds. And the outlook for 2011 is mixed. 

Read the complete  Year-End Review report .

Two of the main factors roiling the muni market were a surge in supply amid uncertainty about a popular bond-subsidy program and rising Treasury rates—which long-term munis tend to track—triggered by the Federal Reserve's bond-buying program, analysts say. 

The yield on 30-year triple-A-rated municipal bonds peaked at 4.85% on Dec. 15, according to a widely watched scale published by Thomson Reuters Municipal Market Data. Those levels on yields were last seen on March 27, 2009. The yield on 10-year triple-A munis also peaked that day at 3.27%, the highest since June 24, 2009, according to MMD. The 30-year closed 2010 at 4.68%, while the 10-year finished at 3.16%.

Perhaps the biggest overhang on the muni market this past year was the fate of the Build America Bonds program, where state and local governments issued federally subsidized taxable bonds as part of the Obama administration's efforts to reinvigorate a weak economy. 

BABs, as the bonds became known, were a hit with local governments because they lowered borrowing costs. Cities and states borrowed more than $165 billion since the program began in April 2009, according to the most recent information from the Treasury Department. 

The program expired Dec. 31, after Congress didn't include it in its 11th-hour extension of various tax breaks. 

For months, however, it wasn't clear whether the BABs program would expire or be extended, so local governments eager to lock in the subsidy hit the market with billions of dollars of bonds in the final months of 2010. That high supply coupled with rising Treasury rates drove prices down and yields up in the muni market as a whole. 

While the Fed's bond-buying program was intended to push long-term interest rates on Treasurys lower, yields have actually risen in recent weeks as investors turned to riskier investments like stocks. 

Retail, or individual investors, hold an estimated two-thirds of bonds in the $2.8 trillion muni market, through mutual funds or individual accounts. Spooked by the tumult, investors fled from muni-bond mutual funds, which saw seven consecutive weeks of estimated outflows totaling nearly $18 billion for the week ended Dec. 21, according to the Investment Company Institute, a fund industry trade association. That came on the heels of 29 consecutive weeks of inflows. 

November alone saw an estimated $7.8 billion in outflows, the highest since October 2008, which saw $8.4 billion in outflows in the midst of the financial crisis, according to ICI. 

While retail investors were fleeing mutual funds in recent weeks, at least one high-profile institutional investor was pouring in money.  Bill Gross, a co-founder and co-chief investment officer at  Allianz
ALIZF


0.95
%




 SE's Pacific Investment Management Co., or Pimco, purchased shares in five of his firm's muni-bond funds, according to Securities and Exchange Commission filings. 

Mr. Gross said during an interview Tuesday on CNBC that some munis presented good buying opportunities relative to Treasurys and in some cases, corporate debt. "Despite the risk there's always the reward function, and you can get 6.65% in New York City Build America bonds, and 7%-plus in California," he said. "That's decent return relative to the admittedly higher risk these days."

Many muni analysts expect January and February to be calm, amid seasonally low borrowing by local governments. There is concern, though, that the expiration of the BABs program will push billions of dollars of issuance back into the traditional tax-exempt market in 2011, potentially driving up yields later in the year. The higher rates could put additional strain on state and local governments, some analysts say, while providing potentially attractive deals for investors. 

Most analysts point to technical factors such as supply and demand as the impetus behind the muni-market tumult, but there also were murmurs of concern about the ability of some borrowers in the muni market—which include everything from nursing homes to cities—to pay off their debt amid a weak, albeit recovering, economy. 

In 2010, there were five municipal bankruptcy filings, down from 10 filings in 2009, according to a recent report from Bank of America Merrill Lynch. And through Dec. 1, there was $4.25 billion of municipal debt in default, which represents 0.15% of the total market, the report says. 

On a recent episode of "60 Minutes,"  Meredith Whitney, a prominent banking analyst who recently turned to analyzing state and local finances, said the U.S. could see "50 to 100 sizable defaults," in 2011 amounting "to hundreds of billions of dollars worth of defaults." 

Many industry analysts dismissed Ms. Whitney's remarks, saying that while defaults could increase amid the fiscal stress facing local governments, there are likely only to be a handful of one-off events, not widespread reneging on debt. 