 The pace of U.S. and allied airstrikes in Libya should slow in the next few days, U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates said, as the coalition experienced its first setback after a U.S. jet crashed in northeast Libya and two pilots safely ejected.  

Fighting on the ground between pro-regime forces and antigovernment rebels continued in Libya and coalition members seek clarity on who will oversee the next phase of military operations.

The North Atlantic Treaty Organization said it agreed to launch an operation to enforce an arms embargo against Libya and that it had finalized plans to help enforce the no-fly zone, but there were no signs of when the plan would be put into operation.

 Yemeni President Ali Abdullah Saleh refused to give in to an array of opponents demanding that he immediately step down to make way for a military-backed democratic transition, and tried to salvage his 32-year rule through negotiations. 

White House concerns that Iran's hand is being strengthened by recent events in the Middle East is central to its response to the turmoil, say U.S., European, and Arab officials.

President Barack Obama's decision last week to use military force against Libyan leader Col. Moammar Gadhafi's forces was made in part by his administration's fear that Western inaction could further embolden Tehran, these officials say.

An Israeli court ordered former Israeli President Moshe Katsav to prison for seven years following his rape conviction, rejecting his attorneys' request for leniency and making him the highest-ranking Israel official ever sent to jail.

 Tokyo Electric Power said external power had been reconnected to all six reactors at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear-power complex, as Japanese authorities made modest gains in containing the crisis at the stricken plant. that has become a focus of international concern.  

But an early-evening spike in radiation levels, as well as continued and unexplained emissions of smoke and steam from two of the plant's most troubled reactors, underscored the uncertainty of the situation. 

Tepco said cooling systems at the No. 5 and No. 6 reactors were working, offering a boost to recovery efforts. Those reactors were the least damaged by the earthquake and tsunami and haven't been the focus of attention, though they raised concern when spent fuel rods stored at their sites began to heat up last week.

The Japan Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency said it detected higher-than-permitted levels of radioactive materials in seawater near the complex, stirring fears of contaminated marine life. 

The number of people dead and missing from the quake as of Tuesday evening was 22,641, of which 9,080 were confirmed dead.

 The government found more radioactive materials in food and drinking water, raising the possibility that contamination from the nuclear plant has spread to increasingly distant locations. Tokyo also faced the task of judging how much radioactivity can be considered safe in the long term. 



 Life in Japan is showing tentative signs of returning to normal, but a fresh challenge may be facing the expatriates and Japanese who left and are now trickling back to their offices: how to cope with ostracism and anger from their colleagues who have worked through the crisis. 



 Japanese authorities warned of more intervention to weaken the yen, while the level of cash in the country's banking system rose to record levels, amid efforts to ease financial strains that could hamper the country's recovery. 



 The future of Portuguese Prime Minister José Socrates hangs in the balance, as the outcome of an austerity vote on Wednesday could lead to his resignation and push the country closer toward taking a financial bailout from the European Union and International Monetary Fund. 



 Higher gas bills and record fuel prices helped push the annual rate of inflation in the U.K. to its highest level in more than two years in February, adding to pressure on the Bank of England to raise interest rates despite a still-fragile economy.  

Separately, an industry survey indicated that U.K. industrial output is expected to pick up further in the three months from March—the brightest outlook in more than four years—and the statistics office's lending data showed the public sector borrowed more last month than it has done in any February on record. 



 German Chancellor Angela Merkel said the government will assign two separate expert panels to check technical and ethical safety questions related to the use of nuclear energy within three months.  



The Italian government will approve Wednesday a one-year moratorium for the country's nuclear comeback, as the global backlash against atomic energy means it faces overwhelming opposition at home. 



Latvia is aiming to return to international capital markets as early as May as the Baltic state continues to rebuild its economy after the worst downturn of any country during the financial crisis, finance minister Andris Vilks said. 

 Belarus's central bank halted the sale of foreign currency to the country's banks, the latest sign of increasing financial pressure on authoritarian leader Alexander Lukashenko. 



 Ukrainian prosecutors have opened a criminal case against former President Leonid Kuchma in connection with the murder of an investigative journalist in 2000, surprising critics who have questioned the will of the president, Viktor Yanukovych, to pursue a thorough investigation of the high-profile case. 



 The Federal Reserve's net income surged 53% to $81.74 billion last year, enabling it to contribute a record amount to the U.S. Treasury's coffers, mainly because of higher earnings on securities the central bank bought to counter the financial crisis. 



Home prices fell for a third straight month in January, a government agency said, adding to evidence that the housing market is weakening even though the economy is improving. 



A top federal regulator expressed concern about some companies' disregard for last year's Gulf of Mexico oil spill but said more deep-water drilling permits would be issued in the next week.



Philippine lawmakers impeached the country's chief anti-graft investigator, Merceditas Gutierrez, in what new President Benigno Aquino's backers say is a victory in efforts to remove an obstacle to prosecuting his predecessor and other top officials for alleged massive corruption.



 Thailand's House of Representatives will likely be dissolved between May 7 and May 10 to pave the way for the general election, Deputy Prime Minister Suthep Thaugsuban said, with a vote probably taking place July 1 and 2. 



India's federal government announced the withdrawal of a proposed tax on health-care services after strong protests from opposition political parties and the general public. 



 Afghan President Hamid Karzai officially unveiled plans for his security forces to begin taking control over modest sections of the country in July as he seeks to exert more power over a nation struggling to establish its independence after a decade of war.  

In the Republic of Congo, at least 19 people were killed when a cargo plane crashed into a densely populated neighborhood of Pointe-Noire—the country's economic capital, while officials said many more people were wounded. 



 The International Monetary Fund lowered its growth forecast for New Zealand, in a further blow to an economy being squeezed by the cost of two earthquakes that wrecked its second-largest city and continuing weakness in the housing and retail industries. 