LONDON—New HIV infections acquired within the U.K. have nearly doubled over the past decade, prompting health officials here to recommend an ambitious widening of testing in order to catch and treat cases early. 

There were 3,780 new diagnoses of infections acquired within the U.K. in 2010, compared with 1,950 in 2001, the U.K.'s Health Protection Agency said Wednesday. 

The sharp increase means infections acquired within the U.K. made up 56% of the 6,750 new infections diagnosed in the U.K. last year, with the rest acquired abroad, the HPA said. The total 6,750 figure was up 32% over 2001, and slightly higher than in 2009, following a four-year decline from the peak in 2005.

Looser adherence to safe-sex practices and a rise in the average person's number of sexual partners appears to be contributing to the problem, said Valerie Delpech, head of HIV surveillance at the HPA, in a telephone interview. 

In past years, "people may have been frightened of HIV. Nowadays they don't see the risk, potentially," Dr. Delpech said. "And we know also there are very effective treatments for a lot of [sexually transmitted infections], so they don't see it as a particular big problem—you just go and get treated," she added, calling this a dangerous perception. 

The HPA is recommending that HIV tests should be "routinely offered and recommended" to all people admitted to the hospital, and to all new primary-care patients, in areas of high-infection prevalence. Almost half of all people in the U.K. diagnosed with HIV are diagnosed late, which significantly boosts their risk of illness and death, the National Institute of Health and Clinical Excellence said Wednesday. 

 Many of the people who acquire their infections abroad come from sub-Saharan Africa, although infections acquired in that region have been falling in recent years, the HPA said.

Overall in the U.K., "black Africans and men who have sex with men are most at risk of becoming infected with HIV," the HPA said, adding that HIV testing should be increased in these communities. 

Total new infections in men who have sex with men grew 70% over the past decade, to 3,080 last year from 1,810 in 2001, the HPA said. Total new infections among black Africans have fallen 28%, to 1,743 last year from 2,433 in 2001.

 Write to  Jeanne Whalen at jeanne.whalen@wsj.com 