WASHINGTON—Radiation levels in certain areas within 25 miles from Japan's Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant would have exceeded levels at which U.S. officials would order evacuations to protect public health, the Energy Department said late Tuesday, extrapolating from data.

Meanwhile, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration said Tuesday that it would block imports of milk and fresh produce from areas near the Fukushima plant, but those imports are negligible. The FDA said it would continue to monitor food imported from Japan to check if it came from the zone affected by radiation.

The Energy Department said U.S. aircraft and ground measurements detected radiation levels around some areas of the plant, mostly in a northwest direction within 25 miles of the plant, that exceeded 12.5 millirems per hour over the course of three days last week. The levels also exceed the average amount of radiation that Americans absorb by more than 170 times.

In the U.S., if those radiation levels were sustained for four days—meaning people were exposed to a total of more than 1,200 millirems—it would trigger an evacuation, or an order for residents to take shelter under Environmental Protection Agency guidelines, the Energy Department said. 

The EPA calls for action to protect public health if radiation exposure exceeds 1,000 millirems over the course of four days.

The Japanese government has ordered evacuation for people living within 12 miles of the plant. But U.S. officials jolted their counterparts in Japan last Wednesday when they said U.S. citizens and military personnel should stay 50 miles away from the plant, going beyond the Japanese order. 

See the Department of Energy's report on radiation levels

A map included in the Energy Department release indicates that airborne monitors detected radiation levels below 1.19 millirems per hour in routes over Tokyo, more than 100 miles south of the plant.

The average American absorbs 0.071 millirems per hour, according to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. A chest X-ray, meanwhile, produces 10 millirems per image, the Energy Department said. The data were gathered by U.S. officials who monitored radiation levels around the crippled  Tokyo Electric Power Co.
9501


0.14
%




 nuclear complex on March 17, March 18 and March 19. They gathered data from more than 40 hours of flights aboard Defense Department aircraft and thousands of ground monitoring points. 

The data released Tuesday show that the U.S. radiation detectors found elevated readings within a band extending northwest of the Fukushima plant. Most of the highest readings occurred within a 25-mile zone.

 Write to  Tennille Tracy at tennille.tracy@dowjones.com 