Mumbai -- Private equity investments in Indian retailers will continue to rise but with a caveat, funds only want to put money in specialty retailers. 

The initial phase of investments in retailers, during 2005-2007, brought home some painful lessons to investors leading to a preference of specialists over generalists. This bifurcation within the retail sector means funds are available to small to medium retail chains, while larger general retail chains find the going tough.

The opening of the sector to foreign direct investments, expected to be part of the budget announced last month, was expected to even out the inequality, but it's unclear when the current administration would have the political muscle to make such a move. 

Specialty retail, broadly defined, includes chains that focus on food and beverage, wellness, fashion and footwear and home furnishings. These stores took off in India over the past few years as many small and regional players organize to tap a national audience. 

They are part of the boom in the sector, with India's retail volumes expected to surge to $475 billion by 2012, growing at a compounded annual growth rate of 9% to 10%, according to Ernst and Young Pvt. Ltd report. This growth story attracted $372 million worth of investments in retail from private equity funds in 2010, a six-fold increase from the previous year, and the highest level in four years, according to VCCEdge, a financial research platform. The previous high was in 2007, when funds put $136 million into the sector.

Opportunities in retail abound. Vibhor Mehra, principal at SAIF Partners Ltd, SAIF, is bullish on the retail sector and is targeting at least three to four investments. The pool of high-growth companies is much larger than what it was nearly four years ago, he said. His company, with $4 billion assets under management, last year invested 1 billion rupees in kids retailer Catmoss Retail Pvt Ltd.

Just like Mr. Mehra, many investors have invested in speciality retailers at the cost of general retailers, who are stuck without any viable financing options. 

Banks, typically, shy away from funding retailers, said  Vivek Subramanian, partner at Avigo Capital Partners. 

Private equity funds are not an option either. These large retail chains need hefty infusions of cash, larger than what India-focused funds can handle. Further, the cautionary tales of Subhiksha Trading Services Ltd and Vishal Trading Ltd, both of whom borrowed heavily to fund aggressive expansion plans, are fresh in investors' minds. (Subhiksha failed to repay its debt, and had to shutter its stores. Vishal, which had 7.3 billion rupees in debt, was sold for 700 million rupees to TPG and the Shriram Group in a distress sale.)

The only option left is foreign direct investments in this sector. Currently, 51% FDI is allowed in single-brand retail and 100% in wholesale cash and carry. Industry has been lobbying for a relaxation of the rules to allow FDI in other retail sectors, and was disappointed when it was not part of the national budget. 

"Given the Indian economic growth rate, there is a great opportunity for consumption to grow," said B. Anand, chief finance officer of Future Group, a conglomerate with several large retail companies under its belt including Pantaloons and hypermarket chain Big Bazaar. 

"However, to grow consumption, significant investments are required in retail," Mr. Anand said. "Currently, with no FDI, the retail market lacks depth and sustainable funding options. The lack of funding has its own ramifications of a slower growth rate. Companies will find it difficult to grow."

These problems are not exclusive to generalists but also extend to large specialty retailers, market participants said. 

For instance, Pantaloons Indian Retail Ltd, the apparel chain which is India's largest retailer by market capitalization, which upon realizing high debt ratios were not sustainable had to look for alternate funding options to ease its burden. 

Pantaloon's total debt was at 13.86 billion rupees as of June 2010, representing a debt-equity ratio of 0.84%. In the last financial year, the company has increased its equity from 38.06 crore to 41.23 crore shares by way of sales to qualified institutional buyers, in effect an increase of its market capitalization to 27.13 billion rupees. Such measures helped Pantaloon reduce its debt by 51%, according to Capitaline data, published by Capital Markets Publishers Pvt. Ltd.

Private equity funds are not averse to investing in retailers, they just prefer the footprint to be smaller. Typically, these investments yield returns in four to five years, after which private equity firms can exit.

An investment in little-known Lilliput Kidswear four years ago turned out to be a winning bet for Everstone Capital Partners, yielding threefold returns when it sold its stake to TPG and Bain Capital last year. Everstone received 11 bids for its stake. 

"When we looked at Lilliput, four years ago, we didn't see it as a retail business but as a children's fashion and apparel brand," said  Sameer Sain, managing director and CEO of Everstone. This distinction "allowed [Lilliput] to focus on the consumer and become channel agnostic -- we sold through other departmental stores as well as through company-run stores."

Food and beverage companies also fall into this high-interest category. 

"Food and beverage accounts for nearly 60% of the consumer spend," said  Mayank Rastogi, partner, private equity at Ersnt & Young . "Today, every fund wants a branded food and beverage company in their portfolio

The Delhi-based private equity firm, Avigo Capital with $400 million under management, invested in denim maker Spykar Lifestyles Pvt Ltd, and is looking to strike at least two more deals in the retail sector in the next two to three years. 

"Retail companies will give better returns than the Sensex, which typically gives 10% to 15% return," said Mr. Subramanian of Avigo Capital, who has looked at a couple of proposals in the last month. 