Independent filmmakers are embracing video-on-demand services to make up for shrinking revenue from theatrical releases and DVD sales. 

Last week, Weinstein Co. bought a 25% stake in Starz Media from Liberty Media Corp. for an undisclosed price. Owning a piece of Starz Media, which licenses and distributes films and TV shows for video-on-demand and online distribution, gives the studio flexibility to deal with the shifting media landscape, says Weinstein Co. Chief Operating Officer  David Glasser. 

Magnolia Pictures, a nine-year-old independent distributor owned by entrepreneur  Mark Cuban, has been experimenting with video on demand, or VOD, for a few years. Since 2008, Magnolia has been releasing roughly a dozen movies a year via video-on-demand before they reach theaters, and plans to expand the number of pictures it releases this way. 

Magnolia President  Eamonn Bowles says that typically, VOD and DVD sales are the biggest revenue sources for a given title, with theatrical bringing up the rear. Magnolia's biggest success with the novel system was last year's "All Good Things," which earned $4 million from VOD and just $367,000 at the box office, from 35 theaters. 

"A dollar is a dollar," Mr. Bowles says.

Independent studios, including the small-budget "specialty" divisions of the major studios, saw their share of box-office revenue decline to 19% in 2010, from 33% in 2001, according to an analysis conducted for The Wall Street Journal by entertainment-research firmNash Information Services LLC. No recent indie release has matched the mass-audience success of 2002's "My Big Fat Greek Wedding" or 2004's "The Passion of the Christ." That was compounded by closures or reductions of specialty divisions including Paramount Vantage and Miramax, which Walt Disney Co. effectively shut down before selling it last year. The six major studios' combined market share grew by 14 percentage points in the same period. Meanwhile, the pie has gotten smaller, too: Audiences in North America spent $10.6 billion on movie tickets last year, down slightly from 2009.

Meanwhile, U.S. sales of DVDs last year was $7.8 billion, 43% below its 2006 peak of $13.7 billion, according to media-tracking firm IHS Screen Digest, including a roughly 20% decline in 2010 from 2009. 

But video on demand has exploded and is beginning to edge out trips to the video store. According to the Digital Entertainment Group, a trade organization, consumer spending on VOD totaled $1.8 billion in 2010, up 21% from 2009. Sales of movies via digital-download services like  Apple Inc.
AAPL


-0.04
%




's iTunes Store and  Amazon.com Inc.
AMZN


2.20
%




 grew 16% in 2010, to $683 million.

Weinstein Co. still hopes to sell movies, of course. As part of the deal with Starz, Weinstein Co. struck a DVD-distribution deal with a Starz subsidiary, Anchor Bay Entertainment. (Starz Media doesn't comprise the Starz premium pay-TV channel, which is part of a separate Liberty-owned entity called Starz Entertainment.)

For Starz, the new agreement provides fresh content to fill its infrastructure. "The Weinstein deal gives us bigger and better product," says  Marc DeBevoise, a senior executive at Starz Digital Media. 

Starz is also exploring releasing other independent movies exclusively on VOD systems and not in theaters or on DVD, says Mr. DeBevoise. But the films would need "the right hooks," he says, such as top actors or directors. Cablevision Systems Co.'s IFC Entertainment, one of the biggest distributors of specialized films in the country, began offering its movies on the VOD format about five years ago. It releases between 75 to 100 films each year. As VOD has taken off, the company's performance has rapidly improved. From 2008 to 2009, IFC's revenue grew 84%, and another 31% in 2010. 

The new  Natalie Portman drama, "The Other Woman," premiered on IFC's video-on-demand platform at the beginning of this year, but won't hit theaters until February.  Jonathan Sehring, president of IFC Entertainment and Sundance Selects, says the movie is "already on track to be our single most successful release on VOD ever."

Some in the movie industry have argued that if audiences can watch a movie at home first they won't bother going to the theater, which Mr. Sehring disputes.

"People in the business used to look at us like pariahs," he says. "Now they're envious. The video-on-demand platform is a great place for American indie movies that had fallen off the map."

IFC's micro-budget movie "Tiny Furniture," released in just over 100 theaters this winter, has done well with VOD. By the time it finishes its theaters and on-demand run, the film will make between $750,000 and $1 million, estimates Mr. Sehring, with just 15% of gross spent on marketing. That compares with the millions that major studios often spend to open a mid-level movie.

Still, many in the industry caution that VOD is not a one-size-fits-all solution to the entertainment industry's troubles. 

For higher budget films, like the Oscar contenders "Black Swan" and "The King's Speech," theatrical distribution remains "a cornerstone of overall profitability," says  Amir Malin, managing partner at investment bank Qualia Capital.

 Write to  Ethan Smith at ethan.smith@wsj.com and Lauren A. E. Schuker at lauren.schuker@wsj.com 