 Editor's Note: We asked several influential voices in academia, media, government and finance for their thoughts on Friday's budget deal. Here's what they had to say.  

 •Jim Jordan: Aim Higher, Set Budgets Lower 

 •John Taylor: Spending Cutters Gain Credibility 

 •Robert Reich: The Tea Party's in Charge 

 •Dean Baker: Obama Throws People Out of Work 

 •Daniel Mitchell: Boehner Left $6 Billion on the Table 

 •Katrina vanden Heuvel: An Offensive Response to the Budget 'Crisis' 

 •Jason DeSena Trennert: Budget-Cutting Won't Be Fun 

 •David Schweikert: America Won When Obama Came to the Table 

By Jim Jordan

In January, the House Republican Study Committee launched an effort to cut a full $100 billion from President Obama's budget, and nearly every Republican voted in favor of making those fiscally-responsible cuts. By contrast, the tax-and-spend Democrats failed to pass their own budget last year, failed to take action on our spending plan this year, and never came up with a plan of their own.

While I respect that some of my Republican colleagues will ultimately support this spending deal, I believe voters are asking us to set our sights higher. The debate is now turning to next year's budget and the debt ceiling, both of which offer real opportunities to chart a better future than the one toward which the country is currently headed. Making a real impact will require the discipline to do the right thing even when it's the hard thing. Americans want us to reach higher, act bolder, and remember the job we were sent here to do.

 Mr. Jordan represents Ohio in the U.S. House and is chairman of the Republican Study Committee. 



By John B. Taylor

The budget deal literally changes the direction of federal spending. As the chart shows the deal ratchets down the Obama Administration's proposed increase in discretionary spending for 2011 to an actual decrease. A year ago the president called for an increase of $39 billion. The agreement calls for a decrease of $39 billion. No one could have predicted such a turnaround a year ago. 

Of course this is just the first step. Next is the 2012 budget. But this step helps establish the credibility essential for completing the job. 

Some might disagree. True the amounts are small compared to the trillions needed. So think of a football game where one team—the sound fiscal policy team—is down by three touchdowns in the fourth quarter. They've been hammered the whole game. Now they have a fourth down and 2 on their 38-yard line. They go for it. They make it. True its only 2 yards and they need 60 more for a touchdown and then three more touchdowns and an impenetrable defense. But the short gain establishes their credibility and they go on to win. 

We really never know whether a play is a game-changer until after the game, and even then it's debated. But this may well be one of those plays. 



 Mr. Taylor is a professor of economics at Stanford and a senior fellow at the Hoover Institution. 

 Back to the Top 





By Robert B. Reich



The budget deal was a tactical triumph for President Obama and House Speaker John Boehner, both of whom skillfully navigated the shoals of tea party politics to avoid a shutdown that one of them would be blamed for. 

But it was also a strategic loss for both because it has emboldened the tea partiers. Not only did they force the president and the Democrats to go more than halfway with proposed spending cuts, but they pushed the House Republican leadership to the brink. 

Even if Republican members of Congress aren't themselves tea partiers, enough are worried about a possible tea party challenger in next year's primaries to follow the tea party's line. This doesn't bode well for the coming higher-stakes game over raising the debt ceiling. That begins in May and will go on until early July when the Treasury runs out of options. 

Games of highway chicken are won by the driver who can most credibly threaten not to swerve. Last week, tea partiers made it known they wouldn't mind a government shutdown. Would they mind the consequences of a failure to raise the debt ceiling? 

Now that the tea partiers are in the driver's seat, all they have to do is convincingly show that they wouldn't—and they'll get almost unlimited bargaining leverage in Washington. That fact alone raises considerably the risk of a terrible crash.



 Mr. Reich is a professor of public policy at the University of California at Berkeley, former U.S. secretary of labor, and author, most recently, of "Aftershock: The Next Economy and America's Future" (Knopf, 2010). 

 Back to the Top 





By Dean Baker



The country has close to 25 million people unemployed, underemployed or out of the work force altogether due to lack of demand in the economy. This is the result of the collapse of the housing bubble that began in late 2006.

The large budget deficits of the last few years have helped to prop up demand, because that demand was not going to come from the private sector. You can go pray at tea parties every night and it's still not going to get the private sector to hire more workers. Firms hire workers when they consider it profitable to do so. You have to be drinking some pretty wild Kool-Aid if you think that more firms are going to hire workers because the government is cutting spending and laying off workers. 

Moody's estimated that the original Republican plan for $61 billion in cuts would cost 700,000 jobs. It looks like the final package will end up with cuts that are roughly two-thirds this size, which should translate into 400,000 lost jobs. 

It's unfortunate that President Obama has been so completely intimidated by the Washington press corps that he can't speak up for common sense and his own economic policies. In a deep downturn like the one we're experiencing, government spending will create jobs under the theory that people work for money. That argument shouldn't be too complicated for the president to lay out to the public. Instead, he is celebrating the fact that he signed a deal that will throw hundreds of thousands of people out of work. 



 Mr. Baker is the co-director of the Center for Economic and Policy Research. 

 Back to the Top 





By Daniel Mitchell



The $39 billion number in the budget deal announced Friday is disappointingly low. I've been told this is a kiss-your-sister deal. If so, we don't have any siblings that look like Claudia Schiffer.

It was unrealistic to expect the full $61 billion sought by Tea Party conservatives, but $45 billion was certainly possible with a bolder approach. The good news is:

• This is the first time fiscal policy has moved in the right direction in at least 10 years.

• There will be no funding for additional IRS agents. Implementing Obamacare would require as many as 16,000 new tax bureaucrats to harass the American people, so at least that process will be stalled.

• A school choice program for Washington, DC, has been restored, thus reversing President Obama's decision to kill the program and sacrifice poor children to advance the interests of the teacher unions.

Now let's look at the less desirable parts of the agreement.

• Total spending jumped by almost $2 trillion during the Bush-Obama spending binge, so a $39 billion cut is almost too small to mention.

•Left-wing organizations such as Planned Parenthood will continue to feed at the public trough, something that should be objectionable to everyone, regardless of your views on abortion.

•Obamacare is not repealed (not that I ever thought that was possible) and there is no restriction on the EPA's unilateral assertion of power to implement global warming policies.



 Mr. Mitchell is a senior fellow at the Cato Institute. 

 Back to the Top 





By Katrina vanden Heuvel



A budget is more than a passel of numbers. It is a statement of a country's values and priorities. And the priorities in the budget deal struck Friday night offend. 

Republicans have doubled down on their reverse Robin Hood agenda. When they speak of "fiscal responsibility," get out your decoder ring. Because what they really mean is that middle-class and working Americans should shoulder the responsibility of tackling debts and deficits. And—natch—in this budget, the toughest cuts will come from education and health.

President Obama has succeeded in limiting the damage. But so far, the president has failed to challenge the inside-the-beltway narrative of debt and deficit "crisis," or lay out a vision of a government working for the common good. It's time to reset the debate and focus on rebuilding an already frayed social contract. Poll after poll shows that majorities of Americans put jobs ahead of deficit reduction. 

An honest discussion would address the real source of our long-term debt: not Social Security and Medicare, not so-called entitlements, but a broken health-care system dominated by powerful drug, insurance and hospital lobbies. A people's budget would champion a fair tax system and call for an end to costly wars that are breeding insecurity.

Deficit hawks across the political spectrum and the tea partiers claim America is broke. It isn't. We are a rich nation. Our trouble is that Washington (with a few exceptions) is bankrupt intellectually.

It's time to tax what we have too much of—financial speculation and extreme concentration of wealth—and invest in what we have too little of—education programs like Head Start, infrastructure, renewable energy and jobs.



 Ms. vanden Heuvel is the editor and publisher of the Nation. 

 Back to the Top 





By Jason DeSena Trennert 



Given how infinitesimally small the spending cuts are as a percentage of the budget, it might be tempting to write off the whole exercise as political theater. But the budget deal is a first step on the path to financial sobriety.

Real fiscal reform requires structural changes to the nation's entitlement programs as well as a serious reassessment of the role and cost of America's defense umbrella. This will require grown-ups to make sustained efforts to determine the size of government Americans really want. Politicians now must balance the needs of the young versus the old, of those with wealth versus those without it, and those who ply their trade in the public rather than the private sector. This won't be easy or pleasant. 



 Mr. Trennert is chief investment strategist at Strategas Research Partners LLC.  

 Back to the Top 





By David Schweikert 

Within minutes after the budget deal that prevented a government shutdown was made public, members of the media were handicapping the "winners" and "losers" of this fight. 

However, what you don't see in Friday's box score is the true victory that was won that evening. Forging this deal not only gave us $39 billion more in spending cuts, it finally brought President Obama to the negotiating table. 

No longer is he able to ignore the $1.5-trillion deficit gorilla in the room. President Obama not only broke the Administration's taboo Friday by admitting we have a problem with the size and cost of government, he also was forced to walk back his previous positions on spending cuts.

Due to the resolve of House Republicans and Americans across the country who knew we could do better, President Obama can no longer sit on the sidelines and ignore a problem that he bears major responsibility for causing. 



 Mr. Schweikert, a Republican from Arizona, is serving his first term in the House of Representatives. 