 I have a question on beneficiaries and trusts. I have numerous IRAs, money-market accounts, savings accounts, etc., and they all have beneficiaries named. However, I want to put a revocable trust together for members of the family, and I don't know if I have to contact each financial institution and remove those names as beneficiaries and reference the trust. Or would the trust "trump" the beneficiaries named for those various accounts? 

    Michael D. Brown  Scottsdale, Ariz.  

Read the complete  Next: Planning & Living the New Retirement report .

Before you get to the "how," make sure you are clear on the "why" of setting up a revocable trust—often called a "living" trust because it functions in your lifetime. These trusts can be "a phenomenal tool" to ease management of your assets in case of disability or illness, says  Martin Shenkman, a lawyer in Paramus, N.J. They also can be useful to minimize or avoid probate at your death. But, he says, living trusts are often "oversold" for probate avoidance to people who have relatively few assets that would be subject to probate.

Upon your death, for example, individual retirement accounts and other accounts for which you have named beneficiaries, along with jointly owned accounts, pass outside of your will and the probate process.

In implementing a living trust, meanwhile, the key is for the trust to be named the owner of various assets, not the beneficiary. Advisers gripe that many individuals set up living trusts but fail to retitle assets. Indeed, Mr. Shenkman says: "It's almost every time that people don't follow through." He notes also that there are tax reasons not to transfer ownership of certain assets, including IRAs, to a trust.

 I have a 529 plan for my grandchild. I read an article that said 529 funds held by grandparents weigh against financial aid more than if the plan was held by my granddaughter's parents. I recently began to transfer these funds when my Vanguard representative recommended that the funds stay with me, saying 529 funds held by me weigh less in the financial-aid calculation than they would if held by my granddaughter's parents. So the question is: Should the 529 funds be held by me or my son? 

    Richard W. Johnston  Stuart, Fla.  

When grandparents fund a 529 college-savings plan for a child who might qualify for financial aid, there is no single answer as to the most advantageous ownership. "The best outcome for one family's situation will not necessarily be the best outcome for another family's," says  Joseph Hurley, founder of savingforcollege.com.

There are two issues: the treatment of 529 assets and of 529 withdrawals. The assets in a grandparent-owned 529 aren't counted as family assets under the federal financial-aid formula; in contrast, a student's parents are expected to pony up 5.64% of their assets, which include parent-owned 529s.

But when grandparents tap a 529 to help pay college bills, those dollars count as student income—with as much as half going into the aid calculation for the following year, Mr. Hurley explains. (Withdrawals from a parent-owned 529 aren't counted as income.)

One strategy that works for some families is for the grandparent to retain ownership of the account and then to pay for the student's final year of college, since he or she won't need to file another aid application, says  Matt McCarthy, head of Vanguard Group's 529-plan business. By keeping ownership, you also retain the right to use the 529 money for yourself if you need it or to direct it to another beneficiary.

 In your March 21 column,  Jon Demos asked about the impact of the Social Security family maximum on individuals who have children under age 18 when they reach age 62. My brother-in-law will be in this situation in a few years. He, like Mr. Demos, plans to continue working for a number of years. When I looked at the Social Security rules, I saw another strategy, "claim and suspend." My brother-in-law would file a claim but suspend payment. By making the claim, his children would be eligible for the dependent benefit. But his eventual benefit wouldn't be reduced by early claiming. Is this a viable strategy? 

    Hanns Kuttner  Bethesda, Md.  

As noted in the last Ask Next, the minor child of a person receiving Social Security retirement benefits may qualify for a payment of up to half of what the parent would collect at his or her full retirement age. But the total benefits based on one person's record are limited to 150% to 180% of the worker's benefit. And until the worker reaches full retirement age, income from continuing employment can reduce or eliminate those payments to the worker and the children.

The claim-and-suspend approach you suggest wouldn't work for a worker turning 62: You can suspend your retirement benefit only when you reach full retirement age, which is 66 for people born between 1943 and 1954.

But this could be a smart strategy for people who still have minor children when they reach full retirement age, says  Carolyn McClanahan, founder of financial-planning firm Life Planning Partners, Inc. in Jacksonville, Fla. The children could collect their benefits; meanwhile, the parent, by not collecting, would get "delayed retirement credits" to boost his or her eventual benefit by about 8% for each year of delay, to age 70.

The claim-and-suspend strategy is more commonly used to start a spousal benefit for a worker's wife or husband while the worker waits until age 70 to file. "It is underutilized for spouses. People don't even think about it for benefiting children," says Dr. McClanahan, who practiced medicine before becoming a financial planner.

 Next welcomes your questions at next@wsj.com. Ms. Damato is a Wall Street Journal news editor in South Brunswick, N.J. 