SANTA CRUZ, Bolivia—President Evo Morales rescinded a move to eliminate popular fuel subsidies that had sparked widespread unrest and the threat of a nationwide transport strike. 

A strike planned for Monday was expected to be called off after the change in policy by Mr. Morales, an indigenous leader who won re-election by a landslide in December 2009.

Mr. Morales had said a week earlier that he would slash fuel subsidies, a move that caused fuel prices to jump 80% in South America's poorest nation. 

Days of protests followed, led by the indigenous supporters that Mr. Morales counts as his base. Riots broke out in slum districts ringing the capital, La Paz, that were previously bastions of support for Mr. Morales. Peasant groups, miners and trade unions threatened a march on the capital to demand his resignation.

"I pledged to govern by obeying the people" Mr. Morales said at an improvised news conference Friday night. He left open the possibility of cutting subsidies again in the future.

The U-turn underscores that the Bolivian leader's popularity isn't secure, even among his core constituency. Mr. Morales, a former leader of a coca-leaf growers' union, won the presidency in 2005 after orchestrating street protests that toppled two previous presidents. The abrupt change in policy also suggests he is facing increasingly difficult economic and political trade-offs from his populist policies, analysts say. 

High on the list of problems is a growing energy bill due to increasing imports of diesel and gasoline. Subsidizing those imports cost the Bolivian government about $380 million a year—about 2% of the country's annual economic output.

Liquid fuel imports have risen steadily since Mr. Morales nationalized the energy sector in 2006, forcing oil and natural-gas companies to renegotiate their contracts to give the government a larger share of the proceeds. 

In the past three years, Bolivia has moved from being a net exporter of hydrocarbons to a net importer, according to Bolivia's National Chamber of Hydrocarbons. Foreign investment has stagnated, barely topping $500 million last year, according to Bolivian media citing the National Institute of Statistics.

In trying to cut fuel subsidies, Mr. Morales had argued that higher fuel prices would spur investment in the energy sector.

But energy executives here said slashing subsidies without other steps aimed at promoting investment would have little effect on production.

"We could see no objective measure or move that would stimulate investment in the hydrocarbon sector," said  Carlos Delius, president of the National Chamber of Hydrocarbons.

The fuel subsidies leave much less for Mr. Morales to spend in other areas. 

"It was money he needed in a hurry to maintain his growing bureaucracy," said  Carlos Chalup, an energy-sector analyst and head of the Bolivian Chamber for Vehicular Gas, a group researching ways to switch vehicle fuels from liquids to gas, which joined last week's protests.

Mr. Chalup said that to pay its bills, the government will likely try to print money or get further into debt with Venezuela, which has been supplying most of Bolivia's diesel on highly favorable terms. Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez is a close ideological ally of Mr. Morales.