On Manhattan's East Side near the East River is Sutton Place, which includes some of the city's most exclusive enclaves.

 The neighborhood takes its name from  Effingham B. Sutton, a 19th-century shipping merchant and entrepreneur who made his fortune during California's 1849 Gold Rush and then built brownstones on 57th and 58th streets in Manhattan. By the early 20th century, the area became filled with tenements, but wealthy families like the Vanderbilts later transformed it. 

 The ritziest part of the neighborhood is dotted with pre-war buildings and properties with intricate facades designed by  Rosario Candela. Most of the apartments are in exclusive co-ops whose boards require buyers to put down at least 50% cash, local brokers say. 

While there are commercial areas on First and Second avenues, the most exclusive areas—at the neighborhood's most-eastern end—are completely residential, without restaurants or storefronts. Residents have included  Marilyn Monroe and  Arthur Miller, as well as former United Nations Secretary-General  Kofi Annan, former New York Gov.  Mario Cuomo and Daily Beast founder and editor in chief  Tina Brown.

 "It's a very specific client—a client that is looking for a lot of peace and quiet," says  Jacky Teplitzky of Prudential Douglas Elliman Real Estate. "Some people will say it's inconvenient, that you don't have a supermarket nearby, but another person will say, 'That's great. There is tranquility there. Not a lot of people are walking around me.'"

 The somewhat isolated location is, indeed, a problem for some. "A lot of people have complained about transportation because the subway is on [Lexington Avenue]," says  Jennifer Breu of Heddings Property Group. 

That's getting closer to changing now that the long-delayed Second Avenue subway is moving ahead and the portion between 59th and 96th streets is slated to be largely completed by the end of 2016. 

Of course, public transportation wouldn't concern many of Sutton Place's residents, where stretch limousines often wait outside the doorman-attended buildings on weekday afternoons.

 In addition to co-ops and condos, there are some townhouses in the neighborhood. A five-story renovated townhouse at 15 Sutton Place is currently available for $10.75 million. The 10-room home, built in 1899, has views of the East River, four fireplaces, an elevator, high ceilings, separate staff quarters, a ground-floor patio and a terrace, according to the listing. 

New construction in the area is limited, but 441 E. 57th St., between First Avenue and Sutton Place South, is a new addition. The 15-story condominium building with six residences has a glass facade that makes it stand out among the brick buildings surrounding it. 

Sales began there in the spring of 2007, and occupancy began last January. The last available unit, a roughly 3,400-square-foot triplex with four bedrooms, four bathrooms, a library, media room and chef's kitchen, just went into contract for an as-yet undisclosed amount, according to  Reid Price, the managing director at Town, which marketed the property. The asking price was nearly $3.8 million.

Prices in Sutton Place have fallen significantly in recent years, just as in nearby neighborhoods. They're still much higher nearer the river and relatively more affordable the farther west one goes. 

In the fourth quarter, the median sales price in Sutton Place was $795,000, down more than 20% from the fourth quarter of 2007, when the median sales price was $996,579, according to real-estate listings and data site StreetEasy.com.

In nearby Turtle Bay, prices fell more than 26%, to $610,000, in the same period. The Upper East side, just north of Sutton Place, fared slightly better, with a decline of only 12% to $925,000.

 Schools: Schools in Sutton Place are in District 2, which includes Vanguard High School, the Manhattan International High School, the High School of Art & Design and P.S. 183 Robert L. Stevenson elementary school. In 2009, 92.6% of students in third grade through eighth grade in District 2 received a proficient score on the math exam, and 85.8% of students received a proficient score on the English Language Arts exam. In 2006, the results were 78.5% for math and 73.8% for reading.

Private schools in the area include Cathedral High School, an all-girls school established in 1905, and the Browning School, a school for boys founded in 1888. Sutton Place is also home to the Garden House School, a pre-school that also has locations in London and in Westchester County's Briarcliff Manor.

 Parks: Large expanses of green space can't be found in Sutton Place, but some pockets do exist. Sutton Place Park is a series of five small parks offering sweeping views overlooking the East River. 

 Shopping: NY Vintage Club has a selection of vintage clothing for women. For children's clothes, check out Ela Baby, and for gifts, stop by Unique Unusuals and pick up candles, stationery and other items. The Manhattan Art & Antiques Center has more than 100 galleries featuring period furniture, jewelry and paintings.

 Dining: In recent years, a variety of ethnic restaurants have popped up in Sutton Place, particularly on First and Second avenues. Try Taksim for Turkish food, Il Valentino for Italian and Sofrito for Puerto Rican cuisine and live music. Fusha Asian Cuisine serves sushi. 

Also in the neighborhood are Real Thai, Les Sans Culottes, Aja Asian Bistro and Neary's, an Irish pub and restaurant that opened on St. Patrick's Day in 1967. Stop by Orchard House Café for coffee or the Sin Bin for drinks. 

—Andrew Grossman contributed to this article.

 Write to  Sushil Cheema at sushil.cheema@wsj.com 