One of the most common scenes involving the Knicks' Wilson Chandler this season is an explosive play, like his Garden-shaking dunk in November against the Washington Wizards, followed by everyone celebrating except him.

He drove down the right baseline and finished with an underhanded reverse slam in the face of 7-foot center JaVale McGee. Then Mr. Chandler jogged down the court, emotionless, as if he was the only person who had not noticed what happened. 

With so little flash in a city that craves it, it is easy to overlook Mr. Chandler on a 25-12 Knicks team that features higher-profile stars such as Amar'e Stoudemire and Raymond Felton. 

But while Mr. Chandler's profile might not be rising, his role within the team has. And after failing to sign Mr. Chandler to an extension before the October deadline, that might cost the Knicks at the negotiating table.

"[In the last] probably, month, I don't know anyone in the league playing better than Wilson," Knicks coach Mike D'Antoni said. "He's been solid every game. His shooting has been off the charts, his defense has been good.''

Mr. Chandler, the 23rd overall pick in the 2007 draft, is averaging career bests in nearly every category. He is averaging 17.8 points per game, third most on the team, along with 6.4 rebounds, also third on the team, and 1.7 assists. At 6-foot-7, he typically starts at power forward but can play multiple positions. 

The success, of course, brings a new set of questions about the team's plans for Mr. Chandler, who is a restricted free agent this season. Team president Donnie Walsh and Mr. Chandler's agent, Chris Luchey, said negotiations for a contract extension in October hit a snag due to uncertainty regarding the collective bargaining agreement.

Mr. Walsh said that he wants Mr. Chandler to remain a Knick. Mr. Luchey said he doesn't know what market value Mr. Walsh will place on Mr. Chandler and said he doesn't yet have a target contract in mind. The two sides cannot sign an extension until July, and the Knicks can match any offer Mr. Chandler receives. 

Speaking in generalities, Mr. Luchey compared Mr. Chandler to Indiana Pacers forward Danny Granger, Bulls forward Luol Deng and Hawks forward Joe Johnson, all of whom received extensions between $65 million and $75 million after their rookie deal. 

"I liked Wilson the day I got here. I think he is evolving into the player I thought he could be," Mr. Walsh said. "He's put a lot of work into it. He's a great kid. "This year he's played at a higher level than he has before. Because, first of all, we're winning games and he's a big part of that. But second of all, he's doing it against teams that know he's trying to do it—and when you can impose your will on the game like that, that separates you out."

 Write to  Kevin Clark at kevin.clark@wsj.com 