HONG KONG -- Hui Xian Real Estate Investment Trust, controlled by tycoon  Li Ka-Shing, fell sharply on its debut on the Hong Kong exchange Friday as retail investors showed a lack of appetite for the first yuan-denominated initial public offering outside mainland China.

The weak showing reflected the perception among retail investors that Hui Xian is a steady income-generating security rather than a quick money-making play, and on concerns that the market won't have access to enough yuan to allow significant trading in the REIT.

Hui Xian was at 4.86 yuan, down 7.3% from its 5.24 yuan IPO price, while the benchmark Hang Seng Index was down 0.48% at 23,690.22 points.

Hui Xian Chairman Kam Hing-lam said the listing is a historic act for Hong Kong and China.

"I am confident that Hong Kong investors' interest in yuan investment products will pick up as they become more familiar with them," he said after trading started.

HK Exchanges Chief Executive  Charles Li said whilst the market response to Hui Xian IPO was outside the control of the bourse, its successful listing was a milestone for the internationalization of the yuan.

"RMB products don't necessarily have anything inherently more superior than Hong Kong dollar products. They are just denominated in a different currency. In the end, we just want to make sure RMB products do not have a natural disadvantage," he told reporters.

Mr. Li added China will "probably for years to come continue to maintain a certain degree of control" on the movement of its currency.

  Alvin Cheung, associate director of Prudential Brokerage Ltd., said the lacklustre response to the debut was expected by the market.

"The product itself is really not that attractive for retail investors. It isn't suitable for short-selling because its focus is on generating stable income. Hong Kong investors also have to take into account the costs for doing the currency exchange," he said.

Cheung added investors were also concerned about liquidity issues arising from trading in yuan products in Hong Kong.

Banks are not permitted to lend yuan to their retail customers, although non-bank financial institutions, such as brokerages, can provide yuan financing.

Hui Xian is backed by the Oriental Plaza, a commercial complex in Beijing comprising malls, tower offices, tower apartments and the Grand Hyatt Beijing hotel, the prospectus said.

The REIT sold 40% of the company at 5.24 yuan each, which was at the bottom end of its indicative price range was 5.24-5.58 yuan.

The Beijing-focused real estate investment trust said Thursday it raised 10.48 billion yuan (US$1.6 billion) in its IPO. The company said its retail tranche, accounting for 20% of the offer, was 2.19 times covered, while its international tranche was moderately over-subscribed. Citic Securities Co., BOC International Holdings Ltd. and HSBC Holdings PLC are the joint bookrunners of the deal.

China has been moving to loosen restrictions on its currency as part of efforts to internationalize the yuan, with Hong Kong acting as the de facto center of the nation's test of letting banks and individuals freely trade the yuan abroad. By the end of February, yuan deposits in the Chinese territory totaled 407.7 billion yuan, up from 370.6 billion yuan in January.