If few writers have embraced acclaim as heartily as Norman Mailer, virtually none have renounced renown as devoutly as J. D. Salinger. His first novel, "The Catcher in the Rye," the story of a disaffected young man expelled from prep school and roaming the environs of Manhattan, became an instant best seller when it was published in 1951. It went on to become a revered text for generations of alienated teenagers, a staple of the college classroom—in short, an American classic. Over the course of the next decade, his fame grew even as he began to recoil from a public and press determined to know more about him.

By 1961, when the hardback publication of "Franny and Zooey" prompted Time to put him on its cover, he had drastically scaled back his publication. After 1965, he granted virtually no interviews with reporters or bio graphers and even removed his author photo from later editions of his books.

Finally, in 1988, facing the prospect of a forthcoming biography about him that would draw on unpublished letters, Salinger took the author, Ian Hamilton, to court and obtained an injunction that forced Hamilton to rewrite his book, "In Search of J. D. Salinger," removing all quotations and even close paraphrases of Salinger's unpublished prose.

Yet ambitious writers like Salinger begin their careers with a need to be noticed. They seek out authors they admire—as Salinger did Hemingway in 1944, when both were in the same theater of the war. They crave the distinction of publication in prestigious venues, as Salinger did when he sought a spot on the New Yorker's lineup of literary greats. Not content with plaudits from Parnassus, they even sell out to Hollywood—as Salinger did when he permitted Samuel Goldwyn to transform a short story, "Uncle Wiggily in Connecticut" (1948), into the weepy "My Foolish Heart" (1949).

Kenneth Slawenski's insightful and sympathetic biography, "J.D. Salinger," convincingly shows that Salinger felt he had sinned by polluting his early work with worldly ambition. His decision to repudiate the world he had wanted to win over with his writing thus had some of the fervor of a religious quest. In "Franny" (1955), the title character cries out: "I'm just sick of ego, ego, ego. My own and everybody else's. I'm sick of everybody that wants to get somewhere, do something distinguished and all, be somebody interesting." Such desires, Salinger eventually concluded, fun da mentally contradicted his sense of writing as a sacred craft.

 By Kenneth Slawenski  Random House, 464 pages, $27

Before Mr. Slawenski, other Salinger biographers—not just Hamilton but Paul Alexander ("Salinger: A Bio graphy," 1999)—have portrayed an eccentric, rather unpleasant man. Halfway through his research, Hamilton seems to have realized that Salinger's reasons for seclusion went far beyond the usual aversion that writers have to being scrutinized. Rather than exploring the motivations of Salinger's solipsism, however, the frustrated biographer resorted to vulgar generalizations about his subject's "saint complex" and "perfection complex."

Mr. Alexander, pursuing the safest route, did not quote or paraphrase his subject's words at all. As a result, his work reads like a summary judgment. He drew on Hamilton's notes as well as interviews with a few witnesses who could testify to Salinger's usually dour demeanor during social encounters. Yet he did not even try to contact the litigious Salinger; instead, he traveled to the writer's Cornish, N.H., retreat and contented himself with a drive-by glimpse of the great writer.

Hamilton and Mr. Alexander both produced what might be called drive-by biographies. Their books were placeholders until someone with the sensitivity of Mr. Slawenski arrived to create a convincing portrait of a man haunted by his own egoism.

The J.D. Salinger of Mr. Slawenski's biography is no saint—and he knows it. He is a terrible husband, virtually abandoning his wives during his 12- to 16-hour writing jags, and refusing to accompany them on vacations and visits to family and friends. He is a fitful father. He treats nearly every editor who wants to publish his work as an enemy. Yet Mr. Slawenski shows him as a rather noble figure, a man capable of creating great art out of self-criticism.

Surprisingly, the biographer suggests, the key to Salinger's behavior lies not in his genteel upbringing or (somewhat fitful) education but in the smoking ruins of concentration camps that Salinger encountered during his work as an intelligence officer in the U.S. Army.

Salinger was born in 1919 to a prosperous businessman father and an adoring mother who nurtured their only son in a plush Park Avenue apartment and sent him to private schools, expecting him to conform to conventional upper-middle-class life. After doing passably well at Valley Forge Military Academy and dropping in and out of classes at Ursinus College and New York University, Salinger found his métier in the Columbia University writing class of Whit Burnett, the editor of Story magazine, who taught him that authors of great literature should vanish into their own prose, jettisoning the egos that would become such a fraught topic for Franny.

But it was World War II that was, as Ian Hamilton put it, the "shaping crisis" of Salinger's life. He hit the beaches of Normandy on D-Day and served in the 12th Infantry Regiment with valorous men, three-quarters of whom were dead by the end of the war. Fluent in German—he had spent some time Austria and Poland before the war—he interrogated suspects for days on end. He thus knew all about a world that had gone awry.

After he smelled the burning flesh of Dachau, a traumatized Salinger checked himself into a military hospital. When he was discharged, he came home filled with disgust for his fellow man. Only gradually was he able to resume his career, and find solace and escape in literature.

Even so, the literary life—the rivalries of authors, the intrusiveness of biographers, the presumptuousness of critics (especially academics)— revolted him. If writing meant anything, it meant a purging of the self. But seeking self-abnegation is a losing battle—as suggested by the suicide of Seymour, Salinger's writer surrogate, in "Seymour—An Introduction" (1959).

Mr. Slawenski's biography will not be the last word, of course. Salinger died a year ago this week, leaving behind a collection of manuscripts. What is to happen to them is not clear. Then there are all those people who knew Salinger, who only now may be willing to speak with biographers. Even should the Salinger estate authorize its own biographer, however, that writer will lament the loss of letters that Salinger and his friends destroyed in an effort to erase the record of the man who wrote the stories.

And it is unlikely that any author will do a better job than Mr. Slawenski capturing the glory of Salinger's life—that for all his meanness and pettiness, he never relinquished the sacred duty he felt called upon to perform. He was a good soldier in the service of literature. If his dedication, in human terms, is rather terrifying, it is also awe-inspiring.

—Mr. Rollyson is the author of seven biographies and of "Biography: A User's Guide" (2008).