The part about going on safari, as I did last September, that they don't tell you and that rarely makes it into nature programs, is that lots of other people have the exact same idea. Indeed, the  Masai Mara during the wildebeest migration can resemble the L.I.E. at rush hour as tourists from Babylon to Bombay pile into Land Rovers in hot pursuit of elephants, lions and the few remaining rhinos.

So-called eco-tourism is becoming less ecological all the time, reaching its absurd extreme one afternoon during my visit as about 20 vehicles converged on three cheetahs as they embarked on a hunt to locate dinner. 

I can't say for sure what happened next because my vision of the cats was blocked by all the other vehicles jockeying for position of the coming kill. At some point the animals broke into a run after a young wildebeest, the rest of us bringing up the rear. The next thing I knew we were trying to find a parking space where we could watch from a safe distance as they dined on their victim while keeping one wary eye out for lions and hyena, the other on us.

Among those in our caravan was  Dereck Joubert, a wildlife filmmaker with his wife, Beverly, whose work has won multiple Emmy Awards and a Peabody. They're also the creators of "The Last Lions" a compelling just-released film about a lioness, her cubs and their struggle for survival. I'll get back to the film momentarily. But when the Jouberts were in town recently to promote the movie I asked Dereck, who has devoted his career to documenting big cats and sounding the alarm over their shrinking numbers, what he thought of our cheetah chase. "The Mara has good and bad," he said, choosing his words carefully. "There are elements of it that are too disruptive—whole migrations turned around by too many people lining the banks." Dereck's solution is "higher cost, lower volume" tourism such as that practiced by Great Plains Conservation, a series of eight low-impact camps he's involved with in Kenya, Botswana and Tanzania. 

In any case, there's an economical, almost carbon-neutral way to get the safari experience without leaving the tri-state area, and that's to see the Joubert's film. 

I was intrigued to watch it mostly because I'd met them and because once you've been on safari, the car exhaust notwithstanding, there's an inescapable element of longing to return. What I was expecting was a piece of vaguely tedious, if scenic, guilt-inducing propaganda about how if we don't do something right now there won't be any lions left and it will be all of our fault.

"The Last Lions" is certainly a call to action (the lion population has dwindled to 20,000 from 450,000 over the last half century due mainly to human population encroachment) but done more deftly than I could have imagined. Narrated sparingly by  Jeremy Irons, it puts you in the center of the action and essentially allows you and your emotions to fend for themselves—as the lion and her cubs suffer the most gut-wrenching hardships. None of them, by they way, at the hands of humans, at least not directly so. Indeed, I believe you never spot a single Homo sapiens in the course of the movie. "People who have seen the film tell me they go in to see a lion film and 10, 15 minutes in they kick out of lion mode and feel like they're watching another human being," said Dereck. "People are drawing deep parallels between their own life and the lion's life, particularly with the economic circumstances."

I don't think I'll be giving anything away to say the lion's mortgage goes underwater, or whatever the big-cat equivalent is, the bank—in the form of a rival pride—repossesses their home, and they're forced into the street where they battle everyone from insensitive government bureaucrats to their fellow dispossessed, in the form of merciless crocodiles and water buffalo. 

To be honest, I had a hard time taking the Jouberts entirely seriously when we first met, mostly because they're so attractive. They look like Hollywood versions of themselves. Dereck bears a passing resemblance to Moses, if Moses wore khaki, and was tall and trim with a white beard and matching ponytail. Beverly is living proof that you can have great skin even if you spend most of your life living out of a tent. 

But as soon as you talk to them you can tell they're for real. High-school sweethearts in South Africa, they often spend months in the bush, with nothing but each other for company, not even a battery-operated DVD player, though they carry a satellite phone for emergencies. Despite the flimsiness of their tent, the Jouberts say they've never been attacked by lions, and only once by a thirsty elephant who tried to steal their water, dragging their accommodations, apparently while they were outside, into a dry riverbed.

"We don't walk around at night," Dereck said. "It's like not going to certain areas of the city after dark. So many accidents happen when guys have a few beers and wander off and get eaten."

"We don't take movies, music, television," he added. "When we're in the field, the field is our television. We went to the bush for the lifestyle of living in the bush."

Don't they get sick of each other? I love my wife too, but I don't think we could go 200 days in a row seeing nothing but each other, hippos and wildebeest. Dereck said he reads Shakespeare to Beverly by candlelight. As I said, they seem too good to be true. "We chose the lifestyle as a function of wanting to be together," Dereck said. "Many people are horrified of 24/7. I think it creates a better bond. You iron out all the wrinkles."

Beverly noted that their collaboration is professional as well as personal, which adds another dimension to the relationship, and perhaps even a healthy element of competition. "We both have an intense drive to create something that depicts the ultimate of what we're seeing in the wilderness," she explained.

With "The Last Lions" they've succeeded, and without a single tour bus in sight.

— ralph.gardner@wsj.com 