PENNINGTON, N.J.—Sixteen-year-old Alex Kline lives a lot like a college-basketball recruit and not at all like an expert in college-basketball recruiting. He usually wakes up around 6 a.m.—earlier, if he has to polish off some homework before school. He's being tutored for the ACT in April and the SAT in May. Also, he's a few weeks into driver's education.

"Junior year's just hitting me right in the face," he sighs.

Pretty soon, he'll start thinking seriously about college, which makes him even more similar to the high schoolers he writes about between—and sometimes during—his own classes. "People are always asking me, 'How's the college process?'" Kline said. "The ironic thing is, I can't even say. I don't know!"

This is ironic because in the last two years, Kline has become something of a mainstay of basketball recruiting, which means he's constantly asking people his age about their own college processes. He reports news morsels on Twitter, trades texts messages with college coaches and prowls Facebook to find out where the finest prospects in the country want to matriculate. 

Among his peers in the recruiting world, Kline is not the most prominent. He just happens to be the only one still in high school himself. 

"He's like a new wave of journalist," said Adam Zagoria, who publishes some of Kline's work on his website, ZagsBlog.com. "He gets a lot of information from kids his own age. My guess is sometimes they're less threatened and more trusting of him because he's their age."

Kline grew up with a knowledge of baseball so encyclopedic that even adults couldn't stump him with their best trivia questions. His mother was diagnosed with a brain tumor when Kline was 5 years old and she died when he was 10, and taking to sports "was a way for him to deal with that," his father, Robert, says. 

Alex's interest switched to football before basketball, but he wasn't much of a hoops player. He wore protective goggles on his middle-school squad, and even he marvels that he's a 145-pound lineman for the Pennington School's football team. He only caught on with varsity basketball as a manager.

When he was 14, younger than all of his sources, he started reaching out to prospects on Facebook. Before long, he was contributing recruiting roundups to other websites and launching his own, TheRecruitScoop.com, where he posts clips of his video interviews with All-Americans. They tower over Kline, who's usually wearing a backpack, with a tournament credential dangling around his neck.

These days, it's impossible to follow basketball recruiting without knowing this teenager with braces on his top set of teeth. More than 5,000 people follow his Twitter feed, which he might update during class by sneaking glances at his phone. (An example: "2011 forward Kevin Thomas of Christian Faith (N.C). left Texas uncommitted after taking an official visit there," Kline tweeted at 9:06 a.m. on a Wednesday.)

His BlackBerry's address book is crammed with hundreds of contacts, including almost 100 coaches, sorted by name and school. 

"He is as good as anybody in the business—or better," said Tony Chiles, a St. John's assistant coach who didn't know Kline's age at first. "I can't imagine how good he would be if he didn't have to do homework."

As much as he swaps information with coaches across the country, Kline tries to contact every recruit he covers at least once a month, he said. Like them, he interacts mostly with his fingers and thumbs, since he prefers not talking on the phone. He considers this gig a hobby and not a job—though he does earn paychecks from time to time—so Kline is unabashed about rooting for his contemporaries. 

"At the end of the day, we're all just teenagers trying to make it," he said. "They can relate to me and I can relate to them." He can also act as a middleman between the two sides, helping players gain exposure and coaches find recruits. Kline understands that this is atypical even in recruiting journalism. 

"But if you have all these connections," he says, "why not help?"

If he sounds like someone who's torn about his career aspirations, that's because he's not sure whether he wants to stay in communications or try his hand at coaching. He's considering latching on with a college team as a manager, and if he pursues that route, he'll have to give up his website. 

He hopes his readers would understand, he says. Kline admits he does have his detractors. Some of his peers charge that he doesn't properly credit their scoops, and if his information is erroneous or he spells a name wrong, he says, "it's like an axe coming 150 miles-per-hour right at my head."

This spotlight will shine even brighter in the upcoming months, packed with high-school state tournaments and, of course, March Madness. 

After that is the Mary Kline Classic, a basketball showcase he's organizing in memory of his mother. "I never really got to honor her properly," says Kline, who keeps a photo of her on his desk.

 He'll do so May 28 at his school by hosting 24 of the area's top prospects for a 3-point-shooting exhibition, slam-dunk contest and all-star game, with all proceeds benefiting the American Cancer Society.

Then comes the summer, typically the busiest season for recruiting news. Finally, once he returns to school for his senior year, Kline will make a college decision for himself. His process, to speak in familiar parlance, is so fledgling that it wouldn't even make for a worthwhile tweet. After years of asking teenagers about their college commitments, he hardly boasts a list of his own. 

"I just have to find the right fit," he says.