ATLANTA—Black and Hispanic populations greatly increased in two of the South's most populous states over the past decade, diversifying their major metropolitan centers as never before, the U.S. Census Bureau reported Thursday.

The metro Atlanta area now has the nation's second-largest non-Hispanic black population, surpassing Chicago but still behind the New York City area. Metro Atlanta has 1.7 million blacks out of a total population of 5.3 million people, according to an analysis of the new census data by William H. Frey, a demographer at the Brookings Institution in Washington, D.C. Metro Chicago has 1.6 million blacks.

In Florida, the Hispanic population jumped 57% to 4.2 million in 2010. Hispanics now represent nearly one in four people in Florida, the nation's fourth-largest state. The black population of Florida rose 26% to just under three million people. 

Demographers say that most of the increase in the black and Hispanic populations in both states stemmed from migration from other states and from immigration, though a higher birth rate among those groups than for whites also played a role.

Georgia's total population grew 18% to 9.7 million. The state's non-Hispanic black population rose 25% to just under three million, while Hispanics nearly doubled to 853,000. Georgia is one of the few Southern states where black gains, by total number, outnumbered those for Hispanics and whites.

Whites continue to move to both states, but not at the same pace as minorities. Florida's population rose 18% over the decade to 18.8 million, despite a slowdown in the overall migration rate in the wake of the recession. 

The latest census data reflect the continued trend of explosive growth in the South. As people and businesses relocate, southern states have gained in economic and political importance. 

After the 2010 census, Georgia is set to gain one House seat, giving the delegation 14 seats, while Florida is set to gain two seats, giving that delegation 27. The two states won't gain representation only in Congress but also in the Electoral College, heightening their importance in the 2012 presidential contest. Southern gains come at the North's expense. Ohio, for example, is losing two House seats.

Better job opportunities—for all ethnic groups—drove population to Atlanta, but the rise was pronounced among African-Americans. Better job prospects prompted Dontay Walker, a 25-year-old piano player and singer, to move to Atlanta last year from Louisville, Ky. As a black man, Mr. Walker said, he has found it easier to get work.

"In Louisville, there are less of us and we have less opportunities," he said. "I moved here and immediately doors opened and they have kept opening."

 Write to  Timothy W. Martin at timothy.martin@wsj.com 