DUBLIN—Irish Prime Minister Brian Cowen will dissolve parliament when it reconvenes Tuesday and announce a date for a new election, he told a government website, closing the curtain on one of the most unpopular administrations of recent times. 

The main opposition parties—Fine Gael and Labour—and political commentators have already indicated that the most likely date for a general election will now be Feb. 25. The prime minister had previously proposed a date of March 11.

Mr. Cowen's deeply unpopular minority Fianna Fail-led government is expected to receive a bruising in the election with all public opinion polls indicating that the next government is likely to be a centrist coalition between Fine Gael and Labour. 

Fine Gael leader Enda Kenny and finance spokesman Michael Noonan went to Brussels Friday to make a case for lowering what they say is a punitive 5.8% average interest rate on Ireland's international bailout. They say this will be a priority if they get into government. 

But European countries have said the terms of the €67.5 billion ($92.73 billion European Union/International Monetary Fund rescue package aren't negotiable. Ireland will contribute an additional €17.5 billion to the bailout package, which was agreed to by the outgoing Fianna Fail-led government last November. 

European Central Bank executive board member Lorenzo Bini Smaghi told state broadcaster RTE Television late Thursday, "The program has been signed and it has to be implemented." 

This week, parliament narrowly voted in favor of the Finance Bill, a condition to receive the international bailout. Ireland was required to pass the bill and implement its austerity budget measures in the first quarter of 2011. The bill has gone to the senate for approval by Saturday. 

The deeply unpopular Mr. Cowen, speaking to state broadcaster RTE Radio's Irish-language station earlier Friday, said he will consult with his family and advisers over the weekend regarding his future in politics

Meanwhile, Labour leader Eamon Gilmore has called for two debates between Fine Gael leader Enda Kenny—the man most likely to become the next prime minister but widely regarded as the less charismatic public performer--and Fianna Fail's new leader Micheal Martin. 

Mr. Gilmore also called for a third debate including Sinn Fein leader Gerry Adams and Green Party leader John Gormley, who last Sunday pulled out of the coalition government with Fianna Fail. 

"This is a reasonable plan that ensures no party leader will be excluded," Gilmore said. 

However, Mr. Kenny has said he prefers only two television debates--one in Irish and one in English--that includes all five parties. A spokesman for Fine Gael denied this was a ploy to avoid a cross-party debate or to protect Mr. Kenny from putting in a weak television performance. 

 Write to  Quentin Fottrell at quentin.fottrell@dowjones.com 