Europe's debt crisis has returned full circle to the problem that started it over a year ago: How to save the malfunctioning Greek state from running out of money.

Greece has been slipping farther behind its targets for cutting its budget deficit and is expected to need nearly €30 billion ($43 billion) of extra financing for 2012, according to euro-zone officials.

The country's growing reliance on aid from other euro members is fueling a debate over whether Greece should hold talks with its private creditors about extending the maturity of its bonds, a step that Germany is quietly pushing but other euro nations are resisting. 

Euro-zone finance ministers meeting in Brussels early next week are expected to debate Greece's debt burden, its need for additional aid, and its request for more time to meet its fiscal targets. Agreement on the increasingly thorny issues surrounding Greece's crisis could take months to reach, participants in the talks warn. 

European governments are coming to accept that Greece will be a ward of its euro-zone peers for years to come. That prospect is politically painful to swallow, especially in Germany, where opposition to aiding Greece is mounting in parliament and among voters. 

The alternative, however, is a messy debt default by Greece that could trigger a major international banking crisis, senior European policy makers say, comparable to the turmoil that followed the failure of Lehman Brothers in 2008. 

Finance chiefs from the most important euro nations discussed Greece's problems—and other issues, including Portugal's imminent aid package—at informal talks in Luxembourg on Friday. 

The gathering, one of many informal meetings of select European officials since the financial crisis began, turned into a media circus after Germany's Spiegel Online reported its existence Friday—and claimed it had been called because Greece was thinking of leaving the euro zone. The report sent the euro tumbling. 

Greece's government denounced the report, saying it has no interest in leaving the euro. Although some analysts and politicians have suggested Greece should quit the euro, most economists and virtually all top European policy makers say any new Greek currency would plummet, lead to the collapse of Greece's banking system and state, and a fresh banking crisis around Europe. 

"We are not discussing the exit of Greece from the euro area. This is a stupid idea and an avenue we would never take," said the host of Friday's meeting, Luxembourg Premier Jean-Claude Juncker. 

Among the topics that were discussed at the meeting, people familiar with the matter said, were Greece's struggle to close its budget deficit amid weak tax revenue and a shrinking economy. Greek Finance Minister George Papaconstantinou, who attended the meeting, told his counterparts from Germany, France, Italy and Spain that his government may need until 2016, rather than 2014 as previously agreed, to cut its deficit to 3% of gross domestic product, people familiar with the matter said. 

Other countries view Greece's request for more time skeptically, particularly Germany, according to Berlin officials. German leaders believe Greece is losing the political will to make tough overhauls of its economy and public sector, and wants to see Greece redouble its efforts, not slow them down, these officials said over the weekend. 

Berlin is particularly unimpressed with the pace of Greece's efforts to privatize state assets and improve tax collection, these people said. 

However, Germany also has signaled in recent months that countries that have accepted aid packages, such as Greece and Ireland, can win some financial concessions if they offer something in return, such as more stringent reforms. 

Participants in Friday's meeting acknowledged that Greece won't be able to return to bond markets next year as planned, people familiar with the matter said. That means Greece will need nearly €30 billion in extra financing from the euro zone's bailout funds, particularly the European Financial Stability Facility, these people said. 

German officials at Friday's meeting said extra credit for Greece should be part of a package of new measures, including more-ambitious overhauls by Athens and talks with Greece's bondholders on extending its debt maturities. 

A maturity extension, which European officials are referring to as a "reprofiling" of Greek bonds, would do little to ease Greece's debt burden. But it would slow the rising exposure to Greek debt of taxpayers in Germany and other European countries, by reducing the amount of refinancing that Greece needs in coming years. That could help to make fresh loans to Greece more politically palatable in Germany. 

Most euro-zone policy makers remain opposed to any form of Greek debt restructuring, including the gentle option of a maturity extension. France, the European Commission and the European Central Bank—which were all represented at Friday's talks—believe any reprofiling risks undermining efforts to win back investors' trust in other indebted countries, especially Ireland and Portugal, according to people familiar with the matter. 

Mr. Papaconstantinou said on Saturday that Greece might sell bonds to the EFSF next year if it can't sell them to private investors. "The markets continue to disbelieve in our country," he told reporters. 

—William Horobin contributed to this article.

 Write to  Marcus Walker at marcus.walker@wsj.com, Costas Paris at costas.paris@dowjones.com and Charles Forelle at charles.forelle@wsj.com 