LISBON—Portugal's €78 billion ($115.69 billion) financial bailout will allow the country to exit debt markets for a few years, while forcing it to make economic reforms that will boost long-term growth, officials involved in the deal said Thursday. 

"This program requires deep reforms and profound changes for our country," Portuguese acting Finance Minister Fernando Teixeira dos Santos said at a meeting with journalists. 

Mr. Teixeira dos Santos confirmed that budget cuts demanded by the European Union and the International Monetary Fund in exchange for the three-year aid package would likely cause the local economy to contract by around 2% in 2011 and 2012.

The information was reported Wednesday, citing people close to the matter. 

The bailout package for Portugal—the euro zone's third country to ask for a bailout after Greece and Ireland—means the country won't have to seek financing on international markets for around two years. Portugal had seen its borrowing costs soar as it grapples with a stagnant economy and high debt levels. 

The terms of the deal set a new schedule for the country to slash a budget deficit that topped 9% of gross domestic product in 2010. Portugal will have to reach a budget deficit of 5.9% of GDP this year, 4.5% in 2012 and 3% only in 2013. 

This represents a relaxation of current targets, whereby the country had committed to bring its spiraling deficit down to 4.6% of GDP this year, 3% next and 2% in 2013. 

"The fiscal adjustment is demanding, but it's realistic," said IMF representative Poul Thomsen at a separate press conference, while acknowledging the adjustment will weigh on economic output. Portuguese unemployment is expected to rise to 13% by 2013 from around 11%. 

Still, Mr. Thomsen said structural reforms will boost Portugal's long-term growth potential—with an economic recovery he anticipates will start in the first half of 2013. 

The bailout plan mandates wide-reaching reforms of Portuguese labor, energy and telecommunications regulations, as well as a slew of privatizations, to shake up an economy that analysts say is uncompetitive and excessively rigid. 

"Portugal's problems are above all structural—as evident from low growth even in the years before the crisis," Mr. Thomsen said. 

  Luigi Speranza, an economist at BNP Paribas in London, described the reform effort as encouraging. "A credible plan of far-reaching structural reforms aimed at increasing Portugal's growth potential is needed as much as aggressive fiscal consolidation," he said. 

Officials weren't able to provide full details on the interest rates to be charged on the €78 billion lending facility—€52 billion of which will be provided by the EU and €26 billion by the IMF. 

The IMF will charge a 3.25% rate for the first three years and slightly more after that. The EU hasn't yet worked out the interest rate it will charge, though a person close to the matter said the overall rate for the bailout package will likely be between 4.3% and 4.7%. 

Mr. Teixeira dos Santos said the maturity of the EU and IMF loans hadn't been decided. 

—Riva Froymovich in Brussels contributed to this article.





