Sure, the brave man who first dared to eat an oyster is a culinary hero, but let's give a shout-out to the adventurous soul who first tackled an artichoke, battling its tough, prickle-topped leaves and going mano-a-mano with its choke, the fuzz-ball at its center that's capable of living up to its name. 

One can chalk the virgin degustation up to wild hunger, but it's fun to think that when our man returned for seconds it was because he had excellent taste, albeit with a quirky bent. An artichoke has a singular flavor that's a fooler. It starts out simply nutty and sweet and then, bite after bite, builds until it seems to fill your mouth, leaving not a speck of space for anything else that isn't sharp, acidic, citrusy or just plain pushy. 

In Europe, the vegetable (really a flower) is treated like a rock star and its early-spring appearance gets a welcome worthy of Persephone, while in Castroville, Calif., the artichoke capital of America, there's an annual festival with a grand parade and nonstop music. For the rest of us, there's the supermarket, where we can count on finding two kinds of artichokes: the globe, which is large, green and bulbous; and the baby, which is small, pointy, usually chokeless and good-to-go raw. 

Big or small, look for artichokes with tightly closed leaves and be prepared to do a little trimming and scooping to get to the choicest morsel, the heart. The job's quick, easy and oddly satisfying—you can go from novice to pro in a couple of tries—though we dare you to stop at a couple.

—Ms. Greenspan's latest cookbook is "Around My French Table."

The ideal first course and ice-breaker: It's hard to be formal when you're eating with your fingers, a must with artichokes. Serves 4

4 large, firm, tight-leaved globe artichokes  1 lemon, cut in half  Herb mayonnaise (see Chris Israel's Mixed Grill recipe) or vinaigrette

 What to do: 

For each artichoke, break off the tough outer leaves from two or three rows around the base, always rubbing any exposed areas with lemon. Cut the stem flush with the base, then slice about 1½ inches off the top of the artichoke. Finally, using scissors, snip across whatever leaves still have sharp spines. 

Bring a large pot of salted water to the boil, squeeze in the lemon juice and toss in the lemon and the artichokes. Put a heatproof plate on top of the artichokes to keep them submerged and boil gently until a knife inserted into the base barely meets resistance, 20 to 40 minutes (depending on size). 

Remove the artichokes and when they're cool enough to handle, run the tops under cold water—the petals will open like a flower. Reach in, pull out the center leaves to expose the choke and use a small knife or grapefruit spoon to scrape away the fuzz. Rinse and drain upside down on a rack. 

Serve at room temperature or chilled (artichokes keep covered in the refrigerator for 24 hours), filling the center with mayonnaise or vinaigrette.



The all-around artichoke, good in a salad or blended into a dip; use the marinade as a dressing. Serves 4

1 cup water  1 cup cider vinegar  1 teaspoon fine sea salt  8 fresh or dried bay leaves  10 baby artichoke hearts, halved  About 1/2 cup extra-virgin olive oil

 What to do: 

In a large saucepan, combine the water with the vinegar, salt and 4 bay leaves. Add the artichokes and bring to a simmer over medium heat. Simmer until the artichokes are tender but still offer a bit of resistance when pierced with a knife, 12 to 18 minutes. Drain, discarding the vinegar mixture and bay leaves.

While the artichokes are still warm, arrange them in layers in a sterilized canning jar (or jars). Arrange the remaining 4 bay leaves around the sides of the jar. Cover the artichokes completely with oil. Set aside until the artichokes are completely cool, then cover.

The artichokes can be consumed as soon as they are cool, but will have even greater depth of flavor if allowed to marinate in oil for at least 24 hours. (Store in an airtight container in the refrigerator for up to 2 months, making sure that the artichokes are always covered in oil.)

Variation: To turn these marinated artichokes into a flavorful spread or dip, drain the artichokes, reserving the oil, and place them in a food processor or a blender; then blend to a smooth puree, adding as much of the reserved oil as necessary. Any leftover liquid can be used as a base for a vinaigrette or as a vinaigrette itself.

—Adapted from "Salad as a Meal," by Patricia Wells

Made-in-a-flash, sweet-sour caponata is great with fish, on grilled bread or over pasta. Serves 6

1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil, plus more for rubbing  4 tender celery ribs, diced  1 onion, finely chopped  3 garlic cloves, thinly sliced  1/2 cup tomato sauce  1/2 cup dry white wine  1/4 cup white wine vinegar  10 marinated artichoke halves, drained and chopped (see Patricia Wells recipe, at top)  1/2 cup pitted green olives, chopped  1/4 cup pine nuts  3 tablespoons sugar  2 tablespoons small capers, rinsed and drained  Kosher salt and freshly ground pepper  3 tablespoons shredded basil  Six 7-ounce skinless mahi-mahi fillets

 What to do: 

In a large, deep skillet, heat the olive oil until shimmering. Add the celery, onion and garlic and cook over moderate heat until just softened, 4 minutes. Add the tomato sauce, wine, vinegar, artichokes, olives, pine nuts, sugar and capers and season with salt and pepper. Simmer about 8 minutes. Stir in the basil and let caponata cool. 

Rub the fish with olive oil and season with salt and pepper. Grill over moderately high heat, turning once, until cooked through, about 9 minutes. Transfer the fish to plates, top with the caponata and serve. Optional accompaniment: grilled bread.

—Adapted from Michael White, chef of Marea, New York 



Sweet artichokes, bitter dandelion leaves and juicy oranges make a salad that's bright as spring. Serves 6

Juice from 1 lemon  Sea salt  6 medium artichoke hearts, quartered  1 bunch young red veined dandelion (or arugula)  5 mandarin oranges  6 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil  Freshly ground pepper  4 ounces pecorino cheese

 What to do: 

Bring 3 of cups water, the lemon juice and 1 tablespoon sea salt to a boil. Add the artichokes and simmer for 6 to 8 minutes, or until a knife poked into the thickest part doesn't meet much resistance. Drain and set aside to cool to room temperature. 

Separate the leaves and, if using dandelions, discard any with jagged edges. Wash, dry and set aside. 

Squeeze the juice from 2 of the oranges (about 5 tablespoons) and put half of it in a small saucepan. Bring to a boil, lower the heat and simmer to reduce by one half. Cool, and combine with remaining juice. 

Peel and cut the remaining 3 oranges into segments. Add a pinch of salt to the juice and, using a whisk or a stick blender, very slowly beat in the oil. Taste and season with black pepper and lemon juice. 

Toss the artichokes and oranges with a little vinaigrette; divide among 6 plates and top with dandelion leaves. Using a vegetable peeler, scrape slices of pecorino over the greens. Finish the plates by spooning the remaining vinaigrette over and around the salads.

—Adapted from David Kinch, chef of Manresa, Los Gatos, Calif.



Three early spring vegetables and a mayonnaise you'll want to always have on hand. Serves 6



For the mayonnaise:

2 large super-fresh organic egg yolks, room temperature  1 cup canola oil  Lemon juice  Salt and freshly ground pepper  1 tablespoon minced parsley  1 tablespoon minced chives  2 teaspoons minced tarragon  1/2 teaspoon minced thyme (optional)



For the vegetables:

12 to 18 baby Yukon gold or baby red potatoes, scrubbed and halved  Olive oil  Kosher salt  2 sprigs thyme  3 cloves garlic, unpeeled, smashed  30 thick asparagus spears, tough ends removed  Freshly ground pepper  18 baby artichokes  1/2 lemon



 What to do: 

To make the mayonnaise: Whisk the eggs in a medium bowl. Drop by drop, slowly whisk in 1/4 cup oil. When the mixture comes together, you can whisk in the remaining oil in a slow, steady stream. Add lemon juice and salt and pepper to taste. Stir in the herbs and refrigerate for at least 1 hour (or for up to 24 hours). 

Preheat the oven to 400 degrees. Line a baking pan with a silicone baking mat or parchment paper.

Rub the potatoes with oil, season with salt and arrange on the pan cut side down; scatter the thyme and garlic on top. Roast until the potatoes can be pierced with a knife, 20 to 25 minutes. 

Once the potatoes are in the oven, rub the asparagus spears with oil, season with salt and pepper and add them to the pan. Roast until the asparagus are slightly charred and just tender, about 15 minutes.

Meanwhile, remove the outer leaves of the artichokes to reveal the pale yellow-green ones, cut off the tips and stems and halve lengthwise. Remove any choke and rub with lemon. Coat the artichokes with oil and divide them among 6 skewers.

Put a grill pan over moderate heat and cook the artichokes, turning them as they brown and brushing them with more oil to keep them from sticking, until they can be pierced with a knife, 15 to 20 minutes. It's nice if they char a bit.

Serve the artichokes, still on their skewers, with the potatoes, asparagus and mayonnaise.

—Adapted from Chris Israel, chef of Gruner, Portland, Ore.

Break off the toughest outer leaves, usually those on the bottom three rows.

Using a serrated knife, cut the stem flush with the base and cut off about 1½ inches from the top.

With scissors, snip off the tops of the leaves with prickly spines.

When the artichoke is cooked, run it under cold water so that it opens like a flower, and pull out the center leaves to expose the choke.

Scrape the choke away with a grapefruit spoon or small knife.