Banker bashing, a fond pursuit of governments and their voters since the financial crisis broke, has mainly been directed at the gamblers on the trading floor and the concocters of esoteric structured products, rather than the deal makers in mergers and acquisitions. But a flurry of regulatory muscle-flexing suggests that the world's bureaucrats are now taking aim at M&A.

The U.K.'s Takeover Panel has unveiled a 172-page consultation document ostensibly intended to rebalance the power in a hostile acquisition in favor of the target. The proposals arose, however, from the protectionist outcry sparked by Kraft's takeover of Cadbury in 2010. Meanwhile regulators around the world are also tightening rules and intervening in deals in a trend likely to dent volume and hurt long-term shareholders.

Under the British proposals, targets will be required to identify potential acquirers as soon as they are approached, even if no formal or informal bid has been received. That disclosure will trigger the "Put Up or Shut Up" rule, with a fixed four-week deadline to make an offer or withdraw. In the past, the Takeover Panel could set a deadline but would generally do so only after talks had dragged on for some time.

The four-week period doesn't offer much time for buyers to carry out due diligence, so they lose their incentive to disclose or leak their interest in a potential acquisition—a tactic sometimes used to put the target under pressure. By requiring targets to name the interested party upon approach (thus starting the stopwatch), unreceptive target boards can, basically, make it difficult for buyers to do their homework on time. A consequence? Without being completely clear on the numbers, funders won't want to back deals. In addition, the consultation also suggests giving target companies the power to have the offer deadline extended, but only for a preferred bidder.

This spirit of transparency extends to the bankers, lawyers and PR-types, who will all have to disclose their fees under the proposed regime.

Industry commentators, especially in private equity, say the proposals are damaging, and it's easy to see why. Sponsors of leveraged bids and their bankers understandably require a great deal of due diligence, which takes time and money. The proposed tighter schedule and a ban on break fees—the compensatory fees paid by targets to bidders if deals fall through—make bidding more risky and, as a result, less likely to take place. Private-equity buyers say they will be disproportionately hit by the abolition of break fees, because due diligence costs can run into the millions, sums that large strategic buyers can afford to risk but which could cripple a small private-equity outfit in the event of a failed bid.

"This is going to make it more difficult to acquire companies on the public market, especially smaller companies," says  Charlie Johnstone, director at ECI Partners in London. "There's a huge number of enterprises valued between £25 million and £100 million [$40 million and $160 million] on the public market which probably shouldn't be there"

Such companies' shares may trade in prices or volumes that are too low to attract the investment required for growth. Taking small, lethargic companies off the public market while revitalizing the executive suite or investing capital is good for these companies and their shareholders. But if buyouts or takeovers become more risky and expensive, companies that could do with a shot in the arm are less likely to get one.

"If you make it more difficult to buy…shareholders will lose out—without a doubt," Mr. Johnstone says.

British regulators say their proposed reforms are motivated by lofty ideals, rather than the public outrage directed at Kraft's 2010 purchase of Cadbury PLC—a venerable chocolate maker dear to many British hearts (and waistlines)—but other countries see no need to cloak their language.

Italian legislation approved Wednesday is explicitly designed to prevent foreign takeovers and is modeled on French legislation already in force. The move, rushed through by decree, has been described by an Italian government source as a "decree on Italian-ness." Across the Atlantic, a Canadian rule protecting strategic firms from foreign takeover effectively sunk BHP Billiton's attempted takeover of Potash last year. That deal, like Kraft-Cadbury in the U.K., prompted public calls for politicians to stem foreign takeovers. The deal between London Stock Exchange Group PLC and TMX Group Inc., currently being considered for approval by the Canadian government, has also been heavily politicized and could fail if vociferous opponents get their way.

Meanwhile, proposed modifications to India's takeover code have been commended for trying to bring India into line with global practice, but are also anticipated to make takeovers more costly. Among the Indian proposals are an increase in the ownership threshold at which a takeover offer must be made (to 25% from 15%), a shortening of the offer deadline to 57 days from 95, and a requirement that acquirers make a bid for 100% of the voting capital—the current minimum is 20%. The current practice of paying target company executives not to set up shop in the same industry after a takeover will be banned.

The world seems to be in the stifling upswing of a 20- to 30-year regulatory cycle, says Mr. Johnstone. "I just hope we don't have to return to the 1970s before we realize that less regulation is better than more."

—By Mike Weir 