The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers took the next steps Saturday to prepare for blowing up a Missouri levee to ease near-record flooding on the Mississippi River, hours after a federal appeals court rejected a request from the Missouri attorney general to stop the process.

"We are seeing water in places we've never seen it before," said Maj. Gen. Michael Walsh, president of the Mississippi River Commission and a top Corps official, who said he had flown over much of the Lower Mississippi and Ohio River systems earlier in the day.

He stressed that he had not made his final decision and that he would try to give 24 hours notice between the decision and the actual blowing of the levee. Residents in the area were ordered to evacuate a few days ago.

Missouri officials have tried repeatedly to halt the process in federal court, arguing that some 130,000 acres of prime farmland along with homes to about 200 people would be destroyed by sending water through the floodway for the first time since 1937. The state argued that the process would violate its clean water act and that the Corps hadn't fully investigated all possible alternatives.

See the latest data from flood gauges throughout the Midwest and South.

A federal circuit court judge rejected the request Friday and an Appeals Court in St. Louis concurred on Saturday morning.

While attention has been focused for days on the decision of whether to blow up the Missouri levee, Gen. Walsh said three other floodways developed since the great flood of 1927 might also need to be used as the river's crest moves south.

"This is an event that may use all the resources that we have to control this level of flooding," he said.

Gen. Walsh said he ordered explosives laden-barges to move into position at Birds Point, Mo., Saturday morning. They are expected to arrive late Saturday night. 

The general stressed that he has not yet made the ultimate decision on activating the Birds Point-New Madird Floodway. 

The next decision he faces is whether to begin pumping explosives into the levee to open a two-mile wide gap that would allow a quarter of the Mississippi's flow to be diverted into the 35-mile-long by as much as 12-mile-wide channel. 

Twenty-four hours after the initial hole is opened, the Corps would blow two holes into the levee at the southern end of the floodway to allow the water to pass back into the river.

The Corps said the spillway would lower flood levels by three to four feet upstream of Birds Point, by allowing water that had been stacking up to pass more quickly downstream.

That could save places like Cairo, Ill., a city of 3,000 at the confluence of the rivers. Gen. Walsh said the levee at Cairo was facing so-called sand-boils—water seeping under the levee that creates a bubbling cauldron of sand—larger than many engineers had ever seen before.

As of Saturday evening, the Ohio River was within inches of the 59.5-foot record set in the 1937 flood at Cairo. The river is expected to crest about a foot above that record early next week and remain there for several days—putting tremendous strain on the levees at Cairo and places like Hickman, Ky. After a few rare days of dry weather this spring, rains returned to the area Saturday and were expected to continue Sunday.

 Write to  Joe Barrett at joseph.barrett@wsj.com 