A study of nearly 112,000 implantable-defibrillator patients said more than one in five didn't meet medical guidelines for getting the expensive devices, and in some cases may not have needed one. 

The findings suggest that if doctors better stick to guidelines, it could lead to lower health-care costs, which could dampen a roughly $4.3 billion U.S. defibrillator market led by  Medtronic Inc.,
MDT


0.96
%




 Boston Scientific Corp.
BSX


1.25
%




 and  St. Jude Medical Inc.
STJ


0.71
%




 The companies are already dealing with sluggish growth and pressure on product prices. The devices can cost upward of $25,000 each. 

Defibrillator patients who fell outside guidelines were often sicker, leading to a higher rate of complications—including death—at hospitals, according to the study, which is being published in the Journal of the American Medical Association. This increase in complications was modest but still problematic, study authors said. 

"While a small risk of complications is acceptable when a procedure has been shown to improve outcomes, no risk is acceptable if a procedure has no demonstrated benefit," they wrote. They were led by Sana M. Al-Khatib, a cardiologist at Duke University Medical Center in North Carolina. 

Ralph Brindis, president of the American College of Cardiology, said this study will "have major implications for physicians and hospitals in their evaluation of their practice patterns." 

The study was funded by the National Heart Lung and Blood Institute. Dr. Al-Khatib and other study authors reported various ties to Medtronic and other drug and device firms. 

While the study highlights patients getting devices when they may not be good candidates, Medtronic and Boston Scientific noted that many patients who could be saved from sudden cardiac death by implants don't get them. Boston Scientific said "that on the whole, this life-saving therapy is under-utilized, rather than over-utilized." Also, the study doesn't have follow-up data to show whether patients who didn't meet guidelines still benefited from devices, Medtronic noted. 

Dr. Al-Khatib agreed that many patients covered by guidelines don't get treated, and she didn't conclude that overall too many devices are implanted. But there were cases where patients were treated with defibrillators instead of waiting to see whether time or other treatments would remove the need for a device, she said. 

Implants mainly ran afoul of guidelines due to timing issues, because guidelines call for waiting after heart attacks, surgery and a heart-failure diagnosis. "Many of these patients show improvement in their heart function if you wait," Dr. Al-Khatib said. 

The study was embargoed for release at 4 p.m. EST Tuesday by JAMA, but it leaked early and appeared to pressure device-makers' shares. St. Jude fell 2.6% to $41.17, while Boston Scientific dropped 1.6% to $7.48 and Medtronic slipped 31 cents to $37.10. 

The study reviewed data from a large national registry that collects information on heart patients, which has some limitations. For example, medical records may not precisely identify when heart failure began for some patients, but giving defibrillators too soon after a heart-failure diagnosis was the main way doctors failed to follow medical guidelines, two doctors noted in a JAMA editorial. 

The study doesn't discern why doctors weren't sticking to guidelines. Dr. Al-Khatib suggested that doctors' lack of awareness and knowledge were the culprits and indicated manufacturers didn't play a role. 

The devices in question jolt hearts when needed to stop potentially deadly rhythm problems. The study reviews implants for patients who haven't had an episode of sudden cardiac arrest but are considered at risk because of their heart's condition. 

Major medical associations have guidelines describing when patients are candidates for defibrillators. Doctors don't have to follow these guidelines, and the study noted that some implants outside guidelines may be appropriate. 

In this case, the study examined four circumstances that put patients outside guidelines: a heart attack within 40 days, bypass surgery within three months, a fresh heart-failure diagnosis or really severe heart failure. The study found 22.5% of the 111,707 reviewed patients fell outside guidelines because of these conditions. Dr. Al-Khatib said she considered this rate far too high. 

Some factors could blunt the industry impact even if doctors bring that rate down. Some patients will still need defibrillators after waiting, and the patients with severe heart failure could get a more expensive type of defibrillator instead, said Wells Fargo analyst Larry Biegelsen. He sees "modest downside" for defibrillator makers from the data. 

Meantime, the editorial writers suggested there could be "considerable savings" from taking alternative approaches to implants during the waiting period, like giving patients wearable external defibrillators. They also said that, if properly applied, the study findings could improve practice patterns and outcomes while also lowering health-care costs. 

The editorial was written by Alan Kadish of Touro College in New York and the Feinberg School of Medicine at Northwestern University in Chicago and Jeffrey Goldberger, also from the Feinberg School. 

 Write to  Jon Kamp at jon.kamp@dowjones.com 