Over the next four weeks, a parade of broad-shouldered gentlemen will appear on your television to authoritatively explain, often at high volume, why some NFL playoff teams are "hot" while others are "not." 

See a statistical analysis of the 12 teams still standing and hear from NFL players on how to beat them.

Some teams will be bestowed with outsized qualities such as the ability to "run the ball downhill" and "put up points" while other, less fortunate playoff teams will be accused of such high crimes as failing to "work as a unit" and thereby arriving at the threshold of the NFL playoffs "limping a little." 

We decided to do something kind of crazy—to venture outside the climate-controlled, fully catered, Wi-Fi-enabled press boxes to seek the opinions of a group that's generally less talkative: actual NFL players who've competed against these teams on the field this season. 

Some of the things these players said were surprising. One player said the New Orleans Saints' offense doesn't like a fair fight. Another said the Chicago Bears defense throws off opponents by charging around at unusual angles. And the Super-Bowl-favorite New England Patriots? Our expert panel said the NFL's current geniuses are actually kind of predictable.

With the wild-card round beginning Saturday, we'll present our findings in two parts. Today's installment: the insiders break down the playoff teams from the NFC. 

The conventional wisdom about the Falcons is that they rely on a bruising running back, Michael Turner, to keep linebackers from helping out on pass coverage and a passing game that hinges on quarterback Matt Ryan running bootlegs to get out of the pocket and throw on the run. That's not wrong, our experts said, but there's an important twist. 

 THE BIG REVEAL: James Anderson, a linebacker for the rival Carolina Panthers, says the play he fears most from the Falcons is what he calls the "crunch," a handoff to Mr. Turner where the back uses his lightning quick feet to fake the defense one way, just subtly, before taking off in another direction. "They get defenses running sideways," says Mr. Anderson. 

Join Jason Gay and Nando Di Fino for a live chat on the NFL playoffs at noon ET Thursday. Send your questions in advance to sports@wsj.com.

How do you prepare for this? Mr. Anderson says defenses can smoke the play out early by looking at Mr. Turner's feet. Most times, he stats runs by taking a big step to the outside. On the crunch play, however, the step is aimed more toward the middle of the line, allowing him to make the deadly cutback. 

The Bears hired "Greatest Show on Turf" architect Mike Martz as their offensive coordinator, but it's still the team's defense that makes headlines. That defense runs the Tampa 2 and this season it got a serious upgrade by picking up defensive end Julius Peppers. But that's not the whole story. 

 THE BIG REVEAL: On paper, the Bears' defense looks like nothing special, with the usual four down linemen and three linebackers—a formation known as a 4-3. But the Bears are unique in that they slant their defensive linemen to one side in an attempt to throw off the opposing offensive line. "For some linemen, it makes them hesitant," says Carolina guard Mackenzy Bernadeau. 

With Chicago's D-linemen slanting, usually to the strong side of the offense, Mr. Bernadeau said the team's formidable linebacking corps, which includes Pro Bowlers Lance Briggs and Brian Urlacher, fills in the gaps. Mr. Bernadeau says there is one way to beat the slanting Bears: By making perfect blocks. When that happens, he says, the slanting can actually make the running lanes wider. 

The Eagles, with their banged-up defense, have become the Michael Vick show. He throws, he runs, and if you watch the highlights, it's clear that the best way to beat the Eagles is to keep him off the field. 

 THE BIG REVEAL: The scary thing about Mr. Vick isn't so much his running ability, says Chris Hope, a safety for the Tennessee Titans, it's his ability to kill enough time in the backfield to give while wide receivers DeSean Jackson and Jeremy Maclin the chance to make "double moves" to get open. 

Even if the receivers are covered, Mr. Vick is able to make a fool out of any player who's tasked to "spy" him, or to keep him contained. Mr. Hope says the better option may be blitzing him. Although Mr. Vick can run away from blitzes or find wide receivers left open, it at least affords an opportunity to knock the mayonnaise out of him. 

The Seahawks are known for mediocrity on both sides of the ball with a slightly dangerous special-teams squad, a vanilla running game and a nuclear option in receiver Mike Williams.

 THE BIG REVEAL: Our panelists agreed on one point: The Seahawks have no business being in the playoffs. 

Much ink has been spilled describing the passing prowess of quarterback Drew Brees. The Saints rely on screen passes, running backs catching balls in the flat and running with them and the deep downfield threat of receiver Marques Colston. But what sets the Saints apart may be their ability to change colors like a chameleon. 

 THE BIG REVEAL: Chris Gocong, a linebacker for the Cleveland Browns, says what makes the Saints so prolific on offense isn't the skill of Mr. Brees or the out-of-this-world corps of receivers, it's the substitutions the team makes on offense. The team is constantly swapping out different "personnel groups," waiting to catch the defense with the wrong mix of players on the field. That's when the Saints go for big plays. "The guys upstairs watching personnel need to be on their toes," says Mr. Gocong. 

The Packers lost a bit of their offensive oomph when running back Ryan Grant went down, and they rely heavily on quarterback Aaron Rodgers to air it out. Their real success this season has come from a mayhem-inducing defense that's ranked fifth overall in the NFL. 

 THE BIG REVEAL: The Packers' defense, led by linebacker Clay Matthews, plays a 3-4 with three down linemen and four linebackers. But whereas most 3-4 teams line up head-on against interior linemen, the Packers often line up across from gaps on the offense, and sometimes to the far outside of the line. The idea, according to Geoff Hangartner, a center for the AFC's Buffalo Bills, is to more quickly penetrate the offensive backfield, creating havoc for pass blockers and run-blocking schemes. "The idea is, hopefully, to knock them back," says Mr. Hangartner. "But at times, a stalemate is a win." 

 Write to  Reed Albergotti at reed.albergotti@wsj.com 