As the possibility of high interest rate looms, companies need to start preparing for this eventuality.

Last week, this column talked about the likelihood of a global move from a low to high interest rate regime. The reason is simple. Rapid growth across emerging countries in Asia, Africa and Latin America is expected to increase the investment rate, but changing demographic profiles will lower savings rate. As a result, the global cost of capital is likely to increase in real terms.

An increase in real interest rates can significantly affect growth particularly in a capital starved economy like India. 

Companies, as a first step, need to focus on identifying projects that generate high returns. 

In a benign capital regime, growth and market share are often valid and sufficient reasons to pursue projects. Companies may expand distribution aggressively or expand capacities despite thinner margins purely to consolidate their position and ward off competition in the market place. Projects that generate returns below the cost of capital may be pursued if they help a company meet its long-term strategic objective.

However, in a high cost capital environment a relentless focus on returns has to be the norm. Companies need to explicitly tell their project teams to analyze cash flows and focus on a project's ability to generate return on capital employed.

Projects that do not meet the new high bar need to be dropped ruthlessly, as both lenders and investors will be highly sensitive to return expectations and such projects are unlikely to be financeable without straining the balance sheet.

Next, an ability to raise capital at lower cost will be a significant strategic advantage in the new world. Companies that enjoy strong brand equity and have direct access to investors will be able to save on intermediation costs and lower their cost of capital. 

It makes eminent sense to focus efforts on building bridges with investors across global pools of capital. It also makes sense to diversify the investor base by tapping across the capital base through debt, equity and hybrid instruments as also across geographies in local and international markets. Developing a retail investor base can also yield rich dividends, particularly in a time when global markets turn risk-averse.

While attempts to tap different markets may be costly in initial rounds, the long term benefits of having a diverse captive investor base that can be tapped in to provide scarce capital cannot be undermined. 

Recent retail bond issuances by State Bank of India are a case in point. In the last six months, India's largest bank has tapped the local market twice raising around 60 billion rupees ($1.35 billion) through attractively priced rupee bonds. Both the issues were oversubscribed and successful. 

In both instances, the bonds traded up on the first day of listing allowing investors to make attractive returns. While this drew criticism from some quarters for leaving too much money on the table, it shows SBI's astute understanding of its need to create and nurture a new investor base.

Companies would do well to follow such examples. Higher interest rates are here to stay, and corporations start to need to factor this in their decision making now.