

MUMBAI --Firstsource Solutions Ltd. has agreed to buy a majority stake in a Sri Lankan business process outsourcing venture in a bid to protect margins from competition, high staff turnover and rising wages at home. 

Firstsource will acquire a 74% stake in the business-process-outsourcing division of Sri Lankan mobile phone operator Dialog Axiata PLC, the company said in a statement to stock exchanges. 

It will spend a total of $1 million on the purchase and infusion of capital in the business, said Chief Executive Matthew Vallance. The money will be raised through internal accruals, he added. 

Firstsource has been struggling to compete with large rivals like Tata Consultancy Services Ltd. and Infosys Technologies Ltd. which offer outsourcing services through their units and use technology to minimize the deployment of people and keep costs low. 

The Mumbai-based company has been seeking to acquire the business-process-outsourcing units of potential customers in return for assured business as revenue from its main market, the U.S., declines. 

In September, it agreed to take over the Teesside customer service center of U.K.'s Barclaycard, as it received a five-year contract from the credit-card and consumer-lending business of Barclays PLC. 

The company has had trouble keeping staff, losing nine out of every 10 employees who were hired to serve Indian clients since March 2010. This kept costs high as Firstource had to spend repeatedly on hiring and training of new employees. 

Firstsource expects the Sri Lankan venture to report at least $20 million in revenue over five years from Dialog Axiata, a mobile-services operator and a unit of Malaysia's Axiata Group Bhd, Mr. Vallance said. 

The business process and technology services market in Sri Lanka is worth $1 billion and is growing at a pace of about 20% a year, he said. 

Firstsource will rename the division it is acquiring, Dialog Business Services, to Firstsource-Dialog Solutions, it said in the statement.

Firstsource said the business will manage Dialog's customer-service operations across its mobile, fixed line, pay television and broadband businesses in addition to offering services to other clients. 

Shares in the company closed 3.7% down at 18.30 rupees on the Bombay Stock Exchange, where the benchmark index fell 2.4%. 

