The chief prosecutor of the International Criminal Court said he has requested arrest warrants for Libyan leader Col. Moammar Gadhafi, one of his sons and his intelligence chief for alleged crimes against humanity in targeting civilians to beat back a rebellion. 

"The evidence shows that Moammar Gadhafi personally ordered attacks on Libyan civilians," said chief prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo at a news conference in The Hague on Monday. 

He said he and his team could show Col. Gadhafi had sat down with his son at formal meetings and plotted murderous violence against a list of Libyan citizens perceived to be enemies. 

He is also seeking warrants for Saif al-Islam Gadhafi and intelligence director Abdellah al-Senussi, Col. Gadhafi's brother-in-law and director of the country's security services. 

Mr. Moreno-Ocampo referred to the younger Mr. Gadhafi as "the executioner" and described a culture of serial political assassination, rape and theft. Before the revolt, Saif al-Islam, educated at the London School of Economics, had been considered a pro-Western modernizer within the regime.

Judges at the ICC will hear Mr. Moreno-Ocampo's evidence over the next three months to decide whether to issue warrants.

The Libyan government denied it ordered the killing of civilian protesters and said it would ignore arrest warrants against the three men. Spokesman Moussa Ibrahim said the prosecutor had relied on faulty media reports and "reached incoherent conclusions." 

The response suggested that international warrants would harden Col. Gadhafi's resolve to fight rather than to opt for a negotiated settlement to step down. A warrant against him would narrow his prospects for exile.

The Gadhafi government didn't cooperate with Mr. Moreno-Ocampo's investigation, but has allowed an inspection by the United Nations Human Rights Council, which has yet to report on the results of a one-day fact-finding mission to Tripoli in late April.

Officials in the rebel administration in Benghazi, Libya, the National Transitional Council, reveled in Mr. Moreno-Ocampo's call for arrest warrants. 

"It's a huge boost for morale," said Mustafa Gheriani, a businessman and adviser to the council.

Council spokesman Abdel-Hafeez Ghoga, while admitting the difficulties of arresting Col. Gadhafi, said the Libyan leader, his sons and aides should be tried in Libya first, both for crimes committed since the start of the uprising in February and those that took place during his rule of more than four decades. 

From the start of the rebellion, Col. Gadhafi has pledged to fight to the death. "I am not going to leave this land," he declared in a televised address in February, before the ICC was called in as part of a U.N. resolution. "I will die here as a martyr."

Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, a 58-year-old Argentine lawyer who once starred in a reality-TV legal show, painted an unequivocal picture for reporters and a television audience. Mr. Moreno-Ocampo said regime forces "shot at demonstrators using live ammunition, using heavy weaponry against funeral processions and placed snipers to kill those leaving mosques after prayers."

A network of exiles had delivered the most credible evidence, said officials who worked with Mr. Moreno-Ocampo. His team has interviewed some 50 people, collected 1,200 documents, and traveled to 11 countries, he said. 

If the ICC judges choose to issue warrants, Libya would be legally obligated to turn over the three men, though that is unlikely. If the men leave the country, other ICC signatories are legally committed to arresting them. The ICC has no police force of its own. 

The ICC prosecutor's request "acts as a warning bell to others that serious crimes will not go unpunished," said  Richard Dicker, international justice director at Human Rights Watch. 

The Gadhafi government has proposed a cease-fire and amnesty that would give tribal leaders on both sides of the conflict a chance to arrange talks on "national reconciliation," bypassing the rebel leadership in Benghazi and leaving the regime in power.

Deputy Foreign Minister Khalid Kaim said senior Libyan officials offered a cease-fire plan Sunday during a meeting in Tripoli with Abdel Elah al-Khatib, the U.N.'s special envoy for Libya. The envoy, who also met with pro-government tribal leaders, left Tripoli without comment.

"If NATO stopped bombing, the Libyan people could resolve their differences among themselves," Mr. Kaim said.

The rebel leadership dismissed the cease-fire initiative. Rebel leaders have said they won't stop fighting or accept any negotiated settlement that would leave Col. Gadhafi and his family in power.

Libyan authorities contend that the North Atlantic Treaty Organization is committing war crimes by bombing the country. 

The U.N. Security Council authorized the airstrikes to protect civilians from Col. Gadhafi's war machine, but the Libyan government says they are killing civilians and destroying the country's infrastructure.

Shortly after Mr. Moreno-Ocampo's announcement in The Hague, the Libyan government arranged a briefing to detail what it called $1.25 billion in damages caused by the bombing to telephone, broadcasting and other telecommunications facilities. The head of the communications workers union said some employees had been keeping a round-the-clock vigil at such sites since early April, serving as human shields. He said there had been a few casualties but he didn't say how many. 

 Write to  John W. Miller at john.miller@dowjones.com, Richard Boudreaux at richard.boudreaux@wsj.com and Sam Dagher at sam.dagher@wsj.com 