 (Please see Corrections and Amplifications below.) 

The stock market still is trying to claw back to its peak before the financial crisis, and housing prices may not yet have bottomed. Some commodities, however, already cost significantly more than they did before the bubble burst just over two years ago, and many others are rising fast.

Read the complete  Year-End Review report .

In a measure of how powerful the raw-materials rally has been, copper and gold are at all-time highs, while cotton and sugar are pricier than in mid-2008. And oil, while down from its peak of $145 a barrel from July 2008, is still pricier than in September 2007, a year before Lehman Brothers collapsed.

The Dow Jones-UBS Commodity Index, which tracks 19 commodities, rose 16.8% in 2010, after climbing 19% in 2009. It remains 11% below its level at the end of 2007, but sub-indexes for metals and agriculture were both up during the past year, while energy was down.

The broad commodities rally has been propelled largely by demand from China and other rapidly growing nations, which have also bounced back quickly from the economic slowdown and are straining the ability of the world's drillers, miners and farmers to meet their needs.

But commodities also are drawing record-setting interest from hedge funds, pension funds and other institutional investors eager to profit from the run-up. Such investors were expected to have poured $60 billion into the commodities markets in 2010, the second largest inflow after $76 billion in 2009, according to Barclays Capital. 

The flood of cash is raising concerns about potential consequences if investor sentiment turns away from commodities, perhaps if the Federal Reserve signals an intent to raise interest rates after years of extraordinarily loose monetary policy.

"When will this money leave the commodity space? That's the billion-dollar question, and nobody knows exactly,"  Bob Takai, general manager of financial services at Sumitomo Corp., said in an email. "But everyone knows it will be very ugly."

For now, however, demand is strong and investors eager, and the results were clearly visible across the commodity markets in 2010.

In 2010, investors were in the driver's seat for precious metals. 

From multibillion-dollar hedge funds to ordinary individuals, investors piled into exchange-traded funds and futures contracts linked to gold and its shiny brethren.

Concerns about economic instability in the West and the risk of inflation in China and other developing nations sent investors fleeing for perceived safe havens, benefiting the group.

Gold ended the year at a record of $1421.10 per ounce, up 29.8%. Last year not only marked the yellow metal's 10th straight up year, but was also its best-performing year in dollar terms in history. 

"This is the first time for many years that investors have been as influential as they have," said  James Steel, a precious-metals analyst at HSBC Bank USA. "Without the increased investor demand, it wouldn't take the market to these levels."

Platinum and palladium, used in car parts, also jumped last year on the back of a recovery of the world's automobile industry.

Palladium soared 97.3%, as it is heavily used in gasoline-fueled engines common in Asia and North America, regions that saw the fastest growth in auto production. Mr. Steel is expecting a 200,000-ounce palladium deficit in 2011, which would be the first deficit in decades. 

Higher emissions standards for farm equipment and other off-road equipment, meanwhile, are pushing up platinum demand at a time of tight supplies,  Dwight Anderson, managing partner at Ospraie Management LLC, a commodities-focused hedge fund, said at a conference this fall. Platinum rose 21.5% in 2010. 

But of all the precious metals, silver's surge came as a big surprise, gaining 83.8% to $30.91 a troy ounce. "People like farmers and bond investors who had remained with safe assets have started to allocate to metals like silver," said  Phillip Streible, senior market strategist at Lind-Waldock. 

The silver market's relatively small market size—$19 billion, compared with $170 billion for gold—means prices are "very highly geared to growth in investor inflows," GFMS said. The largest silver ETF—BlackRock Inc.'s $10 billion iShares Silver Trust—saw an inflow of $1.1 billion during the first 11 months of 2010.

Among base metals, meanwhile, copper remains the favorite industrial metal among a number of analysts. Strong demand from emerging countries, along with a continuous decline of inventories, pushed copper prices up by 33.4% to $4.4395 a pound, a record. 

In mid-spring, placid markets for many major agricultural commodities suggested steady supply and manageable demand. By summer's end, that balance was gone.

In its place came a series of dramatic price spikes, many spurred by supply constraints of key food crops, which reignited global concerns about potential shortages to meet some of humanity's most basic needs.

A drought in Russia sent wheat prices soaring, and corn and soybeans followed, reviving memories of the 2008 rally that preceded the financial crisis. By year-end, corn prices were up 93.5% from June lows, and ended the year up 51.8%. Wheat and soybeans gained 46.7% and 34.1%, respectively, on the year.

Other crops leapt, too. Flooding in Pakistan cut the cotton harvest while Chinese imports soared, sending prices higher than they had been in more than a century. Coffee shot up 76.9% in 2010, while sugar rose 19.2%.

"We've got a more broad-based rally," said  Bill Cordingley, a food and agribusiness analyst at Rabobank, a major agricultural lender.

The rally has investors and policy makers paying close attention to developments that could propel prices higher still in 2011. Dry weather in South America could threaten the size of that harvest, and there are lingering concerns about how much wheat drought-racked Russia will produce next year.

In the U.S., meanwhile, farmers are making key decisions in the coming weeks about what they can plant most profitably, putting a spotlight on estimates of how many acres nationwide will be dedicated to each crop.

In November, the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization's food price index rose for the sixth straight month, putting it just below the peak it hit in June 2008.

No wonder few are predicting agricultural markets will soon return to widespread calm.

For most of the past year, the oil market—the biggest of the commodities by market value—was a dull place.

Robust demand from emerging countries was tempered by record-high stockpiles in developed nations. Larger economic forces were the main driver for prices, and oil and stocks were unusually tightly correlated. Prices stayed in a narrow band between $68 and $92 a barrel. Oil ended the year up 15.2% at $91.38 a barrel.

But the relationship began to break down toward year-end, as oil inventories were whittled down by a global manufacturing recovery and prices reached a two-year high on Dec. 6, at $89.38.

Global oil demand was on track to hit an all-time high in 2010, growing 2.9% to 87.45 million barrels a day, according to the International Energy Agency. The agency forecast a further expansion in 2011, although at a slower pace, to 88.77 million barrels a day. 

On the supply side, meanwhile, many oil producers had curtailed their capital spending during the course of financial crisis, and it usually takes years for new fields to start pumping oil.

Globally, the depletion rate for oil production—or annual production divided by oil reserves—is about 8%, said  Kurt Hallead, co-head of global energy research with RBC Capital Markets. "The challenge for the industry is to continue to replace what's being depleted and produce enough on top of that to meet the long-term projected demand," he said.

The supply-demand dynamic is leading some to predict a strong rally. Morgan Stanley analysts predicted recently that crude oil would go "above $100 per barrel" in 2011, in a recent note.

Natural gas, by contrast, was among the worst-performing commodities in 2010, down 20.9% for the year. Prices were weighed down by continuing growth of unconventional shale gas in North America, and still-weak demand. 

Analysts expect the gas market to struggle further in 2011. Though the surplus may ease, the U.S. will still produce 200 million cubic feet per day more than it consumes, Mr. Hallead said. 

"Most people in the industry are now of the view that long-term gas prices will probably be in the band from $4 to $6" per million British thermal units, said  Frank Murphy, managing director at Robert W. Baird & Co. At year's end, those prices were $4.405.

 Corrections and Amplifications 

The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization's food price index had risen for five consecutive months as of November. This article incorrectly says the index had risen six straight months. Also, crude-oil futures settled at a two-year high of $89.38 a barrel on Dec. 6, 2010. An earlier version of this article said the Dec. 6 settlement was $91.51, which was a later peak, hit on Dec. 23.

 Write to  Liam Pleven at liam.pleven@wsj.com and Carolyn Cui at carolyn.cui@wsj.com 