WASHINGTON—President Barack Obama on Friday demanded that Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi immediately halt all attacks against civilians and withdraw his forces from eastern cities, vowing military action if he fails to comply. 

"The United States of America won't stand idly by in the face of actions that undermine global peace and security," Mr. Obama vowed in a short speech at the White House. He said the U.S. won't be deploying ground troops. 

Mr. Obama signaled a limited U.S. military role, saying the U.S. would provide assets to enable European and Arab allies to enforce a no-fly zone. 

"Here's why this matters to us: Left unchecked we have every reason to believe that Mr. Gadhafi would commit atrocities against his people, many thousands could die, a humanitarian crisis would ensue, the entire region could be destabilized," Mr. Obama said. 

He said the U.S. would provide "unique capabilities" to enable "our European allies and Arab partners to effectively enforce a no-fly zone." 

Mr. Obama said he directed Secretary of Defense Robert Gates and the Pentagon to coordinate military planning. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton will travel on Saturday to Paris to meet with European allies to discuss how the resolution will be enforced, he said.

To comply with the United Nations Security Council resolution, Mr. Obama said Mr. Gadhafi must stop his troops from advancing on Benghazi, the rebel capital, as well as pull his troops back from other strategic towns.

"Let me be clear, these terms are not negotiable," Mr. Obama said.

His comments come as attacks against rebels continued despite claims from Libya's top government leaders that they would institute a cease-fire. A United Nations Security Council resolution called for an immediate cease-fire and authorized military force against the Libyan government. 

Earlier Friday, Mrs. Clinton was leery of proclamations from Mr. Gadhafi's foreign minister that attacks against rebels would stop. Mr. Gadhafi and his loyalists have repeatedly vowed that his government wouldn't give up fighting. 

"We are going to be not responsive or impressed by words," Mrs. Clinton said at the U.S. State Department. "We would have to see actions on the ground, and that is not yet at all clear." 

The president's comments came after he met with a bipartisan group of congressional leaders, including Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D., Nev.), House Speaker John Boehner (R., Ohio), Sen. Dick Lugar (R., Ind.), the top Republican Senate Foreign Relations Committee and Democratic Sen. John Kerry of Massachusetts. 

Mr. Lugar has said Mr. Obama should ask Congress for a declaration of war to enforce a no-fly zone. He also argued that U.S. taxpayers shouldn't have to pay for military intervention, suggesting the Arab League foot the bill. 

Mr. Kerry, along with Republican Sen. John McCain of Arizona and independent Sen. Joe Lieberman of Connecticut, have called for the U.N. resolution to be acted on immediately. 