A larger-than-expected exodus from Cleveland during the past decade shrunk the city's population by 17% to about 397,000, according to U.S. Census data released Wednesday.

The steepness of the drop prompted a skeptical reaction at Cleveland City Hall. "We believe it is a significant undercount," said City Planner Robert Brown.

Political observers said the decline could tilt the balance of political power in one of America's most hotly contested swing states.

"Ohio is expected to lose two congressional districts, and this big decline in Cleveland suggests that both could come out of northeastern Ohio," a Democratic stronghold, said John Green, a University of Akron political-science professor.

Demographers inside and outside of Ohio expected the 2010 population to drop to about 430,000. Its actual fall to below 400,000 is humbling for a city once ranked as America's fifth largest, with its population peaking in 1950 at 915,000.

The drop also shatters the turnaround hopes that arose when Cleveland lost only 5% of its population during the 1990s, following a 12% drop in the 1980s and a 24% drop in the 1970s. The latest drop of 17% is second only to that '70s decline.

City officials said Wednesday that the foreclosure crisis struck particularly hard, forcing many residents to leave and prompting others to take shelter in places where they failed to gain the notice of census takers. 

"We very much question the accuracy of the count," said Mr. Brown, the city planner.

Mayor Frank G. Jackson said the census figures failed to reflect the laying of groundwork for a residential renaissance downtown as well as a continuing evolution of Cleveland—a quintessential Rust Belt city—into a center of medicine, finance and biotechnology, alongside a base of manufacturers.

In a turnabout from the 1990s, Cleveland had a net loss of blacks during the past decade, said William Frey, a demographer at the Brookings Institution, adding that Cleveland received a smaller bump from incoming Hispanics than did many other Midwestern cities such as Chicago.

Still, Mr. Frey noted that other Midwestern cities may yet receiver starker news than Cleveland's. "Michigan's numbers aren't out yet, so we haven't seen what Detroit's going to look like," he said.

 Write to  Kevin Helliker at kevin.helliker@wsj.com 