KIEV, Ukraine—The personal nurse of embattled Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi kept her silence Monday after returning home to Ukraine from the side of a man she apparently called "Papa."

Galyna Kolotnytska, described in a diplomatic cable published by WikiLeaks as a "voluptuous blonde" who "travel[s] everywhere" with Col. Gadhafi, spent her first full day back in Ukraine holed up in her apartment in Brovary, a small town near Kiev, refusing to speak with the roughly 30 reporters swarming outside her modest building.

She arrived in Kiev on a flight with around 185 evacuees from Tripoli early Sunday.

Vladislav Voloshyn, a journalist who was on the flight working for a publication of Ukraine's Ministry of Defense, said she wouldn't answer his questions, but appeared relaxed and defiant in support of her increasingly isolated former boss. "Papa is the best!" he said she called out in Russian while on board, apparently referring to Col. Gadhafi.

"She said life would be worse for her without Papa," Mr. Voloshyn said.

Looking slim and youthful with her blond hair tied back, Ms. Kolotnytska smiled at a television camera in the arrivals hall Sunday, but she didn't speak to reporters as family members ushered her to a waiting car.

Ms. Kolotnytska spent most of Monday in her ground-floor apartment with blinds drawn and not answering the doorbell. She left for around an hour in the afternoon, again declining to answer questions before getting into a cab.

Her young adult daughter, Tetyana, had emerged briefly in the morning, telling reporters that her mother needed to rest.

See some key dates in Col. Gadhafi's nearly 42-year reign.

According to the cable from September 2009, contacts in Tripoli told U.S. diplomats that Col. Gadhafi "relies heavily" on Ms. Kolotnytska, then 38 years old, as "she alone 'knows his routine.' "

The cable also reported claims from unnamed sources that the eccentric Libyan leader and the nurse, part of a retinue of four Ukrainians, "have a romantic relationship."

Tetyana Kolotnytska denied her mother had any romantic ties in an earlier interview with Ukrainian newspaper Segodnya. She said her mother had been in Libya for nine years, originally employed in a hospital before starting work for Col. Gadhafi.

She said her mother's job was tough and that she traveled widely and worked irregular hours.

"My mother is close to him (Col. Gadhafi)," she said. "Mother speaks well of Gadhafi. She says he's a kind person, but can be strict when necessary."

"Other Ukrainian women also work for him as nurses. Mom is one of them," she added. "For some reason, he doesn't trust Libyan women with this matter."

—Viktoria Butenko in Brovary, Ukraine, contributed to this article.

 Write to  James Marson at j.r.marson@gmail.com 