 Spain plans to inject billions more euros into its troubled savings banks and may force them to adopt more transparent structures, people familiar with the matter said, an acknowledgment that previous efforts to fix the sector have fallen flat. 

 Portugal sold €750 million ($1 billion) in 12-month Treasury bills at much lower yields than in a prior auction, suggesting investors' fears over the euro zone's sovereign-debt crisis are moderating. The short-term T-bills were sold at an average yield of 4.029%, sharply down from 5.281% at the previous auction for the same maturity on Dec. 1. 

The euro zone's current-account deficit in November was close to a two-year high as the deficit in goods widened, data from the European Central Bank showed. The current-account deficit widened to €11.2 billion ($14.99 billion) in November, the largest shortfall since the €11.6 billion deficit in December 2008. 

 Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orban confronted critics in the European Parliament, defending his unorthodox economic policies and a controversial new media law as his country takes on the presidency of the European Union. 

Dozens of members of the EU legislature put tape over their mouths in protest against what they see as overly restrictive limits on freedom of expression in Hungary when Orban rose to speak in the parliament's chamber in Strasbourg, France.

 Poland's central bank raised all of its policy rates by a quarter point, ending a period of record-low rates that had lasted 19 months, as consumer price inflation continues to accelerate in the largest economy in the European Union's eastern wing.  

German gross domestic product will grow 2.3% in 2011, the government forecast, as continuing demand from abroad and improving domestic conditions boost Europe's largest economy. Last fall, the government predicted 1.8% growth for 2011. 

 Swiss Economics Minister Johann Schneider-Ammann said the country faced a serious situation as result of the Swiss franc's recent appreciation, and may adopt measures used during the recent financial crisis to help some of the business sectors affected.  

 Former Julius Baer Group private banker Rudolf Elmer was sentenced to two years' probation and a suspended fine for threatening an employee of the bank and breaching Swiss bank secrecy laws. 

 The U.K.'s Conservative-led government unveiled a plan to revamp the 63-year-old National Health Service amid loud protests from doctors and other health-care professionals, as a closely watched fight over state-financed health care moved into high gear. 

Three major U.K. government departments—Defence, Health and Education—"lost control of public spending" at points during the Labour Party's time in power, the Treasury's most senior civil servant, Treasury Permanent Secretary Nicholas MacPherson told Parliament. 

 The U.K. labor market showed little sign of improvement in the three months to November, as the number of 16- to 24-year-olds out of work hit the highest level since records began in 1992, data showed.  

 The Financial Services Authority's head of supervision for U.K. life insurers is leaving the regulatory agency, the latest in a string of senior-staff departures. Stuart King, who has been with the FSA in a variety of roles since the agency was created in 1998, is quitting in coming months to become a managing director at regulatory-consulting firm Promontory Financial Group. 

A new British law that took effect Wednesday makes Queen Elizabeth II, Prince Charles and Prince William exempt from freedom of information laws, meaning many private details of their lives won't be made public for decades. 

 One in five young people in Italy are neither working nor studying, in what marks the highest number of "idle" youths in the Europe Union, according to Italian national statistics agency Istat.  

 U.S. President Barack Obama formally welcomed Chinese President Hu Jintao to the White House, with both leaders calling for a renewed effort of cooperation as they embarked on a summit that will help redefine the relationship between the world's longtime superpower and its rising Asian rival. 

A senior administration official said that in the run-up to the summit, U.S. and Chinese companies have signed about $45 billion of export deals. 

 President Barack Obama is riding a wave of public support into next week's State of the Union address, with more Americans approving of his performance and more seeing him as a political moderate, according to a new Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll. 

But public concern is coalescing around the stubbornly high unemployment rate.

 U.S. Representative Gabrielle Giffords, recovering from a bullet wound to her brain after being shot at close range Jan. 8, is expected to leave her Tucson, Arizona, hospital and move to a Houston rehabilitation center as early as Friday, her office said. 

Home construction in the U.S. fell to its lowest level in more than a year in December as builders cut back on new single-family homes, the latest sign of a moribund market. 

 A former consultant to hedge-fund firm New Castle Funds pleaded guilty in a closely watched insider-trading case. The plea by Danielle Chiesi could put pressure on Galleon Group founder Raj Rajaratnam, who was charged along with Chiesi and four others in October 2009.  

A water-spray system that helps suppress explosive coal dust wasn't functioning properly when a Massey Energy coal mine in West Virginia blew up last April, killing 29 men, federal mine-safety officials said. 

Former Haitian dictator Jean-Claude Duvalier plans to remain in his Caribbean homeland even though authorities want him to leave the crisis-hit country, one of his lawyers said. He stressed that Haiti's government hasn't ordered Duvalier to return to France following his surprise return Sunday after a 25-year exile.

 Vietnam's Communist Party reappointed Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung to its elite Politburo at a secretive congress, in a move that paves the way for the nation's top leader to serve a second term despite economists' concerns about his willingness to apply tough measures to tackle double-digit inflation rates.  

 Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh reshuffled his cabinet in an effort to invigorate a coalition government hit by corruption scandals and faced with rising criticism for failing to keep a lid on surging food prices. Singh promised a more extensive reshuffle after the federal budget in February. 

India is expected to award an order for 126 fighter jets worth an estimated more than $10 billion for its air force by the end of this year, Junior Defense Minister M.M. Pallam Raju said. Six companies—Lockheed Martin, Boeing, Eurofighter Typhoon, Russian Aircraft, Sweden's Saab and Dassault Aviation—are competing for the contract. 

 The conflict over Afghanistan's controversial legislative elections intensified, as President Hamid Karzai agreed to delay the incoming parliament's opening by a month to give a tribunal more time to investigate fraud allegations. Karzai has repeatedly criticized the new parliament, which was scheduled to convene Sunday, as unrepresentative.  

 A Tunisian prosecutor opened an investigation into the overseas assets of the ousted president and his family, as Tunisian authorities worked to restore order amid street protests against remnants of the former regime. His relatives—especially his wife's family—were seen as corrupt and dominated many Tunisian businesses. 

The move came as hundreds of protesters led a peaceful—if noisy—rally in central Tunis, demanding that former allies of deposed President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali stop clinging to power.

Moody's downgraded Tunisia's sovereign rating by one notch and changed the country's outlook to negative from stable.

 The United Nations' Security Council voted unanimously to deploy 2,000 more peacekeepers to Ivory Coast, moving to bulk up its presence in the West African nation as the incumbent president, Laurent Gbagbo, clings to power and neighbors mull the use of force to oust him. 

The spirits of Australians took a hit this month from the devastating flooding, with the Consumer Sentiment Index down 5.7% in seasonally adjusted terms from its December level.