BRUSSELS—European finance ministers sealed a detailed agreement establishing a new bailout fund able to lend €500 billion, or about $710 billion, to troubled euro-zone countries.

The new fund will start operating in 2013 to replace the current, temporary fund. The key difference: The new fund requires the 17 euro-zone countries to put up €80 billion in cash. The temporary vehicle relies only on loan guarantees and didn't require the countries to put up any cash.

The new fund also will require countries to commit to providing an additional €620 billion in capital, if needed, to secure a top credit rating.

The construction of the bailout fund was one of several pieces to make up what European governments have described as a broad program to attack the sovereign-debt crisis. 

European Union leaders meet at the end of this week and have promised to forge a comprehensive deal. European officials cast the bailout-fund agreement as a significant step toward it.

"We now have a comprehensive strategy to strengthen the foundations of the euro area and to restore confidence in the euro-area sovereign-bond markets," said Olli Rehn, the EU economy commissioner. Markets "cannot have the slightest doubt about our capacity to act even in the most stressed scenarios." 

Still, several loose ends still must be tied up. Ministers made no decision Monday about enlarging the current bailout fund. It is touted as having €440 billion in loan guarantees, but in practice it can lend only about €250 billion because of restrictions needed to obtain a high credit rating. Euro-zone leaders have pledged to make the entire €440 billion available but haven't agreed how.

Meantime, a political crisis flared Monday in wobbly Portugal. Its prime minister promised at the last European summit, on March 11, to deliver budget savings to ward off a bailout. 

But the main opposition party has said it won't vote to approve the savings. That could spark a collapse of the government, and likely a bailout, as soon as this week.

And Dublin, which received a bailout last year, is keen to renegotiate the terms of its deal. Scant progress was made on that Monday.

In constructing the new bailout fund, the ministers agreed to cut the price future recipients would pay. That has been a major gripe for Ireland, which pays around 6% for its EU aid.

The temporary fund applies a surcharge of three percentage points over its cost of borrowing money. The new fund will add two points. 

Ireland has asked for a break. But other countries want Ireland to raise its low corporate tax rates in exchange. Ireland has refused, resulting in a stalemate. 

Stress tests next week on beleaguered Irish banks will add a wild card. The results are expected to show that the government needs to inject more capital into banks, which could increase pressure to renegotiate the terms of the Irish bailout.

The agreement reached Monday puts most of the burden for the new bailout fund on the shoulders of the euro zone's big countries. 

Germany will contribute 27.1% of the fund's capital, France 20.4%, Italy 17.9% and Spain 11.9%. That means Germany, for instance, will be responsible for €190 billion of the €700 billion total. 

The fund is required to have commitments greater than its €500 billion lending capacity in order to secure a triple-A rating, which will let the fund raise money cheaply on debt markets.

As with the current, temporary fund, the new rescue vehicle is constructed as an off-balance-sheet entity that raises money as needed.

The countries agreed to inject €40 billion in cash to form the fund's paid-in capital base in July 2013, with the remaining €40 billion in cash coming over the following three years. 

That €80 billion upfront means Germany must write checks totaling €27.1 billion and Spain, €9.52 billion.

An official said the fund should be able to lend the full €500 billion off its €80 billion in paid-in capital. The rest of the capital, about €620 billion, would stand ready if needed to absorb any losses.

Separately, European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet signaled that the bank is likely to increase interest rates as soon as next month. Other top ECB officials echoed his remarks, suggesting that unrest in the Middle East, military strikes against Libya and the crisis in Japan haven't budged the ECB from its view that inflation risks merit a more restrictive monetary policy.