The footprint of European culture can be felt across nearly every wine region in the world. From Argentina to Adelaide, winemakers, merchants and owners can almost always point to a period in their history when a foreign—mainly European—influence played a part in their development. In Australia, the vines were imported in the late 18th century by Europeans, including Italian immigrants, who also helped establish a viticultural presence in Brazil. Further south, the plains of Chile and Argentina were planted with vines brought by the Spanish conquistadores.

The trend isn't limited to countries outside of the northern hemisphere. In Bordeaux, it was Dutch engineers who drained the marshy lowlands of the Médoc, making them suitable for wine growing, while Champagne growers can look to England, where glassmakers first pioneered the stronger bottle that enabled the sparkling wine to be bottled and exported to the taverns of London, providing them with a lucrative market. 

In the 20th century, Europe continued to export its wine-making knowledge. In California, well-known Champagne houses such as Moët & Chandon and G.H. Mumm bought parcels of land to develop sparkling wine using the knowledge they had honed in the cellars of Épernay and Reims. Champagne Mumm's California joint venture was the first of many made by established European estates, as they looked to exploit new lands and markets outside of the traditional wine-growing regions. One of the most recent of these is Hyde de Villaine, a venture between Aubert de Villaine, co-owner of Burgundy's Domaine de la Romanée-Conti, and Napa's Larry Hyde. But perhaps the most famous is Opus One. Announced in 1979, it teamed up Robert Mondavi with Baron Philippe de Rothschild SA's first growth, Château Mouton Rothschild. (The venture is now split between Rothschild and Constellation, which bought out Mondavi's share.)

I recently tasted through nine back vintages of Opus One stretching back to 1987 with winemaker Michael Silacci. Under Mr. Silacci, whose first vintage was in 2001, I noticed the style had become richer and more opulent than the early vintages, which still betrayed a more obvious, cedar Bordeaux character. But these wines are still tailored to bridge the divide between the Old and New Worlds, and they retain that distinctive cedary, polished style.



Mendoza, Argentina  Vintage: 1999  Alcohol: 13.5%  Price: Upon request

The challenge with today's cross-cultural projects is to create wines with a New World character and the poise of the Old World. This is a stylish wine from a joint venture that works. Pierre Lurton has sourced a small parcel of ungrafted vines at an altitude of 980 meters above sea level. The 1999 is very forward and ripe with top notes of dark cherries, cedar, tobacco and chocolate. The vintage saw a crisp spring and a humid summer. During the harvest, the weather improved, resulting in a long ripening season that made the wines concentrated and full. On the palate, the wine has sweet tannins and a slight feel of the forest floor. We tasted it with T-bone steak, and the combination worked very well.

Seventeen years after the creation of Opus One, Baron Philippe de Rothschild once again crossed the Atlantic, this time to Chile, where, with Concha y Toro, the winery created Almaviva. The move came eight years after Château Lafite owner Domaines Barons de Rothschild took over the Los Vascos estate in the Colchagua region, 200 kilometers southwest of Santiago. In 2001, Laurent Dassault, the owner of Saint Emilion's Château Dassault and Château La Fleur, joined forces with Viña San Pedro, one of largest wine producers in Chile, to produce Altair. The San Pedro group has now assumed full control of the venture. Not to be outdone, in 1999 Pierre Lurton, director of Bordeaux's Château Cheval Blanc, created Cheval des Andes in Argentina in collaboration with Terrazas de los Andes. The trick, as always, is to marry the forward character of Argentinean wines with the balance of Bordeaux. 

I tasted the 1999, 2003 and 2006 vintages of Cheval des Andes, all of which vary in their blends of Malbec and Cabernet Sauvignon. The 2006 has by far the most Malbec, with 60%, compared with 35% Cabernet Sauvignon and 5% Merlot. The result is an intense wine with a lot of red fruits such as strawberry and cherry flavors. With time, it opened up, displaying layers of flavors such as smoke and tobacco. The 2003 is a blend of 41% Malbec, 41% Cabernet Sauvignon and 18% Petit Verdot. This was by far the most forward and unctuous of the three, with a distinctive chocolate, spice and tobacco character. The 1999 now has a ripe edge. 

As joint ventures go, Cheval des Andes works well. In the same bracket, I would place Los Vascos, Hyde de Villaine and Opus One. But with all these projects, the proof of the pudding is in the price, which sometimes can seem a little high.

 Write to  Will Lyons at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 