The U.S. regulator for commodities trading threatened  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
GS


0.38
%




 with possible civil-fraud charges over the firm's role in clearing trades for a client.

In its quarterly report, Goldman said the Commodity Futures Trading Commission's staff has "orally advised" the bank that it "intends to recommend" that the agency file "aiding and abetting, civil fraud and supervision-related charges" against Goldman's trade-clearing unit. 

The potential charges relate to trades handled by Goldman where the firm "knew or should have known" that an unnamed brokerage operation was using customer accounts in transactions with Goldman, rather than the client's own accounts.

Additional details were unknown, including exactly what might have gone wrong, what the CFTC may allege in any lawsuit, or the trading volume being investigated by the CFTC. A spokesman for the CFTC declined to comment. Goldman said in its securities filing that it is cooperating with regulators. A company spokesman declined to comment further.

The disclosure raises the question of whether regulators will hold Wall Street firms accountable for spotting suspicious behavior among clients who buy, sell and do other business through securities firms. Last year, Goldman was ordered by an arbitration panel to pay $20.6 million to creditors of Bayou Group LLC for ignoring warning signs of fraud at the hedge fund. Goldman cleared trades for Bayou before it collapsed in 2005. Goldman is appealing a federal judge's November ruling that ordered the company to pay the award. 

The CFTC, led by former Goldman partner  Gary Gensler, has gotten more aggressive in the wake of the financial crisis. Last year's Dodd-Frank financial-overhaul law gave the CFTC more authority to pursue fraud charges. The agency's new enforcement chief,  David Meister, vowed last week to battle fraud and manipulation.

  Brooksley Born, a former CFTC chairman who lost her battle more than a decade ago to win oversight for the agency on over-the-counter derivatives, said the agency is rebounding from an era when its enforcement powers were "substantially weakened."

"The Great Recession was a wake-up call" for regulators to act, Ms. Born said Tuesday.

Civil-fraud charges by the CFTC would be a setback in Goldman's effort to escape recent legal woes. At the firm's annual shareholder meeting last week, Goldman said it paid $726 million in legal fees in 2010. 

Last year, Goldman paid an additional $550 million to settle accusations by the Securities and Exchange Commission that the company duped customers in the sale of a mortgage deal called Abacus 2007-AC1. The matter led to an extensive internal review of Goldman's business practices and numerous changes. Goldman admitted making mistakes but denied cheating clients. 

Tuesday's securities filing included much-more-extensive disclosures of lawsuits and regulatory scrutiny aimed at Goldman than was typical in previous filings. For example, Goldman said it is "in discussions" with Massachusetts securities regulators about their probe into certain research activities at the firm. In 2009, Massachusetts officials subpoenaed Goldman about the firm's weekly "trading huddles," where research analysts gave traders stock tips, some of which were passed to Goldman clients. Regulators have expressed concern that the huddles unfairly gave favored clients an advantage over other Goldman customers. Goldman representatives said in 2009 that ideas that came out of trading huddles were "market color" and "always consistent" with analysis in published research reports. 

Goldman also said it has received subpoenas from unspecified regulators seeking information on the firm's mortgage business and products such as Abacus 2007-AC1, a mortgage-bond deal.

"It makes sense they disclose more now," said  James Angel, professor of business at Georgetown University. "It doesn't cost them anything."

Goldman declined to comment on what led the New York company to make such lengthy disclosures of various legal proceedings. Last November, Goldman was fined $650,000 by the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority for taking several months to disclose that the SEC had warned the firm in a formal document called a Wells notice that the agency planned to sue Goldman and mortgage trader  Fabrice Tourre.

Goldman reduced its worst-case estimate for losses related to legal matters to $2.7 billion from $3.4 billion. The bank didn't offer reasoning for the reduction.

Goldman shares rose $1.28, or 0.9%, to $150.40 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading at 4 p.m. 

 Write to  Liz Rappaport at liz.rappaport@wsj.com 