DETROIT—Michigan Governor Rick Snyder named a former General Motors Co. executive to take charge of Detroit's troubled school district, replacing an official who planned a wide-ranging overhaul of the city's education system.

The governor appointed Roy S. Roberts, 72 years old, who has no experience running a school district, as its new emergency manager. Gov. Snyder said Mr. Roberts is known as a consensus-building corporate leader and past director of several educational organizations, including positions on the board of directors of Western Michigan University and with the Boy Scouts of America.

"I'm not going to let anybody in this state deter me," from providing a top-notch education to the 73,000 students enrolled in the district, said Mr. Roberts, who attended public schools in western Michigan. Unions and school board members expressed cautious optimism about the selection.

Michigan's Republican governor and GOP-led state legislature recently passed a bill to augment the power of state-appointed emergency managers charged with taking over municipalities and school districts.

The current emergency manager for Detroit public schools is Robert Bobb, who was appointed by then Gov. Jennifer Granholm in 2009 and whose contract was extended this year until June by Gov. Snyder.

Mr. Bobb was expected to take on additional new powers this month as he mulled cuts to union contracts, teacher layoffs and additional schools closures. But those decisions will now be left to Mr. Roberts, who is taking office this week in a short transition working along side Mr. Bobb. "Roy Roberts is an exceptionally strong choice to continue the heavy lift of restructuring and reforming the interconnected finances and academics of Detroit Public Schools," Mr. Bobb said in a statement Wednesday.

A controversial figure among school board members, unions and many parents, Mr. Bobb claimed a mandate to overhaul both finances and academics. He launched campaigns to stabilize enrollment—which determines state funding. He hoped to slow the exodus to suburbs and charter schools in a bid to close the district's $327 million budget deficit. He also laid off teachers, closed 59 schools and privatized services such as busing and custodial work.

Mr. Bobb's restructuring plan, including the conversion of as many as 45 schools into charter operations, is now in question. Gov. Snyder thanked Mr. Bobb for his service but said Wednesday the district needed to turn to a new chapter under a different manager with strong Detroit ties.

The news of Mr. Robert's appointment coincided with the announcement Wednesday that Detroit Institute of Arts, the city's premier art museum, named its gallery of contemporary African-American art after Mr. Roberts and his wife following a donation worth more than $1 million. 

Mr. Roberts said he will make $250,000 under a one-year contract and accept no outside compensation, a package worth less than the $425,000 that Mr. Bobb earned from his salary from the district and a supplement provided by philanthropic foundations.

The Detroit district 's student test scores remains among the lowest in the nation, and its dropout rate is almost double the statewide average. 

 Write to  Matthew Dolan at matthew.dolan@wsj.com 