Older players have become a feature of the Indian Premier League.

Sourav Ganguly, nearing his 39th birthday and three years retired from the international game, has been tapped to salvage the Pune Warriors' ailing season. While he isn't likely to make much of an impact with his bat, his name alone will bring fans to stadiums. 

If nothing else, he provides the team with a distinctive identity—team branding, if you like—of the sort that Sachin Tendulkar, 38, provides Mumbai, and in particular Shane Warne gives to Rajasthan, where over three and a half seasons as captain and coach he's molded the team in his own image, in the process making it the most identifiable IPL franchise. 

Warne, 41 years old and four years out of the international game, is the oldest player in the league. He's also bowling like a dream, though he recently announced his plan to retire at the end of the season. 

Kings XI Punjab are led by Adam Gilchrist (39), while Andrew Symonds (35) continues to be an important part of the Mumbai Indians. Top performers this season also include current international players Tendulkar, Jacques Kallis (35) and Michael Hussey (35). 

This is the old guys' IPL.

It wasn't supposed to be like this—whizz-bang Twenty20 looks very much like a young man's game. But shorter game length and the IPL's seven-week season mean it's less physically demanding than other forms of the game—something that injury-prone younger players have also noticed, including Australia's lightning-fast bowler Shaun Tait, now only playing T20 cricket at age 28, and Sri Lanka's brilliant speed merchant Lasith Malinga, retired from Tests to prolong his IPL career at age 27.

Older players are attractive to IPL teams because the concentrated format makes every ball that much more important, and therefore makes a clear head, psychological strength and a mental database of information about similar situations correspondingly more important too. They're also useful in an unofficial coaching capacity, mentoring younger players. And, last but very far from least, they're attractive because they're famous.

The need for a strong identity became even more important this season following the IPL's controversial decision to re-auction nearly all of the available players, completely rejigging team lineups that had just begun to gel, in a league where franchises already risk looking like assemblages of disparate individuals grafted at random onto a city, rather than real, cohesive teams. 

Fans naturally are a bit foggy on the whole issue of who exactly plays where. So scoring identifiable faces might become a better way to get fans through the turnstiles than actually winning. TV viewing figures are down more than 20% this year. 

Ganguly is an icon of Indian cricket whose tough, disciplined captaincy guided the national team from mid-ranking also-rans to the brink of their numerous recent achievements (World Cup winners, World Twenty20 winners, world-ranked number one team in Tests). In particular, the man known endearingly as Dada is a legend in Kolkata. He played for his home-town IPL team, the Kolkata Knight Riders, in the previous three seasons of the league, captaining them in the first and third editions. He wasn't retained by them for the 2011 season, however, then turned down a role as a nonplaying mentor to the squad's younger members, and then went unsold at the re-auction of almost all playing personnel that preceded the current season.

The Warriors could certainly do with some help. Where the other new IPL franchise this season, Kochi Tuskers Kerala, have managed mid-table respectability so far, Pune are stuck near the bottom of the league. They've just won their first game after losing seven on the bounce, with their batting lineup repeatedly under-performing.

On the face of it, a rusty Ganguly hardly looks like the ideal solution—the chances of him rescuing the team's season with feats of derring-do at the crease look slim. But that an IPL team has belatedly realized the value he brings after he was snubbed at the auction might not have that much to do with his likely performances on the pitch.

However he performs, Ganguly will get a few more extra punters to tune in. View it as the equivalent of a soccer club buying David Beckham primarily to sell lots of replica shirts. The IPL is the future of cricket, and it's a place where branding is as important as performance.