WASHINGTON—The vast majority of antibiotics given to livestock in the U.S. is mixed into the feed that animals eat, according to the Food and Drug Administration, raising concerns that mass dosing increases risks to human health. 

Rep. Louise Slaughter (D., N.Y.), who made public the FDA revelation Friday, and others contend that the large-scale feeding of antibiotics to livestock speeds up antibiotic resistance in bacteria that can threaten human health. Livestock groups, such as the National Pork Producers Council, disagree. 

The FDA itself has long been concerned that the widespread use of antibiotics on farms contributes to the quickening of the pace that the drugs become useless to humans. 

When feed is used as a method of administering antibiotics, "some animals will eat too much, some animals won't eat enough and some will eat just the right amount," according to Gail Hansen, a farming specialist with the Pew Charitable Trusts' Health Group. And sick animals will likely be the ones that don't get enough because they tend not to eat as much as healthy animals, Ms. Hansen said. 

There is no evidence, though, of "inconsistency" in the feeding of antibiotics fed to livestock, according to the pork group, which stressed that "feed mill mixing equipment is designed to add antibiotics in the proper amounts." 

The group also said there is no evidence that "the widespread use of antibiotics on healthy animals is contributing to the growth of bacteria resistant to the drugs we use to treat humans." 

The FDA reported last year that livestock grown in the U.S. consumed about 28.6 million pounds of antibiotics. In a letter to Ms. Slaughter dated April 19, the agency said about 74% of those drugs were fed to the animals. A much smaller amount was administered through water and even less was injected directly into the animals. 

"These statistics tell the tale of an industry that is rampantly misusing antibiotics in an attempt to cover up filthy, unsanitary living conditions among animals," said Ms. Slaughter. "As they feed antibiotics to animals to keep them healthy, they are making our families sicker by spreading these deadly strains of bacteria." 

The amount of bacteria found in livestock, meat and humans that has become resistant to antibiotics—the drugs humans need to fight off infections—remains substantial and, in some categories, continues to grow, according to government monitoring. 

When antibiotics are fed in low doses to animals, Ms. Hansen said, the bacteria in the guts of those animals can survive and become resistant. If a person then consumes that bacteria and becomes ill, traditional antibiotics may not work on the illness. 

"Antimicrobial resistance, and the resulting failure of antimicrobial therapies in humans, is a mounting public health problem of global significance," the FDA said in a report released last year. "This phenomenon is driven by many factors including the use of antimicrobial drugs in both humans and animals." 

 Write to  Bill Tomson at bill.tomson@dowjones.com 