A family-owned company has put one of the largest buildings in Washington on the block, hoping to fetch as much as $900 million for the property in what has been one of the hottest office markets in the country.

But the timing of the offer by David Nassif Associates may not turn out to be as good as it looks. Until now, the Washington market has outperformed those in most other cities, thanks to strong demand from government agencies and contractors.

But, with pressure building to lower the national deficit, the government is moving into a contraction mode and real estate has become one of the targets of the budget ax. Last year, President Barack Obama directed federal agencies to accelerate efforts to eliminate unneeded properties, setting a goal of saving $3 billion by the end of 2012. 

Now, a congressional subcommittee headed by Rep. Jeff Denham (R., Calif.) is reviewing leasing practices by the General Services Administration, the agency that handles many of the government-owned or -leased buildings. Citing the need for more information from the GSA, Rep. Denham has frozen the approval of many large leases. 

Constitution Center, the 1.4 million-square-foot building that David Nassif has put up for sale, is among the properties in the subcommittee's cross hairs. One of the leases it is reviewing is for 342,000 square feet that the Securities and Exchange Commission just signed at the property. It is slated to run through 2021.

Looking on the bright side, even if the SEC doesn't occupy that space, the government would still be on the hook to pay the rent and find another tenant to sublet it. Indeed, the Constitution Center's owners note that the building, located just south of the Mall near L'Enfant Plaza, is fully leased.

But all the leases are with government agencies, and they begin expiring in 10 years. Some brokers say growing uncertainty about the budget crisis and a possible long-term slowdown in leasing could weigh on the prices investors are willing to pay for Washington buildings. 

"If a landlord in D.C. has an office building oriented toward federal occupancy, the lack of federal leasing could create a problem," says  Darian LeBlanc, senior managing director with Cassidy Turley.

Until now, investors in Washington property have largely ignored the possibility of a government contraction. Recent sales of prime property have fetched as much as $905 a square foot, according to  Dan Fasulo, a managing director with the real-estate-research firm Real Capital Analytics. 

If investor appetite for Washington property stays strong, Mr. Fasulo says, the Constitution Center could fetch as much as $640 a square foot, for a total of about $900 million, a record price. "There's very few properties this size in Washington," Mr. Fasulo says. "I expect some heavy action." 

The building was built in the 1960s by the father and grandfather of  David W. Nassif and served as the Department of Transportation headquarters until the agency moved out in 2007. At the height of the market, the owners spent about $300 million to redevelop the building without a tenant in hand. But the building has remained empty since it was completed at the end of 2009. 

Last summer, the owners got a break when they leased about 900,000 square feet to the SEC, only to have the SEC come back in October to say that budget cuts meant they needed only about one-third of the space they had leased. 

Although the SEC had contracted for the space, David Nassif opted to help the SEC lease a total of about 1.1 million square feet to other government agencies.

 Corrections & Amplifications 

The Constitution Center, an office building in Washington, D.C., is up for sale and could fetch as much as $900 million. The caption for the photo accompanying this article incorrectly stated that the owner is selling it for $900,000.

 Write to  Maura Webber Sadovi at maura.sadovi@wsj.com 