One of the reasons "Finishing the Hat," Stephen Sondheim's annotated volume of his song lyrics, has attracted so much attention is because he takes potshots at certain of his colleagues, most notably Noël Coward and Lorenz Hart, the second of whom he calls "the laziest of the pre-eminent lyricists." Some people have been upset by his candor, but I confess to relishing it—though not because I necessarily agree with anything he has to say about the parties in question. Most creative artists of Mr. Sondheim's stature, after all, have strong opinions about their peers, and such opinions, whether positive or negative, don't have to be right to be interesting. To learn that Renoir believed Degas to be the only great sculptor since the 13th century, or that Benjamin Britten loathed the music of Beethoven and Brahms, is to learn something important about Renoir and Mr. Britten. So, too, do we learn much about Mr. Sondheim from what he refers to in the subtitle of "Finishing the Hat" as his "Attendant Comments, Principles, Heresies, Grudges, Whines and Anecdotes."

It may be, of course, that one of the things we learn is that Mr. Sondheim isn't a very nice person. I wouldn't know—I've never met him—but I doubt that it matters much in the long run whether he's nice or not. Still, I wouldn't go nearly so far as Bernard Herrmann, who wrote the music for such classic films as "Citizen Kane" and "Psycho" and who once told an astonished interviewer that he had no use whatsoever for nice guys. "I always find difficult people easy," Mr. Herrmann said. "I only find glad-Harrys difficult and vacuous. Nice guys are difficult. It's because they're a bunch of empty-heads, that's why they're nice guys!"

To which I need only respond with two words: Ira Gershwin.

George Gershwin's older brother and longtime collaborator was known on Broadway and in Hollywood for being an unusually agreeable person. In "No Minor Chords," his 1991 memoir, André Previn recalled that Gershwin was "so unfailingly kind-hearted and soft-spoken that his cronies dubbed him President of the Nice Guys Club." He was also one of the very best lyricists in the business, and in 1959 he published his own annotated volume of his lyrics called "Lyrics on Several Occasions."

The lengthy subtitle of "Lyrics on Several Occasions" is so characteristic of its author that it deserves to be quoted in its entirety, complete with ampersands and semicolons: "A Selection of Stage & Screen Lyrics Written for Sundry Occasions; and Now Arranged in Arbitrary Categories. To Which Have Been Added Many Informative Annotations & Disquisitions on Their Why & Wherefore, Their Whom-For, Their How; And Matters Associative."

As the subtitle and structure of "Finishing the Hat" suggest, Mr. Sondheim is closely familiar with "Lyrics on Several Occasions," so much so that he uses the book as a stick with which to beat its author: "Gershwin talks about his lyrics with an ease I miss in most of the examples." I know what Mr. Sondheim means—up to a point. The droll detachment of the lyrics to songs like "I've Got a Crush on You" too often seems to be holding emotion at arm's length. But even though Gershwin isn't my all-time favorite lyricist, I still have infinite respect for his elegant style, and "Lyrics on Several Occasions" provides any number of priceless peeks into his workshop. It also suggests, albeit discreetly, how smart he was: You'll find in its unpretentiously written pages references to the likes of Max Beerbohm, John Dowland, Robert Herrick, Martin Luther, H.L. Mencken and Erik Satie.

Two other things about the book, however, are even more revealing. The first is what gossip-lovers might call a sin of omission: Gershwin has absolutely nothing bad to say about anybody, least of all his fellow songwriters. The second is that he's modest to a fault, actually going so far as to claim that brother George's tune to "Love Walked In" "deserved a better lyric."

Yet sharp-eyed readers of "Lyrics on Several Occasions" will catch occasional glimpses of the quiet pride of a hard-working craftsman, nowhere more so than in this passage: "Given a fondness for music, a feeling for rhyme, a sense of whimsy and humor, an eye for the balanced sentence, an ear for the current phrase, and the ability to imagine oneself a performer trying to put over the number in progress—given all this, I still would say it takes four or five years collaborating with knowledgeable composers to become a well-rounded lyricist."

How touching that "well-rounded" is the best thing that one of the most admired contributors to the Great American Songbook has to say about himself! That's what I call…nice.

 Write to  Terry Teachout at tteachout@wsj.com 