With companies world-wide continuing to gauge the effects of the Japan disaster, venture-backed Zipcar warned in its latest initial-public-offering prospectus earlier this week that shortages of cars and parts from suppliers in the country could materially affect its business.

The car-sharing company's fleet of more than 8,000 vehicles includes several lines manufactured in Japan—Toyota, Honda, Nissan and Mazda among them.

  Honda Motor Co.
HMC


0.79
%




 expects production losses in the tens of thousands, while  Toyota Motor Corp. said it would produce 140,000 fewer vehicles due to shutdowns resulting from supply shortages.

The prospect of higher operating expenses and reduced revenue comes after Zipcar said it doesn't expect to be profitable in 2011. The Cambridge, Mass., company has never been profitable, though it is growing quickly. Its revenue was $186.1 million last year.

Zipcar's IPO had already been delayed as U.K. regulators probed the company's acquisition of rival service Streetcar.

Benchmark Capital, Greylock Partners, Steve Case's Revolution LLC and Smedvig Capital are Zipcar's major shareholders. Meritech Capital Partners and Pinnacle Ventures LLC invested $21 million in December.

—Christopher Zinsli



A positive sign for the economy: Small-business bankruptcy filings are abating.

A study conducted by credit-reporting company  Equifax Inc.
EFX


0.37
%




 analyzed Chapter 7, 11, and 13 filings by companies with fewer than 100 employees. It found that 10 of the top 15 U.S. metro areas with the highest number of small-business bankruptcies in the fourth quarter of 2010 saw a drop from the same period a year ago.

The biggest decline was in the Chicago-Naperville-Joliet area, which had 262 bankruptcies, a year-to-year decline of 30%. Also of note was Colorado's Denver-Aurora area, with a 21% decline. California's Sacramento-Arden-Arcade-Roseville area also fared better than in 2009, posting a 20% decline from a year earlier. 

But some areas in Wisconsin saw a near 17% increase year-to-year, according to the data. California's Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale area jumped 14%, and Texas's Houston-Sugar Land-Baytown area rose 8%.

All told, the 15 metro areas saw a year-to-year drop of 6.2%.

—Emily Maltby



For franchisees, a dearth of credit will remain a major hurdle this year, a new study shows. Banks are expected to lend $8.4 billion to franchises in 2011, an amount projected to fall $2 billion short of demand, according to a study prepared by Arlington, Va., research firm Frandata on behalf of the International Franchise Association, a Washington trade group. 

—Sarah E. Needleman