After serving as mayor of San Francisco since 2004, Gavin Newsom resigned that post Monday to be sworn in as lieutenant governor of California. 

The 43-year-old leaves a legacy of significant social legislation, carved out during sometimes contentious dealings with the city's Board of Supervisors. As mayor, Mr. Newsom gained national attention in 2004 for directing the San Francisco clerk to issue marriage licenses to gay couples. He oversaw the creation of a citywide universal health-care program, the implementation of a controversial "Care Not Cash" initiative—which diverted money from welfare payments for homeless San Franciscans to fund services such as affordable housing and counseling—and the passage of the country's first mandatory composting law, among other environmental policies.

But his tenure wasn't without setbacks and scandal. The public airing of his affair with the wife of a political aide, followed by an announcement that he would seek counseling for alcohol abuse, damaged his reputation, though not enough to prevent him from winning re-election in 2007. In 2009, Mr. Newsom mounted an unsuccessful bid for California governor and later wavered publicly on whether he would remain in politics.

In an interview last week, Mr. Newsom reflected on his tenure and explained how he expects his experiences in San Francisco to shape his work in Sacramento. 



 WSJ: What are the lessons you learned as mayor that you will apply to your new job?

 Mr. Newsom: Ideologues make lousy mayors. Mayors make lousy ideologues. I'd extend that to the governance of our state. People of both political persuasions need to get over themselves and disabuse themselves [of the notion] that you can govern from the extremes. We've got to find common ground. You don't have to sell out your values. But you can't make progress without being pragmatic.

I think the challenge in politics is we're risk-averse. In private business—as someone who has started 16 businesses [including wineries, restaurants and hotels] and has over 1,000 employees—we've had a risk orientation, and I think that's why we've grown. We've made mistakes, but we learn from the mistakes, and we move on.

I had successes and I had shortcomings as mayor. Such is the nature of things. But we increased the number of [attempts] to make progress.

I think government needs to be more entrepreneurial. Right now in Sacramento there is an absence of ideas. There is a deficit, not just financial, but of imagination and an unwillingness of politicians to think outside the box because they're protected in their cocoons of ideologies, districts and parties.



 WSJ: Can you think of learnings from particular episodes—wins or losses—here in San Francisco that you're going to apply?

 Mr. Newsom: We challenged the orthodoxy in homelessness. We took cash away from the most vulnerable San Franciscans—those who are chronically homeless and on welfare—and we converted it into guaranteed services. It was certainly outside the orthodoxy of my Democratic base…but we persevered.

Since we've started, [there has been a] 39% to 40% decline in the street population. But there are still thousands of [homeless] people here in San Francisco. You want to keep pushing things forward. 

As lieutenant governor, I'll have a framework where I'm not hyperbolically engaged in labor negotiations every day, dealing with a homicide, a train derailment, pothole challenges and all that. I'll have the time to reflect and focus on economic development, as chair of the economic-development commission. As the governor focuses on budget and reform, I want to focus on jobs and the new economy.



 WSJ: How has your proximity to Silicon Valley affected your views on governing and economic development?

 Mr. Newsom: Our entrepreneurial ecosystem is part of the DNA that I've grown up with, and I really want to take that to Sacramento. As the lieutenant governor I'll have the freedom—and the burden, because it's a limited portfolio—of being able to navigate through that with [the economic-development] commission and make it meaningful. It's never meant a damn thing…because it's just stale, old reports that say the same thing, that talk about an economy that's long gone. 

We can make the agricultural rhetoric much more dynamic and [look] at China as the godsend for California's economic trade. San Francisco opened two offices [in China]. I'm going to do that in California. We're going to open up trading opportunities and [recruit] Chinese companies to open up their North American headquarters in California. 



 WSJ: Will you work on other areas that you have tackled here in San Francisco? 

 Mr. Newsom: It will depend on where [California Gov.] Jerry Brown is and where the legislature is vis-à-vis my role. The greatest struggle I'll have—as someone who has always been an executive and wants to maintain that entrepreneurialism—is that I don't have the formal authority. But I have the opportunity to use some moral authority, with the bully pulpit of lieutenant governor, to impact health care. [And I want] to find a formal role on the issue of 160,000-plus people we estimate that are chronically homeless in our state.

 Write to  Cari Tuna at cari.tuna@wsj.com 