Could tax-free municipal bonds become taxable?

Every few years, Congress floats the idea of reducing or eliminating the muni-bond tax break, long favored by investors looking to shelter income from Uncle Sam. Such initiatives—no fewer than 125 since 1918—always have faded away.

At least until now. Several proposals are circulating at once. While no one can handicap the odds, analysts and investors say that tax overhaul has to be part of deficit reduction—and that the tax exemption on muni-bond interest is fair game.

"We can no longer afford to dismiss it as if it can't happen," says  Edward Reinoso, a 40-year veteran of the muni market and chief executive of Castleton Partners, an asset-management firm in New York. "It could happen."

Even if it does, the consequences might not be dire. Existing bonds would likely retain their tax-favored status; an overhaul might well raise their market value. 

But if you invest in municipal bonds or muni funds, you should recognize that your favorite tax shelter might not last forever. 

In December, the bipartisan National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform suggested that the interest on new muni bonds could be made taxable. In March, the Congressional Budget Office estimated that replacing the tax exemption with a direct federal subsidy to issuers could save $143 billion from 2012 through 2021. A bill proposed by Sens.  Ron Wyden (D., Ore.) and  Dan Coats (R., Ind.) would crimp the tax benefits of municipal bonds, while a bill soon to be introduced by Rep.  John Tierney (D., Mass.) would fully tax the interest on munis issued after Dec. 31, 2011.

Meanwhile, the tax-free bond market has been shriveling. Only $47 billion in new debt was issued in the first quarter, the lowest quarterly total since 2000. Despite a recent rally, volume has been "pathetic by recent historical standards," says  Chris Mauro, municipal strategist at RBC Capital Markets. He projects that as little as $210 billion in tax-free debt will be issued in 2011, down 23% from last year.

The tax exemption on munis has historically allowed issuers to sell bonds to individual investors at lower yields. That has generally kept demand high and borrowing costs low.

But smaller investors are getting skittish. In the five months through March, estimates  Morningstar,
MORN


-0.39
%




 investors withdrew $43 billion from municipal-bond mutual funds. With an estimated $4 billion more flowing out in April, investors have yanked out nearly a 10th of these funds' total assets in six months.

Munis used to seem like a sure thing. In 2005, says  Natalie Cohen, head of municipal research at Wells Fargo Securities, 57% of new issues were insured, giving them the highest credit ratings. That made most of the market equally safe.

But today, after the financial crisis crippled the leading bond insurers, the number of new insured issues is just above 5%. "People are much more risk-averse because that security blanket of insurance is lacking," says  Christopher Sperry, a municipal portfolio manager at Franklin Templeton. "That is adding to the redemptions and the volatility. And that could last indefinitely" for much of the market unless bond insurance makes an unexpected revival. 

A recent experiment, however, showed another way that municipalities can raise money at lower cost and higher yields. Between April 2009 and last Dec. 31, when the program expired, municipalities could offer Build America Bonds, or BABs.

With a conventional municipal security, the federal government subsidizes bond buyers by exempting their interest income from tax. With BABs, the federal government subsidized bond issuers by paying 35% of their interest costs; in return, investors got a higher, but taxable, yield. 

Municipalities sold more than $180 billion in these issues, largely because BABs appealed to a wider range of buyers who crave higher yield and already don't pay taxes, so they don't need the exemption provided by traditional munis.

By reviving a BAB program, Congress could develop bonds with higher pretax yields and a lower subsidy from Uncle Sam. That should provide after-tax yields comparable to those on traditional munis. It also would broaden the market. And the overall cost to the federal government could drop, because the interest subsidies to issuers ought to be cheaper than the tax break to investors. (Most analysts agree that the subsidy should be set well below 35%.) 

All this "plays well on both sides of the aisle" on Capitol Hill, says  Tim McGregor, director of municipal fixed income at  Northern Trust.
NTRS


0.57
%






In this scenario, traditional muni bonds would no longer be a growing market; many, or even most, new issues would be taxable, not tax-free. Top-quality bonds might trade at higher premiums, while riskier bonds could become harder to sell.

Mr. Reinoso of Castleton Partners says that in his personal portfolio he is favoring bonds with extra-long maturities and protection against "calls" or early redemptions. 

If new munis lose their tax-exempt status, he says, he wants to be able to hang on to the old ones as long as humanly possible.

 Corrections & Amplifications 

Municipal-bond insurance covered 57% of the new-issue market in 2005. A previous version of this article incorrectly gave the date as 1995.

— intelligentinvestor@wsj.com; twitter.com/jasonzweigwsj 

 Write to  Jason Zweig at intelligentinvestor@wsj.com 