This spring in Port St. Lucie, Fla., Mets loyalists are engaged in a tug of war over which player—the recently released Luis Castillo or the likely soon-to-be-released Oliver Perez—is the most loathed in team history.

Perez's detractors rightly cite the left-hander's three-year, $36 million contract; his 0-5 record, 6.80 earned run average last season and his mind-decaying inability to throw a pitch that travels (A) straight, (B) faster than 82 mph and (C) past the hitter.

Castillo's bashers, however, have their own case. The former All-Star second baseman has no range, faded speed and a slow bat. He also committed what must be considered the most infamous drop of a pop fly in franchise lore—a June 12, 2009 blunder that allowed the Yankees to come from behind to defeat their crosstown rivals in the ninth inning.

Yet for all the ire directed toward those two, it fails to approach 1/100th the level of venom once absorbed by Douglas Randall Sisk, a former Mets right-handed reliever who, through much of his five-plus seasons in New York from 1982-87, took as severe a beating as anyone in the history of the game.

Or, to make a clearer point: During the team's 1986 world championship season, Mets officials thought it would be fun to use Shea Stadium's JumboTron scoreboard to play a fictionalized computer game between the '69 Mets and the current team. As the battle went back and forth, a sellout crowd cheered. When Keith Hernandez homered, fans stood. When Nolan Ryan came on in relief, they clapped.

When the game ended with a triumph for the '86 club, the stadium went wild.

Then, WP: Doug Sisk flashed across the screen.

Boooooooooooooooooo!

"You're supposed to just ignore the negativity and pitch well," says Sisk. "But it's much, much, much easier said than done. When you know that your home fans are going to kill you every time you take the field, well, it isn't helpful. I don't care what people say about mind-over-matter—always getting booed takes a toll. It has to."

Now 53 and living in Tacoma, Wash., Sisk has the perspective of a ballplayer 25 years removed from the vitriol. He works as a part-time scout for the organization, as well as a broadcaster for the Triple-A Tacoma Rainiers. When he speaks of the dark days with the Mets, his voice conveys nary a trace of anger. "New York's fans are amazingly passionate," he says. "When they get behind you…"

Once upon a time, they were, in fact, behind Doug Sisk. As a rookie in 1983, he was one of the few bright spots on a dreadful ballclub, posting a 2.24 ERA and 11 saves in 67 appearances. The following season was even better—50 games, 15 saves and a stellar 2.09 ERA. "Doug was awesome," says Ron Hodges, a Mets catcher at the time. "He had that heavy sinking fastball that just fell off the table. If you needed a ground ball, Doug was the guy you wanted on the mound. It was pretty automatic."

Hodges thinks back to April 5, 1983, when the Mets hosted Philadelphia on opening day. Following a 5 1/2-year absence, Tom Seaver started for New York, holding the Phillies scoreless through six innings. When manager George Bamberger pulled him, he brought in Sisk. "Doug was terrific," says Hodges of the pitcher's three shutout innings. "I think he even got the win."

Indeed, Sisk did, and as he and Hodges shook hands after Tony Perez struck out to end the game, optimism oozed through normally dreary Shea Stadium.

 It was all a mirage.

Sisk spent much of the 1985 season pitching with loose bone chips in his right elbow, but he followed the code of the tough-as-nails ballplayer and said nothing.

 What ensued was an ode to the Bump Hadley School of Mound Ineffectiveness. Sisk's once-reliable sinker turned into an unmanned garden hose, twisting left, spinning right, spiraling into the ground and high up in the air. His ERA peaked at 8.53 following a nightmarishly zany 1/3 inning against the Reds on May 4, during which he faced five batters, allowed three hits and four earned runs.

 Whenever Sisk walked to the Shea Stadium mound, boos accompanied him. The narrative was a predictable one: Sisk would walk two, strike out one, walk another, allow two or three runs then exit with his head down and his reputation increasingly tattered.

Before long, something in New York fans changed. Sisk wasn't merely disliked—he was loathed. Mets loyalists took to scratching the paint off his car with their keys and snapping his antennae and windshield wipers. 

One time, while driving out of the players' parking lot following a game, Sisk was shocked to see someone jump in front of his car, pull out a gun and point it at his head. "[Reliever] Jesse Orosco was with me, and we swerved out of the way," Sisk says. "That scared the absolute hell out of me."

Shortly thereafter, Sisk was returning to his home in Port Washington when he noticed a suspicious car trailing him all the way from the stadium. Sisk turned, the car turned. Sisk sped up, the car sped up. "There was no way I was going to drive home to my wife and child with these guys behind me," he says. "So I pulled into [the parking lot of] a bar I used to frequent and walked in. I told the bouncers to look out for these guys, and when they walked to the door the bouncers wouldn't let them in. Clearly, they were there to rough me up."

Eventually, Davey Johnson, the Mets manager, stopped pitching Sisk at Shea, an embarrassing decision that the ballplayer glumly accepted. "What fans don't always seem to understand is that the worst thing you can do to a hometown player is boo him," says Hodges. "We hear it, and it's never encouraging. I've never fully understood the concept—if you want the Mets to win, wouldn't you cheer someone like Doug?"

Sisk underwent elbow surgery toward the end of 1985, and he appeared in 41 games, with a 4-2 mark and 3.06 ERA, for the world champions the following season. Yet his contributions were more social than physical.

Sisk gained a sliver of fame as a 1/3 member of the "Scum Bunch," the unofficial back-of-the-airplane club he formed with Orosco and outfielder Danny Heep. The trio spent their time drinking beers, throwing fruit and causing moderate levels of mayhem. "It was all just fun," Sisk says. "We were just baseball players having a good time."

Sisk lasted one more season in New York, spent 1988 with the Baltimore Orioles and then—after bouncing around the minors—returned home to Tacoma. 

He has been immortalized on the widely read team website, Ultimate Mets Database, where fans remember him as "The human embodiment of Charlie Brown when he was out there on the hill," "Mel Rojas before the real Mel Rojas came along" and "[a pitcher who] could choke on sherbet."

Oddly, the same man once prohibited from pitching at Shea now understands. A couple of years ago, while watching a Seattle Mariners game on TV, Sisk found himself irked by the performance of J.J. Putz, at the time a reliever with the club. Putz was scuffling to get through the inning, and Sisk thought his body language conveyed surrender. 

"Then the weirdest thing happened," he says. "I was all alone, but I started booing at my television. That's when I realized what those fans felt with me.

"For the first time, I empathized."