SYDNEY—Brisbane residents returned to their waterlogged homes Friday and began the arduous process of cleaning up and gauging the scale of damage after floods that spilled across the city's central district eased.

Aerial television footage of flood-affected suburbs showed roads and yards covered in brown mud left by receding floodwaters, and damaged furniture piled up outside homes for collection. In communities west of Brisbane that bore the brunt of the deluge described by onlookers as an "inland tsunami," concrete slabs are all that remain of some sheds and dwellings.

Queensland Premier  Anna Bligh said that with the discovery of a woman's body Friday, the death toll from floods this week has risen to 16. There are 53 people still unaccounted for, she told a news conference, and authorities have grave fears for 12 of them. Around the state, 86 communities have been inundated or cut off by floodwaters, which have affected 17,500 homes and more than 3,000 businesses.

The mining industry, a key component of the state's economy, has also been hit, with 32 mines in the coal-rich Bowen Basin north of Brisbane still out of action, Ms. Bligh said, with "vast volumes" of water to be pumped out of pits. She described a devastated region west of Brisbane as like "a war zone."

One exhausted employee of the Brisbane City Council said, "It's been a terrible, terrible week and I suspect it's going to be months, if not years, before it gets much better."

Along with picking up the pieces of their battered homes, the people of Queensland are starting to file insurance claims. So far 7,000 claims from rural areas have been filed, seeking 365 million Australian dollars (US$363.8 million) in compensation, according to the Insurance Council of Australia. That doesn't include claims from Brisbane, Australia's third-largest city, or by large mining companies.

Ms. Bligh and Bill Shorten, Australia's assistant treasurer and minister for financial services, met with insurance executives Friday, asking them to resolve claims quickly and broaden the scope of claims. Ms. Bligh called on insurers to "act with compassion" and exercise flexibility with those hit by the floods.

"Anyone with a dispute over their insurance assessment is encouraged to engage in a free dispute resolution process that is binding on insurance companies," Mr. Shorten said.

Including the cost of rebuilding ports throughout Queensland, northern New South Wales and parts of Brisbane, the eventual cost to the economy could hit A$13 billion, according to estimates from by investment bank J.P. Morgan. Add in unforeseen losses to revenue and the rebuilding hit to be felt by the state's booming mining industry, and the total cost could exceed A$15 billion.

In a reprieve for battered Queenslanders, forecasters said a low-grade tropical cyclone developing off Australia's northeast coast will avoid the state. Cyclone Zelia, with winds gauged at 125 kilometers per hour, was moving east at around 14 kilometers per hour and was likely to intensify further over the next 24 hours, according to the Bureau of Meteorology.

 Write to  Geoffrey Rogow at geoffrey.rogow@dowjones.com 