TORONTO—Investors dumped shares of  Research In Motion Ltd. Friday, amid growing worry that the BlackBerry maker's current development pipeline—including several new BlackBerry devices powered by its latest operating system—won't be enough to stem declining sales in the U.S.

RIM shares closed down $7.94, or 14%, to $48.65 on the Nasdaq Stock Market on Friday.

RIM lowered earnings guidance late Thursday, saying its BlackBerry shipments would be on the low side of previous estimates. Then, on a conference call, RIM executives raised new concerns about international sales, saying shipments were weak in Latin America. The smartphone maker has in recent quarters enjoyed strong overseas demand despite losing market share in North America to  Apple Inc.
AAPL


0.88
%




's iPhone and devices that run on  Google Inc.'s Android operating system. 

Recent product launches aimed at bolstering sales have been disappointing. Its BlackBerry Torch, RIM's first device with a touch screen and a slide-out keyboard, hasn't been a blockbuster as hoped. And the long-awaited PlayBook tablet launched after a delay, to tepid reviews, earlier this month. 

RIM has struggled to react quickly to changes in consumer preferences, especially after Apple unveiled its iPhone, with its snazzy touch-screen interfaces and a bevy of third-party applications. 

In response, RIM has overhauled its operating system, reached out to app developers and made several recent acquisitions of software companies to address shortcomings. Executives have tempered short-term expectations by saying the company was going through a critical transition. 

But after Thursday's announcement, even some of the most optimistic RIM watchers have begun to question whether the company has done enough. 

"We really want to believe, but...last night's warning caps what has been a string of strategic and execution missteps," Cormark Securities analyst Richard Tse said in a note.

Next week, RIM is expected to unveil the latest version of its BlackBerry operating system and its newest BlackBerry Bold at an annual conference in Orlando, Fla. 

Analysts also expect a series of new touch-screen BlackBerrys in coming months, including another fresh iteration of the Torch; a touch-screen-only BlackBerry to replaces the flawed Blackberry Storm; and new versions of RIM's mainstay BlackBerry Curve.Several new versions of the PlayBook are already planned this year, raising concerns that RIM is stretching itself too thin.

Thursday, RIM co-chief executive  Jim Balsillie also said the latest BlackBerry operating system, BlackBerry 7.0, will include an enhanced Web browser, new smooth and fluid touch interface and improved graphics for gaming, among other things. RIM didn't respond to requests for comment.

While some RIM watchers have applauded the improvements, some also say they merely put RIM on par with other smartphones, which have long been available. 

"Consumers are fickle and are not waiting around for products that are only catching up to smartphones that have been available for a year in some cases," National Bank Financial's  Kris Thompson said in a note. Analysts have also questioned whether the company can execute on all these new launches in the smartphone realm while managing its first tablet roll-out.

 Write to  Stuart Weinberg at stuart.weinberg@dowjones.com 