PARIS—French Prime Minister François Fillon asked the country's nuclear-safety authority to conduct an inspection of all of France's nuclear-power plants in the wake of the crisis at the Fukushima facility in Japan. 

The country's 19 nuclear plants—which house 58 reactors—should be checked to detect vulnerability to flooding, power outages, seismic activity or a failure in reactor cooling, as well as to assess procedures for handling accidents, Mr. Fillon said in a letter to France's Nuclear Safety Authority, made public Thursday. 

"I ask you to check, one plant after another, if improvements are necessary in the light of lessons" from the accident at  Tokyo Electric Power Co.
9501


0.14
%




's Fukushima nuclear plant, the prime minister said. 

The agency must draft a schedule for the checks within a month, and preliminary conclusions must be delivered by the end of the year, according to the letter. 

The prime minister said the inspection process must be transparent, open and conducted in cooperation with the European Nuclear Safety Regulators Group and the Western European Nuclear Regulators Association. 

The government previously proposed an audit of all French nuclear plants by as soon as March 15. Paris insisted right after the Fukushima accident that French plants were safe, but wanted inspections as a precautionary measure to assuage any fears in the French population.

The crisis in Japan triggered a nationwide debate in France over the country's energy policy, with environmentalists calling for a gradual end to nuclear power.

France is the world's second-largest user of nuclear power after the U.S. and before Japan, with as much as 80% of the country's electricity nuclear in origin.

Recent opinion polls showed French public opinion remaining largely in favor of nuclear power, which allows electricity tariffs to be on average as much as 40% less expensive in France than in the rest of Europe.

 Write to  Geraldine Amiel at geraldine.amiel@dowjones.com 