BANGALORE -- Nasdaq-listed iGate Corp. said on Thursday that it has completed the $1.22 billion acquisition of Mumbai-based information-technology services company Patni Computer Systems.

Phaneesh Murthy, CEO of iGate, will be the chief executive and managing director of the combined entity. The acquisition was agreed to in January. The principal stockholders of Patni included Narendra Patni, Ashok Patni and Gajendra Patni, who have been bought out along with private equity firm General Atlantic.

The 20% mandatory offer to the public has also been fully subscribed, giving iGate a total stake of 82.5%, Mr. Murthy said.

Both iGate and Patni will continue to exist as separate listed entitites, but the combined entity has a new go-to-market name of iGate Patni, and a new logo.

"Neither brand is strong enough on their own, though our clients know us; so we need to use both names for now," Mr. Murthy said. "I don't believe in family names in companies, however, so at some point that will go." 

He was leaning towards a single U.S. listing in the future, but there were several regulatory hurdles in delisting Patni, so that will take a few more quarters, he said.

The CEO said a nine-member executive leadership team had been formed, "pruned" from a possible list of 22 people. Patni's board has been reconstituted with lawyer Jai Pathak as chairman, Mr. Murthy as CEO, Shashank Singh, co-head of Apax India, and Goran Lindahl, iGate board member, as new members. Vimal Bhandari and Arun Duggal will continue as independent directors.

While the remaining senior executive members of the Patni team have left, "no further separations" are anticipated, he said.

Former executives at Patni are leaving: CEO Jeya Kumar has stepped down; Surjeet Singh, chief financial officer of Patni, will continue until May 31. Sujit Sarkar of iGate will be the CFO of the combined entity.

The integration of the front-end sales team of about 350 to 400 people has been completed, while the combining of the larger delivery teams will take 18 to 24 months, Mr. Patni said.

"We are in no hurry to integrate, as they are working well on their own," he said.

However, the company wants to increase its margins by six percentage points over the next two years and improve utilization to 80% from the current 70%. 

iGate Patni will focus primarily on banking, financial services and insurance, and health care. Other segments that the company wants to dabble in include media and entertainment, manufacturing, retail, communications, energy and utilities. The combined entity will have a revenue of nearly $1 billion, and this will enable it to compete for larger deals.

"Companies are willing to give you deals worth about 7.5% to 10% of your revenue," Mr. Murthy said. "That means we can now go for deals in the $75 million to $100 million range (on an annualized basis)."

On the question of competition from large, established services companies, he noted that currently, about 9% of info-tech spending was being outsourced to India, and he expected that to go to about 30% by 2020.

"So when multiple people go to the market, they are not looking at the 9%, but at the remaining 91%," he said.

The combined entity has an employee base of 26,000 people and a client base of 360 firms.