One hot Saturday morning in July, in the year 2000, I left my stuffy Berlin apartment with a single change of clothes in my backpack. I didn't quite know where I was going; I just knew that I was leaving. 

Nearly seven months into a seven-year relationship—an imperfect relationship, which started out hopefully and ended badly, a marriage and divorce in all but name—I had a premonition. Not of how things would turn out, but that I needed a break. An afternoon off, I thought, as I brushed my teeth. Or, I reconsidered, while deciding how many CDs to take, a whole day. 

In spite of the heat, I decided to bring along a jacket, then an extra T-shirt, then another pair of shorts. The toothbrush was the nail in the coffin, the key in the ignition. An hour later, I was sitting in a train, heading west, smelling the Prussian countryside through the open windows of an old German train compartment.

At first, I did actually have a plan: to go to Hamburg. But when I got off the train, Hamburg was even hotter than Berlin. I sat on the platform, watching crowds head in all directions. Not Hamburg, I thought, I need to go on. I walked over to the train station's store-size newsstand and beheld the travel section. 

In the land of wanderlust, these travel sections are always fully stocked. Nearly every one of Europe's destinations, major and minor, has its own glossy magazine, with ageless photos showing off its particular pleasures. The beaches, the mountains, and the cobblestone streets—they all shot through me, then sank and rumbled.

In the final decades of the 19th century, Paris had the Left Bank, and Denmark had Skagen, the remote fishing village where a generation of Scandinavian artists and intellectuals spent their summers and completed some of their best work. 

The breakthrough came in 1874, when a young painter named Michael Ancher, fresh from art school in Copenhagen, made his way north by carriage, and fell in love with a local girl. Michael and Anna Ancher gathered around them some of the most original artistic figures of their time, including writer Georg Brandes and composer Carl Nielsen. 

You can still find traces of them in Skagen, especially at the Skagen Museum, which has an impressive collection of the whole group, known as the Skagen Artists. Influenced by the French Barbizon School and later by the Impressionist movement, the artists captured the particular conditions of Skagen, where water on three sides creates a special incandescence. 

A favorite motif of Peder Severin Krøyer (1851–1909), probably the movement's most accomplished painter, was the summer beach at dusk, which Danes call "the blue hour," when the sky and the water seem to merge. 

I counted the Deutschmarks in my wallet, and the dollars back home, and aimed for a dog-eared copy of a magazine called "Dänemark." A few pages later, and I found something: a tiny spit of land and a large-print description of a natural wonder. At the very tip of Denmark's tip, the waters of the North Sea and the Baltic visibly meet in an apparently endless straight line. The tip, it turned out, had a name—as easy to read, and hard to pronounce, as an IKEA chair. Skagen.

Travelers, I know now, fall into two categories: the fugitive and the pilgrim. I was running away that day—from the truth, as it turned out, slowly approaching from a horizon years away, that this relationship couldn't last—but Skagen's miracle, at what felt like Europe's version of Lands' End, let me feel like I was running toward something.

The trip up through Jutland took a dozen hours, until I finally reached Skagen just before midnight, with the summer sun about to leave the sky.

I found a sign at the train station, which led me to a bed-and-breakfast near the harbor, and called my friend on the harbor pay phone. Ready to unleash all the details of my adventure, I got the answering machine. I reeled off the Danish names I had seen from the train and tried to make a joke. 

The next day, I woke up in a place I had never been—a place, indeed, I hadn't known about until the day I arrived—and put on my clean clothes.

Skagen turned out to be wildly beautiful—part fishing village, part resort, with yellow houses and red-tile roofs, and shimmering water on three sides. But I was there for another reason. 

The sun shone that day, and Skagen's squat yellow buildings glowed. I rented a bike and rode against the wind, in search of a line in the water. 

The wind was stunning, exhausting, like a wind tunnel. I would later read on the train home that Jutland was famous for being windy. I would also read that Skagen was famous for its Paris-mad Danish painters, who got through the white summer nights with Left Bank abandon.

The bike took me across Denmark's tip, then up to the spit, which had a name that reminded me of Old English literature rather than new Swedish furniture—Grenen. I walked out to very edge and stared. 

In what did look like a straight line, waves came from the left and the right, and crashed against each other. It really was like two oceans, two shorelines, meeting up over missing land.

The site was extraordinary, but it wasn't mine somehow. Everyone else was Danish, it seemed, and I was a stranger who had taken a few trains and rented a bike. 

I missed what I had run away from: the newfound ordinariness that the relationship had given me. I got back on the bike and headed south, and kept heading south over the next day, until I was back where I started.

I opened the door of my apartment, expecting hot, stale air, and instead I found my friend, making himself at home. The summer days filled up with the kind of cozy steadiness that makes you want to stay where you are forever. I didn't know quite what to call it, so I called it love.

It turned out those two bodies of water weren't really the North Sea and the Baltic, as the German travel magazine had promised—they were the "Skagerrak" and "Kattegat," two subordinate straits. The ordinariness I had craved on the Danish beach, and miraculously found when I got home, gradually faded, flattened, until there was nothing left but two human beings, crashing against each other. 

I still live in Berlin, but on my own, and I still check out the German travel magazines, with a little more wariness and the same old longing. And I have managed to reclaim that site on the beach at Skagen—the Grenen miracle. It happened to me, too, so it is mine, like my long-lost friend, who has gone his own way.