NEW YORK—Gold futures eked out another record, while silver pared earlier losses as traders refocused on lingering concerns about the weaker dollar and U.S. monetary policy. 

Gold for May delivery settled up 70 cents at a record $1,556.70 per troy ounce on the Comex division of the New York Mercantile Exchange. The contract also touched an intraday record of $1,576.60 per troy ounce.

Meanwhile, silver prices recovered from a 12% drop to $42.200 per troy ounce in overnight trade as investors returned to the market to purchase the metal at reduced prices.

Silver for May delivery settled down 5.2%, or $2.506, at $46.078 per troy ounce.

Both precious metals had little reaction to al Qaeda leader  Osama bin Laden's death, announced late Sunday night. The architect of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks was killed in a U.S. military operation in Pakistan.

"It's a non-economic event, and it's very unlike what's going on in Libya or the Middle East," said  Tim Speiss, chairman of the personal-wealth advisory practice at EisnerAmper LLP with more than $1 billion under advisory. Political instability in the Middle East had added to market uncertainty in recent months, while a conflict in Libya had disrupted crude-oil exports, with both developments driving precious metals' prices higher.

By contrast, Mr. bin Laden's importance as al Qaeda leader had faded in the decade since the World Trade Center attacks, and the terrorist organization itself had become more fractured. His death introduced little uncertainty to the geopolitical landscape, muting its significance for gold markets, said MF Global precious metals analyst  Tom Pawlicki.

"It just seems that the market is forward-thinking and looking to the weaker dollar and U.S. budget issuers," Mr. Pawlicki said.

Gold prices had pushed to record highs last week after the Federal Reserve confirmed it would keep interest rates low for an extended period, fanning concerns about inflation and continued weakness in the U.S. dollar. Gold is considered a store of value amid uncertainty, and a hedge against inflation. 

Silver's 12% "cascade" came ahead of the bin Laden news, as thin trading volumes amplified the impact of profit-taking and new higher trading margin requirements, Mr. Pawlicki said. 

Exchange operator CME Group Inc. raised trading margins on silver contracts twice last week due to higher volatility, with the second increase coming into force Saturday.

"It's not a dramatic shift," but higher margins alongside the sharp selloff was enough to force smaller speculators out of the silver market, said  Ira Epstein, director of the Ira Epstein division of the Linn Group.

However, silver prices recouped over half the decline by Monday afternoon as buyers returned to the market.

"At some point people are going to say 'nothing's changed.' We still have problems in the Middle East, and look at [higher] grains prices, inflation is here," said  George Gero, vice president with RBC Capital Markets global futures. 

Investment demand for precious metals, including silver, stems from their ability to retain value amid higher inflation and during times of crisis. Silver prices have benefited from rising political and economic uncertainty, which spurred demand for a safe haven among smaller investors who couldn't afford gold's $1,500 price tag. 

A weak dollar helped boost both gold and silver prices. The greenback slipped versus the euro, with the single European currency recently at $1.4860, from $1.4810 late Friday in New York. 

Dollar-denominated gold and silver futures appear cheaper to buyers using foreign currencies when the dollar weakens. 

 Write to  Tatyana Shumsky at tatyana.shumsky@dowjones.com 