LONDON—U.K. house prices rose modestly in February, but are likely to be stable or perhaps a little weaker over the year as a whole, the  Nationwide Building Society
NANW


0.00
%




 said Tuesday. 

The average price of a home rose 0.3% on the month to £161,183 ($262,019) in February following a 0.1% drop in January. In annual terms, prices are 0.1% weaker than in February last year, following a 1.4% fall in January, which marked the first annual drop since August 2009. 

"The overall picture is still one of a market treading water,"  Robert Gardner, Nationwide's chief economist, said in a statement. On a three-monthly basis, which Nationwide says is a better measure of the underlying trend, house prices were 0.1% weaker in February following a 0.7% drop in January. 

The mortgage lender said demand for homes has levelled out, supported by low interest rates and some stabilization in the labor market. However, the uncertain economic outlook is likely to keep potential buyers on the sidelines for some time yet. 

Nationwide said there were few signs of a glut of unsold homes on the market and sellers remained reluctant to accept lower offers to secure a sale. Mr. Gardner also noted tentative signs that the volume of homes coming to the market was slowing. 

"Given that the recovery hit a soft patch at the turn of the year and looks set to remain sluggish in the year ahead, the property market is likely to follow suit, with relatively low transaction levels and prices moving sideways or modestly lower through 2011," he said. 

Separately, net U.K. mortgage lending increased to its highest level since February 2010 in January, Bank of England figures showed Tuesday. Net mortgage lending increased by £1.8 billion in January and there were 45,723 new mortgages approved. Economists had expected about 43,000 mortgage approvals. Total net lending to individuals rose £1.47 billion—the biggest increase since October. 

Consumers made a net repayment of £333 million in January on other borrowings, as a slight increase in borrowing on credit cards was offset by repayments on other loans, Bank of England figures showed. 

Lending to businesses picked up sharply, rising by £1.1 billion in January, compared with an average monthly decline over the previous two quarters. The central bank's preferred measure of money supply, known as M4, increased by £11.1 billion in January, compared with an average monthly increase of £3.4 billion in the previous two quarters. 

 Write to  Nicholas Winning at nick.winning@dowjones.com, Jason Douglas at jason.douglas@dowjones.com and Paul Hannon at paul.hannon@dowjones.com 