Zaha Hadid first visited China three decades ago, and has traveled there regularly since. With the opening of the Guangzhou Opera House last month, the Pritzker Prize-winning architect finally has a permanent building in China too.

Nearly eight years in the making, the 1,800-seat venue dominates the riverfront of the prime Zhujiang New Town business district and makes a dramatic statement about the city's continuing evolution.

"It is a very rewarding experience to see the realized design and I am grateful to the city of Guangzhou," she says "There are very few places in the world today where architects can find such forward-looking, enthusiastic clients with such passion for innovation."

The 70,000-square-meter complex of steel, glass and concrete was built using both cutting-edge and near-obsolete construction methods. A pair of asymmetric buildings—the main structures of the opera house—contain a metal skeleton that requires 59 unique, custom-cast steel joints. According to Ms. Hadid's firm, the Shanghai foundry that made them borrowed techniques perfected in medieval Europe to produce church bells. Then, since precision was critical to ensuring that the irregularly shaped shell was structurally sound, engineers assembled the components using lasers and GPS positioning.

One of the challenges was to build a performance hall that works for both Italian and Chinese opera, which have radically different acoustic requirements. 

"With Western opera the focus is on natural acoustics, whereas in Chinese opera, the drama and story have priority and audio equipment is used in almost every occasion," says  Simon Yu, an architect with Ms. Hadid's office.

Marshall Day, an acoustics firm, was brought in to help find solutions. These included embedding closely placed molded dips into gypsum panels near the stage to control volume in the asymmetric room. "For Western productions, the space is designed to ensure perfectly balanced acoustics with concealed lighting and audio equipment that can be revealed as needed," says Mr. Yu.

The exterior of the opera house is inspired by the idea of two rocks in a stream, "a poetic analogy," says Ms. Hadid, who as a young architect in 1981 visited traditional gardens in China. The approach resulted in spaces that smoothly flow into others. Ramps and gradually cascading stairs give access to the main entrances and the outdoors. Inside, visitors go from one area to the next surrounded by the kind of clean, fluid lines and textures that have become Ms. Hadid's signature. In the grand entrance hall, windows composed of triangular pieces of glass let in sunlight by day and the neighborhood's neon-lit skyscrapers and towers by night.

The opera house—which had a soft opening in May for last year's National Arts Festival—has become a landmark, a favorite backdrop for wedding photos and souvenir snaps. 

After executing a number of designs for China that have never been built—a yacht club and a housing estate among them—Ms. Hadid is now working on a performing arts space in Chengdu and three projects in Beijing and Shanghai for SOHO China, the private real-estate developer known for its high-end apartment buildings.

While calling China's development "breathtaking," Ms. Hadid says, "As a country known for its speed of development and expansion, China differs in its prerequisites to possess major public projects in the shortest time possible. The constraints for design are certainly not as limiting, though there's a significant restriction for time."

Managers of the opera house began to use the facility last summer, though it wasn't complete. Some problems remain, including flaws on the outside walls and leaks in the ceiling; the latter was fixed temporarily with a pipe that's oddly visible in the main hall. On this, a spokesman of Ms. Hadid's firm could only say: "We've been working with the clients on a few details and understand they will be addressed in due course." (In China, architects have limited authority over construction.)

But on the night last month when the architect arrived to open her opera house, these cosmetic details seemed trivial. Nearly 2,000 assembled for a performance by  Akram Khan, a British-born Bengali contemporary-dance sensation. Overseas guests had paid for their own tickets to fly in from the Middle East, Europe and around Asia. Sipping champagne in the foyer, they mingled with property tycoons from China and Korea waiting to see Ms. Hadid. When she walked in, the room seemed to explode with camera flashes from the 10-person deep crowd that thronged her. It took 10 minutes for her to walk a meter.

Muttered one attendee: "That's how an architect should be treated."