DALLAS—When 10-year-old Drew French slid his rook down the center of the board to checkmate his opponent, it sealed the victory for his P.S. 166 team during last weekend's National Elementary School Chess Championships. And the Manhattan school wasn't the only one to bring a trophy back to the five boroughs: City schools finished on top in five out of nine sections.

"New York teams are so dominant, they might as well call this the state championships,"  Matthew Noble, a chess coach at a school in Tucson, said during the tournament in Dallas.

The city's chess prowess extends to all grades. At the junior high championships in April, New York City schools claimed first and third in the top level and won three of the remaining five sections. When high schools from across the country faced off in Nashville earlier this month, traditional chess powerhouses Hunter College High School, Brooklyn's I.S. 318 and the Bronx High School of Science took the three top spots in the highest level of play.

New York's best grade school team demonstrated just how powerful the city's scholastic chess scene has become with an extraordinary feat: besting accomplished opponents nearly twice their age. The Panda Pawns from P.S. 124 in Manhattan's Chinatown won top honors in the second-toughest division at the national high school championship.

"It's kind of awkward," said  Sean Chung, 10 years old, who stands all of 4-foot-6. "Everyone else is much taller than us." One of the senior members of the Panda Pawns, Sean went undefeated in the three-day tournament, winning five games and taking two draws.

Competing at the high school level wasn't a move P.S. 124 wanted to make. After defeating the Dalton School to become statewide champions at the elementary level, the team had its sights set on beating peers at nationals. But the dates of the grade school tournament conflicted with a mandatory state test. The test date was changed after plane tickets to Nashville had already been purchased, so the team went ahead with its backup plan.

"That these little, bitty elementary school kids could win at that level is quite surprising and quite an accomplishment," said Bill Hall, executive director of the U.S. Chess Federation. "That is serious chess."

"It was a miracle," said  Yury Lapshun, who holds the chess title of international master and coaches at P.S. 124. "We knew we had a strong team but it was a tough competition."

How do chess experts account for New York's success? Chess has entered public and private schools, both as part of the curriculum and as an after-school activity, providing a large pool of talent for local tournaments, at which young players gain deep competitive experience. Immigrants from chess-rich cultures, such as the Russian-born Mr. Lapshun, have helped raise the city's quotient of devotees, who foster interest in the game as parents and often serve as instructors.

Students "are being taught by the top chess trainers in the world. It is absolutely astounding that we have access to these talented coaches," said David MacEnulty, who directs the program at Dalton, where chess is taught to all students from kindergarten through second grade. Three grandmasters work with Dalton students, including Russian émigré and famed chess trainer  Miron Sher.

The city also benefits from its unusual status as a strong chess economy that can support a small army of instructors. In New York, private tutors typically command between $50 and $100 per hour, chess historian  Bruce Pandolfini said. As a tutor himself, Mr. Pandolfini charges $150 per hour for his services.

  Noe Garza, a volunteer coach at an after-school program in San Benito, Texas, joked about the uneven distribution of chess talent during the elementary school championships. "We have a saying," he said. "In New York, throw a rock and nine times out of 10 you will hit a grandmaster."

Robust instruction isn't limited to tony private schools and their elite public counterparts.

Chess-in-the-Schools, a nonprofit, is the city's largest provider of chess instruction both in after-school settings and as part of the curriculum, working with 13,000 students at 50 Title I schools, which serve low-income populations. The group also trains teachers on how to start chess programs. And it's just one of several organizations, including the National Scholastic Chess Foundation and NY Chess Kids, working in schools and organizing tournaments.

Drew French, the student who sealed P.S. 166's victory at nationals, is a fitting example of the city's chess environment. The fourth grader practices twice a week with his team, volunteers to work with younger players once a week and spends weekends competing in tournaments around the city. Chess-in-the-Schools helped his school on the Upper West Side run a tournament.

His mother, Sherry French, said she wasn't surprised by the first thing Drew wanted to do when he returned home from the national tournament: play chess. "He's always asking to play chess," she said.