LONDON—The U.K. Financial Services Authority said Friday that  Neil Rollins, a former senior manager at waste-industry firm PM Onboard Ltd., was sentenced to 27 months in prison for insider dealing and money laundering.

The move follows a string of recent fines imposed by the FSA this month, including a £7.7 million ($12.2 million) fine against  Barclays
BCS


0.23
%




 PLC for failures related to investment advice, and a £2.8 million fine against  Royal Bank of Scotland Group PLC for poor handling of customer complaints.

The fines also come amid plans by the government to break up the FSA, which was widely criticized for not doing enough to prevent the financial crisis.

In his case, Mr. Rollins was also ordered to pay £197,000.66 ($313,000) in confiscation.

After a trial, Mr. Rollins was found guilty in November of five counts of insider dealing and four counts of money laundering after he traded on the basis of information he got as a senior executive.

After learning of his company's worsening financial position, he sold his entire shareholding in PM Group and encouraged his wife to do the same. When Mr. Rollins became aware of the FSA's interest in his dealing, he laundered the proceeds to try to hide his conduct, the FSA said.

In passing sentence, Judge James Wadsworth said: "You sold when you knew it was folly to buy. Every pound you saved was a pound someone else spent...By selling early you broke the trust of your employer [and] you broke the trust owed to the market."

  Margaret Cole, managing director of enforcement and financial crime at the FSA, said: "By pursuing a criminal prosecution in this case, the FSA has shown that it will take tough action against those who abuse positions of trust by dealing on the basis of inside information.

PM Onboard, Mr. Rollins's former company, declined to comment. The lawyers for Mr. Rollins weren't immediately reachable.

In August and September 2006, Mr. Rollins sold all his shares in PM Group, raising proceeds worth £173,875.

When information about the company's worsening financial position was announced to the market, the share price fell immediately by 17 % and then continued to fall over a two-week period.

Mr. Rollins also encouraged his wife,  Louisa Rollins, to sell, thereby avoiding substantial losses.

He later laundered the money by transferring the proceeds of his crime into accounts that he had set up in the name of his father,  David Rollins.

 Write to  Vladimir Guevarra at vladimir.guevarra@dowjones.com 