A doctor who ran a women's clinic in Philadelphia was accused Wednesday of delivering seven babies and then killing them by severing their spinal cords with scissors.

Prosecutors, who outlined the allegations against Dr. Kermit B. Gosnell in a report by the grand jury, also accused him of causing the death of a patient who overdosed on anesthesia.

His clinic, Women's Medical Society in West Philadelphia, which was closed last year, drew mostly lower-income, minority women as patients, prosecutors said. The doctor—whose license was suspended early last year by the Pennsylvania Board of Medicine for "an immediate and clear danger" to public health—staffed his "decrepit and unsanitary clinic" entirely with unlicensed personnel, let them practice medicine on unsuspecting patients unsupervised and directed them to heavily drug patients in his absence, according to Philadelphia District Attorney Seth Williams.

"In addition, he regularly performed abortions beyond the 24-week limit prescribed by law. As a result, viable babies were born. Dr. Gosnell killed them by plunging scissors into their spinal cords. He taught his staff to do the same," according to the district attorney's office, which helped conduct a raid at the clinic early last year that led to the charges. 

Dr. Gosnell, 69 years old, was arrested and taken into custody Wednesday, according to a district attorney's office spokeswoman. 

William J. Brennan, a lawyer representing Dr. Gosnell, said he was in the process of reviewing the allegations. "I would ask that there be no rush to judgment in this case," Mr. Brennan said. 

Vicki Saporta, president of the National Abortion Federation, the main group representing abortion providers, said the procedures described by the prosecutors weren't considered medically acceptable. "If the allegations are true, it is absolutely appalling," she said. "It is criminal." 

Dr. Gosnell's clinic was rejected for membership by the federation in 2009, after an inspection showed it fell short of the group's standards in "numerous" ways, Ms. Saporta said. 

In the U.S., abortions performed very late in pregnancy are rare, with 3.7% performed between the 16th and 20th week and 1.3% at 21 weeks or later, according to figures from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for 2006, released in 2009. Around 79% of abortions are performed in the first 10 weeks.

Early in a pregnancy, abortions can be induced by drugs, involving no surgery, or doctors may use surgical suction to vacuum out the uterus. In the second trimester, doctors are likely to use a combination of suction and instruments, said Tracy Weitz, an associate professor at the University of California, San Francisco, and director of Advancing New Standards in Reproductive Health, a research and policy program. 

For late-term pregnancies, around 24 weeks and later, doctors may actually induce labor, but a drug would be used to stop the heart of the fetus beforehand, Dr. Weitz said. Such abortions tend to occur due to a potentially fatal condition diagnosed in the fetus or the mother. Though the time of fetal viability varies, 24 weeks is sometimes seen as a typical average under state laws.

Law enforcement officers discovered the alleged abuses at Dr. Gosnell's clinic while investigating tips that he had been illegally selling narcotics to people he had never examined, according to prosecutors. Dr. Gosnell faces drug charges as well.

The February 2010 raid of the clinic led to the discovery of biohazard bags containing the remains of 47 fetuses, including that of a "baby boy" with a gestational age of 28 weeks found frozen in a plastic spring-water jug, according to the grand jury report.

The grand jury report also found that for nearly two decades, government health and licensing officials had received reports about practices at the clinic but no action was taken, prosecutors said.

—Anna Wilde Mathews contributed to this article.

 Write to  Dinah Wisenberg Brin at dinah.brin@dowjones.com 