Long before Osama bin Laden's death, al Qaeda had adapted itself to survive and operate without him, ensuring the threat his terror network poses will live well beyond his demise. 

Bin Laden spent the last decade on the run following the al Qaeda-mounted terrorist attacks in the U.S. on Sept. 11, 2001. But his fugitive status didn't render the network impotent. Instead, it forced an evolution: The original group splintered, popping up in new places with new leaders who, in addition to attempting high-profile attacks, encouraged their radicalized followers to strike on their own if the opportunity presented itself. 

Strong al Qaeda offshoots exist not just in hot spots such as Yemen, Somalia and Indonesia, but increasingly in more far-flung locations, such as Sweden and Norway. The leaders of these groups consider bin Laden a religious and philosophical guide, but have worked independently from his command for years. 

The expansion of al Qaeda affiliates comes against a backdrop of political upheaval in the Middle East that is disrupting counterterrorism cooperation by onetime key U.S. allies such as Egypt and Yemen and giving terrorists potentially more operational breathing space.

"We've struck a substantial blow at part of the [radical Islamic] movement, but this is far, far from over," said James Woolsey, a former director of the Central Intelligence Agency.

Since the Sept. 11 attacks, bin Laden's operational role at the head of al Qaeda had faded while his role as charismatic figurehead increased, burnished by videotapes he released featuring him wearing his faded camouflage jacket and brandishing an AK-47 assault rifle. 

However, in recent years, other high-profile jihadis—from Abu Musab al Zarqawi in Iraq to Anwar al-Awlaki in Yemen—threatened to eclipse bin Laden as the global jihadist movement's most powerful spokesman. His death, especially since it came in close-quarters combat with U.S. troops, could change that.

"His martyrdom has the potential to reinvigorate al Qaeda's brand among those already radicalized to the cause," said  Leah Farrall, an Australian counterterrorism expert.

Bin Laden's command largely moved out of Afghanistan in 2001, after the fall of the Taliban, and many core players were caught or killed after the U.S.-led invasion. As the old guard was decimated, bin Laden and Ayman al-Zawahiri, his second in command, were isolated. But their absence only served to diffuse operations over a wider collection of groups and individuals that carried on al Qaeda's mission around the Middle East, Africa, Southeast Asia and Europe. 

Photos from around the world.

 "Justice has been done" and more.

A look at Monday's front pages of U.S. newspapers on the news of Osama bin Laden's death. 

On the ground

Diagram from the CIA

Photos inside and out

The most active offshoot group is al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, or AQAP, led by Nasir al Wahishi, bin Laden's former secretary in Afghanistan who escaped to Iran, was arrested, and subsequently extradited to Yemen in 2003. He escaped from prison in 2006 and spearheaded the merger of the Saudi and Yemeni branches of al Qaeda in 2009.

More than any other group, AQAP serves as connective tissue between al Qaeda branches in other regions. Mr. Wahishi was buttressed in that regard by Anwar al-Awlaki, a U.S.-born radical cleric who gained a following via his Internet sermons and who has become a key recruiter.

The new al Qaeda leaders in Yemen have surpassed their godfather by adapting their message for Western audiences. AQAP is adept at using technology: It publishes an online magazine called "Inspire"—part fanzine, part recruiting tool, offering advice and instruction for would-be bombers. 

The subliminal message from AQAP is that new recruits don't need to seek military training in Pakistan or Yemen to score a hit against the "far enemy," the phrase al Qaeda uses for the U.S. and other Western countries. Radicalized converts don't seek permission from headquarters before acting. 

AQAP's profile has risen in lockstep with that of Mr. Awlaki, who gained a wide following on the Internet thanks to his flawless English and heated sermons. He inspired Maj. Nidal Hasan, who went on a shooting spree at Fort Hood in Texas in 2009, and prepared Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, the underwear bomber who attempted to blow up a U.S.-bound passenger plane on Christmas Day that year. Mr. Awlaki has been singled out by U.S. counterterrorism officials as one of al Qaeda's most dangerous leaders.

AQAP's ability to attempt fresh attacks against the U.S. has increasingly worried U.S. officials because of the instability in Yemen. 

While current President Ali Abdullah Saleh has been a less-than-perfect ally in the fight against AQAP, some U.S. officials worry about the future of cooperation there if he steps down. Some terror experts think AQAP may inherit al Qaeda central's mantle as the focal point of resistance to the U.S.

In Africa, al Qaeda and its affiliates have found refuge in lawless pockets of the continent, from Somalia in the east to Mali in the west. The cells appear to have little connection, but have provided ominous glimpses of what they may be capable of—as in the failed airline attack involving the Nigerian, Mr. Abdulmutallab, and the three suicide bombings in July 2010 at restaurants in the Ugandan capital, Kampala, as patrons watched the World Cup soccer tournament. 

The groups include Algeria-based al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb, or AQIM, which has been linked to several killings and kidnappings of Westerners in recent years. 

In Southeast Asia, veterans of al Qaeda's Afghanistan operation helped establish franchises in places like Indonesia. As time passed, these disparate groups became increasingly autonomous, often working with minimal funding or sourcing funds from sympathizers independently from the main al Qaeda leadership. In some ways this increased their effectiveness, security analysts say. 

And there are numerous Islamic terror outfits not allied with al Qaeda that could gain in prominence following bin Laden's death, including the Pakistani Taliban, behind the May 2010 plot to explode a car bomb in New York's Times Square. 

Other groups include Pakistan-based Lashkar-e-Taiba, which carried out the deadly 2008 assault in Mumbai, India. Daniel Benjamin, the State Department's coordinator for counterterrorism, last week highlighted the group's "continued menace." 

—Will Connors and James Hookway contributed to this article.

  CONTINUOUS UPDATES: News, Reactions, More  