President Barack Obama will name Commerce Secretary Gary Locke as ambassador to China, creating the first opening in his cabinet since Mr. Obama assembled his initial team, White House officials said Monday.

Mr. Locke's departure could be announced as early as Tuesday. The move gives the White House an opportunity to name a business executive to a high-profile administration post at a time when the president has been reaching out to the business community on several fronts. 

A senior White House official said Monday Mr. Obama would "look broadly" at candidates for the commerce job. Last fall, White House officials speculated Mr. Locke might be replaced by a business executive as part of Mr. Obama's effort to improve relations with corporate America.

Mr. Locke, 61 years old, served two terms as governor of Washington state. His maternal grandfather and father were both born in China, and immigrated to the U.S.



He would succeed Jon Huntsman, the former GOP governor of Utah, who leaves next month to consider a 2012 run for president. That decision that came as a shock to White House officials who had assumed making Mr. Huntsman an ambassador removed him from the presidential running. 

At the commerce department, Mr. Locke made numerous appearances and overseas trips to help the administration reach its goal of doubling U.S. exports by the end of 2014. But he played only a marginal role in the administration's high-profile talks to revise and conclude a trade agreement with South Korea. 

Mr. Locke has escorted U.S. business executives on trade-related missions around the globe—most recently, to India. But he has no business experience of his own. 

Last year, with the departure of Larry Summers as Mr. Obama's top economic adviser, business leaders stepped up their demands that Mr. Obama appoint a corporate chieftain to his economic team. Privately, officials suggested Mr. Locke's post was one they could fill with a corporate leader. The last time Mr. Obama looked for a Commerce secretary, he struck out twice—first with New Mexico Gov. Bill Richardson, then with Sen. Judd Gregg (R., N.H.), both of whom withdrew. The president then settled on Mr. Locke.

—Elizabeth Williamson contributed to this article.

 Write to  Laura Meckler at laura.meckler@wsj.com 