As the Sensex flirts with 20,000, again, many Indian companies are fooled into thinking it's the return of the boom phase. They are chasing valuations, when taking money off the table is the smarter thing to do.

In the last few weeks, markets have rallied sharply, but the resurgence doesn't indicate a recovery. Rather, it's driven by the infusion of more than $180 billion into the system by the Japanese government to boost the disaster-ravaged country, and should not to be mistaken for a change in investor sentiment.

The rally is similar to the recovery that started in mid-2009, when central banks across the developed world pumped in hundreds of billions of dollars in a bid to calm nervous markets and stabilize their economies. At that time, investors placed their bets on emerging economies to counter the recession-plagued developed markets sending the equity markets surging from their March 2009 lows.

However, the euphoria of 2007 was clearly missing and it was all about bottom fishing and stock/sector picks rather than an across the board bet on the market. Investors were focused on investing in quality companies that could deliver growth and shareholder value and were available at reasonable valuations.

The rally also saw a huge surge in primary issuance. Again, unlike 2007, this was far more selective. 

Investors showed a marked preference for offerings by large, reputed companies and/or deals with attractive valuations. Deals that fell short were summarily ignored. Many investors even refused to meet management of companies on road show, leave alone participate in the offering, unless the deal price was attractive.

Indian companies and promoters, including the Government of India, struggled to come to terms with this new reality.

Companies put deals on hold, preferring to wait until they got the "right" valuation. Many such companies are still waiting.

Some promoters, who launched a deal, despite an inadequate order book and negative investor feedback, then struggled to close. 

A few companies had to lean on friendly institutions, or do structured deals with high net worth individuals to get the minimum subscription and avoid devolvement. 

Some issuers such as Claris Lifesciences and BS Transcomm were forced to redo the price or size of the deal.

Almost all of these issues fared badly post listing, with the stock price trading much lower than issue price.

The recent revival in the market has issuers wondering whether investor sentiment has changed for the better. However, this rally is again liquidity driven. Markets continue to be fraught with risk, and for a capital-starved economy like India, the opportunity cost of not having capital to fund growth is extremely high.

Most companies focus on valuation and tend to wait for the "right number", which could prove to be an expensive strategy in the long run. Promoters, CEOs and CFOs would do well to remember "cash is king" and to take money off the table when they can.