DUBLIN—Enda Kenny was voted in by parliament as Ireland's new prime minister Wednesday, and faces a torrid task as he leads his debt-stricken country during what he described as its "darkest hour."

Mr. Kenny, leader of the center-right Fine Gael, which won the most seats in elections last month, struck a deal with the second-largest party, Labour, a center-left grouping, to govern in a new coalition. Labour voted in parliament with Fine Gael and other representatives in the sole nomination to elect Mr. Kenny as premier by 117 votes to 27. 

In his acceptance speech, Mr. Kenny said Ireland faces its "most economically difficult days" since its independence nine decades ago. 

"I am very mindful of the task that we begin here. The task of rescuing our economy, of resuscitating our reputation and restoring our society," he said. He spoke of entering a covenant to tell the truth about the crisis, which he said was "still full of many unknowns." 

Parliament convened Wednesday for the first time since last month's elections, a vote dominated by the debate on Ireland's debt crisis. Fine Gael won most seats but fell short of securing an overall majority. 

"Honesty is not just our best policy," Mr. Kenny told parliament. "It is our only policy because our new government will tell the people the truth of our situation, no matter how unwelcome that might be, no matter how difficult that might be." 

  View more slideshows and interactive graphics  

He referred to "old politics" having damaged Ireland "not just economically but emotionally, psychologically even spiritually." He said his new coalition of Fine Gael and the Labour party would begin the task of getting Ireland "working again." 

Ireland's jobless rate has soared to nearly 14% from about 4% in 2007 and the country's finances have been undermined after the previous government was forced to inject €46.3 billion into five troubled banks. 

Mr. Kenny said the crisis was Ireland's "darkest hour before the dawn." Citing poet Seamus Heaney, a Nobel laureate, Mr. Kenny said his coalition would make sense of what comes and keep its head. 

Cut off from debt markets, Ireland turned to the European Union and International Monetary Fund for bailout funds last November. 

Fine Gael and Labour agreed last weekend to a program for government that included pledges to reduce Ireland's budget deficit to 3% of gross domestic product by the end of 2015. Both parties said they will also seek to renegotiate the terms of the international loans Ireland received from the EU and the IMF. 

In a short statement, European Commission President José Manuel Barroso said other European governments were facing similar situations to Ireland. "The fiscal and reform efforts that are being made by the Irish people are very much appreciated," he said. 

Mr. Kenny is due to announce appointments to senior government ministries later Wednesday. He is expected to put political veterans Michael Noonan and Joan Burton in charge of the restructured finance ministry.

Mr. Noonan, who is tipped to become finance minister, shot to prominence as finance spokesman for the Fine Gael.

Ms. Burton is the deputy leader and finance spokesperson for the Labour party, the junior partner in the new coalition. She is widely expected to be appointed to a new ministry of public-sector reform, where she will be responsible for reining in government spending and dealing with public-sector trade unions.

Mr. Noonan and Ms. Burton face huge challenges in dealing with Ireland's interwoven banking and debt crises. Mr. Noonan will be in on the front line of looming negotiations with European Union leaders and finance ministers to soften the terms of the country's international bailout.

 Write to  Nicholas Winning at nick.winning@dowjones.com 