 If there's one main takeaway from Jets general manager Mike Tannenbaum and the way he conducts his drafts, it's that he's unafraid to take risks.

That has been the story of the last three drafts for this team, which in that span has gone from mediocrity to Super Bowl contender. In those drafts, there was one terrible miss, a handful of pleasant, middle-to-late round surprises, and one positive, franchise-changing selection.

Here's an analysis of how those drafts have gone.

 2008 

Round 1: OLB Vernon Gholston, TE Dustin Keller; Round 4: CB Dwight Lowery; Round 5: QB Erik Ainge; Round 6: WR Marcus Henry; Round 7: T Nate Garner.

 Consensus  Then: The Jets walked away with two physically gifted athletes in Gholston, out of Ohio State, and Keller, from Purdue. The Gholston pick, as far as experts were concerned, made sense, though he was somewhat raw and started playing the sport in the middle of high school. Trading up for a second first-round pick, Keller, was considered the bigger risk.

 Reality Now: For all Gholston's talent, he became one of the biggest draft busts in Jets history before being released after three non-productive seasons. Keller, along with fourth-round corner Dwight Lowery, ended up being the team's respite. Keller led the team in receptions in 2010, and Lowery has provided great value, making spot starts in Darrelle Revis's absence. 

 Grade: C-

 2009 

Round 1: QB Mark Sanchez; Round 3: RB Shonn Greene; Round 6: Offensive Guard Matt Slauson.

 Consensus Then: The Jets took a risk by trading up to take promising Southern Cal quarterback Mark Sanchez with the fifth overall pick. After only one year starting at USC, was Sanchez simply a product of a successful system, or could he be the face of the Jets franchise? Similar questions existed about the team's third-rounder, running back Shonn Greene, who had just one glowing season at Iowa.

 Reality Now: Two AFC title games later, few would dispute the wisdom of the move to land Sanchez. Greene, who also was selected after the Jets moved up in the draft to pick him, has also proven to be a good selection. Aside from those two picks, the Jets selected Nebraska offensive lineman Matt Slauson, who has since become a starter.

 Grade: A



 2010 

Round 1: CB Kyle Wilson; Round 2: Offensive lineman Vlad Ducasse; Round 4: RB Joe McKnight; Round 5: FB John Conner

 Consensus Then: Boise State cornerback Kyle Wilson was touted by many as the draft's best corner. With the exception of Joe McKnight (fourth round), the other picks lacked flash.

 Reality Now: Wilson underwhelmed in his first season, but McKnight showed potential toward the tail end of the season, both in the rushing game and on punt returns. Conner showed flashes of potential.

 Grade: C

 Write to  Chris Herring at chris.herring@wsj.com 