The Knicks seem to keep finding themselves in the same exact spots. They continue to blow second-half leads through a series of frustrating misses and defensive lapses. Of course, they keep finding themselves on the wrong side of the scoreboard, since Wednesday night was their fourth straight loss, but mostly, they keep finding themselves walking off the court with the same dejected look. With 11 games to go in the season, standing at 7-10 since the trade for Carmelo Anthony, and with a losing record on the season for the first time in four months, the Knicks seem to be out of answers for now.

The Magic beat the Knicks on Wednesday night at the Garden. New York led by as many as eight midway through the third quarter. But on the game's last possession, boos began to rain down on the Knicks, who have lost seven of their last eight.

"Nobody's happy with it, the only thing we can do is we'll stay calm," Knicks coach Mike D'Antoni said. "I can understand the anxiety, we have it too, we're not immune to it."

Forward Amar'e Stoudemire had his worst game of the season, scoring 13 points and making just six of his 20 shots in 40 minutes. D'Antoni said after the game that Stoudemire is tired, worn down from the long season and a packed March schedule. Anthony, meanwhile had 24 points, nine assists and five rebounds, and he made six of his 12 shots, making it one of the more efficient nights of his Knick career.

The Magic went on a 9-0 run in the middle of the fourth quarter, similar to the Celtics' run on Monday. The run heavily featured Magic backup guard Gilbert Arenas, who scored six points in the stretch.

Magic center Dwight Howard scored 33 points and grabbed 11 rebounds, while all of Orlando's starters were in double figures. Jameer Nelson scored 19, and Hedo Turkoglu had 16 points and 11 rebounds.

At 35-36, the Knicks find themselves under .500 for the first time since Nov. 27, when they were 8-9 and on the road to recovery after a 3-8 start. The Knicks were as good as 21-14 this season after a win on Jan. 7.

"Not good, but that's not going to define the season," D'Antoni said. "Hopefully we'll finish over .500 if we can, but our goal is to get in the playoffs." 

During a fourth quarter in which Orlando outscored New York 32-21, the dagger was Turkoglu's 3-pointer with 4:50 to go. The Knicks staged a minor comeback in the final minutes but couldn't threaten. With under four minutes to go, Anthony connected with Stoudemire for a dunk. However, Howard quickly struck back with a layup. Stoudemire dunked again with 2:18 left, cutting the lead to 103-98, but the Knicks never got closer.