SACRAMENTO, Calif.—California Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger, the former action-movie hero, said he would "blow up the boxes" of state government when he became governor of the nation's most populous state more than six years ago.

California poses special challenges for those who occupy the governor's chair: Its cap on property taxes limits the chief executive's options, and its free-wheeling voter-initiative process can undermine a leader's best-laid plans. Even so, Mr. Schwarzenegger's struggle to improve the state's finances amid an uncertain economy illustrates the difficulties looming before the nation's 26 new governors, many of whom face fiscal problems much like those facing California in 2003.

Mr. Schwarzenegger came to office after an extraordinary recall election to replace Democratic Gov. Gray Davis that featured 135 candidates, from established state politicians to minor celebrities such as actor Gary Coleman.

As Mr. Schwarzenegger leaves office Monday, the bureaucratic "boxes" he targeted remain. Although Mr. Schwarzenegger, a Republican, successfully collaborated with the Democratic-dominated legislature to pass a landmark greenhouse-gas emissions law, he failed to solve the state's fiscal crises and leaves Gov.-elect Jerry Brown with a projected $28 billion budget shortfall through June 2012.

His legacy may now hinge on whether incremental and unproven revisions to the state's electoral and fiscal systems pan out.

Highlights of Arnold Schwarzenegger's governorship

"He started out with his 'Terminator' sunglasses and he's going out with green eyeshades," said John Pitney, a Claremont McKenna College political scientist and former GOP official. "Perhaps reforms of the primary process and redistricting will have some long-lasting effects, but only time will tell."

Those political-system revisions could lead voters to elect more-centrist lawmakers: They charge an independent panel rather than the state legislature with drawing district lines for legislative races, and they eliminate traditional partisan primary elections. But some political scientists say the changes will have little or no effect.

During this year's budget negotiations, Mr. Schwarzenegger also won two long sought-after changes to the budget system. One created a two-tiered pension system for government workers, which his office estimated would save the state $100 billion over 30 years. The other created a 2012 ballot measure that would impose a spending limit on the state budget. Experts say future governors can easily do away with the pension revision, while voters in 2009 defeated a nearly identical spending-cap measure.

Mr. Schwarzenegger's administration was marred during the past two years as he presided over a cumulative $90 billion budget shortfall and legislative gridlock that forced the state to issue IOUs for only the second time since the Great Depression. As popular pressure rose to rein in government, he raised taxes and slashed spending, especially on education. 

Mr. Schwarzenegger said he was unsure what his next step would be. He has said that he would consider returning to acting if the script was right, but that running for the U.S. Senate was unlikely.

He blundered in 2005, when voters rejected four ballot measures that Mr. Schwarzenegger said were needed to fix California. Labor unions assailed the slate of initiatives, which would have imposed a budgetary spending cap and created a new legislative redistricting panel, among other things.

"Picking a fight with the teachers and nurses [unions], or choosing to do redistricting in the manner in which he chose to do it; all of those things were misspent capital," said Don Perata, a former Democratic California Senate president during Mr. Schwarzenegger's term.

Mr. Perata and others said the governor would have been more successful if he had pushed his ballot proposals in 2004, when he was more popular. Mr. Schwarzenegger, in a recent interview with the Los Angeles Times, said he wished he had done that as well.

In 2006 and 2007, the self-described centrist governor pivoted and began working with Democratic lawmakers. Their biggest achievement: passing AB 32, legislation that requires emissions of greenhouse gases in the state to be reduced to 1990 levels by 2020.

Mr. Schwarzenegger easily won re-election in 2006 and, during 2007, his approval rating rebounded to about 60%. But a year later, California's economy cratered. 

The state faced the first of its massive budget shortfalls, which were worsened in part because Mr. Schwarzenegger borrowed to close budget gaps during his first tenure.

Financial difficulties dominated the final two years of Mr. Schwarzenegger's administration. He and legislators engaged in months-long budget stalemates, forcing the state to issue IOUs and delay construction projects. Republicans reviled him for raising taxes. Democrats and social-welfare groups decried his spending cuts to education, and health and social programs. Economists mocked the temporary, one-time solutions to close budget shortfalls.

Mr. Schwarzenegger did end his tenure on a winning note. In addition to his budget changes, he helped defeat an oil industry-backed ballot measure that would have suspended AB 32, the greenhouse-gas emissions law.

In an interview in August, Mr. Schwarzenegger, who at age 63 still projects movie-star charisma, conceded that he did not streamline government as much as he had hoped.

"It's true that we did not blow up all the boxes I intended to blow up. It was more difficult than I thought," Mr. Schwarzenegger said.

 Write to  Stu Woo at Stu.Woo@wsj.com 