Why is it that American productions of the works of Brian Friel, the greatest playwright of the English-speaking world, are so hard to come by? It's been two years since I last saw one, which is far too long. So it is good news indeed that the Irish Repertory Theatre, my favorite Off-Broadway company, is presenting "Molly Sweeney," a three-person show about a 41-year-old woman who undergoes an operation to regain the sight she lost as a baby. 

 Irish Repertory Theatre  132 W. 22nd St., (212) 727-2737  Through March 13

"Molly Sweeney" is one of Mr. Friel's most remarkable plays, yet it hasn't been presented in New York since 1996, which I find even harder to fathom. Fortunately, this revival, staged by Charlotte Moore, the company's artistic director, is immensely persuasive, and I have no doubt that anyone who sees it will be converted on the spot to Mr. Friel's cause.

"Molly Sweeney" is a three-person play constructed along the same "Rashomon"-like lines as Mr. Friel's "Faith Healer," in which the characters speak to the audience but not to one another, telling their collective tale from their own sharply different perspectives. The personalities here are no less varied. Molly (Geraldine Hughes) is a strong, serene woman who long ago came to terms with her disability and now fears—with good reason—the unknowable consequences of regaining her sight. Her husband Frank (Ciarán O'Reilly) is a garrulous ne'er-do-well who sees in Molly's operation the possibility that his own life will be changed, only for the better. And Mr. Rice (Jonathan Hogan), the small-town opthalmologist who performs the surgery, is a man of squandered promise who is sure that operating on Molly will restore to him the high hopes of his lost youth.

What follows is a devastating parable of disappointment in all its terrible forms, one that is vastly more powerful because it is so understated. For in the end none of Mr. Friel's characters gets what he or she wants, least of all Molly, to whom the acquisition of sight proves to be a poisoned gift, one that brings home to her the brutally ironic meaning of the words of the blinded Gloucester in "King Lear": "I stumbled when I saw."

Mr. Friel readily acknowledges having been inspired by "To See or Not to See," Oliver Sacks's essay about the difficulties faced by people who have been blind since early childhood and whose sight is unexpectedly restored in the middle of their lives. Needless to say, Mr. Sacks is no mean writer, but Mr. Friel is a bonafide poet of the stage, the Chekhov of our time, and to see what he does with his borrowed theme is to be taught a priceless lesson in the difference between . . . well, prose and poetry.

As always, though, he presents his three characters as ordinary human beings, and the plain words they speak are not "poetic" in any vulgarly obvious way. Therein lies the singular virtue of this production: It is, in the highest sense of the word, unpretentious. Never do you feel as though Ms. Moore's three fine actors are "performing." They appear instead to be real people who are telling you about something that happened to them. All the art is carefully concealed—but don't be deceived, for this production is artful in every aspect, including James Morgan's simple set, lit with discreet perfection by Richard Pilbrow and Michael Gottlieb, and the sound design of Zachary Williamson, which is so subtle that you might not notice how much it contributes to the show's total effect.

In 1996 the Roundabout Theatre Company imported a production of "Molly Sweeney" directed by Mr. Friel himself that was originally mounted by Dublin's Gate Theatre. It starred Catherine Byrne, Alfred Molina and Jason Robards, a cast that on paper looks as close to ideal as could possibly be imagined. Everyone I know who saw that production still speaks of it in tones of awe. That said, I'm hard pressed to see how it could have been much better than this one, which is so good that it actually made me shiver—repeatedly. To see "Molly Sweeney" in the Irish Rep's modest, cozy little theater is to feel the inestimable privilege of keeping the closest possible company with a veritable wizard of storytelling, seen here at the height of his singular powers. 

—Mr. Teachout, the Journal's drama critic, blogs about theater and the other arts at www.terryteachout.com. Write to him at tteachout@wsj.com.