As gasoline prices surge, Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke is changing his tune when discussing inflation in public—in part to avert criticism that central bankers are out of touch with consumers.

Fed officials have for years cited "core inflation," a measure that excludes food and energy prices. That is because core inflation tends to be a useful predictor of inflation over a couple of years, which they call the medium term, a period that is key to monetary-policy decisions. But this focus has drawn criticism that Fed officials aren't facing economic reality, as if they don't eat or drive.

Now, Mr. Bernanke is taking another tack in his public communications. In two days of testimony on Capitol Hill earlier this month, the Fed chairman never uttered the words "core inflation" while explaining the central bank's aims and policies. Instead of citing a specific measure, he emphasized the Fed's time frame. "Inflation can vary considerably in the short run," he told the House Financial Services Committee. "Our objective is to hit low and stable inflation in the medium term."

He acknowledged that rising prices for food and energy have driven overall, or "headline," inflation higher. But he emphasized the importance of looking beyond short-term price spikes when setting Fed policy. Higher food and energy prices don't present a broader inflation problem unless they cause sustained increases in other consumer prices as well, he said.

"It was a clever, politically motivated choice of words," said former Fed governor  Laurence Meyer, vice chairman of consultancy Macroeconomic Advisers. "It gives exactly the same message. He probably reduced the intensity of questions he would've gotten if he had emphasized core," a word Mr. Meyer said has become "toxic."

The subtle shift comes as prices for oil, wheat and other commodities soar due to growing global disruptions in supply and demand. Crude oil prices are up about 20% in the past month to around $101 per barrel. The average price of a gallon of regular unleaded gasoline, meanwhile, is up 43 cents over the past month to $3.54 a gallon, according to AAA.

Overall, or "headline," inflation was 1.6% over the 12-months that ended in January, according to the Labor Department's consumer price index. However after excluding the increases in food and energy prices, core inflation was just 1% over the same period.

When Fed officials grow worried about rising inflation, they combat it by lifting interest rates or taking other actions to damp demand. But they base policy on the expected path of overall inflation over a couple of years, rather than on short-term price movements. If they responded to temporary price swings, they could end up raising interest rates every summer when gasoline prices typically climb and dropping rates every fall when they retreat. 

Fed officials still follow core inflation and other price gauges as they try to project inflation over the next few years. Their economic forecasts, updated four times a year, include expectations for both core inflation and headline inflation, with the measures converging over a three-year period. 

In a speech last fall, the Fed chairman highlighted other inflation measures—the "trimmed-mean" and median CPI developed by the Cleveland Fed—that remove extreme price increases and decreases. Those gauges also track underlying inflation without automatically removing food and energy from the mix.

But by talking about the need to look past short-time spikes in energy and food prices they often provoke criticism from consumers and lawmakers. Federal Reserve Bank of New York President William Dudley drew derision Friday during an appearance in Queens, N.Y., by saying he believed underlying inflation was low despite rising food and energy prices. One member of the audience responded, "When was the last time, sir, you went grocery shopping?"

Mr. Dudley also noted some prices are effectively lower, saying, "Today you can buy an iPad 2 that costs the same as an iPad 1 that's twice as powerful." A member of the audience grumbled, "I can't eat an iPad."

Many consumers believe economists, particularly at the Fed, are out of touch when they cite core inflation to say inflation has been soft, said  Michael Feroli, chief U.S. economist at J.P. Morgan Chase. This disconnect can have political consequences, he added. "If the Fed loses the common man, then the common man's representative may be more inclined to pass legislation that would be harmful to the Fed's independence."

The Fed chairman's latest communications approach carries some risk. By avoiding the term "core inflation," he could confuse the public about how the central bank thinks about inflation and responds to it, said Mr. Meyer of Macroeconomic Advisers.

"Some people might believe he's now paying more attention to headline rather than core," even though that isn't the case, he said. 

 Write to  Sudeep Reddy at sudeep.reddy@wsj.com and Michael S. Derby at michael.derby@dowjones.com 