An arbitrator ruled against the October decision by newly merged United Continental Holdings Inc. to put 45 70-seat regional jets operated by United commuter affiliates into service in and out of Continental hubs under the Continental flight code, saying it violates the Continental pilots' labor agreement.

The arbitrator, ruling on a grievance filed by the Continental pilots, ordered United Continental Holdings to "cease and desist" from advertising the flights and placing the Continental flight code on those services, according to his decision.

  Julie King, a spokeswoman for United Continental, said although the company disagrees with the arbitrator's decision, it will comply by withdrawing the Continental flight code from the planned flights. But the planes will go into service anyway, operating under the United flight code. That will diminish the revenue the combined company hoped to reap by luring Continental frequent fliers with more spacious 70-seat planes, which in some cases will replace 50-seaters operated by Continental affiliates.

The Continental pilots' current labor agreement prohibits their company from subcontracting regional aircraft services on any planes larger than 50 seats, contract language that  Jeff Smisek, chief executive of United Continental Holdings, has said puts the airline at a competitive disadvantage. Once the two carriers merged Oct. 1, management sought to take advantage of the more relaxed United pilot labor agreement, which allows United to subcontract regional services on airplanes of up to 70 seats.

United Continental planned to begin flying 15 70-seat jetliners operated by two United subcontractors out of Houston and Newark, N.J., on Jan. 4. Fifteen more were to start on Feb. 17 from those cities and Cleveland, another Continental hub, and a further 15 on March 6. The idea was to sell those flights under both the United and Continental flight codes to better meet consumer demand and to improve the profitability of the combined company.

In a bulletin to his members, Capt.  Jay Pierce, chairman of the Air Line Pilots Association branch at Continental, said the union is pleased with the arbitrator's decision. ALPA saw the plan as a violation of its labor contract and "an effort by management to leverage its position in negotiating in favor of outsourcing," he said.

Until United and Continental pilots and the combined company reach a new, combined labor contract, the two individual pilot contracts remain in existence. The two pilot groups and management early in December filed for joint mediation in order to expedite negotiations on a combined contract.

But both pilot groups have made "outsourcing" a key issue in the talks. They believe United and Continental pilots should be at the controls of all but the smallest of aircraft operated on behalf of the combined company.

 Write to  Susan Carey at susan.carey@wsj.com 