NEW DELHI—India's largest mutual-fund company is struggling with poor performance and is planning changes to try to boost investor returns.

Six of Reliance Mutual Fund's 18 equity funds have either lost money or fallen behind benchmark indexes over the last year through Friday at a time when the broader market has surged.

These include some of the firm's largest stock funds. The Reliance Infrastructure fund, with assets of 14 billion rupees ($314 million), slumped 12% over the last year through Friday, and Reliance Equity, with assets of 17 billion rupees ($374 million), has lost 5.85%. These two funds are the worst performers among their peers, according to Delhi-based fund research firm Value Research India Pvt. Ltd.

In addition, the company's flagship 34.5 billion ($758 million) Reliance Vision fund lags its benchmark BSE 100 index by more than three percentage points. The index returned 10.4% over the year through Friday, while the fund, which aims to beat the index through stock-picking, returned 7.23%.

By comparison, the Bombay Stock Exchange's 30-share Sensex gained 12.7% during this period and hit a record close on Nov. 5. (It had pulled back 9.5% since then through Friday.)

To be sure, some of Reliance Mutual Fund's other stock funds have performed very well over the last year. The 16-billion-rupee ($360 million) Reliance Banking fund is the best performer in its category, with a 36% return. The 28-billion-rupee ($620 million) Reliance Equity Opportunities fund is up 21%. Both actively managed funds beat their benchmarks

Still, the underperformance of several Reliance funds is noteworthy given their large size and the overall market's strong performance in the past year. Reliance Mutual Fund, part of the Reliance Group, controlled by Anil Ambani, had assets of 1 trillion rupees, or $22 billion, in more than 40 stock, bond and exchange-traded funds as of December 2010, according to trade group Association of Mutual Funds, making it the largest fund company in India as measured by assets under management.

  Sunil Singhania, head of equity investments at Reliance Mutual Fund, acknowledged that some Reliance funds have underperformed lately, but said he expects them to bounce back. Investors should "look to funds from a slightly longer-term perspective" of two to three years, he said in an interview.

One of the laggards is Reliance Vision fund, launched in October 1995, he acknowledged. But he said the fund's managers are tweaking some investments to boost performance. "We're confident that it will bounce back."

The fund is up 2.8% annually over the last three years and 15.4% annually over the last five years through Friday. Its returns are slightly better than the BSE 100 index, which gained an annualized 1.68% over three years and 14.5% over five years.

The disappointing performance of some sector-specific funds highlights the potential perils of investing in a narrow range of stocks.

"Our call on the infrastructure sector in India has gone wrong," Mr. Singhania said.

When the infrastructure fund was launched in mid-2009, the fund company expected that the re-elected United Progressive Alliance government would spur infrastructure spending, but that hasn't happened, he said. But he is optimistic about the fund this year because of the necessity of infrastructure spending to maintain economic growth, he added. He pointed to recent environmental clearances for some power projects and upcoming auctions for road projects as signs of infrastructure spending this year.

Other sector funds run by the company that have lagged their chosen benchmarks lately include Reliance Natural Resources fund, with assets of nearly 28 billion rupees ($610 million) and which gained only 1.45%, and Reliance Media and Entertainment, with 1 billion rupees ($22 million) and which is up only 1% over the last year.

Mr. Singhania said the natural-resources fund invests in stocks of Indian and foreign companies that deal in commodities, and these often move inversely to the broad stock market. Entertainment companies have been investing heavily in building audiences, and their revenues have yet to catch up, he said. He predicted that the profitability of these companies will improve going forward.

The $1 billion-Reliance Diversified Power Sector fund has lost 4.7% over the year. However, that's better than its benchmark BSE Power Index, which tumbled nearly 10% over this period.

Given the volatility of returns in sector funds, individuals should typically limit their investments in these funds to less than 30% of their total stock investments, money managers say. When new funds are launched that use unusual investment strategies, investors should pay close attention to the risks involved.

Reliance Equity, for instance, was a one-of-its-kind fund when launched in 2006 because it aimed to provide capital appreciation over the long term but also protect investments in case markets fell. The fund raised 59.6 billion rupees ($1.3 billion) at its launch, the largest-ever new fund offering in India at the time, according to Value Research.

Now the fund is less than a third of its original size, and has lost 3% annually for the three years through Friday.

Mr. Singhania explained that the fund uses derivatives that would gain value when the Indian stock market falls and vice versa. If the stock market becomes more expensive, as judged by the price-to-earnings ratio of a broad index, the fund would make more bearish bets, he said. As Indian stocks have continued to rise in recent years, and have risen faster than earnings, pushing up valuations, the fund has made more bearish bets which have lost value.

"Investors were just not able to figure out that it's a long-short fund," says Mr. Singhania. "In an up market, it will never work."

He adds that the fund company's board will soon change the "philosophy of the fund" to remove the requirement for bearish bets. This is partly because the fund manager expects Indian stocks to keep gaining value over the next several years, and partly because of regulatory changes in the use of derivatives in funds.

 Write to  Shefali Anand at shefali.anand@wsj.com or, Follow her @shefalianand  