Louisiana officials are warning oil and natural-gas producers in the state's Atchafalaya Basin to brace for prolonged flooding if the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers opens a major spillway to lower water levels along the swollen Mississippi River. 

The Morganza Floodway, which lies north of Baton Rouge, La., was designed to divert floodwaters from the Mississippi River to the Atchafalaya Basin, a vast swamp and major oil field that cuts through south Louisiana to the Gulf of Mexico. 

The Louisiana Department of Natural Resources Office of Conservation estimates that 2,264 wells lie in that area and would be inundated if the Corps of Engineers carries out its plans. Those wells produce the equivalent of 19,278 barrels of oil per day—about 10% of the state's onshore production, the state agency estimated. 

Completed in 1954, the Morganza Floodway has been opened only once, in 1973. But the worst flooding along the Mississippi River since 1937 has the Corps contemplating opening it again. 

Doing so, the Corps said earlier this week, could inundate parts of the Atchafalaya Basin with as much as 25 feet of water as the floodwaters course toward the Gulf of Mexico. 

Louisiana officials began warning oil and gas producers there late last week, urging them to remove loose equipment, install plugs and safety valves, and affix PVC markers to wellheads so that they will be visible in the event of flooding. 

There are some 140 operators in the basin, including  BP PLC,  ConocoPhillips,
COP


-1.86
%




 Exxon Mobil Corp.
XOM


-0.42
%




,  Apache Corp.
APA


-1.67
%




,  Devon Energy Corp.
DVN


-2.32
%




, according to state data. 

As of Friday there were 18 rigs drilling onshore in south Louisiana and 18 running on inland water bodies, according to oil-field service company  Baker Hughes Inc.
BHI


-2.67
%




 

It is unclear which wells and production facilities are most vulnerable to flooding. 

Devon spokesman Chip Minty said the Oklahoma City company doesn't expect any disruptions at a large St.  Mary Parish well it operates. The well produced more than 223,000 barrels of oil and 430 million cubic feet of natural gas last year, according to state data.

  Paul Vincent, director of finance and investor relations for  Swift Energy Co.
SFY


-7.87
%




, one of Louisiana's largest crude producers, said flooding shouldn't have any impact on its operations because they are primarily located in inland water bodies. 

"Our fields are already operating in 10 to 12 feet of water," Mr. Vincent said. 