MADRID—Spain's economic growth rate strengthened slightly in the first quarter thanks to strong exports, but remains one of the slowest in the euro zone and the world, data released Friday by Spain's National Statistics Institute show. 

In its preliminary estimate for the quarter, the INE said Spain's gross domestic product rose a quarterly 0.3% in the first quarter, up from 0.2% in the fourth quarter of last year—a higher reading than the 0.2% growth forecast by the Spanish central bank May 6. On an annual basis, it said first-quarter GDP rose 0.8%. 

These numbers show that Spain, like Ireland and unlike other troubled euro-zone economies such as Greece and Portugal, is eking out some growth even as it grapples with the collapse of a decade-long construction boom that has weighed on economic output, sent unemployment spiraling and punched a large hole in its public-sector accounts. 

However, they also contrast with Spain's solid pace of growth during the year before the 2008 property bust—when the country often posted annual growth above 3%, leading the euro zone—and strong figures released Friday by other euro-zone economies, including Germany and France. 

Quarterly growth in Germany, Europe's largest economy, accelerated in the first quarter of this year to 1.5%, surpassing the pre-crisis level of early 2008 and beating expectations. France, the euro zone's second largest economy, posted 1% quarterly growth, also beating expectations, and smaller economies like the Netherlands and Austria released similar numbers. 

In Spain, a continued household deleveraging process and unemployment above 21% should keep the growth outlook dim in coming quarters, said  Raj Badiani, an economist with IHS Global Insight. "The modest first-quarter performance suggests that Spain is struggling to establish a more convincing recovery path in 2011. Apart from exports, the economy is struggling to find any other dynamic contribution to growth."

Like many private-sector forecasters, IHS Global anticipates economic growth just below 1% for Spain in 2011, compared with the government's estimate of 1.3% growth. Mr. Badiani said an expected slowdown in the export sector, a consequence of relatively weaker global demand, may lead to just 0.1% or 0.2% quarterly growth in the second quarter. 

"Spain will be increasingly reliant on exports to drive its economy forward in the next years. This could be a tough ask given that Spain's export portfolio covers a wide range of products that are vulnerable to strong competition from Asian exporters," he said. 

 Write to  Jonathan House at jonathan.house@dowjones.com and David Roman at david.roman@dowjones.com 