Does Elvis Presley still matter? If so, why?

The questions arise with the latest release of Presley memorabilia. In this case, it isn't ephemera like Presley cuckoo clocks, lunch boxes, salt-and-pepper shakers and Christmas-tree lights newly minted 33 years after his death, but a boxed set of every master recording released during Presley's lifetime. Handsomely packaged, "The Complete Elvis Presley Masters" (RCA/Legacy) includes 814 tracks on 30 CDs and a 240-page hardcover book with an annotated discography, art from every original single and album, and a lengthy essay by Peter Guralnick, author of two definitive Presley biographies. Priced at $749, the first edition was limited to 1,000 numbered copies and sold out well before its Oct. 19, 2010 release date. A second edition is on sale now and will be shipped later this month.

"The Complete Elvis Presley Masters" serves as a reminder of how vital was the early music of Presley, who would've turned 76 this week, and how disappointing was his decline into caricature later on—but it doesn't help much in answering the question of his present relevance as a musician. Few fans need every track Presley ever recorded, and anyone who thinks he does probably has them already. So in its way, the boxed set might serve as yet another piece of ephemera, yet another testimony to the diligence of Presley's publicity machine, for which the music is no more part of the package than its display case. Set it on a coffee table or faux-marble pedestal and Elvis lives on.

Perhaps it's better that way. In its thoroughness, "The Complete Elvis Presley Masters" presents an obstacle to appreciating the true elements of Presley's greatness: the energy of his early music, which helped R&B cross into the mainstream; the deftness with which he mixed country, gospel and rockabilly in his sound; his swagger, beauty and the sexy rumble of his voice; and the lean, efficient power of his pre-Hollywood band. When compared with the rest of his body of work, these early examples remind us that not everything Presley did was great. In fact, the set makes clear that greatness eluded him for much of his 23-year career, which ended when he died at age 42.

With Presley, the later in his life a recording was made the less likely we are to see even a flake of brilliance. The studio tracks on discs 23 through 27 in the set, which cover the years 1971 through to his death in 1977, are at best pleasant but mawkish: "Burning Love" comes from that era, as does "I've Got a Thing About You, Baby," but these are performances on which Presley approaches his old glory yet doesn't quite reach the top. By then, the burnt-out and drug- addled Presley had two feet planted in the saccharine country-pop mainstream and wasn't going to let it rip even if he could. His joyless live material from that era brings to mind the image of a bloated Presley in white jumpsuit singing the greatest hits of other performers and rushing through his own classics, the great Ron Tutt behind him flailing on drums like Animal from "The Muppet Show." By then Presley himself was already the first Elvis impersonator.

But does any of that diminish the excellence of his early work? No, of course not. But it does create a context for discussing his reputation as a musician. That Presley was to his most rabid fans a god no matter what he did stands for little in the long run. Though there may be no end to revivalist events like Cirque du Soleil's "Viva Elvis" —now being mounted in Las Vegas—at some point Presley's work must stand on its own. Fifty-five years ago this week, Presley cut the still-remarkable "Heartbreak Hotel"; by the end of 1957, he'd released "Hound Dog," "Don't Be Cruel," "All Shook Up," "(Let Me Be Your) Teddy Bear)," "Jailhouse Rock" and "Blue Christmas"—with a lot of chaff in between. Those hits tingle with a trace of danger and dark sensuality. In that era, Presley at his best was undeniably great.

But by 1958, Elvis's decline as a recording artist was already beginning. Touring, films (and their mostly cheesy songs), a low-stress stint in the Army and the burden of being Elvis Presley would soon take their toll.

The boxed set is peppered with not-quite-iconic pre-'70s hits that sound terrific—"Stuck on You," "Little Sister" and "Devil in Disguise," among them—but by 1968 Presley had stumbled so often that, at 33 years old, he needed to mount a comeback special on NBC. Clad in black leather, he looked fabulous and showed he could still summon the old fire. (You can buy a Barbie-style doll of Elvis as he appeared on the program.) Listen to the 35 hours of Presley music on "The Complete Elvis Presley Masters" and we soon realize there's much more bad than good. What's essential could fit on a single CD or perhaps two.

 Mr. Fusilli is the Journal's rock and pop music critic. Email him at jfusilli@wsj.com or follow him on Twitter: @wsjrock. 