By now, you know that England won the 2011 Six Nations Championship and that Italy collected the wooden spoon. 

What isn't clear, and what's still producing heated arguments among fans, is whether any of Europe's leading rugby nations can go on to win this sport's biggest prize when rugby union's World Cup kicks off in New Zealand in September.

The confusion is partly down to the extraordinary unpredictability of this year's tournament. Every week of the 2011 Six Nations unfolded like a wild showcase of seemingly astonishing upsets: France, unbeaten a year ago, lost to Italy; England, undefeated all season, collapsed in Dublin. In all, seven of the first 12 games were within a converted try of a different result.

But a number of trends did emerge that could have lasting significance on how the northern hemisphere fares in New Zealand. Here are a few things to look for:

England tripped up at the finish line when its hopes of a grand slam ended in disappointment with a 24-8 defeat in Dublin. But history suggests that England, the 2011 Six Nations champion despite failing to complete a clean sweep, has a plausible shot at reaching the World Cup final.

A glance at the six World Cups contested so far shows that when the Six Nations and World Cup coincide, the annual joust between Europe's leading rugby countries is a remarkably accurate forecaster of World Cup success.

England got to the World Cup semifinals in 1995 after winning the Five Nations that year, reached the final in 1991, and actually won the tournament following its 2003 Six Nations grand slam.

In 1987, France won the Five Nations and subsequently finished as runner-up to New Zealand, while the French were also semifinalists in 2007 having won the Six Nations that year. 

In fact, only once has the European champion failed to reach the semifinals: In 1999, Scotland won the Five Nations but lost to New Zealand in the World Cup quarterfinals.

In one sense, this is no great surprise: The Six Nations is one of only two tournaments with global significance, along with the southern hemisphere's Tri Nations involving South Africa, New Zealand and Australia. It's logical that the winner of each stands a good chance of doing well in the World Cup, which follows six months later.

But it means that England, which provided most of the fireworks in this year's Six Nations, should continue its recent improvement when its World Cup campaign begins Sept. 10 against Argentina.

"Regardless of the result at the weekend, I think England are going in the right direction," said Matt Dawson, a member of England's triumphant 2003 World Cup team. "They've stepped up another notch over the last year and I would be confident that England could win a semifinal."

For any country hoping to win the World Cup, it helps to have a laser-accurate goalkicker, a dominant lineout and a bunch of forwards who can generate enough force to knock over a rhinoceros.

But arguably the most important factor is a top-class fly-half: In four of the six World Cups so far, the guy in the No.10 jersey has kicked the winning points in the final.

Yet as Europe's leading nations prepare for the World Cup in New Zealand, there is an unprecedented level of uncertainty at the fly-half position. 

Ireland's Jonathan Sexton was inspirational in the defeat of England on Saturday, but his erratic form earlier in the tournament led to a recall for Ronan O'Gara. England's Toby Flood appeared to have made the England No.10 jersey his own after illuminating England's opening two games, but there is now a clamor for Jonny Wilkinson to return. 

James Hook was arguably Wales' best player in this tournament, but started only two games in his favored fly-half position, while Scotland has switched between Dan Parks and Ruaridh Jackson.

If any of these countries is going to emerge as a genuine contender at the 2011 World Cup, resolving the question of who should play the game's most glamorous position is crucial.

France remain rugby's greatest enigma, capable of beating and losing to anyone and impossible to predict with any reliability. Which makes it tough to read too much into a Six Nations campaign that even by the inconsistent standards of French rugby, was a model of inconsistency.

But for Wales and Scotland, the 2011 Six Nations has raised serious doubts about their ability to emerge as realistic challengers in New Zealand. The Scots beat South Africa in a nail-biter last November and are dogged opponents when the scores are close. But scoring tries remains a serious problem: When Nick De Luca crossed the line against Italy on Saturday, it was Scotland's first try at Murrayfield for 11 hours and 54 minutes. 

By contrast, the Welsh have always had a potent offense, but there are questions about the country's commitment to running rugby, especially in a tough World Cup pool that includes Fiji and Samoa (both have beaten Wales in previous World Cups).

Since winning the grand slam in 2008, Wales has never finished higher than fourth and some say the team is going backwards. "Wales have some class players… but I think they play too much the same way all the time," said Philippe Saint-Andre, the Toulon coach. "They are not clinical enough."

It's tough to be upbeat about a team that has finished bottom of the standings for the ninth time in 12 seasons, but the 2011 Six Nations could come to be seen as Italy's coming of age. The Italians recorded just one win in five games, but came within a missed conversion of tying Ireland and had chances against both Scotland and Wales. Take away the eight-try shredding by England at Twickenham and Italy conceded only eight points more than it scored over the course of the tournament. 

Sergio Parisse, the indomitable No.8, was arguably the player of the tournament. And then there was that magical afternoon in Rome when the Italians overcame a 12-point deficit in the final half-hour to record a first victory over France.

In a World Cup pool that includes Ireland and Australia, the Italians are a Cinderella that looks capable of causing a shocking upset.

 Write to  Jonathan Clegg at jonathan.clegg@wsj.com 