ORESTIADA, Greece—Turkey's decision to open its borders for visa-free travel from countries in the Middle East and Africa has helped unleash a flood of illegal immigrants into the European Union, border officials here said Monday.

The main conduit is just outside this unassuming Greek town near Turkey's border, where fields of garlic and brush form the only dry-land border between Greece and Turkey. 

"Look at them wearing suits and ties like they're going for coffee in a café," Georgios Salamagkas, chief of police for the Orestiada district, said during an interview at his office in Orestiade, as he watched a video of migrants walking across the fields from Turkey toward the Greek border in daylight.

Greek and EU border officials describe an explosion of such illegal immigrants, who they say are taking advantage of a cheap, safe expressway to Europe's borderless Schengen area, of which Greece is member. Here, the Schengen area abuts another open-travel zone, the informal visa-free zone developing in the East, around Turkey. 

"Everyone gets to Istanbul by plane, flying on cheap tickets from Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia and so on. Then it's a three-hour car ride to Edirne [a Turkish city on the border] and a short walk to Greece," said Mr. Salamagkas. That makes fees to human traffickers lower, too, as little as €200 ($260) in some cases, compared with the thousands required to travel by dangerous sea routes, he said.

According to Frontex, the EU border-support agency that deployed 175 people to help protect the frontier here, Greece now accounts for 90% of all detections of illegal crossings into the EU. Estimates of the number of immigrants now living in Greece range from 500,000 to two million, huge figures for a nation of 11 million that is more used to sending emigrants abroad.

In Greece, feelings are running high. To stop the flow of immigrants, Greece is planning to build a fence across the fields. Anti-immigrant protesters clashed with police in riots over the weekend. The flood of immigrants is an unwelcome, if small strain on public finances at a time when the country is in deep recession and slashing budgets. 

In recent years, Turkey has signed visa-free travel agreements with Syria, Iran, Lebanon, Morocco, Tunisia, Libya and Jordan, among others. Citizens of many other countries, including Iraq, can buy visas at the border. Coming as other more dangerous routes across the Mediterranean were closed, the changes have been a boon for migrants, border officials say.

"It's true we are making visa agreements with some countries, to boost trade and tourism, but it's not correct to say this is getting people illegally to other countries," said Selcuk Unal, a spokesman for the Turkish foreign ministry. Turkey, he said, detained 260,000 illegal immigrants and 9,000 people-traffickers in the past eight years, and has itself become a target country for illegal migrants who want to stay. 

Greek police estimate more than a quarter of its 54,000-strong force—and roughly the same amount of its €200 million annual police budget—is consumed with combating illegal immigration, cutting forces available to fight rising recession-era crime levels. 

It isn't clear whether the proposed border fence outside Orestiada can solve those problems. The fence would be just 12½ kilometers (about eight miles) long, following the border as it cuts across a bend in the River Evros, which otherwise forms the 200-kilometer division between northern Greece and northern Turkey.

At the moment, this short dry border consists of two parallel dirt roads, with grass between. Twenty-six thousand migrants crossed this short section of dry frontier last year, out of the 47,000 who crossed the entire 200-kilometer125-mile land border, according to Mr. Salamagkas.

"It'll create an obstacle. Even if they cut the fence, it will give us some more time to react," said German police Capt. Gennaro Di Bello, the Frontex team leader for the district around Orestiada. Detected crossings have dropped significantly since Frontex deployed last October, although that could be just the annual winter lull. More than 10 times as many people were detected crossing the border in 2010 as in 2009.

On the Turkish side of the border, Lt. Col. Osman Akdeniz, who commands the southern half of Turkey's land border with Greece, believes the fence will simply drive more immigrants into his sector. There they will have a much harder time—they have to cross first rice paddies, then swamps and finally the river itself, using inflatable dinghies. In the last 15 days, he said his men found three immigrants who had drowned or gotten stuck in the mud and died. Those Turkey catches and deports, will probably just return to try again, he fears.

An organized tour with Col. Akdeniz on Monday displayed an array of thermal cameras, armored cars, troops and sniffer dogs, spread along the river. Fast currents and hypothermia are major winter threats to the immigrants, who he said often wet their clothes so the thermal cameras won't pick up their body heat. 

Up in Orestiada, Mr. Slamagkas is unconvinced his Turkish counterparts are trying to stop the flow. He showed another video in which a group of migrants walks across the fields from Turkey. "This is one of the best-controlled areas by the military in Turkey," he said. "You can conclude how carefully they are guarding it."

 Write to  Marc Champion at marc.champion@wsj.com 