  (See Corrections & Amplifications item below.)  

BERLIN—Authorities blocked sales from thousands of farms across Germany that received shipments of livestock feed believed to have been contaminated with high levels of cancer-causing dioxins, renewing concerns about the efficacy of the European Union's food safety system.

More than 4,700 farms were ordered to halt sales of meat and eggs by Friday, according to Germany's Agriculture Ministry, while officials test whether their products are safe for consumers. South Korea and Slovakia halted the sale of some animal products imported from Germany. Authorities in Britain and the Netherlands said they were investigating the extent of contamination in products containing German eggs.

Dioxins, industrial byproducts that have been linked to cancer and other ailments, result from manufacturing processes such as smelting and paper production. Soil, meats, dairy products and seafood usually contain some dioxins, but exposure to high levels can cause skin lesions. Long-term exposure can harm the body's immune and endocrine systems and has been shown to cause cancer in animals.

The excess dioxins in Germany stem from 2,500 tons of contaminated feed fats manufactured by Harles & Jentsch GmbH, a local producer, between November and December and mixed into livestock feeds sold by various suppliers.

Elevated dioxin levels in Europe have periodically prompted production freezes and recalls in recent years, including a recall of Irish pork and other meat products in 2008 and the slaughter in Belgium of millions of chickens suspected of dioxin contamination in 1999.

Agriculture Minister Ilse Aigner scheduled meetings for Monday with leaders from Germany's agricultural industry to discuss the impact of lost sales on farmers, and called for more uniform food and animal feed safety controls across the European Union.

"We want Europewide, binding standards for isolating health-endangering substances," her spokesman told reporters. "That means companies that make feed fats can't produce industrial materials at the same facilities. Technical compounds must under no circumstances end up in vats used for livestock fats."

All feed suppliers that use Harles & Jentzsch products have halted shipments to customers and reported their client lists to state governments, prompting the high number of preemptive closures, the spokesman said. Almost all of the affected farms were in the state of Lower Saxony. Harles & Jentzsch's headquarters is in the neighboring state of Schleswig-Holstein.

Harles & Jentsch CEO  Siegfried Sievert said in an interview with broadcaster Spiegel TV that the company hadn't yet identified the cause of the contamination. "We are investigating, we are working closely with the authorities. This caught us totally by surprise," Mr. Sievert said. "We didn't use any fats that aren't allowed."

Tests so far on eggs from farms that had used the tainted feed showed that about one third contained dioxins at or slightly above a level considered safe for consumption, while two thirds showed much lower dioxin levels, the Agriculture Ministry said.

 Write to  Patrick McGroarty at patrick.mcgroarty@dowjones.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications:  The German feed fat producer Harles & Jentzsch's headquarters is in the state of Schleswig-Holstein. An earlier version of this article incorrectly said the company is based in the neighboring state of Lower Saxony.