  AMR Corp.'s American Airlines secured a temporary court injunction against Sabre Holdings Corp. in an escalating battle over how airplane tickets are distributed and sold to consumers.

American, the third-largest U.S. airline by traffic, petitioned the judge to halt Sabre from displaying American's flights and fares less prominently than rival airlines in a vast booking system shared by thousands of travel agents.

Sabre, a key intermediary between airlines and travel agents, took that action last Wednesday to retaliate against mounting efforts by American to cut its distribution costs and sell more of its tickets directly. It also hiked the fees it charges American to distribute and sell its tickets.

Closely held Sabre of Southlake, Texas, owns the world's largest global distribution system, or GDS, which acts as a central clearing house for the fares, schedules and seat availability of hundreds of airlines.

In its court filing in Tarrant County, Texas, American argued Sabre's recent actions "threaten to seriously disrupt American's business and harm members of the public and traveling industry."

American said Sabre was "biasing"' its electronic displays of the airline's flights, causing it to lose "countless sales" to other carriers. Sabre also more than doubled the fees it charges American last week, potentially increasing the airline's annual distribution costs by more than $157 million, American added in the court filing.

Sabre, which was created in the 1960s by American before being spun off in 2000, said Wednesday it is acting within its rights.

"Sabre is confident that our actions are well within our contractual rights, and we will aggressively defend against American Airlines' baseless claims to the contrary. We are confident that the court will affirm Sabre's contractual right to protect our customers' interests and support airlines that value transparent and efficient comparison shopping," said  Nancy St. Pierre, a Sabre spokeswoman, in a written statement.

Sabre's contract with Fort Worth, Texas,-based American expires in September. Negotiations on a new contract have turned increasingly contentious since American recently began pushing online travel agencies to connect directly with the airline's own technology platform.

Travel agencies and GDSs have opposed American's efforts, complaining American is trying to shift more distribution costs to intermediaries. The also argue that the current ticket-distribution system ensures more transparency and makes it easier for consumers to comparison shop for fares among competing airlines.

Under the current distribution model, major airlines pay about $3 to GDSs for each leg of a flight that they help book. GDSs typically redirect a portion of that money to travel agencies. Airlines also often make separate, smaller payments to travel agencies after seats are booked. 

American pulled its fares before Christmas from the website of online travel agency Orbitz Worldwide Inc. in a growing dispute over distribution fees. Another major travel agency, Expedia Inc., pulled American flights from its website on New Year's Day after they also failed to settle on new terms.

American, like many other carriers, currently sells about two thirds of its seats through third parties. It booked more than $7 billion in sales in the past year through Sabre, its single biggest intermediary, the airline disclosed in Monday's court filing.

Other major airlines are monitoring the dispute closely. Several are also expected to try and lower their distribution costs and curtail the role of intermediaries as more contracts come up for renewal in the coming months.

 Write to  Mike Esterl at mike.esterl@wsj.com 