Estimates of the death toll in Libya range from 1,000 (the U.N.) to 6,000 (the Libyan Human Rights League). Gadhafi's forces have taken hostage three Dutch airmen who were rescuing European citizens. Tens of thousands of refugees continue to stream into neighboring Tunisia, Egypt, Niger, and the Italian island of Lampedusa. Libyan planes yesterday resumed air strikes on Brega's oil terminal, after rebels there retook the port city on Wednesday. To absolutely no one's relief, the International Criminal Court has opened an investigation.

So the question remains: Will anyone help the Libyan people put an end to Gadhafi's regime? British Prime Minister David Cameron says he wants plans for a no-fly zone over Libya. But U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates describes all such suggestions as "loose talk." 

America has a large stake in the outcomes of this winter's uprisings. But events in North Africa are even more pressing for Europe, where the prospect of tens of thousands of African refugees has prompted an emergency summit next week and elicited warnings of a "Biblical exodus" from Italian Foreign Minister Franco Frattini. Already Rome has deployed maritime crews to hold back the tide of asylum-seekers, while France and Britain have sent ships and planes to help Egyptian migrants return home from the Libyan-Tunisian border. This week, as hundreds of refugees joined the roughly 5,000 already in Lampedusa, the EU pledged €30 million in medicine, food, shelter, and other aid to people desperately seeking to flee Libya.

But Mr. Cameron's call to confront the root cause of the North African flight remains unmet, and it's not hard to see why. For years European states have slashed their defense budgets, and today few spend more than 2% of GDP on their militaries. When Mr. Cameron's government this fall announced a 7.5% cut from a military budget that already accounted for just 2.2% of GDP, it explained that "the Spending Review makes choices" and prioritized "the NHS, schools, early years provision and the capital investments that support long-term economic growth." 

The countries of Europe still retain sufficient military assets to enforce a no-fly zone over Libyan skies and hasten the Gadhafi regime's demise. But just as Britain very nearly gutted its surface fleet on the eve of the Falklands War in 1982, European governments have been gambling that they can continue to scrimp on armaments without putting their core security interests at risk. What's happening today in Libya is a reminder of how short-sighted that gamble may yet prove to be.