ABIDJAN, Ivory Coast—Fighters aligned with Ivory Coast's President-elect Alassane Ouattara on Monday pushed into strongholds of Laurent Gbagbo, the incumbent who has resisted diplomatic efforts to dislodge him, signaling a violent new phase in the monthslong saga over a disputed election. 

In the main city of Abidjan, witnesses said fighting erupted around the residence of Mr. Gbagbo's army chief of staff. The assault on the army chief's residence Sunday evening marks the first time an insurgency in Abidjan has spread beyond the northern district of Abobo, where running gun battles between the army and forces have raged daily over the last month. State-run television later denied any fighting in the area.

In a separate assault overnight, a nearby camp housing pro-Gbagbo youth paramilitaries was destroyed, residents in the southwest suburb of Youpougon said. 

"We heard heavy weapons, rocket-propelled grenades, automatic weapons—you name it," said a 43-year old Youpougon resident based near the youth military camp. "The entire area was flattened."

The identity of the attackers wasn't immediately known. In the past, fighters from neighborhoods loyal to Mr. Ouattara have called themselves "invisible commandos," although the president-elect has denied links with them.

In another suburb of Abidjan, meanwhile, residents said pro-Ouattara fighters have pushed south into the neighborhood of Adjame, in the direction of Mr. Gbagbo's presidential palace. 

The battles in Abidjan, the commercial capital of the world's largest cocoa producer, are part of a broader conflict in the country. New Force rebels, who back Mr. Ouattara, have taken a fourth town in Ivory Coast's volatile western region.

There was no information on casualties from the weekend of fighting. The United Nations estimates the death toll in the Abidjan neighborhood of Abobo, where backers loyal to Mr. Ouattara are concentrated, to be at least 400. About 200,000 have fled the district, the U.N. says.

Fighting between camps loyal to Messrs. Gbagbo and Ouattara has escalated following a series of failed diplomatic overtures to resolve the stalemate. Mr. Gbagbo rejected a deadline to step aside after an African Union summit on March 11. 

While Mr. Ouattara attended the A.U. meeting in Ethiopia, Mr. Gbagbo issued a ban on U.N. and French army aircraft over Ivory Coast airspace. The U.N., which has taken charge of his security, returned Mr. Ouattara over the weekend to the Abidjan Golf Hotel, where he has been encamped since the November run-off. 

Although Mr. Ouattara has distanced himself from fighters attacking positions of Mr. Gbagbo's troops, he has backed robust threats from the Economic Community of West African States against his rival. The regional body, which initially warned of "legitimate force," against Mr. Gbagbo, has since raised the prospect of a naval blockade rather than troops. 

Ivory Coast rebels have regrouped after the disputed election and, in recent days, pushed toward a cease-fire line that divided the northern and southern parts of the country. The U.N. estimates that about 450,000 have fled their homes in Ivory Coast, with almost 100,000 seeking refuge in neighboring Liberia.

 Write to  Monica Mark at Monica.Mark@dowjones.com 