 PLEASANT GROVE, Ala.—Once the twisters ended on Wednesday evening, Brady McLaughlin, a volunteer sheriff’s deputy, headed out with colleagues to survey the damage. There were no 911 calls yet, said the 22-year-old law student; phone and power lines were down.

The first place he reached was Pleasant Grove. As he raced through the flattened town on foot, he could hear people under the rubble. “They were just screaming,” he said. “It was inarticulate. It was just ‘Ahhhh.’”

Some of the cries were from children. At one house, now in a shambles, he helped dig through five feet of torn wood and chunks of wall to rescue two wailing little girls, one just three months old, the other three years old. He ripped a car seat from a nearby overturned vehicle to hold the baby.

Mr. McLaughlin and two colleagues found a woman who had hidden in a refrigerator—“It protected her pretty well,” he said—and another trapped beneath an overturned tub.

He lost count of all the people he dug out, but said there were several dead and no more than 20 alive.

—Ana Campoy

 TUSCALOOSA, Ala.—Stories of looting and generosity are here in equal measure.Mason Vaughn, a 20-year-old junior at the University of Alabama here, walked a mile to campus from the two-bedroom house he rents after the tornado blew all his windows in. He stayed with a friend that night.

There are church volunteers in the hardest-hit areas setting up grills and cooking hot dogs.

But there also is a pervasive fear of theft among residents desperate to retrieve what they can from their homes before nightfall.

When he returned home the next morning, he discovered that some cash, a game system and a new pair of size 13 red and gray Nikebasketball sneakers were gone.

“They took anything they could sell for a quick buck,” he said.

—Douglas Belkin

 CULLMAN, Ala.—The century-old brick homes here have a feature seldom found in most of the deep South: basements. Many residents sought shelter in their basements during the tornados and survived.

Their homes weren’t so lucky.

Many of the stately houses in the downtown area were in disarray Friday, with roofs blown off, walls crumpled and windows smashed. Certain that her badly damaged brick home would be condemned, Stella Couch, a high-school teacher, wondered what to do next.

The neighborhood that drew her family there 15 years ago “will never be the same,” she said, but her insurers may require her to rebuild on the property.

It will be a while before she knows, though. Her insurance company’s office a few blocks away also was destroyed.

—Ryan Dezember

 HUEYTOWN, Ala.—While volunteers sorted donations at a church-turned shelter here, Autumn Rocha bonded with a big yellow dog who was found wandering the streets with no name tag. He had a leash and a collar, but no place to go. 

Ms. Rocha, 20, decided to take him home and post his picture on a Facebook page created to reunite storm victims with lost pets. 

The big yellow dog seemed to like that idea. He licked her face.

—Ana Campoy

 TUSCALOOSA, Ala.—In the 24 hours after the tornado struck, this city the Tuscaloosa Fire Department recovered 36 dead bodies, most inside collapsed homes and buildings, said Lieut. Marty McElroy. Since then, progress has slowed—and the work more frustrating.

One home was reduced to a five-foot pile of rubble. At the center, a piece of yellow tape tied to a piece of timber fluttered in a light breeze.Lieut. McElroy arrived on the scene at about 2 pm. with a back hoe, which combed through the wreckage for 20 minutes. The machine moved plaster walls and a mattress covered in blue sheets with red balloons—and uncovered. Dust billowed up. There was no body.

Lieut. McElroy signaled to wrap it up. On to the next house.

—Douglas Belkin