SINGAPORE—Moody's Investors Service is looking to anticipate any shift in investor sentiment toward Japanese government debt in the wake of disasters that the country has endured recently, and would have taken "more forceful" ratings action in February had it foreseen a deterioration in borrowing conditions, a senior analyst at the credit rating agency said. 

Tom Byrne, senior vice president at Moody's, said late Tuesday that the market for Japanese government bonds was unlikely to see major disruption despite Friday's earthquake—Japan's strongest on record, with a magnitude of 9.0—which triggered massive tidal waves that engulfed coastal regions and seriously damaged nuclear power stations. 

The Japanese government should face no great problems with issuance over the next year or so, he added. In a report Monday, Mr. Byrne had said that the quake didn't make a fiscal crisis imminent, but that it may have brought Japan closer to a "tipping point" where investors could lose confidence in the government's finances.

In late February, Moody's cut the outlook on Japan's Aa2 bond rating to negative from stable, saying that political gridlock was dimming chances for timely action to rein in the nation's ballooning debt load.

"If we had thought there was a lot more pressure and that the situation would deteriorate, we would have taken more forceful ratings action," Mr. Byrne said in an interview, while noting that it would be "interesting" to see how the crisis impacts Japan's comprehensive tax reform package in June. 

In terms of any rating adjustments, "we would want to anticipate the tipping point," he noted. 

Japan's total government debt load is worth nearly 200% of total annual economic output, the highest level among all major industrialized countries. But while the burden has been growing steadily, successive governments have been unable to come up with a solution. Around 95% of JGBs are held by Japanese domestic investors.

The Bank of Japan has taken "an important first step" in response to the disaster to boost its purchases of JGBs and risk assets, and that that move is likely to keep rates lower than otherwise, Mr. Byrne said. 

"I think the JGB market will remain deep and liquid, and face no major disruption. Over the next year or so, the government should face no great problems with issuance," he added. 

Mr. Byrne said he was taking Japanese government spending following the Great Hanshin Earthquake that devastated the city of Kobe in 1995 as a "conservative" benchmark for likely additional expenditure to tackle the aftermath of Friday's disaster. 

Japanese Finance Minister Yoshihiko Noda acknowledged Monday that an extra budget to fund reconstruction efforts was likely to top the amount spent following the Kobe earthquake. 

Mr. Byrne noted that the Great Hanshin Earthquake caused a loss of around 2% of gross domestic product, with a direct cost of around 1% to the government. 

Based on Japan's current output, that would add around five trillion yen ($) to the government's current borrowing target of 44 trillion yen, which it was already likely to overshoot prior to Friday's earthquake, he said. The Bank of Japan could shoulder some of that, while the market would absorb the rest, he said. 

"We're still using Kobe as a benchmark. If it's similar to that, we'll be back to focusing on the long-term fiscal challenges of Japan's large debts and deficits," Mr. Byrne said. 

In so far as the crisis runs down people's savings, that would be a negative, given the importance of domestic investors in sustaining demand for JGBs, he added. 

The government is unlikely to cut spending in other areas to compensate, Mr. Byrne said, adding that raising taxes would also be "questionable" at the present time, although it would be inevitable in the longer term to account for rising social security costs. 

"The economy will probably rebound in the second half of the year when reconstruction starts to take effect," Mr. Byrne said. "But Japan could be in for a rough couple of months," with power shortages and as concern about the safety of Japan's nuclear plants continues to provoke a "risk-off attitude" among investors, he noted. 

Mr. Byrne said the next key event that Moody's is watching out for is the government's comprehensive tax reform package due in June. 

"Despite the need for additional fiscal spending [to deal with the quake], it will still be important for the government to effectively communicate its long-term fiscal-deficit-reduction strategy," he said.

The biggest risk for the trade-dependent nation would probably be a jump in energy prices, severe enough to spark another global downturn, Mr. Byrne said. 

"The worst economic scenario for Japan would be if oil prices spiked to very high levels from a historical context, causing another global recession," he said. "That's a risk going forward."

 Write to  Natasha Brereton at natasha.brereton@dowjones.com 