 The ECB's Trichet signaled the central bank could raise interest rates next month for the first time since the worst of the financial crisis in 2008. He warned that "strong vigilance" is required to ensure that a rise in commodity prices doesn't translate into a generalized increase in inflation.  

 U.S. stocks gained on a strong reading on employment and a drop in the price of oil. Asia was led higher by a rebound in South Korean shares.  

 Sony has whittled its yen exposure to the dollar to "virtually zero" by shifting manufacturing out of Japan to China, the company's corporate treasurer said.  

 A consortium from Japan and South Korea plans to pay $1.95 billion for a stake in a Brazilian miner that specializes in a metal used in high-grade steel.  

 BP said it won't pay bonuses for 2010 to top executives who had responsibility for operations in the Gulf of Mexico during last year's well disaster.  

 The U.K. gave provisional approval to News Corp.'s proposed takeover of BSkyB after the media company agreed to spin off BSkyB's 24-hour news channel.  

 U.S. retailers posted solid sales for February as fuller-priced clothing and winter-clearance merchandise both moved well. 

 Myanmar halted rice exports to keep local prices in check as nations remain jittery about global food prices, which the U.N.'s food body said rose 2.2% in February.  

 Itochu agreed to buy U.K. auto-repair business Kwik-Fit from a European private-equity firm for $1.04 billion.  

 Surging inflation and interest in trading Mongolia's currency are challenges facing the Bank of Mongolia, a top official said.  

 Hedge-fund manager John Paulson, who made his name betting against subprime mortgages in 2007, is the latest high-profile investor to expand into Asia.  

 Citic Pacific said profit rose 50% in 2010 on improved special-steel sales and asset disposals.  

 A heavy military presence could be seen near the Libyan city of Zawiya, as armed antiregime protesters remained holed up in the city. In Bahrain, opposition groups submitted demands to the ruling family that included dissolution of the government.  

 The Philippines sent two military aircraft to disputed waters in the South China Sea after a Philippine oil-exploration vessel said it was confronted by two Chinese patrol boats.  

 The IMF said it will lower its growth forecast for New Zealand, as rescuers gave up hope of finding any more quake survivors.  

 German authorities were probing links between the suspect in the shooting of two U.S. servicemen in Frankfurt and a number of radical Islamist groups, but believe he acted on his own.  

 Muhammad Yunus challenged the legality of a Bangladeshi government order dismissing him as the head of the microfinance bank he founded.  

 Philanthropist Bill Gates warned that the high costs of U.S. health care and pensions for state employees take away funds needed for schools.  

Thirteen people died in a highway ambush and a car bomb attack targeting security forces in Pakistan's northwest.

A Pakistani court said it would proceed with the trial of an American CIA contractor arrested for shooting and killing two Pakistanis, but held off on charging him, lawyers for both sides said.