Saturday's shooting of a congresswoman while she was meeting constituents sparked outreach between party leaders and talk of stepped-up security, against the backdrop of a nascent debate over inflammatory rhetoric in politics. 

A day after a gunman in Arizona killed six people including a federal judge and gravely wounded the Democratic congresswoman, House members from both parties, led by Speaker John A. Boehner (R., Ohio) and Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D., Calif.), held a conference call for lawmakers and staff Sunday that began with an appeal for unity by Mr. Boehner.

"This is a time for the House to pull together as an institution, one body, unified in our common purpose of serving the American people," Mr. Boehner began.

House leaders canceled all scheduled floor activities besides a resolution Wednesday honoring wounded Rep. Gabrielle Giffords (D., Ariz.) and those slain in the rampage.

President Barack Obama called Sunday for a national moment of silence at 11 a.m. Eastern time Monday. He ordered flags to be flown at half-staff nationally and canceled a planned trip Tuesday to Schenectady, N.Y., where he was to tour a General Electric Co. plant.

Prominent political shootings involving members of Congress.

For members of Congress, the violence in Tucson brought new attention to the sparse police protection given to lawmakers away from Capitol Hill. Mr. Boehner told lawmakers he had asked the Federal Bureau of Investigation, along with the Capitol Police and sergeant-at arms, to conduct a security overview for all House members. He also ordered security briefings for the staffers who run lawmakers' home-state offices.

"One of the protections members of Congress have is that something like this is unthinkable," said Rep. Brad Sherman (D, Calif.). "That protection has been stripped away. If there are lunatics who wouldn't have thought of it, now they've thought of it."

Many members of Congress spend weekends holding open events, as Ms. Giffords was doing when attacked. These events are widely advertised and rarely have even a single security guard or police officer.

"I hate to put this in the newspaper, but we don't have any security," Mr. Sherman said. "The word 'balance' implies your life is a compromise between constituents and security. For most of my colleagues, there isn't any balance; you just get out there."

An FBI spokesman said the agency noted a spike in threats against members of Congress after the health-care overhaul passed, adding that there had been a number of arrests as a result. Rep. Raul Grijalva (D., Ariz.) said he and Ms. Giffords were both threatened during last fall's election campaign. Ms. Giffords's district office was vandalized after she voted for the health-care bill.

"Gabby and I used to talk about…the threats on her office, the windows being shot out in her office—mine, too," Mr. Grijalva said. "We went about our business, because we felt those were unique, isolated and different. Unfortunately, after today, all of us are going to have to take more precautions."

On the other side of the aisle, a Philadelphia man was convicted of making terroristic threats against Rep. Eric Cantor (R., Va.), who is now the House majority leader.

Jim Gilchrist, who founded the immigration-law enforcement group Minuteman Project, said he sensed a "violent streak" in American politics and brought a bodyguard to public events. "I am in fear of my life from people like this who are on my side of the argument," as well as from extremists "from the ultra-left," Mr. Gilchrist said.

As signs emerged that the alleged shooter, Jared Lee Loughner, was a disturbed loner, party leaders weren't suggesting any direct link between specific political statements and his actions. Authorities haven't commented on possible motives.

But the shootings appear to be yielding the kind of ruminations on civility and violence not seen since domestic terrorists blew up the Alfred P. Murrah federal building in Oklahoma City in 1995. Some lawmakers and liberal activists implored President Obama to use the moment the way President Bill Clinton did in 1995, not only to call for national unity but to denounce a political culture of violence.

"I hope he does use it as a unifying moment and a time to call for civil discourse,'' said Rep. Steny Hoyer (D., Md.) in an interview. White House officials were guarded Sunday about whether Mr. Obama would add to the brief comments he has made so far.

A number of political figures said Saturday's rampage should prompt candidates and partisans to temper any use of violent rhetoric after a season of political heat.

In the run-up to the November elections, Nevada Republican Senate candidate Sharron Angle talked of "second amendment remedies" to voter frustrations.

Candidate Allen West, now a Florida congressman, said during the campaign of his Democratic opponent: "Let me tell you what you've got to do. You've got to make the fellow scared to come out of his house. That's the only way that you're going to win."

The political action committee of Sarah Palin, the former Alaska governor, posted a map with cross-hairs over the districts of Democratic lawmakers who had voted for the health-care law and had tough re-election battles. Ms. Giffords was included on the map.

A spokeswoman for Ms. Palin, Rebecca Mansour, said in a radio interview Saturday that the targets superimposed on the congressional districts were not meant to be gun sights, as was widely interpreted. "We never ever, ever intended it to be gun sights. It was simply cross-hairs like you'd see on maps," Ms. Mansour said to conservative radio host Tammy Bruce, a Palin supporter, comparing the images to a surveyor's symbol.

She also said that any assertions of culpability on the former governor's part were "obscene.'' In a posting on her Facebook page Saturday, Ms. Palin expressed her condolences to the families of the victims said she was praying "for peace and justice."

Democratic Sen. Joe Manchin stirred controversy last year over the imagery in one of his campaign ads, which showed him loading a rifle and shooting a hole through a copy of the "cap and trade" bill to combat global warming that the House had passed earlier.

Meanwhile, Republicans complained when Mr. Obama appeared to cast them as his "enemies,'' saying that the president had maligned people who were standing up for their political beliefs. Mr. Obama, who had used the word in urging Hispanics to vote for Democrats, later said he "probably should have used the word 'opponents' instead of 'enemies.' "

"It's no secret I've been concerned for awhile about the overheated rhetoric. I'm not subscribing this action to it at all, but long before this incident there have been many of who have been concerned," said Rep. Jeff Flake, an Arizona Republican.

Mr. Hoyer, appearing on CBS's "Face the Nation," said he had spoken with Mark Kelly, Ms. Giffords's astronaut husband, who was "very angry about the level of angry rhetoric that he believes incites people."

 Write to  Jonathan Weisman at jonathan.weisman@wsj.com 