The euro zone's debt crisis is entering a new phase after a brief Christmas lull as Portugal struggles to persuade investors to buy its bonds and other European governments step up pressure on the country to seek an international bailout.

Portugal hopes to raise new funds in a bond auction Wednesday, despite a market selloff in recent days that pushed the interest yield on Portuguese 10-year bonds above 7% Friday, the highest level since the euro's creation. Economists said such high borrowing costs are unsustainable for the country, which is struggling to rein in its debts amid chronically low economic growth.

Among Lisbon's challenges in selling bonds this week is a heavy debt-issuance calendar in which many other governments are also offering safer euro-denominated investments. Failure to attract enough investor interest would signal that Portugal has effectively lost access to capital markets, forcing the country to seek aid.

The euro-zone economy is expected to expand mildly through 2011, aided by a recovery in global demand. But forecasts are overshadowed by the government debt crisis. See how member nations stack up. 

Other European Union countries, including Germany and France, have for weeks been urging Portugal to apply for rescue loans from the joint EU-International Monetary Fund bailout facility, according to European officials. Portugal's government continues to insist publicly that it doesn't need help and that its steady progress in cutting its budget deficit will win investors' confidence.

So far, the EU's deliberations over Portugal haven't reached the intensity seen ahead of the Greek and Irish rescues, a senior official said. That could change quickly, however, should Portugal's borrowing costs continue to rise. Euro-zone finance ministers are set to meet Jan. 17. By then, the market's appetite for Portuguese debt should be clear.

Under the rules of the European Financial Stability Facility, set up in the summer following the €110 billion ($142 billion) bailout of Greece, aid may flow only if a country applies for help. Ireland became the first country to apply for help from the EFSF late last year, receiving a loan package valued at €67.5 billion from the fund, as well as the IMF and other official sources. Ireland's government applied for aid only after pressure from the European Central Bank, which threatened to cut off emergency funding for Irish banks.

European officials believe the Portuguese government under Prime Minister Jose Socrates is so far refusing to apply for aid because doing so would be a humiliating signal of political failure, and would force the country to accept tough austerity policies imposed by Brussels and the IMF. Portuguese politicians observed how Ireland's bailout humiliated the country's leaders in the eyes of their own voters, forcing the Irish government to call early elections.

The worry in Berlin and Paris is that continued inaction by Portugal, despite investors' shrinking confidence in the country's creditworthiness, could lead to a fresh financial-market panic that infects other vulnerable euro-zone countries, especially Spain and Belgium.

Belgium's political paralysis worsened last week after the mediator of talks between parties representing the country's two main language groups tendered his resignation. Belgium has had no government since elections in June, leading to fears that the country won't act to rein in its high debts.

Spain, however, is widely seen in EU capitals as the biggest test of the euro zone's ability to handle the crisis. Spain's economy is the fourth-biggest in the euro zone after Germany, France and Italy. Funding the Spanish government for two or more years could use up all of the money that the EU and IMF have so far pledged for dealing with the euro-zone crisis.

Spain's government insists it won't need a bailout, and many economists agree that Spain's relatively low overall public debt puts it in a stronger position than other crisis-hit European countries. Still, fears of investor flight from Spanish bonds could become a self-fulfilling threat to Spain's ability to service its debts, economists warn.

Uncertainty over whether the existing bailout mechanism contains enough money to support Spain is leading to a debate among EU leaders over whether to increase the size of the EFSF. Germany has resisted committing further funds, partly because aid loans to other euro-zone countries are deeply unpopular with German voters. 

Many Germans believe they are now paying the price for Southern European countries' failure to revamp their economies and public finances, while Germany has overhauled its economy over more than a decade of painful changes. Others in Europe worry that an increase would place vulnerable countries under even more pressure in the markets by signaling that EU leaders are planning for additional bailouts.

Germany has also so far rejected proposals from Italy, supported by Spain, for common European bonds, which would spread the burden of raising money across the 17-nation euro currency bloc as a whole. Berlin objects that common bonds would raise Germany's currently low borrowing costs and could reduce the pressure on other countries for fiscal discipline.

However, signs are growing that Germany's stance on additional measures is softening. Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble said late last year that the country would do whatever it takes to defend Europe's common currency.

—Stephen Fidler in Brussels contributed to this article.

 Write to  Marcus Walker at marcus.walker@wsj.com 