BRUSSELS—Greece's wide budget deficit will decline only slightly this year and barely at all in 2012, according to new projections Friday from the European Union's executive arm, increasing the chance that the indebted nation will need a fresh bailout to get it through next year. 



The figures provide further evidence that Greece is veering seriously from the path of severe budget discipline that the EU has insisted is essential for the country to repair its government finances and regain access to private borrowing. 

Greece is now being kept afloat by bailout money from euro-zone countries and the International Monetary Fund.

In a report released Friday, the European Commission said Greece's budget deficit this year will be €21.1 billion ($30 billion), or 9.5% of its gross domestic product. The government's budget aims for 7.4%. For 2012, the commission said the deficit would be virtually unchanged, at €21.0 billion, or 9.3% of GDP. Greece is planning to reach a deficit of 6.5% next year with new fiscal belt-tightening. 

The commission said it increased its forecast for the 2011 budget deficit largely because Greece failed to bring in as much tax revenue as expected. 

The shortfalls, combined with a 2010 budget deficit that was €2 billion wider than expected, throw a wrench in the bailout plans. They mean that by next year Greece would fall roughly €12 billion behind the fiscal course planned under a €110 billion aid program granted by the euro-zone countries and the IMF last year.

That €12 billion will need to be made up somehow. The country already announced, in April, some €3 billion in budget austerity measures for 2011, in part to make up for shortfalls in tax collection. Those measures aren't included in the forecast because Greece hasn't yet detailed them or passed any legislation to implement them. The measures, which are being discussed with a visiting EU-IMF team and are set to be unveiled next week, are expected to total €26 billion over five years. 

The original bailout is already strained. It calls for Greece to raise €26.7 billion of long-term debt from private investors next year, a figure most private economists say will be next to impossible given that markets are loath to lend money to Greece. The budget shortfalls projected by the European Commission only add to that burden.

Among euro-zone policy makers, acceptance has been growing that something more will need to be done. 

Among the options are granting Greece additional aid, and demanding that the country convince private-sector bondholders to accept late repayments of its debt.Despite several efforts, Greece has struggled to reduce tax evasion and strengthen its tax take.

What to do with Greece will be atop the agenda of a regular meeting of euro-zone finance ministers next week. 

At the very least, Greece will be urged to make more budget cuts. "There is still a need to take additional measures of fiscal consolidation this year," EU Economy Commissioner Olli Rehn said Friday. A fresh assessment of the bailout program from a team of EU and IMF economists in Athens is due in the coming weeks.

Making things worse, Greece's recession is set to be deeper than expected, the commission figures show. It projects a decline in GDP of 3.5% this year, following a 4.4% decline last year. The previous forecast for this year's decline had been 3%.

Still, better-than-expected first-quarter GDP figures, also released Friday by Greek authorities, suggested the recession may have bottomed out. "The recession is becoming significantly shallower," the Greek finance ministry said. That is "also a sign that public revenue will also improve from here on," which would help the budget deficit.

—Alkman Granitsas in Athens and Riva Froymovich in Brussels contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Charles Forelle at charles.forelle@wsj.com 