BERLIN—German Chancellor Angela Merkel failed to inform lawmakers sufficiently when coming up with a proposal for a "competitiveness pact" to reform the euro zone, the president of the German parliament said in a letter to the chancellor. 

Bundestag President Norbert Lammert, in a letter sent to Mrs. Merkel on Wednesday and seen by the Wall Street Journal Friday, complained that lawmakers only got to know details of the competitiveness pact through the media. "Many representatives still don't feel sufficiently informed," Mr. Lammert said in the letter. 

The unusual complaint by the Bundestag president, a member of Mrs. Merkel's Christian Democrats, shows the intense domestic political limitations constraining her. The letter comes as she tries to persuade euro-zone peers to adopt stricter budget discipline, in exchange for further German concessions on aid for the euro-zone's financially-stressed members. 

Mrs. Merkel has already answered the letter, the Chancellor's deputy spokesman  Christoph Steegmans said Friday, though he declined to reveal what she wrote. 

"We are of the opinion that we have informed the Bundestag correctly," Mr. Steegmans said. "Whenever there was something to report, we have forwarded the information accordingly." 

Mr. Lammert, in his letter, said Mr. Merkel didn't meet, or only insufficiently met, her obligations under a law governing the cooperation between the government and parliament on European Union affairs. The law stipulates that the government has to inform the Bundestag as early and completely as possible on all initiatives regarding the EU. Mr. Lammert urged the chancellor to make up for her obligation to inform parliament, both now and in the future.

Government leaders from the euro group are meeting in Brussels Friday to debate Mrs. Merkel's proposal for the competitiveness pact, as well as plans to strengthen a temporary fund to bail out troubled euro-zone members, known as the European Financial Stability Facility. The leaders also want to finalize details for a permanent rescue fund, known as the European Stability Mechanism, which would become effective after mid-2013. 

 Germany wants the pact to include wide-ranging measures to improve fiscal discipline and the overall health of euro-zone economies, such as balanced-budget amendments and higher retirement ages. However, the content of the pact has been watered down through negotiations ahead of its expected approval at an EU leaders' summit at the end of March. 

Mrs. Merkel has acknowledged that the pact won't end the indexation between wages and inflation in some countries after Belgium's opposition. Austria opposes raising retirement ages, while Ireland rejects the idea of harmonizing the corporate tax base, both measures Germany had advocated. 

Next Thursday, German lawmakers will vote on a motion that asks the government to prevent the euro zone's future rescue fund from buying government bonds from troubled countries. The motion was put forward by coalition lawmakers in February, and also calls for the government to avoid letting the European Stability Mechanism be used to force some euro-zone members, such as Germany, to assume the debt of others. 