ZURICH—Werner Coninx may have been one of the world's most voracious art collectors. The son of a prominent Swiss publisher—and a friend of Swiss novelist Max Frisch, who mentioned Coninx in his novel "Montauk"—he amassed some 14,000 paintings, drawings and sculptures during his lifetime. Not all of the pieces may be considered high art and many of the works he bought during a span of 40 years may be ridiculed by critics as trash. But his love for art—he was a painter himself—is undoubted. 

An exhibition of around 200 works from his collection at the Coninx Museum, which is located in the collector's former family villa that overlooks Zurich, tries to make some sense of his collecting rationale. Curators Ludwig Hasler, a philosopher, and Beat Zoderer, an artist, dubbed the show "Sammelwut Sammelgut," which is a play on words to express the collector's obsession. The show attempts to organize the works in six different thematic groups in search of an overarching order. However, this thematic approach isn't held up throughout as the curators also wanted to show the inherent chaos within Coninx's collection. One of the main rooms of the exhibition displays around 80 sculptures and collectors items, ranging from African masks, ritual knives from Asia, South American statuettes or simple porcelain dishes, that are casually stacked on two shelves. The exhibition catalogue sardonically notes that the "shelves from the storage room have been ordered randomly—in the way the relocation company deemed it most convenient." It's pure chaos, reflecting Coninx's unhindered lust to buy works of art, be they expensive or cheap.

Among the highlights of the show, meanwhile, are rarely shown paintings and drawings of Swiss painters Ferdinand Hodler, Arnold Böcklin and Johann Heinrich Füssli. A undated Hodler painting, called "Fillette Tenant une Fleur" (Girl Holding a Flower), shows a rare effort of the Swiss artist experimenting with Impressionist techniques. A Böcklin drawing showing a waterfall shows how diligently the artist worked on simple studies for larger works. Füssli, meanwhile, is represented with a well known standard work with a scene from Shakespeare's "A Midsummer's Night Dream," showing a fainting woman.

Swiss painters feature prominently in Coninx's collection. Coninx himself was a board member of one of Switzerland's most important dailies, the Tages Anzeiger, which was taken over by his family in the early 20th century, giving him the funds to support himself and others. His beneficiaries also included Frisch, who received the financial means to finish his studies and often received Coninx's old suits, which were slightly too large for the Swiss novelist. 

Thus, the collection shows many paintings of lesser known Swiss artists such as Aimé Barraud, whose undated self portrait shows him with a cigarette, looking sad and depressed. A revelation is a female portrait by Auguste Frédéric Dufaux from around 1900. The painting, called "Tête de Jeune Femme" (Head of a Young Woman) looks so fresh and appealing that the observer feels to stand in front of a real person were it not for her somewhat dated haircut and blouse.

While paintings and drawings dominate the show, some religious sculptures and artifacts illustrate the breadth of Coninx's interests. In the so-called White Room of the museum, a Sumerian tablet, a Greek Orthodox icon, a Buddha head and a sitting Madonna are exhibited next to each other, illustrating that Coninx's collecting fury was neither impeded by a time frame nor cultural boundaries. 

 Until May 28 

  www.coninx-museum.ch  

 Write to  Goran Mijuk at goran.mijuk@dowjones.com 