KABUL—Swarms of Taliban fighters Saturday unleashed a major assault on Kandahar, targeting key government installations across southern Afghanistan's largest city.

At least 24 Afghans, including civilians, have been injured in the fighting, said Kandahar provincial government spokesman Zalmai Ayubi. The fighting started at about noon and continued past nightfall. There were no immediate reports of fatalities.

The Taliban hit the Kandahar governor's compound first, and then targeted the Afghan police headquarters, the transportation police headquarters, the intelligence service headquarters, a police station and various other coalition and Afghan security buildings, officials said.

Saturday's coordinated assault on the symbols of the Afghan state is the latest in a string of increasingly brazen Taliban attacks in the country's second-largest city, the focus of the U.S. troop surge.

"We heard gunfire nearby, and the police quickly [flooded] the area and told us to close our shops. People were running off the streets for shelter and the city is empty now," said Taj Mohammad, a shopkeeper in Kandahar City. "All the shopkeepers are stuck here, the security forces won't let us move and everyone is nervous."

The U.S.-led coalition said in a statement that at least five suicide bombers were involved in the attacks, using vehicles packed with explosives. Insurgents were also armed with rocket-propelled grenades and assault rifles.

"This clearly was intended to be a spring offensive spectacular attack which was thwarted by Afghan National Security Forces," said U.S. Marine Corps Maj. Gen. James Laster, the coalition's deputy chief of staff for joint operations, in a statement.

Eyewitnesses reported that hundreds of Afghan and U.S. security forces were patrolling the mostly deserted streets by Saturday afternoon and into the night, while about 10 coalition helicopters were hovering over the Kandahar governor's compound and the intelligence and police headquarters, where fighting continued.

Saturday's attacks came a day after the Taliban released a statement condemning the killing of Osama bin Laden's by U.S. forces, and vowing that his death "will give a new impetus to the current jihad against the invaders."

Taliban spokesman Qari Yusuf Ahmadi said, however, that Saturday's Kandahar assault wasn't a reprisal for bin Laden's killing but marked instead the start of the insurgency's previously announced spring offensive.

Mr. Ahmadi added that the nearly 500 prisoners that the Taliban spirited out of Kandahar's Sarpoza prison last month were involved in Saturday's operation. These escapees included high-level Taliban commanders and shadow governors. 

Saturday's "operation shows our strength; it's the first time we've been able to fight for over six hours and prisoners from Sarpoza have joined us," said Mr. Ahmadi.

The U.S.-led coalition has poured billions of dollars and deployed the bulk of the 30,000 surge troops sent to Afghanistan last year to the Kandahar and Helmand provinces, the Taliban's strategic homeland, aiming to rout the insurgents ahead of this year's fighting season.

Saturday's attacks were the latest show of strength by the Taliban, who have successfully penetrated the Kabul-based Ministry of Defense last month and assassinated the police chief for Kandahar province. 

—Ghousuddin Frotan and Zia Sultani contributed to this article.