Questions about the safety of breast implants, whose sale was restricted for more than a decade until 2006, resurfaced Wednesday with an announcement by federal health officials that the implants may be linked to a rare cancer. 

The Food and Drug Administration said it believed the risk is small but statistically significant. It acted after reviewing studies and doctors' reports in recent years about a small number of women with implants developing a cancer called anaplastic large cell lymphoma.

Health officials cautioned patients and doctors not to panic or have the implants removed if they don't have symptoms. They said the disease, which has been found in scar tissue near the implant, isn't the same as breast cancer and can be treated. 

The FDA said it had identified as many as 60 cases of ALCL and verified 34 since 1997 among the five million to 10 million women who have received the implants after breast-cancer surgery or for cosmetic enhancement. The cancer was diagnosed after women began experiencing problems with the implants, such as pain, swelling and lumps— in some cases years after their surgery. 

"One of our most important messages today is that women with breast implants who are not showing any symptoms or problems" require only routine checks with their doctors, said William Maisel, the FDA's chief scientist in the device division. 

For the first time, regulators offered a possible mechanism for the disease, speculating that the silicone in and around breast implants may be involved in stimulating cells that induce lymphoma. Some implants are made of a silicone gel, and silicone also forms the casing around saline implants. ALCL "has a very unique fingerprint that suggests the possible association," said Dr. Maisel.

In the U.S., implants are sold by  Allergan Inc.
AGN


-0.43
%




 and  Johnson & Johnson
JNJ


0.81
%




 unit Mentor. An Allergan spokeswoman, Caroline Van Hove, called the reports of cancer cases "extremely rare" and said most patients in those cases have responded to treatments including removal of the implant. 

"A woman is more likely to be struck by lightning than get this condition," said Ms. Van Hove in a written statement. A Mentor spokesman said the company supported the FDA's efforts to gather more information about the possible link.

Allergan's implant business expected to record about $300 million in sales for 2010. The market for breast implants—both cosmetic and reconstructive—is about $820 million worldwide and growing 8% a year, according to Wells Fargo analyst Larry Biegelsen. 

Diana Zuckerman, a longtime foe of implants who runs the National Research Center for Women and Families in Washington, said, "This could be the tip of the iceberg in terms of risks of autoimmune-related diseases for several million women with breast implants." 

In 1992, the FDA, under then-commissioner David Kessler, sharply curbed the use of silicone-gel implants after concerns arose whether leaking silicone gel caused breast cancer and immune-system diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and lupus. Under the move, women who wanted to increase their breast size for cosmetic purposes alone could only use saline implants.

Dow Corning Corp., a former silicone-gel implant maker, filed for bankruptcy protection in 1995 after thousands of lawsuits over its implants. The company later emerged from bankruptcy protection and began paying out $2.35 billion in claims.

Despite harrowing stories from a number of women with implants, some major studies concluded that the risks were overblown. In 1999, the Institute of Medicine, an independent federal research organization, linked silicone implants to local complications but not systemic health problems. The FDA allowed silicone implants back on the market for cosmetic use in 2006, over the objections of several consumer health groups.

Marcia Angell, a Harvard Medical School senior lecturer, wrote a book called "Science on Trial" in 1996 criticizing what she called a lack of evidence behind the assertions of implant risks. On Wednesday, she again warned against overplaying the danger. 

"I'm extremely skeptical of the connection and concerned that the FDA is being alarmist. Even if this holds up, it's such a tiny risk that I don't think it should influence decisions on whether to have the implants," she said in an interview. Ms. Angell has no known industry ties. 

But Dr. Kessler said Wednesday that the FDA acted properly. "It is harder to assess risks in implants because implants are in the body for decades," he said. Some substances thought to be inert turn out to be more reactive."

Most of the ALCL case reports in the new FDA review came in after the 2006 approval decision, said the FDA's Dr. Maisel.

ALCL appears in different parts of the body including the lymph nodes and skin, according to the National Cancer Institute. Each year ALCL is diagnosed in about 1 out of 500,000 women in the U.S. ALCL in the breast is even more rare, with three out of 100 million women per year diagnosed in the U.S., according to the FDA. 

If a breast implant patient has persistent fluid around her implant after the surgery has healed, her doctor should consider the possibility of ALCL cancer, and have a sample of the fluid tested, said Dr. Maisel.

Because the risk of ALCL appears to be "very small," the FDA said it believes there's a "reasonable assurance" that implants are safe and effective.

Dr. Maisel said his agency is working to establish a registry of patients with the rare cancer to learn more, and he urged doctors to notify the FDA about any confirmed cases.

—Jonathan D. Rockoff contributed to this article.

 Write to  Jennifer Corbett Dooren at jennifer.corbett-dooren@dowjones.com and Alicia Mundy at alicia.mundy@wsj.com 