TOKYO—U.S. military forces stepped up relief activities in support of Japanese efforts to cope with a humanitarian crisis.

The 8.9-magnitude earthquake and subsequent tsunami that struck eastern Japan on Friday left thousands unaccounted for and sent more than 200,000 evacuees to relief centers in search of food, water and shelter. 

Marines stationed on Okinawa dispatched a high-speed military ferry to Japan Monday morning to assist in the operations, according to the U.S. military. The fast logistics craft, based on a commercial passenger ferry, is to deliver supplies, communications equipment, personnel and equipment for a refueling base. 

U.S. Marines continued reconnaissance operations for the planned land-based supply and refueling base, to be set up west of Sendai. "They're going to be building it by today, tomorrow or sometime in the next 48 hours," said Sgt. Maj. Steve Valley, a military spokesman. "So at least then we'll have a supply point close to the major damage."

Aircraft based on Okinawa also took part in the relief operation. According to a Marine Corps news release, two KC-130J cargo aircraft flew to Marine Corps Air Station on Futenma to pick up a command-and-control system and transport it to Naval Air Station Atsugi, Japan. Eight Marine CH-46E transport helicopters are also flying in support of the relief effort.

The large-scale mobilization of U.S. armed forces stationed in Japan and elsewhere marked the first such wide-ranging joint operation to deal with a disaster, according to Kyodo News.

Meanwhile, the U.S. Navy's Seventh Fleet was forced to make an unexpected detour after encountering low-level radiation downwind of a damaged Japanese nuclear power plant on the country's tsunami-ravaged northeast Pacific coast, the Yokota-based U.S. Forces Japan said in a statement.

The contamination from the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant was detected by U.S. ships en route to the devastated northeastern Japanese city of Sendai and by their accompanying aircraft in the area, the military said.

U.S. Navy disaster-response operations were centered on the USS Ronald Reagan Carrier Strike Group, including more than seven ships that arrived Sunday and took up positions off of the northeastern coast of Japan's main island.

The group's namesake super-size aircraft carrier is being positioned to serve as a floating refueling base for relief aircraft flown by the Japanese Self- Defense Forces and coast guard, as well as fire, police and other civilian authorities involved in search-and-rescue operations in the area, the military said.

Elsewhere, SH-60 antisubmarine helicopters stationed at a U.S. naval base in Atsugi, outside of Tokyo, scoured debris fields in the sea on Monday and conducted search-and-rescue activities along the coast of the most devastated areas.

Some surveillance aircraft based at Kadena Air Force Base on Japan's southernmost island of Okinawa also were deployed over coastal waters to locate survivors and survey the damage, the U.S. military said.

Other U.S. military aircraft also stepped up operations. Two Air Force C-17 Globemaster III cargo aircraft left Joint Base Lewis-McChord, Wash., on March 12 to deliver search-and-rescue equipment and personnel to Japan. In addition to the C-17s, Air Force tankers are refueling transport aircraft over the Pacific Ocean. 

The USS Tortuga was expected to arrive Tuesday at Tomokomai on the eastern coast of Japan's northernmost island. From there, it will ferry its pair of heavy-lift MH-53 helicopters, along with about 300 Japanese Self-Defense Forces troops and 90 vehicles to Aomori on the tip of Japan's main island of Honshu, U.S. Forces Japan said.

Several other U.S. Navy vessels with the embarked 31st Marine Expeditionary Unit are arriving from Southeast Asia to bolster U.S. forces already deployed in the relief effort, the U.S. military said. These include the USS Blue Ridge, the flagship command vessel of the 7th Fleet.

—Nathan Hodge in Washington contributed to this article.