They nicknamed a prosecutor "Napoleon" and a defense lawyer "George Washington." To break the tension, they parodied lines from wiretaps. They squabbled over long bathroom breaks. And once they started deliberating, they never wavered from their belief that  Raj Rajaratnam was guilty of insider trading. 

Such was the life of jurors over 12 days of deliberations in a drab room in a federal courthouse near Manhattan's Foley Square, in the one of the most high-profile white-collar trials in American finance.

In an interview with The Wall Street Journal, Leila Gonzalez Gorman, a 44-year-old teacher from Westchester County, N.Y., painted a picture of a serious jury that had tried to poke holes in the government's case and wanted to like Mr. Rajaratnam, a Sri Lanka-born hedge-fund titan. 

Ms. Gorman said jurors were impressed that he was a "very smart man" and she didn't hold it against him that he didn't testify. At one point, jurors prayed for his family.

But she said the jury was persuaded by dozens of secretly recorded calls of him trafficking in illicit information—and was unimpressed with the defense strategy. She referred to Mr. Rajaratnam's lead lawyer, John Dowd, as "tired" and said his voice was a "monotone." She said the defense "kept saying the same thing. It wasn't meaty." 

A spokesman for Mr. Dowd, who plans an appeal, called the description "surprising in light of the many reports of John's vigorous style and the clear passion he put into the case."

The prosecution victory—a conviction of the Galleon Group founder on all 14 counts of securities fraud and conspiracy—is a boost for the U.S. in a campaign against insider trading. Next week, prosecutors will begin another such trial, featuring dozens more covertly recorded calls.

The judge in the Rajaratnam case, Richard Holwell, asked jurors not to talk after a circus-like seven-week trial. But in addition to Ms. Gorman's extensive account, other jurors shared certain details with the Journal.

Their private discussions began at midday on April 25 just outside Courtroom 17B in a New York court that has been the scene of numerous white-collar trials in the past century.

The 12 jurors sat down quietly for nearly half an hour around a thick wooden table, letting the evidence they had just heard soak in. "We just sat there and thought: Where do we start?" Ms. Gorman said. 

Immediately, there was confusion over the definitions of legal terms such as "securities fraud." They consulted reference materials that offered explanations. 

They took a secret vote for foreman and selected Robert Jirmnson, a 56-year-old graphic artist from the Bronx. "He had natural charisma and made everyone feel intensely comfortable," said Phillip Wedo, an alternate juror.

Criminal complaints and developing disclosures in the Galleon insider trading case allege a far-reaching and complex scheme. Here, the known and alleged relationships.

After spreading out stock charts, trading records and photos of witnesses on the table, jurors listed the charges on a flip board. Several expressed a belief Mr. Rajaratnam was guilty. But they didn't want to rush to judgment.

The jurors examined the evidence deal by deal, count by count. "We all wanted to give Raj the benefit of the doubt," Ms. Gorman said. "I wanted to believe he was an honest man. How could someone so smart and rich already be involved in something so horrendous?"

Carmen Gomez, a 55-year-old educator, said Mr. Rajaratnam appeared "calm," adding that in the trial, "he was just sitting over there like a gentleman." 

They used nicknames for some of the players. Jurors dubbed prosecutor Reed Brodsky "Napoleon" mostly because of his dark hair but also for his self-assured, animated style. A spokeswoman for the Manhattan U.S. Attorney's office declined to comment.

 They called defense lawyer Terence Lynam, with a shock of white hair, "George Washington." Told of that, Mr. Lynam said he considered it a "compliment because George always told the truth."

Several times, jurors asked to listen again to the tapes. On one, Rajiv Goel, a cooperating witness, told his friend Mr. Rajaratnam "you're a good man"—to which Mr. Rajaratnam responded that it sounded "highly suspicious." Later, Mr. Rajaratnam told Mr. Goel he would give him "a kiss on the cheek" when he saw him. Both laughed.

The recorded exchange became a running joke, helping break the tension. When a juror offered another a stick of gum, or to clean up the table, the response would be that the gesture was "highly suspicious," or a juror would offer a "kiss on the cheek."

At no point did any juror argue that the defense had made a strong enough case to acquit. But the jurors challenged each other, trying to take the defendant's view to make sure they weren't blindly accepting the government's version.

After a week, jurors agreed on the five counts of conspiracy. They had discussed several of the nine counts of securities fraud in detail, making headway toward agreements on about a third of them.

Then deliberations hit a snag.

On May 2, 70-year-old juror Janette Kabat quietly told peers that she wasn't feeling well and was excused for a medical procedure.

Judge Holwell then dismissed her for health reasons, rejecting pleas from prosecutors to let the 11 jurors continue. Judge Holwell moved an alternate into her spot, and told the jurors to start over.

Frustrated, the jurors scrapped the unanimous guilty votes. They tried to keep poker faces as Wilson Thomas, a 39-year-old Westchester County parks department employee, joined them May 4, trying not to sway him by any emotions or clues about where they stood.

By week's end, Mr. Thomas was up to speed. The jurors again were in agreement: guilty on the five conspiracy counts. On Friday, May 6, Ms. Gorman suggested they might be able to finish quickly.

"This is not going to be over today," one of the other women jurors told her sternly. "I gave that idea up," Ms. Gorman said.

The jurors—who wouldn't deliberate when anyone went to the bathroom—began snapping more at each other. When Ms. Gorman, a runner who also dances as a hobby, lingered in the bathroom to stretch and exercise, she says it irked other panelists who wanted to move along the proceedings.

Tension built further last Monday. About half of the jurors wanted to continue deliberating through a short lunchtime; others wanted to have an hour off to go outside, smoke or just take a walk during a glorious spring afternoon.

They took their minds off the deliberations by reading on breaks. Among the books: the romantic travelogue "Eat, Pray, Love" and "Civil Disobedience" by Henry David Thoreau.

By Tuesday, the jury had reached agreement on most of the several remaining counts of securities fraud. That evening, the jurors organized the evidence files. "Let's go home and think about all of this," one of them said.

After about an hour Wednesday morning, according to Ms. Gorman, "everyone said, 'We're done.' " They sent a note to the judge at 10:15 a.m. informing him they had reached a verdict.

Mr. Thomas suggested they join hands and say a prayer for the families of Mr. Rajaratnam and the other witnesses. "It wasn't their kids' fault," Ms. Gorman said. "There was a sadness."

 Write to  Jenny Strasburg at jenny.strasburg@wsj.com and Jeannette Neumann at jeannette.neumann@wsj.com 