 General Motors is replacing its head of product development, a move aimed at shoring up what Chief Executive Dan Akerson has identified as a key trouble spot. The car maker named Mary Barra, an engineer who had been running GM's human relations department, as senior vice president of global product development. She replaces product guru Tom Stephens, who is moving into a new position.  

Mitsubishi Motors said it aims to take advantage of demand in emerging markets like China to boost the number of vehicles it sells by almost 40% over the next three years, part of an ambitious plan to triple its net profit. The plan also calls for more procurement and production outside Japan to cut costs and cushion the impact of currency fluctuations, increased capital and R&D spending and a greater variety of fuel-efficient cars.

 EasyJet warned its fiscal first-half pretax loss may double from a year earlier because of higher fuel costs, but the budget carrier predicted a robust second half and kept a broadly unchanged full-year forecast. 

Air New Zealand said it has bought a stake in Australian carrier Virgin Blue Holdings in a challenge to dominant domestic airline Qantas Airways. New Zealand's flag carrier said it plans to increase its holding in Virgin to 15% and has already secured approval from the Australian Foreign Investment Review Board. 

Boeing said it plans to cut about 1,100 jobs through the end of next year as it pares production of a line of military-cargo aircraft. 

ATR, a Franco-Italian builder of regional turboprop aircraft, said it plans to ramp up production in the coming years and is targeting annual deliveries of 70 aircraft a year, compared to 51 in 2010, due to growing demand from airlines for fuel-efficient planes. 

James Woolery, an M&A partner at Cravath Swaine & Moore, is leaving the law firm to join J.P. Morgan Chase as co-head of North American M&A, the bank said.

Belgian bank KBC Group said Jan Huyghebaert, the chairman of its board of directors, will step down and be replaced by Thomas Leysen on Oct. 1.

Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group is on the hunt for new European bank assets, after buying $5.3 billion in project-finance loans last year, said Katsunori Nagayasu, president and chief executive officer of Japan's largest bank by assets and market capitalization. 

Occidental Petroleum will take a 40% stake in the estimated $10 billion Shah sour-gas field development in Abu Dhabi in a bid to meet the soaring gas needs in the United Arab Emirates' largest sheikdom. 

Exxon Mobil said offshore gas projects it's helping to develop and operate in Australia are over budget and face delays amid rising costs for engineering services and a tight labor market in the resource-rich nation. 

 Morgan Stanley's fourth-quarter profit rose 35% to $867 million as revenue climbed on gains at its key institutional-securities and wealth-management businesses.  

Morgan Stanley paid employees an average of $256,595 each in 2010, an increase of 7.5% from 2009. The firm set aside $16 billion for compensation and benefits last year, an overall 11% increase from the previous year as net revenue jumped 15%. 

The company hasn't paid a dividend since early 2007. Late Wednesday, Sallie Mae reported fourth-quarter earnings rose 45%, boosted by a big jump in interest income.

Spread-betting broker City Index was fined £490,000 ($783,400) for failing to report transactions to the U.K. markets watchdog, the latest in a series of fines on banks and brokers for not keeping proper records. The Financial Services Authority said City Index failed to submit accurate reports on about 2 million transactions between November 2007 and September 2009, representing nearly 60% of its business in the period. 

RSA Insurance Group said its full-year operating profit was dented by heavier-than-usual claims from harsh winter conditions, but promised investors a stronger 2011. 

 Hedge-fund company Man Group reported a ninth consecutive quarter of net outflows from its funds, bucking asset growth in the broader hedge-fund industry.  

MF Global said it has reached a preliminary agreement on the settlement of a shareholder lawsuit stemming from its initial public offering in 2007. 

First-round bids for PAI Partners' 50% stake in French dairy products company Yoplait are due at the beginning of February, people familiar with the situation said. 

Asahi Glass aims to grab a 30% share of the market for cover glass used in smartphones, tablet computers and other electronic devices, saying the consumer segment will likely become a "pillar of growth." 

 The European Union ordered its 27 members to shore up security in its Emissions Trading Scheme following a digital heist in the Czech Republic by computer hackers that temporarily shut down trading in the European Union's market in carbon permits.  

Warren Buffett will be leaving the board of Washington Post Co., where he's had a long association. Buffett, who serve as a director until his existing term expires in May, has been on the board since 1974, with a break of eight years when he became a director of Capital Cities.

Coking coal production by Anglo-Australian miner BHP Billiton's Queensland operations fell 30% in the latest quarter from the prior period and the company warned of a longer term impact on its operations. 

Koninklijke Ahold outperformed its U.S. peers as it reported fourth quarter same-store sales growth of 0.9% to €7 billion ($9.43 billion), but cautioned consumers continue to focus on value, and promotional activity remains high, particularly in the U.S. 

 Google said co-founder Larry Page will replace Eric Schmidt as chief executive. Page will take charge of day-to-day operations as CEO starting April 4, while Schmidt will become executive chairman, focusing externally on partnerships and government outreach. 

The internet giant also said fourth-quarter profit jumped 29% from a year earlier to $2.54 billion. 

 European Union antitrust authorities are expected to approve Intel's proposed purchase of software maker McAfee, a person familiar with the matter said. 

Hewlett-Packard is shaking up its board, as four directors closely involved in the decision to oust former CEO Mark Hurd said they wouldn't stand for re-election and the company named five new directors to take their places. 

Advanced Micro Devices' fourth-quarter profit slid 68% to $375 million due to a prior-year $1.24 billion legal settlement benefit paid by rival Intel, while revenue inched up and margins narrowed. 

 Mobile phone maker Sony Ericsson eked out an €8 million ($10.8 million) profit in the key end of year quarter, as it was forced to cut prices to woo customers.  

 Amazon.com said it has acquired full control of LoveFilm, a European DVD-by-mail rental service that is often described as the Netflix of Europe. 

Samsung Electronics, the world's biggest producer of memory chips and flat-screen televisions by revenue, bought Dutch display-technology firm Liquavista for an undisclosed sum last month. 

Research In Motion has started blocking its BlackBerry smartphones from accessing pornographic websites in Indonesia, at the government's request. 

The company also said its talks with the Indian government over access to deciphering corporate emails sent through its devices are "ongoing and positive." 

T-Mobile USA is considering selling nonstrategic assets, particularly some of its cellular towers, to raise cash for further investments, according to Rene Obermann, chief executive of parent company Deutsche Telekom. He said the company isn't in a rush to pursue a deal, and that it would consider a sale only if needed to make a large investment.

Iberdrola agreed to buy Brazilian power utility Elektro Eletricidade e Servico for $2.4 billion, in a bet that strong growth in Latin America's largest economy will offset its weaker home market. Spain's biggest power utility by market capitalization will buy Elektro from U.S.'s Ashmore Energy International in cash and assume Eleckro's debt.