NANTERRE, France—A decade after her father rattled French politics and society by taking second place in the country's presidential elections, Front National leader Marine Le Pen is taking up the challenge again ahead of next year's general vote.

To fashion a credible candidacy, she is trying to shake off her far-right party's nationalistic, xenophobic heritage and instead wooing working- and middle-class voters disappointed with the economic record of the center-right's leader, President Nicolas Sarkozy. 

She might persuade some of them, analysts say.

"We have nothing of the extreme right, nothing," Ms. Le Pen, 42 years old, said in an interview in her office in Front National headquarters in Nanterre, a working-class suburb of Paris. "We are in favor of democracy, of party politics. We support the rule of law. Our adversaries stamp us as extremists to try and discredit us."

So far, Ms. Le Pen has made inroads that few in France thought possible. During the first round of local elections last Sunday—an election largely seen as a litmus test for next year's presidential race—the FN garnered 14.7% of the total, as voters delivered a blow to President Sarkozy's UMP party, which got 16.3%. The second round of voting is this Sunday.

Much of Ms. Le Pen's chance next year depends on who runs as France's Socialist candidate—the most likely, if unconfirmed, candidate being International Monetary Fund chief Dominique Strauss-Kahn. According to a poll released by consultancy Ipsos on Wednesday, Ms. Le Pen would beat Mr. Sarkozy in the first round of the presidential vote if Mr. Strauss-Kahn ran on the Socialist ticket. According to the poll, Ms. Le Pen would garner 19% of votes against 18% for Mr. Sarkozy in the first round, while Mr. Strauss-Kahn would take 33% of the vote.

"She stands a good chance of getting to the second round," said  Emiliano Grossman, a professor at Sciences Po in Paris. "When I see her on TV I'm gobsmacked. She's very, very good." Mr. Grossman says the Front National's results in the first round of local elections on Sunday was its best yet in a local vote. 

The resurgence of the Front National, which has been around for four decades, underscores growing discontent among working-class people in France. Lingering fears that globalization will sweep away the country's industrial base, compounded by the economic downturn, have made French people more reticent than ever to accept a dilution of the country's generous welfare state, even as the suffering public finances of governments across Europe are forcing cuts to health, pensions and labor benefits.

Many voters say Mr. Sarkozy's recent attempts to liberalize the French economy—including by effectively dismantling France's 35-hour working week—go against their interest. The economic uncertainty has also added to fears that immigrants are taking jobs away from French people.

Ms. Le Pen's populist words speak to their fears. 

"We need a strong state," said Ms. Le Pen, a twice-divorced mother of three and former saxophone player. "The Americans don't understand this. They associate it with socialism.We're for the market economy, but we consider that the state must act pre-emptively to avoid the excesses of the market. We're not socialists, we're Gaullists," she said, referring to the political ideology based on the thought of Gen. Charles de Gaulle, a leader of the Resistance and later president. Mr. Sarkozy's right-wing UMP party is considered a political heir of Gen. de Gaulle's movement.

The resurgence of far-right parties is happening across Europe. Geert Wilders's PVV, which has compared the Quran to Adolf Hitler's "Mein Kampf," is the Netherlands' third-largest party. In Austria, the Freedom Party, with its anti-immigration agenda, came second in Vienna's municipal elections last October, with 27% of the vote. The Danish People's Party, which promotes a restrictive immigration policy, is the third force in parliament; it offers some support to the government, but isn't part of the cabinet. 

For many French people, the Front National is in synch with other European right-wing, anti-immigration parties. Jean-Marie Le Pen, the party's 82-year-old founder, has been shocking France's political establishment for years. He was convicted in 2005 for incitement to racial hatred for calling Nazi death camps a "detail of Second World War history." 

At Front National headquarters in Nanterre, visitors are greeted by a statue of Joan of Arc, famous for her victories against the English during the Hundred Years' War, and by the statue of an oversize rooster—the traditional French emblem.

During the 2002 elections, Mr. Le Pen's extreme stance appealed to voters unsettled by what they saw as rising insecurity in France, particularly in the suburbs of big cities. In the first round, Mr. Le Pen beat Socialist candidate Lionel Jospin, though the FN leader lost in the second round to center-right candidate Jacques Chirac.

Ms. Le Pen, although she is trying to revamp the party's image, remains true to its nationalistic roots: For example, she says some economic sectors better serve the common good by staying in public hands. Ms. Le Pen wants the French state to buy back almost all it owned before the wave of privatizations started in the 1980s, including telecom firm  France Télécom and energy company Électricité de France. 

She also is sticking to her party's longstanding anti-euro stance—a position she says is all the more tenable now that European countries are scrambling to change the union's architecture to avoid future debt crises.

"The euro is going to collapse. My responsibility is to prepare for the exit rather than to have it inflicted upon us, because it's going to be a catastrophe," Ms. Le Pen said. 

The Front National has put together a 12-step plan to exit the euro, under which the Bank of France would recover its prerogative to issue the national currency, the franc. Under the plan, the franc would temporarily coexist with the euro and ultimately be pegged to a "multimetal standard" comprising gold and various other precious metals. 

Economists generally agree such a plan isn't realistic. But that doesn't mean French people aren't listening. When Ms. Le Pen hosted "Le Grand Journal," a TV show on Canal +, its audience peaked at 2.18 million people, a record since the show was first aired in 2004. 

Under the plan, France could revalue its currency against weaker euro countries, such as Greece and Spain, if they were to exit the currency, as well as against the U.K. and U.S. currencies. Then it could use its currency as a commercial weapon to prop up trade in the same way that China and the U.S. are doing, the Front National says. 

"Today we are fighting a currency war but with our eyes blindfolded and with a chain tied to our feet," Ms. Le Pen said.

Others warn that scenario could be disastrous. "The day France exits the euro and recreates the French franc, the franc will drop 15% to 20% against the euro, which means everything you buy abroad would increase by 15% to 20%, including oil. That would be a disaster for French people's daily life," said the UMP's Alain Juppé, France's foreign minister, on French radio on Thursday.

 Write to  Gabriele Parussini at gabriele.parussini@dowjones.com and Nathalie Boschat at nathalie.boschat@dowjones.com 