PHILADELPHIA—For the second straight year, Cornell University was the runner-up at the NCAA Division I wrestling championships. Both times, the Big Red was beaten by a team from the Big Ten. Iowa took the crown last year, and Penn State captured the 2011 title Saturday at Philadelphia's Wells Fargo Center. 

But how can Cornell, an Ivy League team that offers no athletic scholarships, even compete with such powerhouses?

In basketball, the school managed an improbable run to the Sweet 16 last year. This year, its Ivy cousin Princeton put its usual first-round scare into a top team before succumbing to Kentucky. But in wrestling, Cornell is no lovable underdog. It's one of the sport's elite programs. Ranked No. 1 for most of the year, the team was expected by many to win this year's title. 

And it's not just Cornell that's had success on the mats, though only six of the eight Ivy schools field varsity teams. On Saturday, wrestlers from Harvard and Penn were also named All-Americans (awarded to the top eight finishers in each of 10 weight classes.) Last year, Harvard's J.P. O'Connor was the national champion at 157 pounds. 

But Cornell is the only Ivy that's lately been making a serious run at the NCAA team championship. How are they doing it? The school's former wrestling coach and current athletic director Andy Noel cites contributions from "key generous alumni."

 Chief among them are former Goldman Sachs Chairman Stephen Friedman and his wife Barbara Benioff Friedman, who contributed millions for a new weight-training facility and then a first-of-its-kind complex built specifically for wrestling. 

Cornell's Mack Lewnes, who on Saturday was named an All-American for the third time, definitely noticed. While in high school, he had expected to follow his brother to Oklahoma State until he visited Cornell's Ithaca, N.Y., campus and saw its "amazing" facilities. 

The school sells recruits on the idea that while they might not get the free education offered by programs with athletic scholarships, their future earnings potential makes it a financial winner. With an active alumni network, wrestlers can expect a range of summer internship options in business, medicine and on Wall Street. 

But of course they still have to make the grades. Cornell's current coach, Rob Koll, says about 10% of the wrestlers he'd like to recruit can make the cut academically. 

Roger Reina, a former coach who made Penn the Ivy League's dominant program in the 1990s, says that Ivy programs are "positioned extremely well" in sports that have no professional league. If the dream of a pro career is off the table, recruits can be persuaded to focus more on a school's academic offerings.

 At Penn, Reina coached several All-Americans, and in 2000 Penn wrestlers won both an NCAA title (Brett Matter) and an Olympic gold medal (Brandon Slay).

The Ivy teams also may benefit from a strange funnel effect. The sport continues to grow among high school students. According to data from the National Federation of State High School Associations, wrestling is the sixth-most popular sport for boys, just behind soccer and ahead of cross country. 273,000 boys wrestled on high school teams during the 2009-2010 season, but there are only 80 NCAA Division I wrestling programs. With 10 starters and perhaps a total of 30 kids on each team, opportunities exist for about 1% of the high-school wrestling population. 

A 1972 law known as Title IX has succeeded in opening up athletic opportunities for women on college campuses, but has also had the unintended effect of reducing opportunities for men in sports like wrestling that don't generate revenue. The Ivy schools have a better chance of snagging top talent when, for example, the entire Southeastern Conference isn't participating.

Once that talent arrives on campus, though, the challenge is to balance a heavy course load with a commitment to compete at the highest levels of a demanding sport. Zack Kemmerer of Penn says that he finds this challenge "terribly unbearable." 

Kemmerer became an All-American last weekend in the 141-pound weight class, but he said afterward that he really doesn't have time for school, wrestling and a social life.

"You've got to ax one of them," he said. "I've sort of lost my social life," he added with a grin, and then suggested that his current difficulties are good preparation because "honestly nothing could be as hard as this. Any job, having a family, I don't care what they say. I'm ready."

A chemistry and philosophy major, Kemmerer hopes to become a patent lawyer. Most attorneys would likely agree that his expectations have been appropriately set for the life of a first-year associate.

Not that the Ivy kids are the only ones who hit the books. In a Journal survey last fall, corporate recruiters ranked Penn State as their favorite place to look for new employees. 

The headhunters descending on Happy Valley will likely be eager to talk to Quentin Wright. The business management major entered the tournament as the ninth seed but captured the national title at 184 pounds.

 Afterward, he thought about balancing wrestling and academics. "I can compare it to a full-time job," he said. "I don't have much time to do anything else. I did five hours of homework the day before the Big Ten tournament just because everything was due that Sunday night."