Read the complete  Quarterly Investing in Funds report .

There's a communication gap between some financial advisers and their clients.

Investors want help understanding their portfolios, but the statements they receive from their advisers sometimes contain too much information on trades, taxes, fees and products without any analysis or explanation of how it all relates to their personal financial situation.

Advisers supply these detailed reports in part because they're required to by law. Since the 2008 crisis, however, many have been piling on additional information thinking they are improving transparency. But many critics believe they are not. 

To bridge the gaps in understanding, some firms are offering short, simple communications to augment the detailed financial reports. For instance, Rockland Trust, a community bank based in Hanover, Mass., provides "road map" reports that track the client's portfolio from the beginning of his or her relationship with the firm. The road map also uses a range of statistical variables to predict the value of the client's portfolio in the future. The bank's advisers review each report with clients in person to put it in context with the clients' goals.

Legacy Trust, based in Grand Rapids, Mich., takes a similar approach. "We put an emphasis on communications because it's how a small organization can differentiate itself from a big organization," says  William Walker, Legacy Trust's president and chief executive.

When good clients fall into credit problems, things can get tricky for financial advisers.

Untangling credit and cash-management problems can be very time-consuming, and threatens to turn an adviser into a full-time credit counselor. Many advisers will do work for clients that they're not directly paid for, just because they value the relationship. But when it comes to credit issues, which can be particularly unwieldy, it's important for advisers to declare up front what they are, and aren't, willing to help with. This may depend on the client.

  Anna Behnam, a financial adviser for Ameriprise Financial Inc. in Rockville, Md., guided one couple on how to read a credit report and coached them through the legwork required to repair their credit and finances. She also helped them set up a system of automatic bill payments, but says she told them: "I can't come to your house to pay your bills each month. Well, I can. But I won't."

—Email the writers, both with Dow Jones Newswires, at thomas.coyle@dowjones.com and marshall.eckblad@dowjones.com.