ISLAMABAD—Pakistan's army chief issued a rare public condemnation Thursday of a U.S. drone strike that killed up to 40 people, in a sign of mounting disagreement between the two countries over how to defeat Taliban militants sheltering on Pakistan's border with Afghanistan. 

Gen. Ashfaq Kayani said an unmanned U.S. Predator drone had earlier Thursday "carelessly and callously targeted" a peaceful meeting of elders in North Waziristan, a Pakistani tribal region and Taliban stronghold.

"In complete violation of human rights, such acts of violence take us away from our objective of elimination of terrorism," Gen. Kayani said in a statement. Pakistan had officially protested the strike, he said.

Pakistan's foreign ministry separately called the attack a "flagrant violation of all humanitarian rules and norms." Foreign Secretary Salman Bashir has asked the U.S. ambassador to Pakistan, Cameron Munter, for an explanation and an apology, it said. 

A U.S. official dismissed the criticism of the strike. "These guys were terrorists, not the local men's glee club," the official said. 

A Pakistan military spokesman said the attack on a meeting in Datta Khel, a town in North Waziristan that is the center of a Pakistani Taliban faction headed by Hafiz Gul Bahadur, killed 35 to 40 people.

A local tribal elder said four missiles hit the meeting—known in the local Pashtun language as a jirga—, which had been convened to resolve disputes arising from mining operations in the area. Some militants associated with Mr. Bahadur and sympathizers were present, but many other participants were local village heads, the elder said. At least 25 people were killed in the strike, he said.

The U.S. doesn't give details of strikes carried out by the Central Intelligence Agency, making it hard to verify figures provided by sources in Pakistan. 

Gen. Kayani's comments reflect a heightening of tension with the U.S. in recent months over the offensive against Taliban militants in the mountainous tribal regions, which has been conducted in the past two years through increased drone strikes and a ground offensive by the Pakistan army.

Pakistan has criticized drone strikes before. But the country's top generals don't typically comment on the CIA campaign, and sometimes acknowledge supplying intelligence on targets. This month, a general said the strikes often hit hard-core militants, including foreign al Qaeda-linked fighters, though his comments to local reporters were later played down by military headquarters as a personal assessment. 

At the same time, military officials are mindful of public outrage over civilian casualties from the drones, which have contributed to rising anti-American sentiment.

Pakistan has thousands of soldiers fighting in the region but has faced public criticism from the U.S. for failing to target some of the most deadly Taliban factions based in North Waziristan. U.S. officials say Pakistan is harboring militants that might prove useful allies once the U.S. pulls out from Afghanistan. Such comments have angered Pakistan officials, who say any approach which leads to increased tensions with tribal leaders and large numbers of civilian casualties will be counter-productive.

In the meantime, the U.S. has intensified its drone campaign, centered on North Waziristan, with more than 100 reported strikes in total in 2010, killing over 400 militants. Strikes have again picked up in recent days after a lull earlier this year which some U.S. officials put down to increased tensions between U.S. and Pakistan intelligence services, making it harder to pinpoint targets.

Tensions between the U.S. and Pakistan reached the boiling point in January, when a CIA contractor killed two armed men in Lahore, Pakistan's second-largest city. The contractor, Raymond Davis, was released Wednesday and flown out of the country after Pakistani officials agreed to pay $2.4 million compensation to the families of the victims. U.S. officials said they expected to refund Pakistan that amount and hoped bilateral relations would improve.

The U.S. says Mr. Davis fired in self-defense as the men tried to rob him. But his release has sparked protests from Islamist groups angered that he didn't face trial locally.One Islamist party, Jamaat-e-Islami, said it would stage nationwide protests Friday after Muslim prayers.

 Write to  Tom Wright at tom.wright@wsj.com 