A potting table—the British call them "benches"—is pure practicality: a workhorse, a model of organization. It's the station, typically waist-high with shelves, drawers, a ledge or a sink, where you do your potting, planting or just plain "pottering." It is to the gardener what a kitchen counter is to a cook. 

But it can also be pure poetry: the gardener's version of a writer's desk, an artist's studio. A place to "menu plan"—a focal point for the imagination. Over time, the best ones become charmed with use.

There are a lot of good, standard benches out there, in a variety of styles. Gardeners say that the basics to keep in mind when choosing are height, surface and material. 

"You don't want to be stooping," said Lee Buttala, preservation programs manager at the Garden Conservancy in Cold Spring, N.Y. Mr. Buttala's potting table at home, which he designed, is 38 inches high, "a few inches higher than a kitchen counter," he explained. "Think about a science lab table in high school, which works well with a stool or standing."

At the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx, the greenhouse benches, which are stainless steel, have adjustable legs. 

 Top vendors that do mail order. (It's not too late to plant!) 

It's become a heyday for buying seeds. The old-school victory garden of cukes, tomatoes and mint is now an international alliance: black futsu squash, puntarelle, demi-root parsley and thousands of others. And the flower garden, long intent on hybrids and genetic show-boating, is returning to first principles: 19th-century favorites and native sons and daughters from across the country.

Marc Hachadourian, the manager, also stressed the importance of the surface.

"Have a surface that's easily cleanable," he said. "Wood is porous, which could transfer diseases from plant to plant." Mr. Hachadourian recommended cutting a piece of Plexiglass or linoleum to fit, if the table is wood. Many classic potting benches are zinc-topped. Deborah Nevins, a Manhattan-based landscape designer with a garden in East Hampton, suggested soapstone, a deep sink for immersing pots and a cedar-wood base.

Ken Selody, a nurseryman at Atlock Farm in Somerset, N.J., works at a treated-lumber bench with a poured-concrete counter, for durability, and cement-block legs, for adjustability. He stressed elbow-room and space.

"Like a kitchen, you never have enough," he said. If space is an issue—you're potting on a city balcony, for example—tables are available with fold-out wings and extensions.

Consider your storage needs too: shelves, ledges, drawers and hooks for soil bins, fertilizers, watering cans, pots, seed packets and tools. 

And customize, accessorize and personalize. Gardens are a work in progress. Potting tables are too. Their makeshift qualities help make them creative centers. Mr. Hachadourian recommended plastic sweater bins for soil. Amy Pennington, the author of "Apartment Gardening," published last month, uses paint buckets for seed mixes. (And her dining room table for potting.) Debra Prinzing, a garden writer in Seattle, Wash., suggested small galvanized garbage cans, flowerpots and vintage bread and flour bins for organizing. 

Ms. Prinzing's current potting bench is an old folding picnic table. Factoidz.com will tell you how to convert a used computer desk. Pottery Barn sells a potting bench that doubles as a bar, if you're the thing that needs to be potted. 

And then there are antiques. Florists' tables, milk benches and industrial shop carts have all taken their turns at potting. And genuine potting furniture, usually 19th-century English or French, has taken its turn as sofa tables and hallway consoles. 

"They're cool," said Michael Trapp, who owns an antiques and decor shop in West Cornwall, Conn. "Interesting colors or textures, painted or funky. Nicely distressed. They've been humanized by touch."

And they're allowed to show dirt. You'd be disappointed if they didn't.



A no-nonsense pine work table has a tall sill at three edges to contain dirt spills—a classic feature. 67½" x 21" x 36", $2,011, europeantradingco.com 



A French wooden work table, circa 1900, retains its original metal hardware, and a sturdy will to work. 73" x 37½" x 31½", $2,850, marshgardendecor.com 



This sleekly lined hardwood potting bench has a built-in basin, and is clearly design-minded. 31" x 23" x 35", $365, touchedbydutch.com 



This aluminum English table is small and inexpensive, but highly functional, with storage trays on each side. 40" x 20" x 30", $75, greenhousemegastore.com 



This bench's zinc top provides quick water clean-ups, and a surface less prone to rot and buckling. 36" x 14" x 31½", $419, japangarden.co.uk 