Month by month, businessman  Rick Wolf has quietly supported the direct care of people living with HIV and AIDS. 

Mr. Wolf, 50 years old, is the president of Wolf-Gordon, a wall covering company based in New York. Monthly, through the company's Gift of Hope program, a donation of about $8,000 is made to the Design Industries Foundation Fighting AIDS, a national support, education and advocacy organization. 

Total contributions to the foundation via the Gift of Hope program have come to roughly $1.3 million since the mid-1990s. Mr. Wolf previously served on the foundation's board.

"We're a small business, basically, that has raised a lot of money and we feel great about that," says Mr. Wolf.

The Gift of Hope program is simple. When interior designers specify the purchase of one of the company's products, they can include a code indicating that a portion of the sale price should be directed toward the foundation. 

 "It was pretty much the most logical thing because DIFFA is so affiliated with our industry and there are so many people affected by AIDS in our industry, especially when we started the program," Mr. Wolf says. "We figured we could create a program that would raise money for DIFFA and help us in a marketing sense."

But while the idea was simple, implementing it required the company to reprogram its systems and send its sales team out as ambassadors for the foundation.

 "It was a lot of effort to make it work, but we feel that the benefits to DIFFA and benefits to Wolf-Gordon have paid off over the years," says Mr. Wolf.

The Design Industries Foundation Fighting AIDS, founded in 1984, has given more than $38 million to direct-care AIDS organizations nationwide and is supported by people in the interior design, architecture, fashion and other design fields. 

The annual Dining by Design is the organization's signature event in New York and runs from March 17 through 21 at Pier 94.

 The core of the event is different dining table installations created by celebrity designers. Mr. Wolf's wall coverings are expected to be on display in one of the installations.

The event helps raise awareness about the daily needs of people who have HIV and AIDS. 

"Especially today, I feel that AIDS really is not talked about a lot," says Mr. Wolf, adding that the topic "seems to have gone away from the forefront of everybody's mind."

 Write to  Melanie Grayce West at melanie.west@wsj.com 