Troops of Ivory Coast President Alassane Ouattara have killed an insurgent warlord once loyal to the new president, in a new round of violence that highlights the difficulty of reuniting the West African nation edging back from civil war. 

The death late Wednesday of Ibrahim Coulibaly, head of the so-called Invisible Commandos, could remove one of the many obstacles Mr. Ouattara faces as he tries to re-establish political stability and revive the economy of the cocoa-producing giant, two weeks after former president Laurent Gbagbo was pulled from a basement bunker at his residence. Mr. Ouattara and Mr. Gbagbo were engaged in an armed conflict after the latter refused to relinquish his president's post following his loss of in the November election.

Mr. Ouattara's government has been trying to restore electricity and water supply in Abidjan, the country's commercial hub, and to reopen the main ports to cocoa exports. Retail banks were scheduled to open for business on Thursday. The president called on civil servants to return to work early next week.

The new leader also has had to quell sporadic uprisings by Gbagbo supporters since the ex-leader's departure. 

Although Mr. Coulibaly's forces helped oust strongman Mr. Gbagbo, they also have so far refused to lay down arms for his elected successor, Mr. Ouattara. And unlike many military commanders who pledged allegiance to Mr. Ouattara after Mr. Gbagbo's arrest, Mr. Coulibaly declined to do so. 

He was expecting political reward in exchange for his help in ousting Mr. Gbagbo, people familiar with the matter said.

"You cannot expect a general to do the work and then be tossed aside," a top official within the Invisible Commandos said.

On Wednesday, government troops raided Mr. Coulibaly's stronghold in Abobo, a district in Abidjan. Mr. Coulibaly was killed during the subsequent fighting, a government spokesman said. 

The death of Mr. Coulibaly, who once guarded Mr. Outtara's wife, could spark more fighting, should allies to IB—as Mr. Coulibaly called himself—opt to challenge the president's authority. 

So far, residents in the Abobo area said Thursday that calm had returned to the area. They expressed hope that Mr. Coulibaly's death would mean the end of fighting between the Invisible Commandos and Mr. Ouattara's forces.

"This is going to make our lives easier," Daouda Doumbia, a 32-year-old electrician and Abobo resident, said in a telephone interview.

Mr. Coulibaly, 48 years old, previously had spear-headed a 2002 coup attempt against Mr. Gbagbo, which led to the country being cleaved into a government-controlled south and rebel-held north. He led a force of some 5,000 fighters.

The Invisible Commandos again became active after November's disputed presidential election. Though the United Nations certified results showing challenger Mr. Ouattara had won with 54% of the vote, President Gbagbo also claimed victory. The incumbent president later entrenched himself in the basement of a presidential residence in Abidjan. He was arrested by Mr. Ouattara's troops after U.N. and French forces crushed Mr. Gbagbo's last pockets of resistance.

Now, Ivory Coast prosecutors have launched preliminary criminal probes against Mr. Gbagbo, his wife and about 100 members of their entourage, government officials said. Prosecutors are seeking to determine their roles in the nearly five-month standoff that dragged the country into civil conflict.

Lawyers for Mr. Gbagbo said the former president was unduly held on house arrest.

"How can you restrict the freedom of a man when no charges have been laid against him?" asked Habiba Toure, one of five French lawyers hired to defend Mr. Gbagbo. Ms. Toure said the lawyers have had no direct contact with Mr. Gbagbo since he was arrested on April 11.

Government officials said Mr. Gbagbo was being detained following a decision by Ivory Coast's interior ministry aimed at preventing public unrest.

Any trial of Mr. Gbagbo would amount to a complex political and judicial equation because the former president still has many supporters in Ivory Coast and because several allies of Mr. Ouattara are suspected of being behind some of the mass killings that took place during the recent conflict.

Earlier this month, prosecutors at The Hague-based International Criminal Court said they were planning to launch an investigation into alleged widespread killings in Ivory Coast, a probe that could involve both sides of the conflict.

Mr. Ouattara has said judicial authorities would investigate all crimes, even if perpetrated by his own supporters.

 Write to  David Gauthier-Villars at David.Gauthier-Villars@wsj.com 