HONG KONG—In November 2003, Nancy Kissel went to great lengths to cover up her husband's death after bludgeoning him, stuffing his body into a sleeping bag that belonged to their eldest daughter and rolling it up in their living room rug, Hong Kong prosecutors told the court in the fourth day of her retrial Friday.

Ms. Kissel was convicted in 2005 of murdering her husband, Merrill Lynch investment banker Robert Kissel, but won a retrial after Hong Kong's highest court found flaws with the initial trial. 

This week, Ms. Kissel, 46 years old, pleaded guilty to manslaughter and not guilty to murder. In the previous trial, Ms. Kissel testified she killed her husband while defending herself from his drunken, cocaine-fueled assault. She remains in police custody.

Continuing his opening argument Friday, prosecutor David Perry told jurors that Ms. Kissel engaged in a "cleanup and disposal operation" in which she threw out blood-stained items and shopped for replacements at Tequila Kola, a popular home-goods and furniture store on the southern end of Hong Kong island, spending 27,000 Hong Kong dollars (US$3,372) on two rugs, one of which would replace the living room carpet. 

Ms. Kissel also sent her two domestic helpers on errands to buy, among other things, rope and packing tape, which she used to secure the bundle containing the body before hiring movers to haul it into a rented storeroom in the Parkview apartment complex where the family lived. 

In the roughly six days between Mr. Kissel's death and police's discovery of his body, Ms. Kissel continued to engage in day-to-day activities in a clear-headed "normal" manner, Mr. Perry said. He cited emails during that time in which Ms. Kissel appears cognizant, even witty. Mr. Perry also said the defendant regularly made calls to her lover in Vermont on a secret mobile phone she used to hide the affair. 

Such evidence of "presence of mind" will be key to the prosecution's argument that Ms. Kissel didn't act in self-defense or in a fit of rage, as a manslaughter charge would require. 

The prosecution said it will seek to show that Ms. Kissel drugged her husband with a milkshake that contained various sedatives prescribed to her from two different doctors before bludgeoning him while he was unconscious.

The postmortem exam of Mr. Kissel's body found four drugs in the victim's stomach, Mr. Perry said, one of which was Rohypnol, a sedative commonly known as a date-rape drug. This evidence, Mr. Perry said, would be consistent with forensic analysis that shows Mr. Kissel endured at least five blows to the head with a heavy metal ornament while lying prone.

Police began investigating Mr. Kissel's disappearance after a colleague at Merrill Lynch, David Noh, filed a missing person's report. Officers arrested Ms. Kissel shortly after discovering Mr. Kissel's body in the storeroom. 