  AT&T Inc.
T


0.69
%




 will take a pretax charge of about $2.7 billion in the fourth quarter in a move to simplify how it accounts for pension and other post-retirement benefits. 

The Dallas-based telecommunications company said Thursday it would now recognize gains and losses in the year in which they are incurred, using a practice called mark-to-market accounting, rather than spread them out over several years. 

The accounting change clarifies one of the more volatile aspects of a large employer's financial results, better tying performance to the current economic state. It would eliminate the "smoothing out" of gains and losses over several years. Under the old system, some of the pension-plan losses recorded during the stock market decline in 2008 would still be on the books for 2010.

AT&T joins a number of large U.S. corporations including Honeywell International, General Electric Co. and International Business Machines Corp. in revamping pension-accounting practices. 

When Honeywell made the move, the market reacted positively, said Goldman Sachs Group analyst Jason Armstrong. He speculated late last year that Honeywell would embolden AT&T and Verizon Communications Inc. to make the switch. 

A Verizon spokesman declined to comment. Sanford Bernstein & Co. analyst Craig Moffett, who believes Verizon will almost certainly make the same change, said its future results under such a shift look rosier than AT&T's, but noted the underlying economics for both companies would remain unchanged. 

"This is something I personally wrestled with for some time," AT&T Chief Financial Officer Rick Lindner said during a conference call on Thursday. The change would remove the "complex and involved process" of calculating the cost of these benefits for investors, he said. 

Mr. Lindner added that he does not see a significant change to AT&T's long-term earnings trends as a result of the new calculation. 

The charge, which reduces earnings by 28 cents a share, is driven by a reduction in the plan discount rate to 5.8% from 6.5%, partially offset by higher-than-expected returns on plan assets and favorable health care cost trends in 2010, the company said. 

The change won't affect AT&T's cash flow or pension funding requirements. 

AT&T Controller John Stephens said he expects the change in gains and losses to even out over time, and expects 2011 benefit-plan costs to be roughly in line with last year. 

As part of the change, each unit will record individual service costs from the plans, although the return on assets and total cost will be recorded as a company-wide line on the income statement. Mr. Lindner said that he expects 80 to 90 basis points of higher margins in the wireline business, where most of the pension and retirement activity is located, and expects less of an impact on the other units. 

Growth in AT&T's medical costs have slowed as a result of favorable renegotiations with the unions and better management in the past few years, with Mr. Lindner citing more deductibles and the option of generic drugs as a few drivers. But he added that given the volatility of health care, he expects the cost to grow at an annual rate of 5%. 

—Lauren Pollock contributed to this report.

 Write to  Roger Cheng at roger.cheng@dowjones.com 