Britons on Thursday cast ballots in local elections and in an electoral-reform referendum, with both votes expected to deliver the same result: a setback for the Liberal Democrats, the junior partner in the U.K.'s coalition government. 

Held a year after an inconclusive national election paved the way for the Lib Dems to join the government, Thursday's vote is widely expected to show that the party has lost substantial ground since then. 

The Lib Dems are the central backer of the electoral-reform measure, which would dump the U.K.'s longtime voting system—known as "first past the post"—for what is known as a preferential model. Getting the referendum on the ballot was one of the main prizes the party won last year in striking a deal to form a coalition government with Prime Minister David Cameron's Conservative Party. 

But polls predict U.K. voters will stick with the current system, adding strength to a growing chorus from both critics and supporters who say the Liberal Democrats got little out of the coalition deal. That comes on top of criticism that the Lib Dems broke pre-election pledges by backing policies pushed by the Tories, such as increasing the sales tax and tripling the cap on university tuition fees.

The referendum campaign has been fractious, with mudslinging by both coalition partners. The coalition so far has proved more stable than predicted, but the bitter new divisions exposed during this campaign could foment trouble for the alliance from within both parties. 

"This is a critical election for all the major parties and one of the moments in which the future of British politics is going to become a little bit clearer," said  Mark Wickham-Jones, a professor of political science at Bristol University. 

Like the U.S., Britain uses a first-past-the post-system in which the candidate with the most votes wins. The U.K.'s first referendum in 36 years proposes a switch to the so-called alternative vote, in which voters rank candidates by preference. If no candidate wins more than half the votes, these preferences come into play. 

Supporters of the current system say it provides stable one-party governments, while the alternative vote encourages coalitions cobbled together through back-room deals. They say that under the alternative system, the party with the most votes could lose to groups that finished second or third as preferences come into play.

"I'd rather have a strong Labour government or a strong Conservative government than a weak government of either," said Labour supporter Martin Cargill, 60 years old, as he cast his vote in East London. 

Those favoring the alternative vote say that under the current system, over two-thirds of the seats in Parliament are won without the support of a majority of their constituents. These people say the current winner-takes-all system means the increasing number of smaller political parties in the U.K. are locked out despite winning support. 

Voting reform is a benchmark issue for the Liberal Democrats, who often win one in four of the votes but typically take only one in 10 seats in Parliament because the party's supporters are spread more evenly across the country than those of the two main parties. The prospect of voting change was used by the leadership of the centrist Liberal Democrats to justify joining with the right-leaning Conservatives last May, despite misgivings among Lib Dem supporters that they weren't a suitable ideological fit. 

A study by the University of Essex concluded that under the alternative vote, the Liberal Democrats would have won 89 seats in last year's election, rather than the 57 they did win. The Conservatives would have won 22 fewer seats and Labour 10 fewer. That result would have given Labour and the Liberal Democrats a parliamentary majority and made a coalition between them a feasible alternative. 

In the local elections, a strong showing for Labour is likely to cement the position of the Labour Party's Ed Miliband after an uncertain start as party leader. In a poll for YouGov released on Thursday, 42% of those asked said they would back Labour in a general election, 37% said they would support the Conservatives and 10% the Liberal Democrats, well below the 15% to 20% range the Lib Dems typically poll. 

The biggest loser is likely to have been the beleaguered Liberal Democrat leader, Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg. 

"They've not kept to anything they've said," said Charlotte Rowley, a 21-year-old student who lives in Mr. Clegg's constituency in Sheffield, in northern England, where Labour is expected to win control of the town hall. "They've lost themselves a whole generation of votes," said the former Liberal Democrat supporter.

—Michelle Abrego  and Jenna Layne Voigt  contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Alistair MacDonald at alistair.macdonald@wsj.com 