Secondary airports used to be the ticket to cheap fares because that's where discount airlines roosted. But new data from the U.S. government show the price gaps in major markets have narrowed considerably.

Average fares at primary hubs have come down, according to a Department of Transportation report issued last week, and fares at secondary airports have gone up. The result is you don't necessarily have to go out of your way to save on airfare.

"You're seeing a reversal,'' said  Thomas Kinton, chief executive of the Massachusetts Port Authority, which operates Boston's Logan International Airport. "Customers we were losing now have come back.''

Logan lost lots of customers to Providence, R.I., and Manchester, N.H., for many years as low-fare Southwest Airlines Co. played its secondary-airport strategy to perfection. Suburban customers avoided traffic getting to the airport, as well as high parking fees and frequent flight delays, and enjoyed low fares.

But now Logan has fixed many of its problems and lured in lots of discount carriers, even Southwest. The biggest carrier at Logan in terms of passengers and flights: discounter JetBlue Airways Corp. That has radically changed fares—the average domestic ticket at Logan is now 19% cheaper than it was a decade ago, according to DOT.

Lots of factors beyond the cheapest ticket go into airport choice. For some travelers, preferred airlines make the decision obvious when flying to or from cities with multiple airports. Proximity to your destination counts—a long cab ride or car rental might wipe out fare savings. And cheap parking, short security lines and free Wi-Fi at a secondary airport can make a good deal even better.

But airline executives say the biggest driver of customer choice is ticket price. 

Big hubs in San Francisco, Chicago, Dallas, Los Angeles and Washington, D.C., have countered the secondary-airport phenomenon by opening up gates and reducing delays and congestion to attract discount airlines. That brings cheaper prices and forces incumbent airlines to match prices, at least on a limited basis.

The average domestic ticket price at Chicago's O'Hare International was $372 in the fourth quarter of last year, according to the DOT's Bureau of Transportation Statistics. That was 12% lower than the average price in the last quarter of 2000.

Yet the average domestic ticket price at Chicago's Midway, the traditional home of discount carriers, increased 25% over the same period. Flights are still cheaper from Midway, but the gap has narrowed considerably.

Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport, home to AMR Corp.'s American Airlines, has aggressively recruited discounters like AirTran Holdings Inc., Frontier Airlines Holdings Inc. and Virgin America Inc. Average domestic ticket prices at DFW also fell 12% over the past 10 years; they increased nearly 29% at nearby Dallas Love Field, home to Southwest.

At San Francisco International, domestic ticket prices fell by more than 16% over the past decade as the airport became the home of Virgin America, even though it is already a major hub for United Continental Holdings Inc., and welcomed back Southwest after a long hiatus.

Across the bay at Oakland International Airport, which Southwest and other discount airlines turned into a rapidly growing star of the secondary-airport trend, fares rose more than 11% from 2000 to 2010. 

An Oakland airport spokeswoman said part of the increase comes from a greater percentage of longer flights, which tend to have higher fares, because airlines have dropped some shorter flights within California.

The narrowing gap reflects how big airlines and big airports are slashing costs to offer cheaper prices and better compete. And in the past year, Southwest has dramatically increased its prices.

Last year, Southwest's average, one-way passenger fare of $130.27 was up a hefty 15% compared with 2009 and 52% higher than the $85.87 average fare in 2000, according to the company. Part of the change comes from flying longer flights—the average passenger trip on Southwest was 663 miles in 2000, compared with 885 miles last year. But the airline's cost structure has changed dramatically, as well, as prepurchases of cheap fuel and cost hedges ran out.

Airline-industry consolidation has also been a major factor in the shift away from secondary airports. Flight-schedule cuts and mergers such as the couplings of American and Trans World Airlines, US Airways-America West, Delta-Northwest and United-Continental have reduced congestion and delays and opened up gates at big airports.

Lower fares are helping tempt travelers back to major regional airports

In the past, big airlines claimed most all gates at big airports, effectively forcing new entrants to secondary airports. But with empty gates to offer, managers at big airports went after discount airlines.

Boston, for example, told airlines they could no longer hoard gates—they had to sublease a gate or give it up if it wasn't being used for the airport's average number of flights per gate—typically five or six a day.

That opened up enough gates for JetBlue to launch flights in 2004 and grow rapidly, Mr. Kinton said. Since then, JetBlue has squeezed some bigger airlines off routes. American, for example, stopped flying to San Diego; San Jose, Calif.; Seattle; Austin, Texas; and San Francisco from Boston. JetBlue flies to all those cities from Boston now.

The so-called Big Dig road-and-tunnel construction project ended and eased traffic near the airport, making it easier for passengers to get in and out. Airport improvements came with a modernization project. And because consolidation among airlines left big airports with fewer flights, delays declined. That made big hubs more attractive to low-cost carriers intent on getting in and out quickly.

"At the same time, passengers were saying, 'Enough of the secondary airports. We want to go to the big business hubs,' " Mr. Kinton said.

Airport officials in Providence and Manchester say passenger traffic has declined for at least the past four years because of schedule cuts and the recession, along with changes at Logan.

When the construction snarled the city and there was little low-fare service at Logan, Manchester grew rapidly, said Thomas Malafronte, assistant airport director. 

Officials at Providence's T.F. Green Airport hope new flights from Delta Air Lines Inc. and a new link to Boston-area rail service signal a return to growth. 

"Our fares are still competitive overall, and the ease of access to the airport and available parking in close proximity to the airport are positives to consider,'' said airport vice president Patti Goldstein.

 Write to  Scott McCartney at middleseat@wsj.com 