DETROIT—A judge cited an executive of a bridge company for contempt of court Monday and tossed him in jail, clouding the future of the privately owned Ambassador Bridge at one of the U.S.'s busiest border crossings with Canada.

Wayne County Circuit Judge Prentis Edwards fined Detroit International Bridge Co. $7,500 for failing to comply with a February 2010 ruling requiring the company to rebuild a series of bridge access ramps to state specifications. The judge ordered Dan Stamper, president of Detroit International Bridge, to remain in jail until the reconstruction begins.



"Given the history of this case, it is evident that stringent sanctions are needed to bring about compliance," Judge Edwards wrote in his ruling.

Mr. Stamper was freed late Monday after the company commenced work on the ramps. "It's a shame that this situation had to occur and that the court had to order scheduled meetings between our company and the [Michigan Department of Transportation] under the supervision of a court-ordered monitor, so we could move forward to complete the Ambassador Bridge Gateway Project," he said in a written statement after his release.

Mr. Stamper had come to Wayne County Court hoping to win approval for the new ramps, which remained closed due to a yearlong legal standoff with the Michigan Department of Transportation.

The ramps connect the current bridge to Interstates 75 and 96 in Detroit, along a corridor that serves as a vital conduit for autos and parts traveling across the international border with Windsor, Ontario. And they form a critical piece of Detroit International Bridge's plan to erect a second, parallel span of the often-congested Ambassador Bridge.

Judge Edwards also ordered the Detroit Department of Transportation to report to the Michigan Department of Transportation every other week to ensure that the reconstruction work proceeds according to the agency's guidelines.

"Today's ruling sends a strong message that you cannot ignore a court order," said Michigan Department of Transportation Acting Director of Communications Bill Shreck. "It is time to obey the court and build what we all agreed to."

A ruling in favor of Detroit International Bridge would have put pressure on Canadian environmental authorities to accelerate their review of the Ambassador twinning project and would have cleared the company to seek U.S. Coast Guard permission to start bridge construction on the U.S. side of the river. Both regulatory processes were stalled pending resolution of the Michigan Department of Transportation dispute.

In challenging the February 2010 ruling, Detroit International Bridge had argued that the Michigan Department of Transportation's specifications for the ramps were vague and inconsistent. The roads Detroit International Bridge built follow a more circuitous route that leads traffic past a company-owned duty-free shop and a gas station offering discount fuel to motorists heading into Canada.

Business and political leaders in the region have been arguing for nearly a decade about the future of the Detroit River border crossing, an important link in the auto industry's supply chain. Some $1.2 billion worth of goods cross the U.S.-Canada border each day at all of Michigan's border points, with a quarter of that going across the Ambassador Bridge. Some local leaders have raised concerns about such a critical economic link being in private hands.

In recent months, Detroit International Bridge, owned by trucking magnate Manuel "Matty" Maroun, had scored gains in its battle against plans for a new publicly owned bridge across the Detroit River about three miles away from the Ambassador.

That plan had broad backing from auto industry executives, the U.S. and Canadian governments and Michigan's then-Gov. Jennifer Granholm, a Democrat. But state lawmakers balked at the potential cost to taxpayers in a state facing economic and fiscal troubles, and the initiative died in the state Senate.

Ms. Granholm's successor, Republican Gov. Rick Snyder, has said he has no interest in backing the publicly owned bridge if it requires any taxpayer money.

Mr. Maroun, who criticized the public bridge project as wasteful and an attack on his business, pledged to build the second Ambassador Bridge span with his own funds. He has already spent more than $500 million to upgrade ramps and toll plazas on both the U.S. and Canadian sides.

Last month, Detroit International Bridge snapped up a key piece of property-a riverfront bait shop-that was a sticking point in its dispute with the Michigan Department of Transportation. The state agency had rejected Detroit International Bridge's overpass network partly on grounds that it would render the bait shop inaccessible. By buying the bait shop ahead of Monday's court proceeding, Detroit International Bridge had hoped to eliminate that objection.