They were the kind of mistakes the St. John's seniors had seen a lot in their tumultuous time at the school—a defensive lapse in the final moments, critical turnovers, missed foul shots.

But if the team has proven anything this year, it's that for all the reminders, familiar faces and uneasy echoes, something is different. If nothing else, luck is now on the Red Storm's side.

St. John's (21-10) staggered past Rutgers, 65-63, to advance to the quarterfinal round of the Big East Tournament. The Red Storm will face Syracuse at 2 p.m. Thursday at Madison Square Garden.

For all the mistakes St. John's made at the end of its narrow victory, others made more. 

Rutgers (15-17) had two turnovers in the final 20 seconds. But the gravest errors appeared to be by the officiating team. With Rutgers trailing by two points with 4.9 seconds left, Red Storm senior Justin Brownlee swiped the pass. Exuberantly, Brownlee appeared to travel and then step out of bounds with 1.7 seconds remaining on the clock, as he lofted the ball into the stands. Instead of a whistle, the final buzzer sounded, ending the game.

Rutgers first-year head coach Mike Rice scrambled for an i-Phone as soon as he left the court to watch the game's final sequence, already posted in infamy on YouTube. 

While talking to the officials, "I was a lunatic, to be honest with you," admitted Rice, who appeared collected and calm in his post-game press conference. But if he had seen the replay while still on the court, "I might literally have done a Van Gundy and held one of their legs," he said. He tried to smile.

Ultimately, he concluded, everyone makes mistakes. "It is what it is," he said.

In a statement issued by Big East Commissioner John Marinatto, the conference acknowledged that "two separate officiating errors" occurred at the end of the game. "Both missed violations should have caused the game clock to stop and a change of possession to occur prior to the end of the game," the statement said, evidently referring to the missed travel call and Brownlee's stepping out of bounds before the game clock expired. "Neither error is reviewable or correctable under NCAA playing rules."

The officiating crew of Jim Burr, Tim Higgins and Carl Walton was not made available for comment.

St. John's head coach Steve Lavin said he had only been able to piece together the "chaotic" events from player and staff conversations in the locker room. "Until I actually can review the game and the closing moments, I wouldn't be informed enough to really speak about it," he said.

For the Red Storm, the game seemed to confirm one of the worries following the team into this postseason: with nine active seniors, they are laden with veterans. But none have experience advancing through a tournament.

St. John's had one turnover and two missed foul shots in the game's final 13 seconds, not counting Brownlee's mistakes. The team did not score a field goal in the final four minutes.

"This is a learning experience for me," said a chastened Dwight Hardy, who fumbled the ball out of bounds in the game's final seconds. "It was my fault. I didn't catch the pass."

Coming off a gritty overtime win against Seton Hall on Tuesday, Rutgers clung to St. John's throughout the first half. Instead of showing fatigue after a long and emotional win over an in-state rival, Rutgers seemed determined to seize control of a narrative that had anointed St. John's the region's renaissance team.

By contrast, St. John's appeared jittery in the game's opening minutes, its senior class unused to its new position as favorites. 

Now they feel lucky to have survived their first game.