An escaped peahen with green feathers found her way back into custody at the Bronx Zoo amid much fanfare Wednesday, leaving zoo officials to grapple with a problem that's getting less attention on the public stage: deep city budget cuts. 

New York City Mayor  Michael Bloomberg's proposed spending plan for the fiscal year beginning July 1 cuts the operating budget for the Bronx Zoo by more than 50%, said officials from the Wildlife Conservation Society, which runs the institution.

  John Calvelli, the society's executive vice president for public affairs, said the cuts, if approved by the City Council, would be "catastrophic." Laying off employees, closing exhibits, shortening hours and sending animals to other institutions are all possibilities, Mr. Calvelli said.

"Everything is on the table," he said. "We'd have to look at everything."

On Wednesday, members of the Cultural Institutions Group—a coalition representing the 33 cultural institutions on city-owned property that receive significant funding from city government—met with members of the City Council to discuss the impact of the mayor's proposed cuts. These institutions range from the Metropolitan Museum of Art to community-based organizations, such as the Jamaica Center for Arts & Learning.

Overall, if the council approves the mayor's budget proposal—which was released Friday—the groups would lose collectively $35.5 million, a 50% reduction from the current year, said  Margaret Honey, chairwoman of the CIG and president of the New York Hall of Science.

These cuts could result in roughly 1,000 layoffs across the board, she said. Other than the Education Department, which could lose 4,100 teachers through layoffs, the cultural groups face—as a sector—the largest number of potential layoffs, she and others said. 

"It's going to be extremely hard for some of the small institutions to make a go of it, if these cuts got through, " Ms. Honey said. She declined to specify the institutions that might face closure.

Every year, the City Council typically restores funding to cultural groups as part of negotiated deal with the administration. But this year, council members said, these restorations will be particularly difficult because the mayor has proposed high-profile, high-dollar cuts, such as the elimination of more than 6,100 teaching positions and the closing of 20 fire companies. 

  Marc LaVorgna, a spokesman for Mr. Bloomberg, blamed a reduction in funding from the state and federal governments. "At the same time, the state and federal governments continue to increase costs on the city through mandates, leaving us unable to fund programs at the level we would like," he said.

Council Member  Jimmy Van Bramer, a Queens Democrat who heads the council committee overseeing cultural affairs, said he and the City Council will work to "restore as much as possible." 

Council Member Domenic Recchia, a Brooklyn Democrat and chairman of the Finance Committee, called these institutions an "economic engine."

"They bring in money," he said. "Whatever we invest in them, we get back, our money, plus more."

As for the zoo, Mr. Calvelli said sending animals to different institution would be an act of last resort. "Our goal is, once a New Yorker, always a New Yorker," he said. And the peahen? She's back, he said with a chuckle. "For now." 

 Write to  Michael Howard Saul at michael.saul@wsj.com 