The drive to revamp corporate tax rules kicks off in earnest on Friday, when Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner sits down with executives of more than a dozen major U.S. companies. 

One likely focus of the discussions will be finding ways to use an overhaul to encourage more investment in the U.S. 

"We have to create stronger incentives for investment in the United States, both by American and by foreign companies," Mr. Geithner said in a speech this week.

President Barack Obama pushed through a temporary tax break on new business equipment as a spur to investment in last month's tax deal that extended Bush-era income-tax levels. 

But many experts believe more fundamental tax changes are needed to draw investment to the U.S. and strengthen the tepid recovery. That has led Mr. Obama and his top aides to consider embracing a corporate-tax overhaul as a major goal for the new Congress, where business-friendly Republicans have gained power. Recalibrating corporate taxes also could boost the administration's efforts to mend frayed relations with business leaders. 

Mr. Geithner's meeting Friday is the first of a series with executives from large and small businesses to discuss an overhaul. Attendees are expected to represent about 18 major multinationals, including Cisco Systems Inc., Wal-Mart Stores Inc., Procter & Gamble Co. and General Electric Co.

Administration officials have repeatedly cautioned that they haven't decided yet whether to pursue corporate-tax changes this year. Lawmakers are likely to move forward even without a White House push, also including tax rules for individuals in their review. The House Ways and Means Committee will hold the first of its tax-overhaul hearings on Thursday of next week.

Republicans generally support revamping the tax code and some Democrats—including centrist Sens. Mark Warner of Virginia and Ron Wyden of Oregon, as well as Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid of Nevada—have expressed interest in doing this. Senate Finance Committee Chairman Max Baucus (D., Mont.) already has begun hearings, and said Thursday that his aim is to "work to reach consensus." 

Legislative leaders worry about the fiendish political complexities of such a project. Some changes help certain industries but hurt others.

Several possible elements of a revised corporate-tax structure could encourage investment. A lower U.S. tax rate, for example, could reduce some incentives for U.S. companies to shift assets to lower-tax countries. Many corporate leaders want Washington to reverse its longstanding policy and let them bring back billions in overseas profits without being taxed in the U.S.

More-targeted changes have also been floated recently by some corporate leaders, including sharp tax-rate reductions for income generated from patents and other intellectual property. Such rate reductions, known as "patent boxes" or "innovation boxes," have been adopted across Europe.

Business leaders on Mr. Obama's Export Council, an outside advisory group that looks for ways to boost U.S. exports, recently endorsed the idea, saying in a letter that a tax cut should extend to "all intellectual property that is important to the U.S. economy." 

"It really needs to be looked at in the context of comprehensive tax reform," said Rep. Charles Boustany (R., La.), a member of the Ways and Means Committee who has been weighing the idea.

Critics argue that a patent carve-out could provide a windfall to some big companies and could be expanded to include logos and other less deserving types of intellectual property. 

Finding any new tax breaks that can meet the administration's tough budgetary standards is likely to prove a struggle. Mr. Obama is insisting that changes to the corporate-tax code not add significantly to the government's already dire fiscal problems.

That means the budgetary cost of new tax benefits—including a lower rate—likely would have to be made up through elimination of other popular business breaks.

Administration officials said they were open to corporate leaders' suggestions for specific breaks such as a patent box, but cautioned against breaks that add to deficits. "If someone has an idea for greater incentives for investment, great," one official said. "But I hope they come with ways to accommodate it within [the standard of] revenue neutrality."

At the meeting where the president's Export Council approved its tax-overhaul recommendations last month, outgoing White House economic adviser Lawrence Summers encouraged business leaders to come up with ideas for spurring investment, but also urged them to avoid seeking a grab-bag of tax breaks.

"The case for investment incentives is compelling," Mr. Summers said, according to a transcript. But "if the business community formulates a wish list [without regard to budgetary impact], that is not a strategy that, in my judgment, is very likely to get to the end successfully."

 Write to  John D. McKinnon at john.mckinnon@wsj.com 