BAGRAM AIRFIELD, Afghanistan— George Graves has met the enemy, and he is a hamster.

Plagued by guilt because he hadn't served in Vietnam, Mr. Graves raised his hand when his bosses at the U.S. Department of Agriculture sought a volunteer to deploy to Afghanistan. 

Now he finds himself waging war on birds that could shut down a jet engine in flight, and on the varmints that attract them.

It's safe to say that Mr. Graves has killed more enemy in two months in country than most soldiers ever will, from Indian crested porcupines and golden jackals to gray dwarf hamsters and Libyan jirds, a sort of giant gerbil. He ships the remains to the Smithsonian Institution, whose research collection is short of genetic material from Afghan mammals.

"Not only is it contributing to airfield safety," Mr. Graves says, "but it's also contributing to science world-wide. It's kind of a win-win situation. Except for the animals, of course."

Mr. Graves, 57 years old, was in Idaho riding a desk in the Agriculture Department's Boise office when he heard about the Afghanistan gig, which perfectly combined his skill as a trapper and his desire to go to war. As a boy in Wichita, Kan., he trapped rats in a vacant lot. He skinned them, tanned them and sold the hides to a friend. The friend's mother was not pleased, and young George had to return the money.

He was draft age in the early 1970s, and thought about enlisting in the Army. His father and grandfather had served. But the U.S. was still in Vietnam and his mother talked him out of volunteering. ("You know how a mother is," explains Ruth Fox. "He's my only son.")

"I've felt guilty about it ever since," he says.

Mr. Graves ended up studying wildlife biology in Colorado, covering his tuition by trapping foxes, pine martens, bobcats, spotted skunks and other furry critters. And he got a job with the USDA's Wildlife Services, whose mission is "wildlife damage management." 

Mr. Graves looks every bit the Western outdoorsman, with a ruddy complexion and a bushy gray mustache that droops over the corners of his mouth. He wears frameless glasses and a creased khaki uniform, and carries two shotguns and a revolver as he patrols the flight line in a blue Ford pickup with USDA stickers on the doors.

A larger mammal might damage a fast-moving plane on the ground, he says. Rodents and hares attract black kites and other raptors that could cause a crash if sucked into an engine in flight. Rodents, probably jirds, chewed the wiring of Bagram's special bird-detection radar.

Mr. Graves conducts weekly three-minute spot checks at designated locations, part of a study of Bagram's bird and animal population. Much of his time, though, is spent trapping, snaring or shooting, a bid to make a small dent in the giant base's wildlife population. Every day, while fighter jets scream down the runway, Mr. Graves checks his trap lines. He has set out about 50 spring traps made for mice and rats, as well a handful of neck snares and foot traps.

He baits rodent traps with a homemade paste of peanut butter and Quaker Oats, stored in a Fritos bean-dip container. 

On a typical day, he'll catch a common shrew, a few house mice, several jirds and some hamsters. More rarely, he'll get a hedgehog or jackal. "I've had a 15% to 20% kill rate with jirds" in the mousetraps, says Mr. Graves. "Sometimes it will just pop them in the nose." The rat traps are usually lethal.

A crowd of airmen gathered last month when Mr. Graves pulled up to his office with a Cocker Spaniel-size porcupine in the bed of his truck. "I just assumed people knew there were porcupines around here," he says.

"Wildlife Services seeks a balance among various priorities, including wildlife and environmental conservation, human health and safety, financial considerations and social factors," Carol Bannerman, a Wildlife Services spokeswoman, wrote in a response to questions about Mr. Graves's work. The service reports that in fiscal year 2009, it "dispersed" 87% of the wildlife it encountered nonlethally.

Mr. Graves's job can be dangerous, and he gets hazardous-duty pay. Bagram has been mortared several times since Mr. Graves arrived in November. Some of his trap lines abut barbed-wire fences with triangular red signs that warn of mines from previous wars. Late last year, he found a live grenade while inspecting a fence for holes.

Mr. Graves's assistant is a bearded Afghan falconer, 49-year-old Mohammed Arif, who was a mujahedeen fighter in the 1980s when Bagram was a Soviet base. Mr. Arif's specialty is setting delicate fishing-line bird snares, which he conceals all around the runway. Back in Washington, the Smithsonian has less interest in the birds, so Mr. Arif eats the sparrows and starlings he catches, after Mr. Graves jots down the species and location.

The birds are usually alive when Mr. Arif removes them from the snares. If he fells the birds with his slingshot—he can hit a sparrow at 20 yards—he murmurs "God is great" before firing, an invocation that makes the meat halal, edible under Islamic dietary rules.

Mr. Graves seals the small mammals into plastic zip bags and stores them in a freezer in his office. "Even the most common specimen is going to be valuable to us, and we have very little in our collection from Afghanistan," says Suzanne Peurach, collections manager of mammals for the U.S. Geological Survey's Patuxent Wildlife Research Center, who brokered the Smithsonian deal. "They're already being sacrificed, so this is a way to make very good use of them."

Researchers are curious about everything from the contents of the animals' stomachs to the parasites hidden in their fur. But, Ms. Peurach says, it's too risky to send a collecting expedition to Afghanistan these days.

 Write to  Michael M. Phillips at michael.phillips@wsj.com 