The chronically delayed "Spider-Man: Turn Off the Dark" will take a nearly four-week hiatus beginning April 19 and has rescheduled its opening, for the sixth time, to June 14, producers said Friday.

The cancellation of almost a month of scheduled preview performances will allow the $70 million musical's new creative team, charged with overhauling the troubled production, to revise the script and incorporate new songs from U2's Bono and the Edge.

Preview performances are expected to resume May 12.

Longtime "Spider-Man" director  Julie Taymor was ousted this week from the helm of the show when lead producers  Michael Cohl and  Jeremiah J. Harris hired "The Boy From Oz" director  Philip William McKinley and Spider-Man comic writer  Roberto Aguirre-Sacasa to rework the musical.

The new artistic team is expected to spend the next several days plotting their revisions.

The extended hiatus will almost certainly further inflate the cost of what is already by far the most expensive show in Broadway history, since producers are contractually obligated to stick to certain payment terms once a show begins preview performances.

For example, under the terms of contracts with the Actors' Equity union, the musical must pay overtime rates to actors rehearsing their primary roles more than eight hours a week or 12 hours a week for actors also charged with an understudy role. 

Producers have been determining whether they can pay for the changes with the money they have left or must try to raise more cash, a person familiar with the matter said Thursday.

Though adding new musical numbers during previews is a Broadway tradition, such moves are far tougher with today's technically complex shows. 

A few new minutes of onstage action can require hours of technical rehearsal to reset cues for automated sets and lighting, while also demands time for mundane shifts, like relocating dressers backstage.

Despite the announced replacement of Ms. Taymor, producers and the Tony Award-winning director remain locked in negotiations concerning the terms of her pending departure. Talks between the parties continued through Friday.

—Ellen Gamerman contributed to this article.

 Write to  Erica Orden at erica.orden@wsj.com 