A Renaissance lord crossed with a gorilla. A portrait of a lady with a tiny head. A Romantic poet with a clown nose. This week, New York's New Museum launched a major exhibit of works by George Condo, a contemporary artist best known for adapting the style of the Old Masters to his own portraits, creating a unique cast of grotesque characters.

On Wednesday afternoon, the day the exhibit opened, the 53-year-old artist visited one of his major sources of inspiration, the Frick Collection, a New York museum showcasing works from the Renaissance through the late 19th century. The Frick is close to Mr. Condo's Upper East Side home and studio, and he comes here often. Since he paints entirely from his imagination, rather than from photographs or models, he looks for technical guidance from the works by the long-dead masters on the gallery's walls. If he needs to paint a ribbon, for instance, he'll study a bow on a damsel's dress by the French Rococo painter Jean-Honoré Fragonard.

Mr. Condo's paintings, many of which sell for around $450,000, aim to play a trick on his audience: The artist bets that his characters will seem real despite their giant jug ears or mismatched gargoyle eyes because they've been created using techniques similar to those of classical painters whose works have long been accepted as believable.

Walking around the Frick in his paint-splattered shoes, he stopped at a 1631 oil painting by Rembrandt, "Nicolaes Ruts" (pictured right). Mr. Condo, who brought along his New Museum catalog, pointed to the cover image, pictured at far right: a clown with demented woodchuck teeth staring out of the frame and positioned in a similar pose. He's looking for "a feeling of classicism," he said.

Another bit of shared DNA between the works: In Rembrandt's merchant and Mr. Condo's clown, the same sides of the face are bathed in shadow and set against a lighter background; the other sides of each face are light and placed beside a darker background. Looking from the Rembrandt to his own strange work, Mr. Condo let out a guffaw: "I get a kick out of art," he said.

At this week's party for the exhibit, "George Condo: Mental States," the artist mingled with his recent collaborator, the hip-hop artist Kanye West. Mr. Condo created cover art for Mr. West's new album, "My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy," painting several options, including surreal portraits of Mr. West, who rapped as he posed. The musician initially chose Mr. Condo's image of a white winged creature straddling a naked black figure for the cover art, but the album now sells in stores with Mr. Condo's painting of a ballerina.

Inside the Frick, Mr. Condo seemed far removed from rappers and art openings. He approached "The Progress of Love: Love Letters," by Fragonard, and studied a young woman's dress, which looked white even though it was created with gray and blue, with shadows in the folds of the skirt painted in yellow rather than a dark color. He pointed to his own 2004 painting, "The Cracked Cardinal," and described a similar use of color and shading.

Later, he noted the burnt sienna and blue-green that Fragonard used in another large work. Putting his face inches from the canvas, Mr. Condo admired the color combination: "That's something to think about for the next painting," he said. "It just looks so pretty."

 Write to  Ellen Gamerman at ellen.gamerman@wsj.com 