Once upon a time in Hollywood, between the collapse of the old studio system and the onset of the present system of transmogrifying movies into global licensing properties, there was a brief period roughly between 1965 and 1975 when Hollywood made some of its most distinctive films. One studio in particular, Paramount, shone the brightest in this new golden age, producing movie after movie that helped define the era, including "Rosemary's Baby," "Goodbye Columbus," "Catch-22," "Nashville," "The Conversation," "Love Story," "True Grit," "Chinatown" and, what may be the finest movie ever made, "The Godfather."

The studio, though Hollywood's oldest, had been acquired in 1966 by Gulf & Western, whose other businesses ranged from salvaging scrap metal in the Midwest to sugar farming in the Dominican Republic. The blustering, sharp-elbowed chairman, Charles Bluhdorn, had no experience in the movie business. The new head of production, Robert Evans, a former actor, also had no experience as a studio executive, nor did his top deputy, Peter Bart, whom Mr. Evans had recruited from the New York Times.

How did this unlikely combination accomplish such phenomenal success? In his memoir, "Infamous Players," Mr. Bart attempts to answer this question. Readers are fortunate to have such a well-placed guide. He is not only an insightful journalist—after his stint in the movie business, Mr. Bart returned to print and became the editor of Variety—but an insider: He immersed himself, as Mr. Evans's right-hand man, in Hollywood's curious culture of that era.

"Virtually every party, and they were almost nightly, had their standard offering and lines of cocaine and piles of joints," followed by a communal hot-tub soak, he writes. "I smoked the joints and welcomed an occasional cocaine high after an arduous day, and the hot tubs became habitual as did the subsurface wandering hands." 

The cocaine, which Mr. Bart considered to be a "party drug," was not a problem for him, but it was for Mr. Evans. Mr. Bart says that he has a "a non-addictive personality," but "Bob Evans was the mirror opposite" and eventually began "retreating from reality." (Evans eventually pleaded guilty to a cocaine-related charge and was sentenced to probation.) And the haze of drugs was not all. Paramount was also "consumed by sexuality." Mr. Bart says that he could not even conclude a breakfast negotiation with a literary agent for the rights to a novel without her propositioning him.

Meanwhile, he became increasingly suspicious that Bluhdorn (who died in 1983), had "the mind of a criminal" and was dealing directly with "financiers who had close ties to the mob community." These suspicions fed his worst fears, if not paranoia, as production on "The Godfather" began. Mr. Bart notes that "the studio was exposing the Mafia at the very time its corporate parents were engaged with dealing with them." Even though such a connection was never established in the real world, Mr. Bart viewed the studio as "a black hole of conflict and corruption." Nevertheless, he persevered in his job for seven years. 

Why hang on? He reasoned that the black hole's "darkness helped bring forth the light." Actually, in the realm of science a black hole sucks in light—but, hey, this is Hollywood, where anything goes. And the light, according to Mr. Bart, took the form of brilliant movies.

The creative team at Paramount ingeniously matched best-selling books (by Mario Puzo, Erich Segal, Joseph Heller, Ira Levin) with both talented directors (Francis Ford Coppola, Arthur Hiller, Mike Nichols, Roman Polanski) and inspired actors (Marlon Brando, Ali MacGraw, Alan Arkin, Mia Farrow). They then stewarded the projects through the arduous stages of development, production and editing.

As a result, Mr. Evans, together with his hot-tub companions, achieved an extraordinary string of successes—including some of the most intelligent adult fare ever to come out of Hollywood. Unfortunately, the game ended in 1975, when Bluhdorn ousted the increasingly erratic Mr. Evans.

 By Peter Bart  Weinstein Books, 273 pages, $25 

Mr. Bart correctly notes that many of these films, in addition to becoming prominent pop-culture markers, enjoyed box-office success. But as good as the movies were, they were not what saved Paramount—or, for that matter, Hollywood. The studios actually lost most of their audience during this decade of creative flourishing. In 1965, the average weekly movie audience in America was 44 million; by 1975, the audience had fallen to a near-nadir of 19.9 million. What saved every studio in Hollywood were three new cash cows delivered to town beginning in the late '70s.

The first was home video: This gave Hollywood a new means of harvesting an audience that had been lost at the theaters. The second windfall came from the proliferation of cable television—the studios were able to license the movies in their libraries to cable networks. Finally, the FCC's strengthened Financial Interest and Syndication rules—forcing TV networks to buy programming instead of producing and syndicating it themselves—delivered to the Hollywood studios the lucrative television-syndication market.

The team of Paramount executives who ruled the immediate post-Evans era, notably Barry Diller, Michael Eisner and Jeffrey Katzenberg, had no problem recognizing and exploiting this new business reality. In doing so, they helped reshape the movie-making business. But somehow they never approached the artistic success that grew out of the chaotic, hot-tub culture that the old newspaperman Peter Bart so colorfully records.

—Mr. Epstein is the author of "The Hollywood Economist." 