The U.N.-authorized Libya operation has made "good progress" militarily, reports the German magazine Der Spiegel. "But that, it seems, was the easy part." Uh-oh: 

London's Daily Mail reports that the Germans--whose diplomats helped draft the U.N. resolution authorizing the operation, then refused to vote for it because it was too strong--are withdrawing assets from the Mediterranean "after fears they would be drawn into the conflict if NATO takes over control from the U.S."

Here in America, meanwhile, the Obama administration is sending mixed signals. Actually, "mixed" doesn't quite do it justice. It's more like pureed, chopped or whipped signals. Yesterday Attorney General Eric Holder told a news conference: "I think that, you know, Gadhafi's presence, continued presence in Libya is something that has got to end, given the fact that he's lost all legitimacy with his people." 

We're still waiting for the interior secretary to weigh in, but as long as the attorney general is making pronouncements about foreign-policy strategy, we're glad at least that he's clear. Gadhafi must go!

Or must he? President Obama, in a CNN interview yesterday, observed that "Gadhafi may try to hunker down and wait it out even in the face of a no-fly zone, even though his forces have been degraded." Which is true enough as an analytical matter, but when we first read the quote, with no further context, we worried that it was a show of weakness. Were we right? Here's what the president said next:

This is, to say the least, an unconventional approach. It's like holding a gun to a criminal's head and telling him you're not going to shoot, but if he doesn't cooperate, he may be subject to a stiff fine. It's so counterintuitive that one wonders if it is some sort of brilliant reverse-psychology ploy.

 David Rothkopf of Foreign Policy magazine quotes this clarification of the administration's policy from White House speechwriter Ben Rhodes:

And here's more Obama from CNN.com:

So the U.S. objective is to get Libyans talking? That's so typical of Obama, we have to conclude he's just being himself. So much for the brilliant reverse-psychology fake-out theory.

On the other hand, let's make three quick points in Obama's favor. First, there may be an upside to his languid approach to foreign policy. America should not grovel to other governments to let it act in their interests, as John "Global Test" Kerry urged back in 2004. But Obama isn't doing that. He has struck a pose of such indifference that France and the Arab League ended up begging the U.S. to show some leadership. In geostrategic terms this may not be an improvement over the activist early Bush years, but it's satisfying to see these self-involved "allies" put in their place.

Second, Politico reports that "some foreign leaders are asking that the Nobel Committee take back the peace prize it awarded Obama in 2009." Somebody--not clear if it was a foreign leader or just a follower--said on Twitter: "Barack Obama has now fired more cruise missiles than all other Nobel Peace prize winners combined." How many cruise missiles did Rigoberta Menchu, Jody Williams or even Yasser Arafat even have?

Third, albeit unrelated to Libya, Politico reports that a Chilean reporter asked Obama to apologize for long-ago U.S. support of Augusto Pinochet, the American-backed military dictator who ruled brutally but did save his country from communism. Obama's response:

Perfect. No bow, no grovel, just a polite but firm rebuff. Who says Obama hasn't grown in office?

  These Guys Failed Logic 101   "Vice President Joe Biden called on Tuesday for a nation-wide effort to make the United States the world leader in college completion by 2020, offering a 'College Completion Tool Kit' to help," Reuters reports. Whatever. But this detail late in the story caught our attention:

Got that logic? The more of your money the government spends on something, the more "affordable" it is.

 NewsBusters.org reports on a similar crime against logic. In this case the perpetrator is Andrew Romano of Newsweek, who wrote one of those stories on how ignorant Americans are. Erica Hill of CBS's "Early Show" explained the article's premise:

The second example is evidence of troubling ignorance. As to the former, we know Joe Biden's name, and we're convinced we'd be smarter if we didn't.

Now, here is one of Romano's explanations for this ignorance:

Gosh, if only we offered free public education to the poor, we could--oh wait! We do? Hmm, could it be, perhaps, that the problem isn't "income inequality" but failing schools?

  Another Reason to Love Capitalism   "Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez thinks capitalism may be responsible for the lack of life on the planet Mars," FoxNews.com reports:

Did you ever read "War of the Worlds"? If Chavez is right, capitalism is a boon to interplanetary peace. Another benefit: Charlie Sheen ought to be able to stop pretending he isn't a total bitchin' rock star from Mars.

  Who Needs Whom Now?   Kim Guadagno is the lieutenant governor of New Jersey. We know, who cares? Well, she's the first lieutenant governor of New Jersey. The position was created by a 2005 amendment to the state constitution, and the 2009 election was the first in which a lieutenant governor was chosen.

We know, we know! Who cares?!

Fred Snowflack cares. In September, on his Morris Politics blog for the Daily Record of Parsippany, Snowflack wrote:

Snowflack is no longer with the Daily Record. His last blog entry, posted Feb. 4, announced cryptically that it was his last day with the paper and he was going into "exile." GannettBlog has much more information about the cutbacks that hit Snowflack and many of his Record colleagues.

Don't worry, though. He found another job, and one that takes full advantage of his blogging experience. He contributes to You've Been CC'd, the blog of the New Jersey governor's office, whose contributors list informs us that the communications director for the lieutenant governor is the delightfully named Fred Snowflack.

New Jersey may not need a lieutenant governor, but Snowflack is lucky it got one.

 Two Papers in One! 

 Life Imitates the Onion 

  Still Trying to Live Up to the Kennedy Legacy   "Kerry Admits to 'Long Overdue' 12-Hour Booze Binge"--headline, AOL.co.uk, March 22

  'Interest Rates Are at a Historic Low, and We're Going to Default if We Don't Get Spending Under Control . . .'   "Government Lays Out Case Against Bonds"--headline, New York Times, March 23

  World Ends, Plenipotentiary Hardest Hit   "Arab Revolts Force Diplomats to Remake Lives and Careers"--headline, New York Times, March 23

  Modern Bride: Banned in Hartford   "CT Considers Confiscating 'Large Capacity' Magazines"--headline, National Review Online, March 23

  He'll Be Luckey Not to Lose His Shirt   "Tattle: Howard Stern Is Sirius About Stock"--headline, Philadelphia Daily News, March 23

  Hey, Kids! What Time Is It?   "Spring Is the Time to Rock Your Socks"--headline, Philadelphia Daily News, March 23

 Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking   "Yes, Sex Can Kill You, U.S. Study Shows"--headline, Reuters, March 22

  Look Out Below!   "Detroit's Population Crashes"--headline, The Wall Street Journal, March 23

  It's Always in the Last Place You Look   "Masters of Disguise Among Meatless Burgers"--headline, New York Times, March 23

  News of the Tautological   "Bottled Water Industry Supports World Water Day"--headline, International Bottled Water Association press release, March 22

  Breaking News From 1959   "Finally: Cindy Sheehan Speaks"--headline, DailyCaller.com, March 23

  News You Can Use   "Bursting to Remove Your Appendix? Hold On"--headline, Tennessean, March 22

  Bottom Story of the Day   "It's Official! Gay Republican Running for President"--headline, Mother Jones website, March 23

  Lots of Green   Something doesn't quite add up about this story from FoxNews.com:

So Planthaber (that seems to be the correct spelling) is an arborist? He may have a delightful name, but how can he afford to buy such an extravagant rock? Maybe money grows on trees after all.

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Daniel Mullen, Michele Schiesser, Scott Syfert, Pat Rowe, Ethel Fenig, Ed Lasky, James Benenson, Rick Walsh, David Gerstman, Gad Meir, John Bobek, Zack Russ, Taylor Dinerman, Naftali Friedman, Jeanie Ribble, Joe Perez, T. Young, Ed Grinberg, Richard Haisley, Richard Belzer, Michael Driscoll, Alek Vey, Steven Stratton, Paul Dyck, John Sanders, Jonathan Kahnoski, Bill Schweber, Rex Pilger, Marc Young, David Hallstrom, Rod Pennington, Chris Hayes, Edward Tannen, Bill Heyman, Stuart Sullivan, Lew Olowski, Jeff Brown, Kenny Alwes, Bill King, Steve Black and Dovid Bendory. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)