It's like a recurring bad dream for India's consumer-goods companies. Only this time around, things are even scarier. 

With global food and commodity prices rising fast, purveyors of processed foods in India are facing a margin squeeze. It brings back memories of a similar trend in 2008, but in 201,1 companies face it along with a sharp rise in competition. 

Consider instant noodles. Demand for these is likely to grow at a compound annual growth rate of 18% between 2009 to 2014, market researcher Euromonitor International estimates. This has drawn competitors into a space once dominated by Nestlé India. In the past year alone, three companies—Hindustan Unilever, GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare and ITC—have entered the category, and shopkeepers say there are now about 25 varieties of instant noodles on the store shelves, nearly twice that of two years ago. 

But if that's not enough to pressure profit margins, prices of their primary ingredients, wheat and palm oil, rose 18% and 38%, respectively, in the fourth quarter of 2010. Passing on these costs is proving difficult, in particular for new brands.

Already, Morgan Stanley says firms are behind the curve in raising prices of their products, and it predicts operating margins for the consumer-goods companies it covers will narrow by 0.3 percentage point in the just-ended quarter as a result. The squeeze could worsen in the new year as companies lose the benefit of festival-related spending in the December-end quarter. 

The impact will vary by the product mix of each company, and it isn't limited to food products. Palm oil, for example, is a key ingredient of soaps. Each 10% increase in palm oil prices takes 1.5 percentage points off the operating profit margin of Godrej Consumer Products, which makes bath soaps and detergents, Morgan Stanley says. At Hindustan Unilever, the impact would be less than half that. 

This won't drive companies into the red. In the December 2009 quarter, Godrej's operating margin was 18.6%, and Hindustan Unilever's was 16.5%. But costly raw materials aren't the only risk. To compete for business, companies are spending heavily on advertising, and persistent inflation means some Indian shoppers will struggle to buy staples like rice and onions, let alone processed foods. 

This is déjà vu—with a nasty sting attached. 

 Write to  Harsh Joshi at harsh.joshi@dowjones.com 