MEXICO CITY—Authorities searched Thursday for assailants who attacked a convoy carrying a retired Mexican general working as a local police chief.

It was the latest offensive against a group of military men charged with cleaning up corruption in the police forces. 

The shootout took place Wednesday and appeared to have targeted retired Gen. Carlos Villa, who was hired last year as the police chief in Torreón, a city in northern Mexico that has been a drug-war epicenter. 

Mr. Villa, who was profiled in The Wall Street Journal in December, was traveling in an armored vehicle that was part of a convoy and wasn't shot. 

But his spokeswoman said two police officers had been seriously wounded and were in the hospital. Mr. Villa said he would continue as police chief.

The attack marks the latest in a string of hits against former military men who have been tapped take on organized crime groups that have placed a stranglehold on many Mexican cities. 

Coahuila, the state where Torreón is located, has more than a dozen generals in charge of its police forces. 

Last month, gunmen shot and killed retired Gen. Manuel Farfán, the police chief of border town Nuevo Laredo, after the general had completed barely a month on the job. Last year, ex-generals who had become police chiefs in Cancún and Garcia, a city in northern Mexico, were also killed in similar hits. Authorities blamed drug traffickers for the killings.

The attack against Mr. Villa may have been revenge by an organized crime group. The night before the attack, members of his police force battled gunmen in Torreón, killing four people who authorities described as cartel hitmen. The following morning, Mr. Villa's convoy was ambushed by five dark SUVs that opened fire and sped away. 

Torreón and its sister city Gómez Palacio lie on a central highway route through Mexico used to traffic drugs and thus have been the scene of a mounting turf war between Mexican drug cartels Los Zetas and the Sinaloa Cartel. 

Last year, the cities made national headlines when authorities arrested a local prison warden for allegedly letting prisoners out to perform killings in Torreón, including the massacre of 17 people at a party. Shortly afterward, a group of journalists were taken hostage by the Sinaloa Cartel, authorities said, and forced to bargain for their release by broadcasting videotapes discrediting Los Zetas.

The violence continued in recent days with 10 people killed in firefights on Saturday in two local Torreón bars.

Since Mr. Villa was appointed in January 2010, he has launched a campaign to clean up the city's police force, which he and city officials say has long worked as an arm of crime groups. Last year the entire force walked off the job and demanded Mr. Villa's ouster. The city's mayor fired nearly every officer, saying too much of the force was working for drug traffickers. 

Raul Benítez, a security expert in Mexico City, said military men were rarely targeted by drug cartels unless they begin working for police forces. "When a general is named police chief they know he has arrived to clean up the police force," he said. "That's when it creates a danger for the general."

 Write to  Nicholas Casey at nicholas.casey@wsj.com 