The prices of municipal bonds are plunging to depths last seen during the financial crisis. At least one high-profile analyst is predicting widespread defaults. And a big asset manager is putting its expansion into munis on hold. Is the situation in muni-land really as dire as all that? 

In a word, no. And investors who can see past all the hand-wringing and remain disciplined may even find opportunities to profit.

It has been hard to ignore all the bad news in the market of late. State budget deficits are expected to increase from $120 billion in fiscal 2011 to $140 billion in 2012, thanks in part to underfunded pensions and growing health-care costs. Investors, meanwhile, are bailing: Muni bonds have lost 5.3% since Nov. 10, while muni funds have seen outflows of $22.7 billion. Vanguard Group on Jan. 13 shelved a plan to launch three muni funds, while  J.P. Morgan Chase
JPM


0.30
%




 & Co. CEO  James Dimon this week warned that investors should be careful.

In the course of just a few years, muni bonds have joined a list of investments, from housing to money-market mutual funds and auction-rate securities, that have lost their safe-haven status.

 $350 billion Total issuance of municipal bonds expected in 2011, down from $430 billion in 2010.

 3.12% The yield on a 10-year top-rated municipal bond, versus 3.36% on an equivalent Treasury note.

 $22.7 billion The amount of money withdrawn from municipal-bond funds since Nov. 10—about two-thirds of the $34.5 billion that had been invested since Jan. 1, 2010.

 $ 2.9 trillion The total dollar amount of outstanding municipal bonds, up from $1.5 trillion in 2000.



 Sources: Municipal Market Advisors; Investment Company Institute; ValuBond 

"Historically, people have gone to the muni market because they believe they're the safest things out there," says  Burt Hutchinson, a financial adviser in Wilmington, Del., who has been recommending that clients sell their muni bonds. "Today people are realizing maybe they aren't as safe as we think they are." 

And yet the situation may not be as grim as some suggest. 

Municipal bonds are issued by states, counties, cities or their agencies to finance public works, such as roads and bridges, housing projects, airports and hospitals. For years, individual investors, especially those in the highest tax brackets, have liked munis because the interest payments are generally exempt from federal and, in some cases, state income taxes. 

In the past few years the fiscal outlooks for many states and cities have worsened, as governments struggle to balance their budgets and pay for essential services. 

But that may be starting to turn around as some governments take action—sometimes extreme—to plug budget gaps. In California, Gov.  Jerry Brown on Jan. 12 announced $12.5 billion in spending cuts. That same day, Illinois raised its state income-tax rate to 5% from 3% to help plug an estimated $13 billion budget shortfall. 

"We've never defaulted, not once in our entire history, including during the Great Depression," says  Tom Dresslar, spokesman for California Treasurer  Bill Lockyer. He says paying debt service for the state's bonds is the Treasurer's second-highest priority, after schools. 

Revenues for U.S. municipalities as a group rose during the first three quarters of 2010, and the trend is likely to continue, say economists, as the U.S. economy slowly recovers from the recent recession. Even strategist  Meredith Whitney, who is among the most outspoken muni-market bears, predicts that not a single state will default on its debt.

That doesn't mean investors are in the clear. Far from it. With budget season just beginning, investors should be ready for more bad fiscal news to hit the headlines for the next several months, as states try to plug those massive holes. That, says  Chris Mauro, director of municipal bond research at RBC Capital Markets, could keep the market churning until midyear or longer.

"We advise people to remain mindful of this," Mr. Mauro says. 

Yet at least some of the recent muni-market losses can be traced to factors other than the creditworthiness of states and cities—factors that might not influence the market much longer. For starters, the big drop in municipal bonds coincided perfectly with the selloff in the Treasury market that began on Nov. 5, two days after the Federal Reserve's announcement that it would begin buying bonds. Since munis, like most bonds, trade relative to Treasurys, the late-year slump probably accounted for at least some of the rise in muni yields. (Bond prices move in the opposite direction of their prices, so when prices fall, yields spike.) 

The end-of-year muni rout also coincided with a surge of supply brought about by Congress's decision not to renew the Build America Bond program, which had provided subsidies to municipalities that issued taxable bonds. With the program set to end on Dec. 31, states and cities flooded the market. Total muni issuance this year, however, is expected to drop to $350 billion from about $430 billion, according to research advisory firm Municipal Market Advisors.

Even the decision to extend the Bush-era tax rates took a bite. Since most munis are federal-tax-free, they become more attractive as tax rates rise. When Congress on Dec. 7 extended the current tax rates until 2013, muni-bond-fund outflows spiked, from $76 million the week ended Dec. 1 to $1.3 billion the week ended Dec. 8.

"The problems didn't get worse all of a sudden," says  Phil Condon, a senior municipal-bond portfolio manager at DWS Investments. "But the average investor looks at prices going down and assumes it's a problem with finances and it starts this cascade of events."

The selling is presenting unusual opportunities. Because of their tax advantages, munis typically carried yields of about 82% of comparable Treasurys. No longer: A typical 10-year muni yielded 3.41% on Jan. 13, versus 3.3% for a 10-year Treasury. 

Bargain hunters are betting on a replay of late 2008. Back then, munis fell about 11% from Sept. 9 through Oct. 16, 2008, as the financial crisis peaked following the Lehman Brothers collapse. But munis quickly reversed course, rallying 12% during the next three months.

For investors, the key is to be selective. While some muni yields might seem too tempting to pass up, investors would be better served by sticking with high-quality, broadly diversified holdings, advisers say, even if the yields are lower. 

This means looking for credit ratings of single-A or higher—preferably triple-A—and avoiding areas with declining populations, rising unemployment, excessive pension costs or other problems, say advisers. 

Likewise, investors should be discerning about the types of muni bonds they buy. There generally are two kinds: "general-obligation bonds," which are backed by the taxing authority of a state or city, and "revenue bonds," which can be backed by revenues from toll roads or other public projects. 

  Lewis Altfest, chief investment officer of Altfest Personal Wealth Investment in New York, says that while he has many worried clients, he's been a buyer recently. In late December, for example, the firm bought general-obligation bonds from Orange County, N.Y., which sported a 4.8% yield and a triple-A rating. Other bonds that the firm likes include an issue from the New York City Water and Sewer System and bonds from the Metropolitan Transportation Authority. The yields on all those bonds are up at least one percentage point from where they were trading at in early November, he says.

Many financial advisers say they have tightened up their criteria for selecting individual munis.  Marilyn Cohen, president of Envision Capital Management, a Los Angeles fixed-income money manager, for one, has been remaking the composition of her clients' muni holdings over the last 18 months by dumping bonds from troubled states—including California and Illinois—and buying out-of-state bonds from states with low deficits and fewer unfunded liabilities, such as Virginia and Tennessee. She also likes essential-service bonds in areas with low foreclosure rates, such as San Francisco. "California is in a terrible state, but the Department of Water and Power is doing just fine," she says. 

Mutual funds, of course, offer quick and easy diversification, in theory providing more safety. But some muni funds have been hammered recently. To maximize the diversity, advisers say, investors should stick with national funds rather than state-specific portfolios—even if it means giving up a state tax benefit.

More important, investors should focus on funds that invest conservatively. Portfolios that take more interest-rate risk or use "leverage," or borrowed money, to amp up returns have been among the hardest hit recently, says  Miriam Sjoblom, an analyst at  Morningstar Inc.
MORN


-0.09
%




 

In many cases, investors have more to fear from interest-rate risk than credit problems, say advisers. Rising yields tend to hit long-term bond funds the hardest, because investors demand higher payments to compensate for holding bonds instead of rolling them over to higher-yielding short-term bonds. The  Eaton Vance National Municipal Income Fund, for example, offers a yield close to 6%, the highest in the long-term national muni-fund category—but it was also the category's worst performer during the three months ending Thursday, losing almost 14%, according to Morningstar. 

The fund tends to focus more on long-term holdings than most muni funds, a strategy that results in higher yields but also more interest-rate risk. It also holds "inverse floaters," which magnify up and down moves. The fund has been hit lately with a vicious cycle of investor redemptions, which force it to sell bonds in a down market, which causes the fund's value to fall further, which then prompts more investors to dump the fund, says  Thomas Metzold, co-director of municipal investments at Eaton Vance. 

Safer bets, say analysts, are high-quality intermediate-term funds that keep a lid on interest-rate risk. Some portfolios that get good marks from Morningstar analysts include  Fidelity Intermediate Municipal Income and  Vanguard Intermediate-Term Tax-Exempt. These funds have fallen roughly in line with the intermediate muni-fund category in the three months ended Thursday, declining about 3.5% and 4.8%, respectively, versus the average loss of 4.5%. 

As of Nov. 30, the Fidelity fund had roughly 90% of assets in holdings rated single-A or higher, while the Vanguard fund devoted 95% of assets to these higher-quality bonds. 

Two other funds held up even better during the period, by using strategies that sought to protect against rising interest rates. The  Pimco Tax Managed Real Return Fund lost only 0.8%, while the  JPMorgan Tax Aware Real Return Fund lost 1.8%. 

Exchange-traded funds, which trade like stocks, also offer investors easy access to muni bonds, but they should be approached with caution. Muni-bond ETFs generally are easier to trade than their underlying bonds, and substantial gaps can appear between an ETF's share price and the value of its underlying holdings. The  iShares S&P National AMT-Free Municipal Bond Fund,
MUB


0.00
%




 for example, traded at a 2.4% discount to the value of its holdings in mid-November, though that gap on Thursday was about 1%. 

Some advisers say muni ETFs could see more problems in the months ahead as volatility, and muni bonds' illiquidity in general, make it increasingly difficult for the funds to track their respective benchmarks. "A muni might only be priced once a month—which is why we made a conscious decision to stay away from muni ETFs," says Mr. Hutchinson, the adviser. 

Still, for investors sticking with high-quality holdings, the depressed muni market "may present numerous opportunities," says  Richard Ciccarone, chief research officer at McDonnell Investment Management, a fixed-income firm. Adds  Michael Walls, portfolio manager of the  Ivy Municipal High Income Fund: "There's a lot of yield in the market from very strong individual credits. Twelve months from now, all the fearful statements that were made will be forgotten."

 Write to  Ben Levisohn at Ben.Levisohn@wsj.com, Jane J. Kim at jane.kim@wsj.com and Eleanor Laise at eleanor.laise@wsj.com 