 Forks of Salmon, Calif. 

I'm careening downstream, upside down, on the Salmon River. My body is wedged into a kayak, the helmet on my head bumping off rocks on the river bottom. I thrust my paddle above the roiling water and try to flip my boat up. It almost works. I gulp a mouthful of air before the boat tips back over into the rapid. This is called "carping," because you look like a carp broaching the surface with your mouth desperately agape.

Back under water, I hear my kayak coach, Dave Farkas, in my head. "Finesse, finesse," he says. I take two seconds longer to set my hands in a better position, sweep out the paddle, and the next thing I know I'm upright and breathing air.

I'd wanted to learn whitewater kayaking for years. Eventually, I took an introductory course in Nepal where the student-teacher ratio was great: one-to-one. Unfortunately, I could understand only about every fourth word my alleged English-speaking instructor said. Mostly, I just tried to do what he did. On the first day we practiced in a pool and I seemed to get the Eskimo roll, the essential technique for flipping your boat up without having to abandon the craft. The so-called wet exit, which leads to swimming, is something kayakers prefer to avoid, especially in the vicinity of waterfalls.

On day two in Nepal we ran a Class II rapid on the Bhote Kosi and I had no idea what I was supposed to do. I rocketed down the river, waves slapping me in the face, the boat ricocheting off rocks. I paddled like mad, trying to turn between boulders, stabbing into the stream to stay vertical. It was like being strapped to a roller coaster that had jumped its rails.

Somehow I survived, but later, trying to cross upstream against the current, I flipped. My roll failed and I found myself swimming—just above a Class II rapid. My butt and feet bounced over the rocks as I shot downstream. I felt like a cork being blasted by a firehose. It was a quarter of a mile before the water slowed and I could reach shore. I had lost one flip-flop in the chaos but somehow managed to keep the other one in my hand. On the beach I found someone else's lost flip-flop—the right side and size to replace mine.

I didn't know if I'd ever be that lucky on a river again, so when I got back to the U.S. I decided to get some real whitewater instruction. Which is how I wound up at Otter Bar, a weeklong kayak program on a beautiful, remote stretch of the Salmon River in Humboldt County in the far northwest corner of California. 

Otter Bar has been around for almost 30 years. Owner Peter Sturges says the worst accident a client ever suffered was a broken finger. "The most dangerous thing you'll do this week," he says, "is drive home."

I try to keep that in mind one night when we gather to watch a DVD called "Dream Result," made by his son Rush, which follows a group of top kayakers around the world. One scene shows Tyler Bradt paddling off of Palouse Falls in Washington and falling 186 feet, higher than Niagara Falls, disappearing in the spray. He pops out of the turbulent pool at the bottom with a broken paddle and a new world record. Then the younger Mr. Sturges hucks off an 80-footer and breaks his back (his father says he was paddling again in two months). 

Most days at Otter Bar are far less extreme. In the morning the 15 students and four instructors practice techniques in a pond and later examine the results on video; in the afternoon we run rivers. Bombing down small rapids is the easiest part: Gravity does most of the work. I find it far more difficult to grasp the nuances of angle, edge and speed.

Aiming for something is easy enough, but gauging when to go fast (you want to move faster than the river to maintain control) is a more practiced skill. Knowing when to subtly change the tilt of your boat with your knee and coordinating that with the proper stroke at the right speed . . . Well, let's just say I had a lot of incentive to improve my roll. That week, I spent more time upside-down than a bat.

The first day on the river, I went for a swim, but after that I developed a reasonably effective, if not pretty, roll. I kept hoping for a carp-free day, but a more realistic goal would've been nailing a roll on my first try. Still, my second attempt always worked.

Then, on day six, I ran my first Class III rapid. I cruised down the initial part of the whitewater, turned into an eddy too late and flipped—just above where the Class III waterfall tumbled into the abyss. 

"Oh no," Mr. Farkas said to another student watching from the river's edge.

My classmates later told me I tried to roll several times before being swept over the falls upside down. My only memory is thinking an unprintable word, then feeling like an entire baseball team was battering my helmet with bats. Next thing I knew I was swimming. Or trying to. I had sealed up the wrists and waist on my waterproof paddling jacket—but not the neck, which quickly filled with water. I swallowed several mouthfuls. 

I was out of the whitewater, but small, barely visible currents were still tugging at me, dragging me places I didn't want to go. Mr. Farkas was quickly in front of me, telling me to grab the back of his boat. He towed me to shore. 

The next two Class III sections I ran without incident. Later, I settled into the hot tub at the lodge with a beer and a copy of the American Canoe Association's "River Safety Anthology," which could more honestly be titled "Ways People Drown Kayaking." It was chilling reading ("death may be a single paddle stroke away") and for a while I considered confining my whitewater career to the jets of a jacuzzi. 

But the next day I squeezed into a kayak again atop the Class III rapid where my wild ride had taken place. This time, I pulled into the upper eddy without mishap. My mouth was dry as I stroked into the main rapid, whipsawed through the falls without turning over and paddled downstream. I was feeling great as I turned into the lower eddy. But I hit the wrong edge and capsized. 

I carped once, then stuck a roll. 

 Mr. Ybarra is the Journal's extreme sports correspondent. 