Longwinded staffers at New York City Hall better heed Polonius' advice about brevity being the soul of wit—Mayor  Michael Bloomberg's latest office enhancement demonstrates he doesn't have time for dillydallying.

The mayor has ordered the installation of count-up clocks in meeting rooms throughout City Hall to make staffers mindful of how much time they're spending jawing with one another. The technology is super simple, you push a button at the start of the meeting, and the display shows all participants how much time has passed.

Mr. Bloomberg, a 68-year-old billionaire who built a financial communications empire from scratch, has a long history of trying to boost productivity at the workplace. "We're always looking to find ways to make things work faster," explained  Stu Loeser, the mayor's press secretary. "We're not here to sit around and meet with each other—we're here to get things done."

One of Mr. Bloomberg's friends in the private sector recently mentioned the count-up clocks to the mayor. At the friend's office, the presence of the clocks shortened meeting times by 20%, Mr. Loeser said. 

The mayor has already installed four of these clocks at City Hall. Two are in the "bullpen"—Mr. Bloomberg's trademark no-walls, open-style office where he works alongside top staffers in the west wing of City Hall. One is in the second-floor room where the mayor holds his morning staff meetings. Another is in the first-floor "outer-ceremonial" conference room.

Eight more are coming for other meeting rooms around City Hall. All are being paid with private money, said Mr. Loeser, who declined to specify the donor. And, for the record, Monday's staff meeting lasted 28 minutes.

"It's a great idea," said  Robert Becker, president of Meeting Planners, an Indiana-based firm, when told of the City Hall clocks.

"I've been in enough meetings where they just ramble, and when you get done at the end of the two hours, or one hour, you turn to the colleague next to you and you say, 'Well, what did we accomplish?'" Mr. Becker said.

Brad Johnson, who calls himself a "business meeting survivor" and is marketing a device that tallies the dollars spent at meetings, called the mayor's clocks "fantastic."

Mr. Johnson's device, called TIM, as in "time is money," allows users to enter the number of people in the room and ballpark an average hourly wage. Participants can then see how much money they're spending in meetings. "All of us probably spend way too much time at meetings," Mr. Johnson said. "And if you really thought about how much time it's taking versus how much we're getting done, it's pretty eye opening."

In Mr. Bloomberg's autobiography, "Bloomberg by Bloomberg," the mayor recounts how he once got frustrated at a meeting at his company in which the participants read a summary of their department's progress from the printed notes handed out at the meeting's start. 

"The next week I had the chairs removed from the conference room before we started," Mr. Bloomberg wrote. "It's amazing how much quicker and more focused stand-up conferences are."

Several years ago, the mayor installed countdown clocks at City Hall and a dozen or so city agencies that keep track of the days, hours, minutes and seconds remaining before his term expires. Most of the clocks come with the message, "Make every day count."

Mr. Loeser stressed that there are no limits to meetings at City Hall. The clocks are there just to inform participants about the meeting's length. "Even in an environment in which people come to meetings prepared with the best information and the most efficient way to present it, sometimes there's more that can be done to make things work faster," he said.

So far, staffers at City Hall appear to be giving the clocks the thumbs up. "Anyone that works in an office environment has walked out of a meeting at some point thinking, 'Why in the world did that have to take so long?'" said  Robert Doar, commissioner of the city's Human Resources Administration. "Are these clocks going to change that? Well, it did for me yesterday." 

 Write to  Michael Howard Saul at michael.saul@wsj.com 