Naples, Florida

Davis Love III is a natural on the golf course and a naturally nice guy. He is not, however, a natural actor.

It didn't help during a Bridgestone commercial shoot in Naples, Florida, last month that Mr. Love's pal, Fred Couples, was goofing with him. After more than a decade with Titleist, Mr. Love is making his debut this year as a staff player for Mr. Couples' longtime sponsor, Bridgestone. During practice takes for the first commercial the two filmed together—the script called for them to stride purposefully toward the camera on a driving range—Mr. Couples deliberately botched his line. "Welcome to another Titleist challenge," he brightly intoned.

"Don't mess me up, man," Mr. Love complained.

A bit later, during live takes of the scene, Mr. Love couldn't quite get his gesticulative timing down. He was supposed to point emphatically on the word "your" as he said, "Where we fit the right ball to your game." But he kept jumping the gun. And the more he miscued, the itchier he got to point sooner, not later. 

This broke up the other Tour pros watching via live feed in a nearby shed. LPGA star Paula Creamer, in particular, couldn't stop laughing. Mr. Couples, guessing correctly what was going on inside, eventually turned to the camera and said, "Hey, you guys back in the hut, take a hike." Or words to that effect.

December, for high-profile Tour pros, is often the month they do most of their television commercials and other photos shoots for the year. New contracts start in January, while many new club, ball and clothing lines come out in the late winter or spring. Practically speaking, for sponsors, December is the only viable month when entire Tour staffs can be assembled in one place at one time, because of tournament schedules. 

Bridgestone, for example, cycled its top seven players through the sets at a rented country club here, and got eight 30-second commercials recorded in a 36-hour period. The pros—including Matt Kuchar, Lee Trevino, Nick Price and Brandt Snedeker—also signed posters, flags and golf bags for customers, posed for print ad photographs and did individual video commentaries on the products they use. 

The well-catered event (the players were billeted at a nearby Ritz-Carlton) cost Bridgestone plenty. On average in the U.S., production expenses for a 30-second TV spot is $342,000, according to the American Association of Advertising Agencies. That would put the tally for the nine Bridgestone ads in excess of $3 million. 

Dan Murphy, vice president of marketing for Bridgestone Golf, said the company spent less than that, due to the efficiency of shooting all the ads in one session, but that the costs still amounted to one fifth of the unit's total annual marketing budget.

When Bridgestone invited me to hang out at the photo shoot, with the one proviso that I not write about it until this month when the ads start to appear, I accepted primarily as an opportunity to get to know some of the players better. One thing I learned was that the pros value the commercials they do for sponsors for more than just the money they rake in from their contracts. Marketing is one of the main ways athletes these days create personas for themselves.

Ms. Creamer, for instance, said she loves doing photo shoots and views the resulting ads—she's usually clad in pink, often with a ponytail—as an important way to "interact" with her fans. The three ads that Mr. Couples shot in the company of an extremely beautiful Brazilian model named Adrienne Ferreira certainly do his dashing sportsman image no harm. 

Mr. Love, for his part, talks knowledgeably about the quality of Bridgestone products, but acknowledged that he looked forward to playing a more featured role in Bridgestone campaigns than he did at Titleist, where he was just one of a larger group of staff players. "I'm at the age where I am a brand myself. Whether it's Polo or my other sponsors, the more exposure I get from Bridgestone, the more exposure I get for them, and vice versa. It all works together," he said.

As in the army, there's a lot of "hurry up and wait" at photo shoots. The downtime between takes on the practice range, and later at the clubhouse, had the feel of a locker-room during a rain delay at a pro tournament. With players drifting in and out, the conversation flitted from investment strategies, to where to get the best steak in Naples, to Anthony Kim's erratic career trajectory. Ms. Creamer passed along a report of the then-secret but since-acknowledged romance between PGA Tour star Dustin Johnson and LPGA standout Natalie Gulbis. Mssrs. Couples and Love described an enormous horse farm to which they had recently helicoptered in Northern Ireland while at a tournament. Mr. Love detailed his efforts to use up his annual allotment of Ralph Lauren/Polo merchandise before the year ended. For a while, Ms. Creamer worked on her Japanese with the help of a Bridgestone employee from Japan. Mr. Trevino regaled crew members with stories of golf with Jack Nicklaus, Ben Hogan and others.

As you might expect in such a context, far from fans and the public eye, the atmosphere was low key and collegial, like office workers at lunch. The only difference, it struck me in retrospect, was how exotic the context of office life is for elite athletes: investments, horse farms, international travel, celebrity friends. 

"The biggest challenge at a shoot like this is to keep on schedule so the players can get back, on time, to their families, their limos, their jets or whatever," said the director, Scott Nelson of Nelson Creative in Atlanta. In this case, all the trains ran on time.