Hong Kong -- This will be a busy deal-making year for Asia's technology companies, with more than a dozen Chinese Internet companies set to list in the U.S. and continued activity by Indian telecom companies selling tower assets via initial public offerings or mergers, a senior  Citigroup
C


1.50
%




 banker said. 

"There are at least 15-20 companies in China with plans to IPO in the U.S. this year, in industries such as online, e-commerce, internet infrastructure, raising anywhere from $50 million to $300 million each," said  Nikhil Eapen, head of technology, media and telecommunications for Asia at Citigroup, in a recent interview. 

"They opt to go to the U.S. as this is the natural home for the comparable universe with Chinese internet players commanding a high premium." 

Mr. Eapen noted that in the U.S. tech companies have a "broader universe of comparable stocks and investor interest." 

Earlier this month, Chinese security software provider Qihoo 360 Technology Co. said it plans to sell as much as $200 million of American depositary receipts in an IPO this month, while mobile-Internet services company NetQin Mobile Inc. also filed to sell up to an estimated $100 million of American depositary shares. 

In 2010, four of the five best IPOs on American exchanges came from Chinese stocks, led by online video firm  Youku.com,
YOKU


-6.69
%




 which raised $200 million by selling American depositary shares, and registered a 161% pop on its first day, according to data provider Dealogic.  E-Commerce China DangDang Inc.
DANG


-2.05
%




 gained 87% in its debut. 

But the reverse was also true: The worst five debuts came from China-based companies, with mobile application company Ski-mobi Ltd. skidding 25% on its first day in December. 



 E&Y's Adrian Macartney Talks Of African Ventures 

So far this year, five Chinese companies have started trading in the U.S., after having raised a total of just $161 million, the biggest of which was  BCD Semiconductor Manufacturing Ltd's $70 million IPO. 

Telecom towers, sold by Indian operators, are another area that's set to see activity this year, "as operators continue to free up their asset exposure and the larger tower strategic (firms) continue to build scale," Mr. Eapen said. 

Instead of owning and operating their own towers, mobile-phone operators also opt to lease infrastructure from third parties to reduce costs and roll out services faster as competition intensifies in the world's fastest-growing telecom market by subscribers. 

GTL Infrastructure Ltd and Viom Networks Ltd have made unsolicited bids for Vodafone Essar Ltd.'s 7,000 telecom towers, with one of the bids amounting to about $700 million, a person familiar with the situation told Dow Jones Newswires last month. Vodafone Group PLC owns about 67% of Vodafone Essar Ltd, which was formed in 2007, while Essar Group company Essar Telecommunications HoldingsPvt. Ltd has 11% and Essar Communications Holdings Ltd 22%. 

On the Indian IPO front, Viom Networks plans to raise $1.5 billion from an IPO in India in the third quarter, a person familiar with the situation said earlier. 

But Indian firms may also struggle to raise funds due to the weak domestic market and concerns ranging from corruption scandals and political instability at home, to higher global crude and commodity prices that threaten to hurt companies' profitability. 

Last week, Indian mobile handset maker Micromax Informatics Ltd. cut the size of its planned IPO by about 30% reflecting the turbulent Indian stock market this year. The company now plans to raise up to $104 million by offering 21.5 million shares at an indicative price range of between 187 rupees and 217 rupees ($4.15 and $4.82), according to a term sheet. The initial plan last August was to raise as much as $150 million, according to people familiar with the matter. 

These deals come on top of continued acquisitions by companies seeking to move up the technology ladder. 

"Tech M&A will primarily be driven by two themes--players will look to acquire scale and push into new markets, such as in the hardware sector and companies looking to turn potentially disruptive technology trends such as cloud computing and tablet computing to their advantage by making acquisitions that add products and extend capabilities," Mr. Eapen said. 

"We see technology and market drivers as having a greater impact on tech M&A than profitability, capex or leverage," he said. 



