New Delhi -- When American private equity fund Texas Pacific Group gained control of ailing Vishal Retail Ltd earlier this month, it marked the culmination of a process involved the Reserve Bank of India, the nation's biggest banks and financial institutions, and dealt with a mountain of debt and a pile of unsold goods.

"This is the first significant distressed-asset buyout in the Indian market," said  Puneet Bhatia, managing director and country head of TPG Capital India Pvt. Ltd. India's central bank intervened to ensure that banks with loans to Vishal were protected through a corporate debt restructuring exercise.

TPG and Shriram Group took over the debt-ridden business through a joint venture subsidiary, TPG Wholesale Pvt. Ltd, after paying 700 million rupees through a slump sale approved by the Delhi High Court on March 14.

Vishal's retail trading unit has been sold to Airplaza Retail Holdings Pvt. Ltd, owned by the Shriram Group, while the wholesale trading, institutional sales and franchise operations has been taken over by TPG Wholesale, led by  Gunender Kapur, formerly president and chief executive of the food and grocery division of Reliance Retail Ltd. 

"The business is seriously financially distressed," said Mr. Kapur, who heads the end-to-end operational turnaround at Vishal. "The first 90 days' objective will be to identify and fill those gaps. The extreme shortage of working capital, and the availability of merchandise meant the business has been losing customers."

India allows foreign investment in single-brand retail businesses of up to 51%. Overseas investors are not allowed in other areas of the retail sector but can hold up to 100% in wholesale cash-and-carry businesses. In the wake of the economic slump of 2008-09, it would have been common sense to assume that acquisitions would be a fairly simple affair, even allowing for India's labyrinthine systems. 

But it didn't quite work out that way. 

 Looming Debt 

Amit Gupta and Anil Khatri, co-founders of Coralbay Advisory, represented Vishal founder R.C. Agarwal in the deal. Mr. Agarwal was an entrepreneur who had built up the business from scratch by catering to clientele in lower and middle-income areas but had overextended himself just as the market went into a slump. 

Coralbay approached the businessman burdened with debt and out-of-date inventory, besides liabilities and operational costs racked up over the course of seven years. Messrs. Gupta and Khatri recalled that Vishal had initially considered a minor equity infusion as being enough to bail it out.

"We went to him in June (2009)," Mr. Khatri said. "He had used 10 advisors before us who were trying to raise 500 million for him. We said, look, that will be a drop in the ocean. Your problem is the 5-6 billion rupees of short-term debt which needs to be rolled over." 

Resolving that wasn't going to be easy, Coralbay realized, after discovering the state of Vishal's balance sheet. 

"It was very difficult for us to visualize how the debt could be rolled over, given that the economy was very weak, the stock markets were looking very weak," Mr. Khatri said. "t was more or less common knowledge that there was a problem on the balance sheet, i.e., there was a big pile of inventory."

Finding the money to pay off the short-term debt was a big issue, said ex-Ernst & Young's Badri Narayanan, who led the restructuring exercise for TPG.

Coralbay said the lenders had given Mr. Agarwal short-term loans as a bridge facility, while he tried to raise funds through a qualified investor placement to expand Vishal's rapidly shrinking equity base. However, that plan was shelved during the global credit crisis. 

"He (Agarwal) basically got stuck in a situation where he had borrowed heavily, to the extent of 7 to 8 billion rupees, and all that money, or a great deal of it, was used to purchase inventory which had now become aged and substantially lower in value than everyone had thought," Mr. Gupta said.

Meanwhile, there was an increasing consensus among RBI's debt restructuring cell's lead bankers that Vishal could go the Subhiksha way. The Chennai-based retail chain had shut down after it failed to find rescuers during a debt restructuring process.

The pressure on Mr. Agarwal, who was seeking to remain in charge of Vishal amid the rescue, was increasing.

"The lenders had lost confidence in him," said Amol Jain, principal of TPG's Asian business, who was involved closely in the restructuring process. "He had taken on a lot of debt – and the failings had become clear to the lenders who were refusing to restructure under him."

 The TPG Deal 

The CDR cell had started to approach prospective investors – among them TPG – in June 2009. 

TPG, which has $48 billion of capital under management globally, has several companies with a retail focus in its portfolio including Burger King in the U.S. and Myer Holdings, Australia's largest chain of department stores. Underlying TPG's decision to acquire Vishal was its view that retail would in the long run make money in India, given the macro drivers.

For close to three months, Messrs. Jain and Bhatia, who served the fund for eight years, painstakingly combed through the convoluted debt of the 165-store discount retail chain, assisted by consultants. 

TPG saw opportunity buried beneath the complexity once it had completed its due diligence. 

"There were virtues in the business," Mr. Bhatia said. "Any company that had held up this far without having any access to capital or liquidity speaks volumes for the platform. There were plenty of things that were right, but lots that was wrong. There are various systems and processes you need to upgrade as you go from 100 to 200 stores, the right resources and management team."

On the other hand, costs such as rentals were below the industry average, he said. 

"The supplier base was solid, but the downfall of this and many other retailers in India is that without getting the core model right they go too far," Mr. Bhatia said. "They start to play to the gallery in the public markets where market cap is based on the square footage you have under management versus the core profitability – that is where most people stumble." 

Mr. Bhatia, also a spokesman for the fund, said it takes sophistication, science and refinement to run a retail business successfully, especially as the playing field is highly competitive and margins are low.

In September 2009, TPG put forward a proposal, which concluded that a minority stake purchase wouldn't make financial sense.

"We were pretty skeptical about doing a deal with the promoter involved," Mr. Bhatia said. "The courtship went on for almost two-three months." 

Meanwhile, Vishal's Mr. Agarwal still believed the company was doing well, and with the injection of fresh equity and a partner he could turn the business around.

"It was at the third or the fourth meeting that we presented our proposal," said Mr. Jain. "What we had decided was a drastic haircut for the lenders, the promoters losing all equity. It was quite draconian and we made it clear that we were not prepared to work with the founders." 

By January 2010, the Texas-based private equity firm offered to invest 2.5 billion rupees in fresh capital, restructure 3.5 rupees of debt in various forms, and pay 70o million rupees to Vishal. It also agreed to give 18% equity to banks.

 When Others Entered the Fray  

Two months later, TPG, Mr. Agarwal and some of the lenders agreed on terms. 

"But Mr. Agarwal continued to look over his shoulder to see if something better was coming along," said Mr. Jain, even after TPG and the bankers signed a memorandum of agreement, led by Sunil Srivastava, general manager of the mid-corporate group at State Bank of India, which chaired the debt-restructuring committee.

Mr. Agarwal insists that this was his way of making sure investors were covered.

"During the entire [restructuring] process, our main aim was to ensure that the interest of all stakeholders was protected," Mr. Agarwal said in an e-mail response to questions. "We are happy that we were successful in achieving the same."

As TPG was closing in on the deal in July last year, Future Group, led by veteran retailer Kishore Biyani, submitted a rival bid for Vishal. Mr. Agarwal had earlier approached Mr. Biyani to join hands with him in reviving the business. 

"That is the reason the deal took so long -- the situation was so fluid," said Mr. Jain of TPG. "The process is bound to change if others enter the fray."

Also causing delays were the demands of unsecured lenders Life Insurance Corp of India and Deutsche Bank Group, which applied for court stays on Vishal's sale of assets to TPG. 

This came up just when TPG was conducting a postal ballot of Vishal's shareholders, seeking support for the sale – another condition for the deal to be closed.

Seeking the promoter's cooperation and that of the non-CDR lenders, simultaneously, may have speeded up the process, Mr. Jain said.

While it's unclear whether TPG sweetened the deal to match Biyani's offer, Messrs. Jain and Bhatia said they held their ground.

"We did not bend to any pressures," said Mr. Jain. "The proposal that we brought over the finishing line was more or less the same as what we offered before the competitive bid."

People close to the deal said the hostile bid by Mr. Biyani led to some drama. TPG indicated that it would walk away from the deal, if things continued to get dragged out, a gambit that subsequently paid off.

 Demand  for Troubled Assets  

For distressed-asset investors, the contest for Vishal has several pointers. On the one hand, the deal was a test for the industry. On the other, the delays, the impenetrability of Vishal's finances and the fierce battle for reviving a near-insolvent company–with only one interested buyer and an ill-fated hostile bid–attest to the complexity of distress investing in India. 

However, unlike other segments, where valuations of Indian companies have been driven up due to overcrowding by private equity funds, distress has fewer contenders. That may change.

"We will we see more transactions," said Mr. Gupta of Coralbay, which represented Vishal. 

"I think more and more private equity funds are realizing that there is too much cash chasing the few attractive growth stories, so if they want to do sizeable deals in India they will have to build a distress capability," he said. "After all, this is what private equity is supposed to be doing globally isn't it?"

That this doesn't happen so easily in India may be because of the lack of a bankruptcy code, such as the Chapter 11 mechanism in the U.S., where banks can assume control of a company quickly, according to experts. 

What typically happens in India is a soft restructuring with a minor equity infusion, and, as a result, "quite a few of these cases end up failing simply because one, the recapitalization is inadequate, two, nothing is done to fix a broken business model," Mr. Gupta said. 