NEW YORK—Gasoline this summer will cost less than previously expected after last week's selloff in oil futures, but Americans will still pay far more at the pump this year than last, according to the U.S. Department of Energy. 

A gallon of regular gasoline at the pump will average about $3.81 nationwide during this year's summer driving season, which runs from April 1 through the end of September and coincides with Americans taking vacations.

That is five cents less than the agency's previous outlook for summer prices, but well above last summer's average of $2.76 a gallon, the department's Energy Information Administration said in its latest forecast. 

The EIA also said there is a 41% chance that retail gasoline prices will average more than $4 a gallon during July.

While the U.S. average price is still approaching $4 a gallon, that psychologically significant threshold has already been breached in many parts of the country. Last week, a gallon of regular gasoline on average cost $3.97 a gallon in the U.S.

The EIA attributed its downward revision to the recent pullback in the price of crude oil, the raw material used in fuel production. Benchmark oil futures plunged more than 13% last week, spurred by disappointing readings on the U.S. economy and worries that consumers were balking at soaring energy costs. 

Oil has since clawed back some of those losses. The front-month contract recently traded 1.1% higher on the day, just shy of $104 a barrel, on the New York Mercantile Exchange.

That is above last week's low of $94.63, but well below the recent high of $114.83 hit May 2.

"Despite the moderate downward revision to the outlook for oil prices, the rise in crude oil prices from last year continues to imply higher petroleum product prices this year compared with last," the EIA said in its monthly short-term outlook.

West Texas Intermediate crude, which has come to symbolize U.S. crude prices although it is just one grade of oil that can be delivered against the Nymex contract, for immediate delivery will average $103 a barrel in 2011 and $107 a barrel in 2012, the EIA said. That is a reduction of $4 and $6 a barrel, respectively, from last month's estimate. 

WTI averaged $79 a barrel in 2010. 

Despite the revision, the balance between global supplies and demand will remain tight through 2012, driven by rising consumption in emerging economies and slowing production growth from countries outside the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, the EIA said. 

A gallon of regular gasoline is expected to average $3.66 for all of 2012, the agency said, up from $3.63 this year and $2.78 a gallon in 2010.

 Write to  Dan Strumpf at dan.strumpf@dowjones.com 

