The media frenzy over Facebook's private offering already has made Google's 2004 IPO look tame. 

This week,  Goldman Sachs Group
GS


0.23
%




 abruptly ended its offer of Facebook shares to U.S. clients, leaving others rushing to fill the void. Goldman reportedly concluded that all the media attention left the deal in danger of violating U.S. securities laws. 

Given that Facebook boasts more than 500 million users and is the subject of "The Social Network," a front-runner to win the Academy Award for best picture, the intense public interest surely can't have been a big surprise. 

The real question is whether Facebook is worth $50 billion—its implied value after a $500 million direct investment by Goldman and a Russian investment firm in late December. There are obvious uncertainties, starting with the paucity of financial results released by the company. Even with the Goldman offering materials in hand, it is hard to run a discounted cash-flow analysis, not that it would even make much sense for a company so young and unproven.

That raises another question—the same one I posed when  Google went public: Is Facebook that rare entity, the natural monopoly? This is a company that invents (or stumbles upon) a business model or technology impossible to replicate, meaning it can extract high profit margins for the foreseeable future. 

In Google's case I concluded it was, and invested accordingly. By having the largest community of users, whose patterns of behavior enable it to refine and improve its search algorithms constantly, Google consistently delivers superior search results. The Google business model is also relatively invulnerable to management changes: Its stock barely budged following Thursday's surprise announcement that co-founder  Larry Page will replace  Eric Schmidt and become Google's sole chief executive.

Can Facebook deliver a similar advantage? Or will it suffer the fate of Myspace, the once-dominant but now struggling social-networking site? To me, this is the critical question for potential investors, one that transcends Facebook's current financial data.

I'm not a Facebook user, so I turned to someone who fits the key demographic: Adam Gilbert, 22 years old, a 2010 college graduate now working as a media strategist in Chicago. He told me that Facebook pretty much constantly occupies a tab on his computer screen, and he actively uses the site about an hour a day. He currently has 1,234 "friends."

Mr. Gilbert says he still has a Myspace profile but hasn't used the site since 2007. By contrast, he says, Facebook is much more interactive and instantaneous, and a much better way to "promote yourself and build communities. Once you discover mutual interests, you can build spider webs" of like-minded friends.

My conclusion is that Facebook does indeed have at least some elements of the natural monopolies enjoyed by both Google and  eBay.
EBAY


0.63
%




 With the largest community of social networkers, Facebook has unrivaled data on how people use the site and can rapidly adapt to changing behaviors, much as Google adapts its search algorithms. And if your goal is to reach the largest possible community of like-minded people, then you want to be part of the network with the largest number of users. Facebook is obviously a marketer's dream, with tailored ad placements that could rival the effectiveness of Google's search-based ads.

Facebook isn't going to be for everybody. But its potential strikes me as vast, and at this point, largely impervious to competition—not that it can afford to take anything for granted. I'll go way out on a limb and say that I think Facebook is cheap at $50 billion. If it is a natural monopoly, and given that it already ranks as the most-visited site in the U.S., it will someday deserve a valuation closer to Google's, which this week stood at more than $200 billion. 

Had I been a qualified Goldman client, I would have been angling for shares and would be hopping mad that chance was taken away. But a public offering, with better disclosure and investor safeguards, may still prove to be the better deal—and one widely available to the rest of us. It depends on how Facebook deploys its new capital and whether other investors embrace my optimistic view between now and 2012, when Facebook has indicated it might go public. 

—James B. Stewart, a columnist for SmartMoney magazine and SmartMoney.com, writes weekly about his personal investing strategy. Unlike Dow Jones reporters, he may have positions in the stocks he writes about. For his past columns, see: www.smartmoney.com/commonsense.