WASHINGTON—Japan's nuclear disaster is putting new pressure on President Barack Obama's energy strategy, which has relied on calls to expand nuclear power to win support for a broader effort to promote alternatives to coal and oil.

On Tuesday, the White House resisted calls from Democratic congressional leaders for a special review of U.S. nuclear-plant safety in the wake of the Japanese nuclear crisis—a move similar to one ordered by German Chancellor Angela Merkel on Monday. 

Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D., Nev.) and House Minority Whip Steny Hoyer (D., Md.) on Tuesday called for reviews of U.S. nuclear-plant safety. Rep. Ed Markey (D., Mass.), a key Obama ally on environmental issues, demanded information on seismic safety features, including power plants' abilities to sustain cooling functions during a total power blackout, the situation that has crippled reactors in Japan.

The Senate Environment and Public Works Committee will hold a hearing Wednesday to discuss the Japanese nuclear crisis with Nuclear Regulatory Commission Chairman Gregory Jaczko.

White House officials held their ground on Mr. Obama's pro-nuclear energy strategy. Mr. Obama requested the NRC do a "lessons learned" study of the Japanese disaster and to incorporate the findings into the agency's safety reviews.

But, White House press secretary Jay Carney said, "He doesn't have to order a review because they're constantly going on."

Energy Secretary Steven Chu, testifying before a congressional panel Tuesday, said "the United States has rigorous safety regulations in place to ensure that our nuclear power is generated safely and responsibly" and played down fears that dangerous levels of radiation from Japan could reach U.S. shores. Such concerns have led to runs on stocks of potassium iodide pills, which are used to ward off radiation poisoning.

"There's really no concern in terms of the health effects on American shores," Mr. Chu said. "I think they really shouldn't be doing those things, quite frankly. But it's a free country."

The Japanese nuclear crisis is the latest setback for Mr. Obama's energy strategy, the only piece of his original five-part domestic agenda that hasn't become law. 

Mr. Obama has tried to stake out a middle ground on energy between environmentalists whose top priority is attacking climate change and conservatives who chanted "Drill, Baby, Drill" during the 2008 presidential campaign.

Mr. Obama embraced certain Republican priorities, such as using federally backed loans to revive the U.S. nuclear-power industry and expanding offshore oil drilling. 

In return, the president hoped to win bipartisan support for expanded renewable-energy programs and limits on the emission of heat-trapping greenhouse gases.

But so far, a combination of political setbacks and unforeseen disasters have derailed Mr. Obama's plans.

Mr. Obama shelved his plan to expand offshore drilling after the Deepwater Horizon oil spill last summer. Republican leaders have rejected climate-change legislation, and are pushing instead bills to prevent Mr. Obama from using regulatory agencies to enforce greenhouse-gas limits.

The administration's proposals to support nuclear power haven't spared it from Republican criticism that its energy policy tilts too heavily against coal and oil—the fuels that still power most of the U.S. economy. They cite the slow pace of issuing new oil-drilling permits in the Gulf of Mexico since last summer's oil spill. 

On Tuesday, the State Department said it will require an additional environmental review of a proposed 1,700-mile TransCanada Corp. pipeline that would bring up to 1.1 million barrels a day of crude oil from Canada's oil-sands region to Gulf Coast refineries. The requirement could delay the project, which has drawn fire from environmental groups critical of oil-sands development.

Now, the Japanese disaster is reinvigorating liberal objections to nuclear power.

Eben Burnham-Snyder, a Markey spokesman, said the disaster will only raise the cost of financing new nuclear plants and require more federal subsidies, something even Republicans will balk at.

"We don't need nuclear," he said.

White House spokesman Nicholas Shapiro distinguished between the Deepwater Horizon spill, which pointed up regulatory gaps and prompted a drilling moratorium, and nuclear power, which has its own independent regulatory agency tasked to constantly police the safety of plants in its jurisdiction.

He said incident response plans already exist to deal with radiation leaks from nuclear-power plants, accidents involving nuclear weapons or nuclear weapons production plants and laboratories, or attacks using nuclear devices or "dirty bombs" designed to disperse radiation. 

  Per Peterson, chairman of the nuclear-engineering department at the University of California, Berkeley, said the events that have caused the accident now challenging one of Japan's nuclear plants are unlikely to befall the U.S. for several reasons. 

While the U.S. does have some nuclear plants in earthquake zones—as in the case of California—they are near "slip-strike" fault lines that lack the potential to cause very large tsunamis as the Japanese "thrust fault" has, he said. 

After the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, Dr. Peterson said, the government required nuclear-plant owners to ensure that their facilities could accommodate portable diesel pumps to provide electricity to the facilities.

—Corey Boles contributed to this article.

 Write to  Stephen Power at stephen.power@wsj.com 