MEXICO CITY – U.S. Ambassador to Mexico  Carlos Pascual resigned Saturday, another diplomatic casualty of the Wikileaks cables scandal, and a sign of growing strains between Washington and Mexico over the country's fight against powerful drug gangs.

Mr. Pascual, a career diplomat for 23 years, had been under fire by Mexican President Felipe Calderon after publication of several Wikileaks cables in which the U.S. envoy questioned Mexico's institutional capability to tackle organized crime.

Mr. Calderon, a conservative with a strong nationalist streak, was particularly angry with one cable, signed by Mr. Pascual, which described Mexican army as risk averse and inefficient.

U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, in a statement, said she had accepted Mr. Pascual's resignation with "great reluctance," and called him the "architect and advocate" of U.S.-Mexico relations in Washington.

"Carlos has relayed his decision to return to Washington based upon his personal desire to ensure the strong relationship between our two countries and to avert issues raised by President Calderon that could distract from the important business of advancing our bilateral interests," Ms. Clinton said in the statement.

Mr. Pascual's resignation is the first of a U.S. diplomat at a foreign posting following the publication of Wikileaks cables. The U.S. ambassador to Libya was recalled for consultations after the publications of some cables, and U.S. State Department spokesman  Philip Crowley resigned recently after he criticized the prison conditions of U.S. Army Private  Bradley Manning, suspected of having given classified documents to the Wikileaks site. 

The envoy's resignation comes amid friction between Mexico and the U.S. even as the two countries have increased joint efforts to fight drug gangs that have taken control of large areas of Mexico. Since 2006, when Mr. Calderon sent thousands of soldiers and federal police to fight well-armed drug traffickers, more than 34,600 Mexicans have died in drug-related violence. 

Many Mexicans blame U.S. drug consumption and the flow of arms to Mexico for much of the country's violence. Mexican officials are quick to take offense when their U.S. counterparts criticize Mexico's drug efforts, or blame widespread corruption and inefficiency in Mexico's law enforcement and justice institutions for the country's problems. 

Just in recent weeks, a U.S. law enforcement agent was killed and another wounded in an attack by drug cartel gunmen. Mexican legislators have strongly criticized the use of U.S. drone aircraft, authorized by the Mexican government, to spy on drug traffickers as an infringement on Mexico's sovereignty. They have also demanded an investigation of a program by the Bureau of Alcohol Tobacco and Firearms that allegedly allowed weapons into Mexico from the U.S. in an attempt to roll up arms trafficking networks. 

"Despite all the cooperation between the two governments, there is an underlying strain and a lot of frustration that violence is on the increase, and not on the decrease," said  Michael Shifter, the head of the Washington-based think tank the Inter-American Dialogue.

Polls show that Mr. Calderon's security program, the centerpiece of his government's policy, is failing to yield fruit with Mexican voters as the country prepares for 2012 presidential elections. As Mexicans become increasingly worried about the growing violence, they appear to increasingly favor the opposition Institutional Revolutionary Party, which ruled Mexico for most of the last century, and now appears set to win back power from Mr. Calderon's center right party. 

Mr. Calderon's onslaught against the U.S. diplomat was as unrelenting as it was public. First, in an interview with El Universal newspaper in Mexico City last month, Mr. Calderon said Mr. Pascual demonstrated his "ignorance" of the country in the cables, and was guilty of misrepresenting Mexico's situation. Then in another interview with the  Washington Post during a quick visit to Washington earlier this month, Mr. Calderon said he would take up the ambassador's future in a meeting with President  Barack Obama later that day.

Asked by the Washington Post whether he had lost confidence in the ambassador, Mr. Calderon said confidence was "difficult to build and easy to lose."

Both the White House and the State Department strongly and publicly backed Mr. Pascual after Mr. Calderon's criticisms. 

A State department source said Mr. Pascual offered to resign after Mr. Calderon's comments to the Washington Post, but his offer was rejected by Ms. Clinton. But when Mr. Calderon's hostile attitude towards the ambassador continued, Mr. Pascual insisted on the resignation. "He did the selfless and honorable thing," the U.S. official said. "Mexico is losing a very good and committed friend."

It was unclear who, if anyone, would be nominated to replace Mr. Pascual, who will remain with the administration, the State Department statement said.

Analysts lamented Mr. Pascual's decision to resign, and said they feared the absence of an ambassador in the Mexican capital could hurt the relationship. 

"It freezes the relationship somewhat," said  Eric Olson, a Mexico expert at the Mexico Institute in Washington's Woodrow Wilson Center. "Cooperation will continue, efforts to fight organized crime will continue, but the lack of a top diplomat in such a vital role is a real setback." 

As ambassador, Mr. Pascual had worked hard to broaden the Mexico-U.S. relationship, ranging far from the embassy and spending a lot of time in crisis areas like the border city of  Ciudad Juarez, the most violent place in Mexico. "It's disappointing that Calderon hasn't been more of a statesman and has dragged the relationship in the mud because of personal reasons," Mr. Olson said.

Among other positions, Mr. Pascual served as ambassador to Ukraine. Most recently he was vice president for the foreign policy program at the Brookings Institution before being called back to the foreign service by Ms. Clinton. 

 Write to  Jose de Cordoba at jose.decordoba@wsj.com 