A New Jersey judge issued a report Tuesday saying Gov. Chris Christie's school-funding cuts last year were so deep, they prevented schoolchildren from receiving an education up to the standards required by the state constitution.

The report, written by Superior Court Judge Peter Doyne, was ordered by the state Supreme Court as part of a challenge to Mr. Christie's budget. The court asked the judge to determine whether the state could still provide the constitutionally required "thorough and efficient" education when funding was $1.6 billion less than required by law.

The court's eventual ruling could have major implications for the governor's proposed $29.4 billion budget. It would be the latest judicial intervention in the way New Jersey pays for public schools. The state spends about a third of its budget on local school districts.

"It is clear the state has failed to carry its burden," Judge Doyne said in the report. He wrote that disadvantaged students have been hurt the most despite an administration effort to shield them from the cuts.

Mr. Christie rejects that notion. 

"The Supreme Court should at last abandon the failed assumption of the last three decades that more money equals better education, and stop treating our state's fiscal condition as an inconvenient afterthought," the governor's spokesman Michael Drewniak said about the report. "The court's legal mandates on the legislative and executive branches of government have incontrovertibly contributed to our current fiscal crisis."

The challenge was filed last year by the Education Law Center, an advocacy group. Both sides have until April 14 to respond to the report. 

"A special master's report like this carries great weight with the higher court," said David Sciarra, the executive director of the Education Law Center. "Its conclusions are sobering about the impact of the funding cuts on students across the state, particularly poor students, regardless of where they live."

For more than three decades, the court has been involved in spending decisions, through a series of lawsuits including the long-running case Abbott v. Burke that ended with the court requiring equal funding for poor and rich districts. One of Mr. Christie's top goals is to remake the court by appointing his own justices. 

Judge Doyne was appointed in 1993 by then-Gov. Jim Florio, a Democrat, and reappointed in 2000 by then-Gov. Christie Whitman, a Republican. In 2009, he was named an assignment judge in Bergen County by current Supreme Court Chief Justice Stuart Rabner, who was appointed by former Gov. Jon Corzine.

In 2009, the court approved a complex school-spending formula devised by Mr. Corzine that, among other things, gives districts more money for students who are poor, need special education or don't know English.

The new spending formula received the court's blessing for a three-year test run to evaluate its impact. But the formula was only fully funded in its first year, as the state coped with the economic crisis. 

Even with the help of federal stimulus money, Mr. Corzine underfunded the formula by a few hundred million dollars in the second year.

The major blow came last year, when Mr. Christie cut $1 billion from the previous year's spending. Thanks to growing costs, the cut left the formula underfunded by $1.6 billion.

The Education Law Center said the state shirked the court's order, while lawyers from the state attorney general's office said the Christie administration had no choice in a dire budget year but to trim from the largest piece of the pie.

The Christie administration said it tried to make the cuts as fair as possible. It cut up to 5% of each district's overall budget, which meant dozens of districts that don't rely as heavily on state subsidies saw aid completely wiped out.

But Judge Doyne wrote that last year's budget disproportionately harmed poorer districts.

Robert Copeland, superintendent of the Piscataway school district and one of the districts in the challenge, said his district lost critical services for students who needed them the most, such as guidance counselors for troubled students. 

The 7,200-student district cut 50 positions, reduced Saturday and summer programs and increased class sizes.

"They certainly were far and above beyond niceties," he said. "The case that we were trying to make was that thorough and efficient isn't like a light switch. It doesn't go on and off. It's really like a dimmer switch. You take funding away it gets a little bit darker."