 STATS: A 3,335-square-foot, four-bedroom, three-bath home with a one-bedroom guest cottage asking $1.99 million, or $598 per square foot. The price was recently lowered from $2.3 million. Property taxes in 2010 were $20,328. Annual dues to the homeowners association, which maintains the neighboring six acres of lawns, are $1,500. 

 DETAILS: This Cotswold-style house sits on land that served as a private hunting ground in the late 1800s for Oliver Hazard Perry Belmont (of Belmont Park racetrack) and his friend Cornelius Vanderbilt. It's also where Mr. Belmont kept his exotic animals—there's a photo of an elephant and gamekeeper standing at the site of the house. In the 1920s, New Yorkers Michael van Beuren and wife Mary Archbold van Beuren, daughter of the president of Standard Oil, built an estate. The large main house, owned by actor Nicolas Cage, has been on the market for $7.8 million; the kennel cottage (Mrs. van Beuren was president of the Pekingese Club of America) is asking $6 million. 

65 Gray Craig Road, Middletown, R.I.

 THE SELLER: Maryalice Huggins, an antiques restorer and the author of Aesop's Mirror, a love story about a Rococo mirror and Ms. Huggins's fascination with old things. The mirror hangs in the studio and isn't for sale.

 THE NEIGHBORHOOD: The house is surrounded almost entirely by open land, but for those who want to be part of the Newport scene it's five minutes to the Castle Hill Inn. 

 WHAT I PAID: Ms. Huggins paid $1.95 million in 2005 and spent an estimated $400,000 redoing the plumbing and electrical, adding air-conditioning, updating the bathrooms and putting in a new kitchen. 

 WHY I'M SELLING: "I want to go onto another project," says Ms. Huggins, who says she's actively searching local listings. 

 WHAT I'LL MISS: "The privacy and being in a place where you can take a walk and never see a house and look out at a great expanse of ocean and shoreline," says Ms. Huggins. "It's like living in a park."

 WHAT I WON'T: "Old houses need babying," says Ms. Huggins. "You can't just leave it for a year." By "it" she means clipping the hedges, cutting the ivy, weeding the garden, putting on and taking off the storm windows and the original wood-framed window screens. When a screen needs replacing, she gets out her hammer and scissors and fixes it herself.

 OTHERS SAY: "They just reduced the price, so I think it's well priced now," says  Paul Tobak of Prudential Real Estate. "They crossed the threshold getting it under $2 million." He adds though the house has charm and elegance, he might add a garage.

 I BET: Melanie Delman, president of Lila Delman Real Estate, has the listing and expects the house to go for close to the asking price this spring.

 —Post your guess as to what the house will sell for—and when—in the comments section. Listings will be followed for six months. 

 Write to Sarah Tilton at Sarah.Tilton@wsj.com

