WASHINGTON-Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid remained defiantly supportive of spending known as earmarks Wednesday despite a veto threat from President Barack Obama, but another top Democrat suggested the party had little choice but to go along with the president's insistence that earmarks be dropped.

In his State of the Union address Tuesday night, Mr. Obama said he would veto any legislation that contained earmarks, the special spending, usually for home-state projects, that lawmakers insert into appropriations bills.

Mr. Reid, who is proud of using his clout to help his home state of Nevada, responded by speaking out forcefully in favor of earmarks Tuesday and again Wednesday, creating an unusual rift between the nation's two most powerful Democrats.

Mr. Reid said Wednesday on NBC that Mr. Obama is "absolutely wrong" and that "he should back off and let us do what we do." On ABC, Mr. Reid said that calling for an earmark ban is "great for an applause line" and "only for show" in terms of cutting the deficit.

Sen. Richard Durbin (D., Ill.), the No. 2 Senate Democrat and Mr. Reid's top deputy, suggested that Mr. Obama would get his way on earmarks. He noted that the House, under Speaker John Boehner (R., Ohio), has adopted its own earmark ban.

"At this point, Boehner isn't going to send us any bills with earmarks, and we are out of the business, as well," Mr. Durbin told reporters. "So, at this point, I don't think the president is going to have to use the veto pen."

Critics in both parties have long complained about earmarks, saying they distribute taxpayer money according to lawmakers' clout, rather than where it's needed.

The issue was seized on by tea party and other activists in the last campaign as a symbol of back-room politics. House and Senate Republicans have adopted an earmark ban, even though several prominent GOP figures, including Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R., Ky.), have defended earmarks in the past.

Mr. Obama has previously opposed earmarks, but he's also signed bills containing them.

Some Republicans greeted his veto threat with skepticism. "The president noted his support for a ban on earmarks, notwithstanding his signature on legislation containing earmarks," said Rep. Tom Price (R., Ga.). 

Earmark supporters like Mr. Reid say the Constitution gives Congress the right to control spending, and that banning the practice improperly cedes power to the president and the administration.

 Write to  Naftali Bendavid at naftali.bendavid@wsj.com 