INDIANAPOLIS—When HBO featured the Jets last summer on its NFL documentary "Hard Knocks," the program aired at an ideal time to attract a small but specific audience, one that had a personal and professional stake in watching it.

College football teams were holding "two-a-days"—their preseason training camps—as the cable network revealed the ins and outs of Rex Ryan's practices and coaching habits. The series hooked University of Pittsburgh linemen Jason Pinkston and Greg Romeus, who made sure not to miss any of the season's five hour-long episodes.

"I love Coach Ryan and the way he gets his players going," Pinkston said here last week at the NFL's scouting combine. "I'd love to play for a coach like that."

Already drawn to "Hard Knocks" because of its subject matter, many participants in this year's combine said they couldn't get enough of the show's portrayal of Ryan. In fact, an informal survey of more than three-dozen of the event's 330 invitees suggested that, among the league's pool of prospective rookies, Ryan and the Jets possess a resonance and popularity that might eclipse any other NFL team's.

For a franchise that has neither won nor appeared in a Super Bowl in 42 years, that with its consecutive appearances in the AFC Championship Game has only now shed its reputation as a wasteland for promising young talent, this development is unprecedented. The members of pro football's next generation, it seems, want to play in New York, and they want to play for Rex Ryan.

"He's super cool," South Carolina defensive end Ladi Ajiboye said.

HBO has profiled five NFL teams on "Hard Knocks," broadcasting the program annually since 2007, and of the 39 players interviewed for this story, 32 of them (82%) said that they had watched some or all of the season that focused on the Jets. (North Carolina running back Shaun Draughn didn't watch the show but said he would have if he could have: "I didn't have cable this year.")

Although any player who put himself through the rigors of the combine—the 40-yard dash, the weight-lifting, the eyeballing from coaches and player-personnel people—likely would be content with being drafted by any of the NFL's 32 franchises, it was obvious that Ryan's exposure to the invitees through "Hard Knocks" had made an impact. Universally, those who had seen the show cited Ryan's humor and unabashed confidence as his most appealing attributes.

In one scene, for instance, Ryan dressed down the entire team after some of his players had been eating cheeseburgers during practice, saying that he believed the Jets were "better than every [bleeping] team in the league" and capping the speech with a command: "Let's go eat a [bleep] snack."

"Most coaches have that dull sense of humor where they tell one joke and laugh at it themselves," Georgia Tech running back Anthony Allen said, "but he was a funny guy. It really opened my eyes."

For any college player with a realistic chance of making it in the NFL, of course, there is inherent value in watching "Hard Knocks" or the portions of the combine that the NFL Network broadcasts—in seeing even a sliver of what life in the league is like. In that context, it was easy to understand why certain scenes from "Hard Knocks" would be memorable and instructive for a pro prospect.

When quarterback Mark Sanchez found his SUV filled with packing peanuts or punter Steve Weatherford purchased 100 Shake Weights for the team, players saw the sorts of pranks and moments of levity that are common among NFL teammates. When the Jets pared their roster down to the minimum 53 players, "it was a reality check" as those who didn't make the team were asked to turn in their playbooks, according to East Carolina running back Dwayne Harris.

Often, players said, they would gather in their dorms or apartments with a few teammates or roommates—"Not your girlfriend," Nevada running back Vai Taua said, "'cause your girlfriend don't want to watch"—and eat a late-night dinner of pizza or takeout food while the program was on. The content of each episode frequently became a discussion topic the following day in their locker rooms.

"It's a show they'd be looking forward to watching," Wisconsin tight end Lance Kendricks said, "like a 'Jersey Shore.'"

If "Hard Knocks" gave college players an inside look (though a limited one) at their future profession, its depiction of the Jets' day-to-day operations provided them with an image of Ryan that, in their minds, defied the stereotype of NFL coach-as-dictator. "I kind of looked at it as the NFL is all business-like, but he definitely gets his team to have fun out there," Maryland wide receiver Torrey Smith said. "But I know all teams aren't the same."

Ryan was his typically boisterous self here as he addressed the media Thursday, offering a brand of outspokenness that comes naturally to him and that he knows how to wield to his advantage.

He opened with a seven-minute monologue in which he guaranteed—for the third straight year—that the Jets would win the Super Bowl, a moment of rote audaciousness that seemed designed to pique people's interest. In at least one case, it did.

"I like that," said Joe Morgan, a wide receiver from Walsh University. "You don't want to go out there like, 'Oh, we hope to win the Super Bowl.' The ultimate goal in football is to win the championship, and you've got to come out with that kind of confidence."

South Carolina offensive lineman Garrett Chisolm said he liked that Ryan was an "energetic, in-your-face coach," a style of leadership to which, one would think, Chisolm would be accustomed. In college, he played for the visor-donning, rival-tweaking, dadgummit-muttering Steve Spurrier.

Are there any similarities between the two?

"Not really," Chisolm said, "My coach is no Rex Ryan."

 Write to  Mike Sielski at mike.sielski@wsj.com 