FLORHAM PARK, N.J.—This was the day when a locker seems the loneliest sliver of square footage in the NFL.

Four white plastic hangers dangled from a bar inside Trevor Pryce's on Monday afternoon as the Jets' defensive end sat with his feet propped up on duffel bags. Nick Folk carried a stack of orange shoeboxes to accommodate his various kicking cleats; he was the only player in the room at the time.

 Less than 24 hours after the 24-19 loss Sunday in Pittsburgh that for the second consecutive year left them one victory short of the Super Bowl, the Jets packed away their personal items, left a bittersweet year behind them, and began an uncertain offseason.

With the NFL's owners and players heading toward an impasse and potential lockout in March over a new collective bargaining agreement, with a roster loaded with free agents who may or may not return, the Jets will face an interesting and unpredictable next few months.

 They seemed to approach this season as if they were desperate poker players, going all in by acquiring players who had at least one of two qualities: a flickering career light or an expiring contract.

Now, the Jets will have some hard choices. Among the players who don't have contracts for next season (assuming there is a next season) are the team's top two wide receivers (Braylon Edwards and Santonio Holmes), its leading tackler (linebacker David Harris) and its placekicker (Nick Folk). Coach Rex Ryan said Monday that he would love to bring back all 53 players on the team's roster. "Is that realistic?" he then added. "No."



It may prove especially difficult where Messrs. Edwards and Holmes are concerned. The two were essential to the development of second-year quarterback Mark Sanchez, providing him a pair of skill-position threats that he did not have during his rookie year, combining for 105 receptions, 1,650 yards and 13 touchdown catches this season. (Mr. Holmes had 52 receptions, the third-most on the team, despite a four-game suspension for violating the league's substance-abuse policy.) But each regards himself as a No. 1 receiver, and if there is a free-agency period, each likely will want to paid accordingly—which, in turn, could price the Jets out of bidding for both of them.

Mr. Ryan and general manager Mike Tannenbaum also will have to decide whether to wring another year out of some, all or none of a group of aging veterans, including running back LaDainian Tomlinson, defensive end/linebacker Jason Taylor, fullback Tony Richardson, and Mr Pryce. Over Mr. Ryan's first two years with the franchise, he and Mr. Tannenbaum have adopted an obvious formula to try to keep the Jets competitive despite so much roster turnover: acquire older players who are affordable and motivated and can complement the team's younger core—Mr. Sanchez, cornerback Darrelle Revis, offensive linemen D'Brickashaw Ferguson and Nick Mangold, running back Shonn Greene.

"It's the way this team is built," said Mr. Pryce, one of the team's defensive ends, who sounded as if he was leaning toward retiring after having played 14 NFL seasons. "They're just football players. The football players are fit to what Rex wants his team to look like. As long as you keep fitting those pieces in, the team will be fine."

On Tuesday, Mr. Ryan will convene his coaching staff to evaluate the performance of each player on the roster, and he maintained that the Jets' back-to-back appearances in the AFC Championship Game testify to how close his team is to reaching and winning a Super Bowl. "That's not a fluke," he said. "That means we're a heck of a football team."

Fair enough, but the Jets could have made things easier on themselves the last two years. All six of their playoff games under Mr. Ryan have been on the road, and had they finished with better regular-season records in 2009 and 2010, they might have earned themselves at least one postseason home game, let alone a first-round bye.

Yes, the Jets have beaten their AFC East rivals, the New England Patriots, three times in five games under Mr. Ryan, including in the playoffs' divisional round last week. At some point, though, it would seem they have to win a division title to give themselves a less-arduous journey through the playoffs.

"This isn't just about beating New England because, quite honestly, we've done a pretty good job of it," Mr. Ryan said. "It seems like nobody else in the league can beat them. So we've got to find ways…to beat these other teams that we lost to."

If they don't, their seasons will keep culminating in the same silent, lonely scene that plays out in 31 of 32 NFL locker rooms every year.

 There was injured safety Jim Leonhard, talking about continuing to rehabilitate his broken leg. There was linebacker Calvin Pace, slipping out the door. There was punter Steve Weatherford, wearing a black Megadeth T-shirt, stepping over a circle of brown boxes. 

"Later today," Mr. Pryce said, "this place will be a ghost town." It already was.

 Write to  Mike Sielski at mike.sielski@wsj.com 