LONDON—Former British Prime Minister Tony Blair told an inquiry into the Iraq war that he disregarded concerns from the government's top legal advisors about the legality of the 2003 U.S. led invasion, addressing a still-raging controversy in the U.K.

In a statement released before answering questions, Mr. Blair said that Peter Goldsmith, the country's former attorney general, had warned him that attacking Iraq may be illegal without further backing from the United Nations. 

But the former Labour prime minister said that he believed the advice was "provisional" and once Lord Goldsmith was fully "abreast" of the situation he would change his mind. 

In the U.K., there has for many years been a debate about whether Mr. Blair ignored legal advice that said the Iraq war was illegal under international and domestic law. 

The five-member panel conducting the probe—known as the Iraq Inquiry—is looking at the eight years from the build-up to the war through the U.K.'s withdrawal in 2009. 

The Iraq conflict, which left 179 British military personnel dead, was widely unpopular and caused massive public protests.



Appearing for a second time before the panel examining the U.K.'s involvement in Iraq, Mr. Blair confronted criticism of his decision-making that has grown louder since he left office in 2007 and hurt the legacy of one of modern Britain's most powerful figures.

After being criticized in his earlier appearance for not appearing contrite enough for the loss of life, Mr. Blair said on Friday that "I regret deeply and profoundly the loss of life." A member of the audience shouted out that it was "too late." 

Mr. Blair addressed another controversial alleged incident, saying that he had not given President George W. Bush some sort of "blank cheque" on support in a meeting with Mr. Bush in Crawford, Texas, in April 2002. 

"What I was signaling was that there would be no withdrawal of support for something we thought right and do-able, simply for reasons of political pressure," he said.