With a $25,000 grant to the nonprofit Wellness in the Schools, the Palette Fund is helping to support healthy eating programs in New York City schools.

The Palette Fund honors the late Rand Harlan Skolnick who served as the president and CEO of his family's business, Solgar Vitamin and Herb Co. This is the second year the fund has awarded grants to support nutrition, wellness, and programs for cancer patients and for gay youth. This year's grants total more than $800,000 and were awarded to 19 organizations, including God's Love We Deliver, the New York Zen Center for Contemplative Care and Pancreatic Cancer Action Network.

The grant to Wellness in the Schools will place a part-time chef alongside the kitchen staff in a high-poverty public school for one year. The chef will help the staff initiate a cook-from-scratch menu. 

"We go in there with these cooks and we work alongside them and hopefully through osmosis they will, after a few months, be able to do the menu on their own," says Bill Telepan, executive chef for the organization. 

Additionally, the Wellness in the Schools chef will teach four cooking classes focused on healthy eating and recipes—everything from oatmeal and other grains to the types of potatoes and how to prepare them. Wellness in the Schools was founded in 2005 and serves nearly 15,000 children in 19 schools. 

Ruth Fehr leads the nutrition and wellness programs for the Palette Fund and had previously volunteered with Wellness in the Schools as a chef. She introduced the organization to Mr. Skolnick. 

"He loved the program," says Terrence Meck, 33 years old, who was Mr. Skolnick's partner and now serves as president and executive director of the Palette Fund.

While the foundation supports other programs that educate children about nutrition, Mr. Meck says Wellness in the Schools not only changes a school menu but the minds of everyone involved.

"Rand so believed in the power of education," says Mr. Meck. "For Wellness in the Schools, this is educating also the teachers in the school, the principal, the school aides and the people serving the food. It's really getting them on board with nutrition as well."

Mr. Meck likes to work with organizations that use new models to approach a problem. "There isn't 10 years of research showing that this model does work," said Mr. Meck of Wellness in the Schools, "but clearly with the rate of obesity, rate of diabetes, looking at the future of our youth…we need to start taking risks to start combating this problem."