PARIS—French economic growth surged beyond expectations in the first quarter of 2011, reaching a rate not seen for almost five years, official statistics agency Insee said Friday. 

Gross domestic product in the euro zone's second-largest economy rose 1% in the first three months of the year, after a 0.3% expansion in the fourth quarter of 2010, Insee said. 

Economists were expecting a 0.6% expansion. The first quarter growth figure also out-stripped the 0.7% forecast of the Bank of France and Insee's own forecast of 0.6%. 

Data from Germany Friday also surpassed expectations, showing a 1.5% rise in GDP over the same period while economists were expecting 0.9%. 

Still, the French GDP growth figure for the fourth quarter of 2010 was reduced to 0.3% from a 0.4% estimate previously, and the measure of GDP growth for the full year was reduced to 1.4% from 1.5%. 

French investment accelerated significantly to a 1.1% rise in the first quarter from a 0.5% rise in the final three months of 2010. Insee also noted a 3.4% jump in manufacturing production in the first quarter, the strongest rise for at least 30 years. 

Consumer spending—the key driver of the French economy—rose less markedly, up 0.6% in quarterly terms after a 0.4% rise in the last three months of 2010. 

Trade was a drag on growth in the first quarter of 2011 as imports rose 2.7% on the quarter and exports rose only 1.4%. Stock adjustments accounted for 0.7 point of the 1% growth recorded after dragging on growth at the end of 2010. 

Government officials had already revealed the strength of first-quarter growth Thursday night, before the embargo of 1:30 a.m. ET Friday. Prime Minister François Fillon said on French television that growth was above 0.8%, and finance minister Christine Lagarde later gave the 1% figure in an interview with Agence France Presse. 

The French government forecasts GDP growth of 2% in 2010, which is central to its target of reducing the deficit to 5.7% of GDP this year. 

"The 2011 growth rate is now likely to exceed our estimate and the government's target of a 2% growth. That may help the budget deficit to be a touch lower than the downwardly revised official target of 5.7%," BNP Paribas economist  Dominique Barbet said. 

Still, other economists were more cautious. "This is obviously an excellent figure... But we must make it clear: today's publication struggles to mask the vulnerabilities of the French economy and a slowing is expected in the second quarter," said  Alexander Law, chief economist at financial consultancy Xerfi. 

"From the second quarter, activity will be disrupted by the combined effects of the high level of the euro and raw-material prices, and the tireless rise of inflation, which is advancing faster than salaries."

French bank Natixis said today's figures should lead it to raise its current forecast of GDP growth from 1.5% this year, but stressed the first quarter could be a one-off. 

"We think that the rebound is now behind us and that French GDP growth should significantly slow down in the quarters to come, with the rise in inflation and the slowdown in global trade," Natixis economists  Camille de Williencourt and  Jean-Christophe Caffet said in a research note. 

"Looking ahead, this rebound is likely to disappear in the second quarter," said Barclays Capital's  Marion Laboure and  François Cabau. "Hence, we do not expect this growth pace to be sustainable. Indeed, the French recovery is likely to be affected by inflationary pressures, a relatively strong euro and the normalization of policy rates." 

With presidential and legislative elections on the cards for May 2012, focus will now turn to growth expectations in 2012 as a basis for a budget. 

For 2012, France has committed to bringing down the deficit to 4.6% of GDP with a growth forecast of 2.25%. Many economists don't expect France's economy to reach that rate of growth next year and the finance commission at the senate has warned the government against making optimistic forecasts. 

"The strong growth in 2011 will clearly help the preparation for the 2012 budget, but it is still a particularly complicated one," Mr. Barbet said. 

France's growth in the first quarter contrasted with that of neighboring Italy, where the economy expanded by just 0.1% in the first three months of the year from the previous quarter, for an annual growth rate of 1%, according to Italian statistics institute Istat.

The Italian growth figures missed economists' forecasts of 0.3% growth quarter-to-quarter and an annual rate of 1.3%.

In Germany, meanwhile, the economy grew 1.5% in the first quarter.