LONDON—Since 1984 the French-Canadian "Cirque du Soleil" has dazzled audiences all over the world with its classy take on traditional circus skills, minus the animal acts. Its current show, "Totem," written and directed by the avant-garde Canadian Robert Lepage is almost beyond praise, and certainly defies description. 

It would need thousands of words to begin to detail the act involving five Chinese girls riding stilt-high unicycles, who do amazing things involving light metal bowls of various sizes carried on their heads. While they pedal with one foot, the other one kicks the bowls, sometimes backwards, into the air. The website (which I'd consult before seeing the show) explains: "The abundance of fall is represented by the harvest colours and details of the costumes as five unicyclists juggle metal bowls in an astounding display of agility, balance, synchronized control and physical grace, tossing the bowls with their feet—sometimes over their shoulders—and catching them on their heads without using their hands."

And this tells you nothing about Kym Barrett's costumes or Nathalie J. Simard's astonishingly elaborate makeup. Says the small print of the website: "Each unicyclist has her own look, but together they form an integrated unit. The base costumes are printed in earth tones, with small details sewn onto them—including bolts and screws as well as feathers and insects. The line of the costumes and the stylized tutus create flirty ballerina silhouettes." 

This leaves out of account the eight live musicians, whose sound is amplified so as to move directionally around the circular auditorium; Carl Fillion's Buckminster Fuller-inspired "skeletal substructure of a huge turtle," a latticed dome that supports all sorts of gymnastic maneuvres; the projections onto the plastron (underside) of the "turtle," which culminate in projections of swimmers, who then appear to emerge from it—in person, as it were.

One thing is certain. It's a big-budget production.

Led by its founder, Guy Laliberté, the group has become socially and environmentally conscious, to the extent that the only advertisement in its tasteful program booklet is for the "One Drop Movement": "When people are forced to drink dirty water, it should make the rest of us sick." The program also tells us how the troupe grew from being street entertainers to having "resident shows" in Las Vegas, Florida, Mexico, Japan and Macau. With recent Gulf capital investment, Cirque du Soleil also plans to create a resident show on The Palm Jumeirah in Dubai.

So despite the several empty seats at the opening night at the Albert Hall, we needn't worry about the box-office takings for "Totem."

Mr. Lepage is currently building the Metropolitan Opera's "Ring" cycle. He is one of the great artistic personalities of our time, and this is his second Cirque du Soleil show. He has contributed the over-arching plot of "Totem" as a parable of Darwinian evolution, "inspired by the foundation narratives of the first peoples." Thus the costumes recall Native Americans, Mayans—and "the most poisonous frog in the Amazonian jungle". There's a sub-"2001: A Space Odyssey" feel to the piece; the vocal part of the Latin/Rock/vaguely familiar Pop musical score features a lot of what sounds like nonsense syllables; and I personally found the comedians unfunny. (Though not the hilarious seven ages of mankind's evolution sketch—aping the famous cartoon of Darwin—in which a procession of monkeys and apes in ascending order of height culminates in a man in a suit using a mobile phone.)

Those are the sole defects of the piece. Another contribution, which I suspect is Mr. Lepage's: the basic discipline of "Totem" is dance. There is never a foot (bowl, ball, stick or ring) put wrong, and Jeff Hall's choreography is a lot more "Swan Lake" than "Strictly Come Dancing." 

Tribal "Native Americans" manipulate hoops in mind-boggling combinations. Two beautiful Belarus foot-jugglers make limp squares of cloth behave like rigid table tops. An Italian and a Spaniard stand on something the actual size of a table top, which turns out to be the world's smallest roller-skating rink, and they whirr around it at scary speeds. A handsome, scantily costumed Canadian pair do impossibly contorted things with their lithe bodies—he tall, she tiny—on a fixed trapeze. A character chastises another for littering; it turns into a mock bullfight; the "toreador" picks up the litter, and does a bit of Flamenco juggling with it.

Best act: the Russian men, some of whom hoist three flexible bars no more than a foot wide onto their shoulders, while others, the "flyers," treat the long bars as tightropes or trampolines. On them they perform heart-stopping treble and quadruple somersaults and twists familiar only from Olympic high-diving events.

 Until Feb.17 

  www.cirquedusoleil.com/en/shows/totem  

 Write to  Paul Levy at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 