Eduardo Porter thought he had found the perfect place to buy coffee: A pie shop near where he lived sold an excellent cappuccino for just $2.75—a steal for one of the best cups of coffee he'd ever tasted. But then the shop raised the price to $3.50, about what he'd pay anywhere else. Mr. Porter was furious. He vowed never to buy coffee in the shop again. He didn't care that the place had switched to bigger cups, but he did care that the homey little enterprise seemed as bloodless as Starbucks in its economic calculations. Then he started to miss his delicious cappuccinos—still reasonably priced and a short walk from his house—and realized how irrational his boycott had been. "So now I'm drinking great coffee again," he writes in "The Price of Everything," an exploration of how "every choice we make is shaped by the prices of the options laid out before us—what we assess to be their relative costs—measured up against their benefits."

Mr. Porter, an editorial writer for the New York Times, uses economic rationales to explain all sorts of social phenomena, such as why men prefer women with big hips and breasts (reproductive abilities) or why animal-rights movements are more popular in wealthy societies than in poorer ones. ("It is more expensive to kill a steer in a humane sort of way. More Americans can afford that.") The book offers some moments of insight—a thoughtful discussion of intellectual property rights concludes that the Internet undermines the value of intellectual property, with the likely result that there will be less of it—but much of Mr. Porter's argument is less than persuasive.

Take the subject of polygamy. The reason polygamy has faded over the past 2,000 years, Mr. Porter says, is that men realized that monogamy raised their value relative to women. (He contends that in polygamous societies the male-to-female ratio tilts in women's favor, allowing females to "mate above their station.") Another reason for the rise of monogamy, he says, is that "polygamy succumbed to the need for social cohesion"; he cites a study of 156 countries showing that monogamous societies are "less corrupt, less likely to use the death penalty, and richer."

There was, however, an important noneconomic event 2,000 years ago that spread the Jewish view—unusual at the time—of marriage as a monogamous institution: the birth of Christianity. Polygamy is practiced today mostly in societies where Christianity has been kept at bay. Not only do such societies tend to use the death penalty and be more corrupt, they also tend to be less Judeo-Christian. Ideas matter.

Tracking the changing "price" of women, Mr. Porter turns his eye to America's fertility rate, which went into steep decline around 1970. He writes: "The standard family deal, in which women exchanged the service of their uterus, child care, and household chores for their husband's wage, was rendered obsolete the moment women arrived home with a paycheck of their own."

 By Eduardo Porter  Portfolio, 296 pages, $27.95

Except that the fertility rate in the U.S. has been declining since the Founding, with the only major upward spike coming in the 20 years following World War II. Certainly more women entering the work force in the 1970s contributed to the resumption of the decline, but so did the curtailing of infant mortality, the arrival of the contraceptive pill and scores of other factors.

In fact, declining fertility is a global trend, evident everywhere from Mexico to Iran. It appears in societies where women still work very little outside the home. Mr. Porter seems unaware of this fact. And he seems misinformed about the source of the slight uptick in the U.S. fertility rate in recent years. He attributes it to professional women finally getting around to having children. Not so. The increase is due almost entirely to the elevated fertility of recent Hispanic immigrants, who raised the national average.

In a section about religion, Mr. Porter argues that "successful" religions are those that raise the "price" of belonging: "Dietary restrictions, tattoos, clipped foreskins, and other rules of behavior help the committed recognize one another, assist one another, and isolate themselves from the rest." So far, so good. But then he adds: "Radical religious groups are more proficient at terrorism than their secular peers" because such groups require adherents to make the "sacrifice" of shunning the outside world.

Is it sacrifice and isolation that fosters "proficient" terrorism? There are plenty of religious believers who pay exceptionally high "costs of entry"—Mormons, Jehovah's Witnesses, Mennonites—and they don't count terrorists among their number. Again, Mr. Porter's model skips over the beliefs, doctrines and worldviews that can affect behavior as much as comparative "price."

In the end, "The Price of Everything" amounts to a grab bag of liberal pieties disguised as logic. Illegal immigration, we're informed, has no economic downside; banned drugs should be legalized; conservative arguments against health-care reform are foolish; President Obama's financial-regulation law is wise. Trying to make sense of why Americans, unlike their counterparts in other Western countries, persist in religious belief, Mr. Porter says: "I suspect it has to do with the fact that, for a rich country, the United States has lots of poor people." There go those poor people again, clinging to God (and no doubt their guns too).

In a section on global warming, Mr. Porter—who naturally thinks that the world must invest billions of dollars to combat this looming catastrophe—leans heavily on reports from the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change without mentioning the mistakes and scandals that have tainted the panel's work. He does explain why skeptics seem unmoved: "Republicans mostly oppose legislation to cut carbon emissions because of their ties to the energy industry." And that's that.

As a piece of lay economics, Mr. Porter's book isn't worth a great deal. As a Democratic policy tract, it's standard fare. But as a window into liberal provincialism, "The Price of Everything" is invaluable.

 Mr. Last is a senior writer at the Weekly Standard. 