The Securities and Exchange Commission is likely to consider a delay in transferring oversight of midsize investment advisers from federal to state regulators.

A switch in regulators for advisers who manage between $25 million and $100 million in assets was supposed to start occurring this summer. But the deadline may now be extended to the first quarter of 2012, according to a recent letter from Robert Plaze, associate director for regulation of the agency's division of investment management. Regulators need until the end of 2011 to reprogram a national registration database for advisers, Mr. Plaze wrote in the letter to a national organization of state regulators.

Advisers are still waiting for the SEC to adopt the proposed rules that will make the regulatory transition official. The extension of the deadline also must be considered in a rule-making procedure by the SEC.

The shift in oversight stems from last year's Dodd-Frank financial-regulation law. State regulators lobbied for the change because the SEC, they said, was focusing its limited resources on larger advisers. Midsize advisers were effectively operating unchecked, they said, which can create problems for investors and state authorities.

The SEC recently began asking state securities regulators whether they have examination programs in place for these registered investment advisers, an agency spokesman confirmed. In cases where states don't have programs in place, Dodd-Frank lets the SEC retain oversight.

A few states, including New York, are still trying to resolve concerns about testing programs. New York stands out, however, as home to the world's biggest financial center. About 350 New York-based advisers would shift to state oversight, one of the largest groups of any state.

But it's unclear whether New York has authority under current law to routinely test advisers.

"Our office is in the process of assessing the new federal statute and how it affects present New York State law," says a spokeswoman for Attorney General Eric T. Schneiderman, echoing comments the department offered last August. Mr. Schneiderman took over in January from ex-New York attorney general and now Gov. Andrew Cuomo.

The SEC has approved long-debated changes to lists of financial documents that investors and brokerages must exchange during securities arbitration. 

The newly approved plan from the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority spells out two lists, replacing 14 lists used since 1999 to categorize the documents to be exchanged in specific types of disputes. 

Investors will still be expected to submit certain in-depth information about their financial histories, such as tax returns and loan histories, among other details, according to regulatory filings. Brokerages would have to turn over documents related to commissions and compensation when customers allege churning, and certain internal reports in cases that allege a brokerage's failure to supervise its adviser. 

Early versions of the Finra proposal had been criticized by investor advocates and brokerages as requiring too much information. 

Among changes, the version approved by the SEC spells out that arbitrators have some flexibility to decide which documents are required.

The rule change, as approved, also requires Finra to establish a task force that will continue to look at certain issues affecting the discovery phase of arbitration disputes, a period before the hearing when parties exchange information.

—Ms. Barlyn is a reporter for Dow Jones Newswires in New York. Email her at suzanne.barlyn@dowjones.com.