Long-time ad man  Joel Babbit of Atlanta isn't new to entrepreneurship. In the late '80s, he built advertising agency Babbit & Reiman into a dominant player in the Southeast, eventually selling the firm and opening a second agency, 360, which heavyweight Grey Global acquired in 2002. That's when Mr. Babbit, who stayed on to manage large accounts, noticed a keen interest in green advertising. After raising $10 million in start-up funds – all in one day – he quit and launched Mother Nature Network, an environmental news site, in January 2009. Mr. Babbit used his sales skills to persuade five companies, including  Dell Inc. and Miller Brewing Co., to sign up as advertisers on day one. Advertisers each pay $300,000 a year to sponsor categories on the site (everything from green gadgets to organic farming) and content is written by about 20 in-house journalists and 80 freelancers. The site now pulls in more than two million visitors a month, and expects $6.5 million in revenue for 2010. 

Mr. Babbit, 57 years old, serves as chief executive – and remains the sole member of Mother Nature Network's sales department.

Edited interview excerpts follow.

  Q. How did you come up with the idea for the company?  

 A. All of our clients [at Grey Global] started spending more money on communicating the environmental message. I'd be sitting in a meeting when the environment was being discussed. I had no idea what they were talking about, but I'd nod my head as if I did. I'd run back to look at the Internet. I was amazed at the lack of resources for someone like myself. It was technical and academic. It was all over my head and also boring. 

  Q. So you saw an opportunity to start your own green site.   

 A. I would look at these charts [at client meetings] and see the huge number of people interested in the environment. What had started as a small group of experts, scientists and activists had turned into a mainstream audience. I figured they were going through the same disappointment as I was. They'd go to the Internet for clarity, but it was too technical. 

  Q. How did you raise $10 million in start-up funds – in a single day?  

 A. I was having lunch with  Tom Bell, former chairman and CEO of Young & Rubicam, who's a really brilliant guy. We're talking just typical chit-chat, and I said, 'I came across this opportunity.' He asked how much it would cost; I said, maybe $10 million. He said, 'If you do it, and you run it, I'll give you 20%.' Then he picks up the phone and calls  Pete Correll, former chairman of Georgia-Pacific, who happened to be in the building next to us. We go see him. Pete asked, 'How much is Tom putting in?' When he heard $2 million, he said, 'OK, I'll put in $2 million.'

  Q. Then what?  

 A. That night I was having dinner with  Doug Hertz, a childhood friend who owns United Distributors. I said, 'Doug, I had the craziest day.' I told him what happened. He wanted to see what I showed them. I said, 'I don't have anything to show!' But he liked the idea, and said he'd put in $2 million. So that night, I got home from dinner and called  Chuck Leavell, keyboardist for the Rolling Stones and a tree farmer who's environmentally articulate. I knew him through business connections. So I described this to him, and we decided to put the rest of the money in between the two of us. 

  Q. When did you actually start building Mother Nature Network?  

 A. I gave notice [to Grey] the next day. I had woken up that prior morning without a clue. You never know what's going to take place in a 24-hour period. 

  Q. How come you steered away from banner ads (that most sites use) and toward a sponsorship model?  

 A. I use the example of the Nascar jacket, with all the messages popping off of it. It's ineffective. Our content is divided into categories – there is no marketing message from any other company except that sponsor. There's exclusivity.

  Q. You sometimes create videos or interactive graphics on behalf of advertisers. How do users tell what's "advertorial?"  

 A. We mark it as advertisement and put it in a box. I think it's probably more defined than many other ad units [on other sites]. There is a very strict line between advertising or sponsorships, and editorial. If we don't report accurately and fairly, we'd lose our credibility. So we will report negatively on a sponsor if we have to, and everyone understands that.

  Q. How did you get the word out about Mother Nature Network?  

 A. It's never one thing – it's always a combination. Having Chuck Leavell helped a great deal. He was the catalyst for a lot of positive press. I always joke that if it was just me, there might have only been a feature in my daughter's school newsletter. 

  Q. When did you know this would be successful?  

 A. I'm still nervous, 24 hours a day. I've seen too many times when a guy is sitting at a table in Vegas with a huge stack of chips – then you come back an hour later and he's got two or three left. I'm extremely confident. At the same time, fear is a great motivator. I'm Jewish, so it's somewhat genetic that I'm scared.

  Q. What's your best tip for other entrepreneurs?  

 A. A lot of people come to me for advice in starting a new business. Many, many times they'll say something along the lines of, 'I was going to do it last month, but the timing wasn't good.' If you wait until the time is right, you'll never do it. There's never a good time to start a business and take a risk like that. You'll be waiting the rest of your life.

And don't go into environmental news. I don't need any more competitors!



 Write to  Colleen DeBaise at colleen.debaise@wsj.com 

