The passage of the Don't Ask, Don't Tell Repeal Act of 2010, which will give the president discretion to allow military service by open homosexuals, reopens the question of ROTC at elite universities, many of which had cited antigay discrimination as a reason to keep their Vietnam-era bans in place.

Pacifist Colman McCarthy, a former Washington Post columnist who "directs the Center for Teaching Peace in Washington and teaches courses on nonviolence at four area universities and two high schools," is unalterably opposed to ROTC. He's received a lot of attention the past few days for an op-ed piece he wrote for the Post in which he describes ROTC as a "taint" on "the intellectual purity of a school, if by purity we mean trying to rise above the foul idea that nations can kill and destroy their way to peace."

It's a totally wrongheaded and poorly argued piece. But we'd like to focus on the one paragraph in which he says something true:

This matches our own experience. When we've encountered American servicemen and recent veterans, we've found them to be some of the finest men, and occasionally women, we've ever met. The military represents the best of America, and it's good to hear even a pacifist admit it.

Alert readers will note that in quoting McCarthy, we have made him the beneficiary of perhaps the most charitable elision in history. We did so because the paragraph contained an invidious and distracting comparison, and we wanted to focus on what McCarthy said that was true. Here's how the full paragraph reads:

The first thing that must be said about this is that whereas McCarthy knows from experience what American combat veterans are like, his professed admiration for the "soldiers" of the Taliban's "army" is purely notional. What is behind this notion is oikophobia, or disdain for America.

Such an attitude shouldn't surprise us. Unless you are a citizen of a determinedly neutral nation like Sweden, patriotism and pacifism are almost impossible to reconcile. An attachment to one's own country entails the temptation to side with it, and against its enemies, in case of war. And to sustain the belief that war is always the greatest of evils, it is helpful, perhaps necessary, to diminish other evils--hence McCarthy's implied moral equivalence between the America and the Taliban.

With this background, you can see how McCarthy would process the puzzling realization that American warriors are men of exceptionally admirable character. His oikophobia prevents him from considering the possibility that this has anything to do with their being American, so it must be that all warriors--even the Taliban--are admirable.

Wait, did he just say all warriors are admirable? Some pacifist this guy is!

But actually, he goes even further, acknowledging that the people who make up "the peace movement" are of inferior character compared with American military servicemen. To hear McCarthy tell it, they are inferior even to the Taliban. We wouldn't go that far, but we have to agree with his overall point. To the extent that there is such a thing as a "peace movement" in America, its members are a contemptible lot. But why are peaceniks so unworthy?

For one thing, because pacifism is dumb. It is merely the reductio ad absurdum of the trivial truth that war is bad. Philosophers and statesmen have a wide range of opinions as to when going to war is wise, justified or necessary. Only a child or a simpleton thinks the answer is "never." Thus the "peace movement" tends to attract the dull and the immature.

To be sure, under some circumstances it takes courage to stand against one's government. A public pacifist in Nazi Germany, or in Iran or North Korea today, would be an admirable figure notwithstanding the naiveté of his ideology. By contrast, being a pacifist in 21st-century America entails risking exactly nothing. One can even make a comfortable career of it. Just ask Colman McCarthy.

  Bad People   Former Enron adviser Paul Krugman is harshly criticizing New York's Mayor Michael Bloomberg, calling to mind the quip attributed to Henry Kissinger about the Iran-Iraq war: It's a pity they can't both lose. On Thursday Krugman posted an item called "Bloomberg's Katrina" on his New York Times blog:

We can't stand Bloomberg either, but we wondered if Krugman would acknowledge the reports in the New York Post last Thursday and Friday that sanitation men "sabotaged the blizzard cleanup to fire a salvo at City Hall" in order to "sabotage budget cuts." 

We checked Krugman's blog and found nothing else on the subject--except for this somewhat-related item: "It's always important to realize that someone can disagree with you politically without being a bad person. But there are bad people in politics, too."

One such bad person, according to Krugman, is Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey. Krugman was referring to this report from Today's Sunbeam of Salem, N.J.:

So Christie is a bad person because he blames mayors for failing to get the roads plowed. But that's just what Krugman did in the case of New York City. Apparently there are also bad people who are former Enron advisers.

  Don't They Have a Duty Not to Drink Alcohol?   "Report: NYC Sanitation Supervisors Ignored Duties to Drink Alcohol During Blizzard"--headline, FoxNews.com, Jan. 2

  The Worst Outbreak Since the One That Didn't Happen   In one of those 2010-in-review pieces titled "The Year in Islamophobia," the liberal website TalkingPointsMemo.com inadvertently ends up debunking the trend it is supposedly reviewing:

So it was the "worst outbreak" of "Islamophobia" since the one that "never really materialized" nine years earlier. The outbreak of 2010 materialized even less.

  The Mystique of Marketing   We've seen this before. "Climate PR Effort Heats Up," reads the Politico headline:

One global-warmist flack "said [President] Obama should eventually play an important role as the nation's educator-in-chief." Because the American people just love being lectured by that guy.

This is all awfully familiar. We've seen it before with global warming--as well as ObamaCare and any number of other topics. Those on the left are enthralled with the idea of mass marketing and PR, which they seem to imagine are methods of fooling large numbers of people. Actually, effective marketing and PR are about establishing trust, which requires honesty.

In light of the Climategate emails and the ever-changing claims as to how global warming will affect the weather, Americans have good reason to suspect that global warmism is a scam. No PR effort can succeed unless it begins by acknowledging that those suspicions are legitimate.

  Reliable Sources   The New York Times reports on the Obama administration's plan to regulate carbon dioxide as a "pollutant":

You've got to admit, as reasons for requesting anonymity go, that's an honest one.

  Homer Nods   Donations to the U.S. government are tax-deductible, according to IRS Publication 526, and contrary to an item Thursday (since corrected). Also, the same item initially misidentified the affiliation of law professor Daniel Markovits. He is on the faculty at Yale, not Cornell. We regret the error, but all ivy is gray in the dark.

  Metaphor Alert   "But at a moment when centrism seems to be the party's antidote to a redrawn political landscape, Mr. Grayson is setting forth a radically different playbook of sharp elbows and unapologetic liberalism."--New York Times, Jan. 3

 Out on a Limb 

 We Blame Global Warming 

  We Blame George W. Bush   "Hormones Could Be to Blame for Post-Holiday Torpor"--headline, Puffington Host, Jan. 2

  We Blame His Wide Stance   "Flier Blames Tabasco Spill for Lewd Act"--headline, TheSmokingGun.com, Dec. 30

  Sounds Like a Great Strategy   "Learn More About Health Care Reform Act, and Fend Off the Post-Holiday Blues"--headline, Free Lance-Star (Fredericksburg, Va.), Jan. 1

  ObamaCare Doesn't Cover Bowlegs   "Bowlegs Woman Who Lied to Receive Medical Benefits Will Pay Restitution, Serve Probation"--headline, Oklahoman, Dec. 30

  Read My Lipstick: No More Bailouts   "Tea Fuels Fun at Fairy Costume Party"--headline, Journal Star (Peoria, Ill.), Jan. 2

  Sen. Byrd Knew Orville Wright   "Fossilized Bird Brains May Yield Secret of First Flight"--headline, LiveScience.com, Dec. 30

  Generalissimo Francisco Franco Is Still Dead   "Matt Bai Still Doesn't Understand Political Parties"--headline, The New Republic website, Dec. 30

 Himmler Had Something Similar 

  The Lonely Lives of Experts   "A Sex Scene Like No Other in South Africa: Big frisky frogs fascinate experts--who fear for their future because of encroaching development."--headline and subheadline, Los Angeles Times, Jan. 2

  The Lonely Lives of County Bodies   "Sheriff: LaSalle County Body Is Missing Woman"--headline, ChicagoBreakingNews.com, Jan. 3

  We Can Only Imagine   "It's Not So Great Being Average"--headline, JewishWorldReview.com, Dec. 31

  What's the Over/Under for Number of Unique Visitors?   "New Website for Problem Gamblers Announced"--headline, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, Jan. 3

  It Is Possible to Be Too Saucy   "Saucier Man Charged in Murder-for-Hire Plot"--headline, Clarion-Ledger (Jackson, Miss.), Dec. 30

  Thank Goodness--Who Wants to See a Naked Nonagenarian?   "UConn Streak Ends at 90"--headline, CNN.com, Dec. 30

  Stay Away From Our Mother, Cal Thomas!   "Cal Thomas: A New Threat to the Elderly"--headline, Omaha World-Herald, Jan. 3

  Hide Your Blankets! Here Come the Massive Fish!   "Massive Fish Kill Blankets Arkansas River"--headline, CNN.com, Jan. 3

 Hey, Kids! What Time Is It? 

 Questions Nobody Is Asking 

 Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  Dog Breastfeeds Model--Now That Would Be News   "Peta Model Breastfeeds Dog for Charity Calendar"--headline, Anorak.co.uk, Jan. 2

  Obama More Popular Among Others Than Some--Now That Would Be News   "Obama More Popular Among Some Democrats Than Others"--headline, RasmussenReports.com, Jan. 2

  Look Out Below!   "The 5 Deadliest Drops of 2010"--headline, NPR.org, Dec. 31

  It's Always in the Last Place You Look   "Wanted Man Found at Chuck E Cheese Restaurant"--headline, WHIO-TV website (Dayton, Ohio), Dec. 31

 Too Much Information 

  Someone Set Up Us the Bomb   "Pilots' Claims in Crash Files Dog Med Test Company"--headline, Associated Press, Dec. 31

  Everything Seemingly Is Spinning Out of Control   "Joe Biden Poised for Larger Role in Obama White House"--headline, Boston Herald, Jan. 2

 News of the Tautological 

  Breaking News From 1206   "The Biggest Tests for Mongolia Lie Ahead"--headline, The Wall Street Journal, Jan. 3

  Breaking News From 1959, 1963, 1975, 1979   "Brown Sworn In as California Governor"--headline, Pasadena (Calif.) Star-News, Jan. 3

  Breaking News From 1968   "Schwarzenegger Weighs Career Options"--headline, Daily News (Los Angeles), Jan. 1

  Breaking News From 1969, 1970, 1971, 1972, 1973, 1974   "Nixon's Campaign Promises Unfulfilled"--headline, Politico.com, Jan. 3

  Breaking News From Stardate 3012.4   "USS Enterprise Captain in Sex Video Investigation"--headline, Daily Telegraph (London), Jan. 3

  News You Can Use   "How to Break Bread With the Republicans"--headline, New York Times, Jan. 2

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  Whoosh!   In his final column of 2010, the New York Times's David Brooks looks at a book by a pair of philosophers who "take a smart, sweeping run through the history of Western philosophy. But their book is important for the way it illuminates life today and for the controversial advice it offers on how to live." To sum up that advice:

We don't know what "serial whooshes" are, and we doubt this has much to do with real life. But it does describe your typical David Brooks column pretty well.

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Scott Syfert, Glenn Ackerman, Hillel Markowitz, T. Young, Taylor Dinerman, Bryan Fischer, Richard Belzer, David Grambo, Bruce Goldman, Bill Black, David Pybus, Kyle Kyllan, Brian Kalt, Dean Hinderliter, Dave Ceely, Dennis Powell, Peter Iorio, Kenneth Wells, Marc Young, Michele Schiesser, Jim Miller, Rod Pennington, Robert Kay, Paul Stinchfield, Israel Pickholtz, John Bobek, John Sanders, Zack Russ, John Williamson, Evan Slatis, Edward Grinberg, David Smith, Mark Finkelstein, Joe Perez, Larry Fransson, Bob Sauerteig, Frank Free, Suzanne Goraj, Jerry Soverinsky, Rex Pilger, Jerry Skurnik, Mark Kellner, Bill Gately, John Barnes, Merv Benson, Robert Godwin and Michael Capel. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)