The Supreme Court is set to answer a question with huge implications for workers: Are employers' promises of benefits such as pension payments and health-care insurance worth the paper they are written on?

 So far, lower courts have answered with a resounding "no"—leaving employees from managers to factory workers at risk of being short-changed when it comes time to tap benefits they have been promised. 



The case, which concerns the pension plan at  Cigna Corp.
CI


-0.04
%




, could be decided as soon as Monday. At issue: If your employer deliberately provides inaccurate information about your benefits, and you rely on it to your detriment, do you have recourse? 

The outcome not only could reshape the pension expectations of Cigna employees. It also could have a significant impact on 401(k)s, health plans, disability insurance and other employer-sponsored benefits. 

 Among the many people who would be affected: Paul Frommert, who retired after 39 years as a regulatory-compliance manager at  Xerox Corp.
XRX


-0.81
%




 and now spends most days on the golf course. The 72-year-old isn't polishing his putting—he is working part-time to pay for groceries and other essentials. He also mows lawns.

 For years, the Ontario, N.Y., resident says, he believed he had a pension worth roughly $3,000 a month, based on his annual individualized benefit statement from Xerox. 

But the statement didn't disclose that because Mr. Frommert had left the company from 1985 to 1989, he was subject to a different pension calculation that, as it turned out, reduced his payout to zero. 

Mr. Frommert and other Xerox employees sued on the basis that the calculation was unfair, and that the company failed to tell them about it. The Second Circuit Court of Appeals twice ruled in the Xerox employees' favor, and required Xerox to recalculate the benefits. Xerox then appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, challenging whether a court could tell a company how to administer its own pension plan. Last year, the high court agreed that Xerox could use its own method to calculate the benefits, which it is in the process of doing. 

"We believe this action should help reduce the complexity and expense of [pension] litigation going forward and allow for more predictability and uniformity in the administration of pension plans," a spokesman for Xerox wrote in an email.

The outcome of the Cigna case could determine whether Mr. Frommert and other Xerox retirees get the pension they expected.

To be sure, most employees can rely on what their employers tell them about their benefits. But regardless of how the Cigna case plays out, you need to be aware that if your employer gives you wrong information—even if it is in writing—and you act on it, you may be out of luck. 

It is especially critical to keep this in mind when making life-changing and often irrevocable decisions—such as whether to switch jobs, retire, take a payout or modify a life-insurance policy. Usually, the only thing that determines the benefit in the event of a dispute is the formal plan document. 

Here's what you should know before making those decisions: 

  • Get it in writing.  

Employees generally assume benefits administrators know what they are talking about. Richard Todisco did. According to court records, the 47-year-old  Verizon Communication Inc.
VZ


-0.42
%




 employee called the company benefits hotline on several occasions between November 1999 and January 2000 to inquire about buying additional life insurance to cover his wife. The person at the other end of the 800 number told Mr. Todisco that during the open-enrollment period he had the right to double the level of his insurance benefits to $176,000 without submitting any statement about his current health, according to court documents. 

He signed up for $88,000 in supplemental coverage in 2000, and named his wife, Diane, the beneficiary. Assuming she would get the benefit, Mr. Todisco, who lived in Salem, N.H., removed her from his primary life-insurance policy and replaced her with his two daughters. 

He died shortly thereafter, and Verizon refused to pay the supplementary coverage to his wife because Mr. Todisco never submitted a statement of his current health, as the plan required, according to court documents.

Ms. Todisco sued, and in 2007 the First Circuit Court of Appeals upheld a lower court's conclusion that regardless of what the benefits person said, employees had to follow the plan rules. 

Similarly, after Alex Ladouceur, a president at Credit Lyonnais Rouse in New York, learned the company was going to be absorbed by its parent, Credit Lyonnais, in 2001, he says he met with the director of human resources to ask what would happen to his benefits. Mr. Ladouceur says the HR executive encouraged him to stay, saying his salary wouldn't be cut and that his 13 years at the subsidiary would count toward a pension at his new employer. 

Soon after the merger, the company cut Mr. Ladouceur's pay and he quit. He subsequently learned that only his service after January 2001 would count toward his pension, resulting in a total benefit worth less than $10,000 instead of the $100,000 he had been expecting. He and other former employees sued—but because they didn't have anything in writing, they had no legal claim, said a federal court in New York. The ruling was upheld on appeal in 2009 by the Second Circuit Court of Appeals. 

In court, Credit Lyonnais didn't contest that in meetings it had told the employees their former years would count toward their pension, but said it had to follow the legal terms of the written plan document.

Verizon had no comment.

  • Be especially careful with spinoffs and mergers.  

When  Abbott Laboratories
ABT


-1.82
%




 spun off its hospital-supply business  Hospira Inc.
HSP


-0.01
%




 in 2004, the 9,200 workers in the unit say they were led to believe that little would change. Initially, that was true. They sat at the same desks doing the same jobs, and had the same parking spots. 

Companies want workers to stay during transitions, so they often promise that pay and benefits won't change, says  Karen Ferguson, director of the Pension Rights Center, an advocacy group in Washington. But, she adds, one of the first things many companies may do is cut benefits. Abbott and Hospira both said they made no promises about benefits.

After the spinoff was complete, Hospira terminated retiree health benefits and froze the pension. The Hospira employees alleged that management planned all along to eliminate their benefits and used the spinoff to accomplish this. A federal district court in Illinois ruled that the employees failed to provide credible evidence to support their claim that the spinoff was intended to deprive them of their benefits. The employees have appealed to the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals. 

"Potential employee benefit savings never factored into the decision to create the spinoff," a Abbott spokesman wrote in an email, "and the decision to terminate the pension plan and retiree medical benefits after the spinoff was completed was Hospira's."

A Hospira spokeswoman wrote that the court's decision "validated our long-held position that Hospira acted in compliance with the law at all times." 

  • Look beyond the official plan summary.  

Employers are required to disclose all critical details of their benefits plan in the so-called summary plan document, or SPD. In Amara v. Cigna, a lower court in New Haven, Conn., concluded that the global health-services company's SPD failed to disclose that employees' pensions would stop growing after it changed the plan in 1998, and gave them "downright misleading" information in handouts and meetings. In a decision affirmed in the Second Circuit in 2009, the court ordered Cigna to give the 27,000 employees the benefit it led them to believe they were entitled to receive, an estimated total of $80 million.

The issue now before the Supreme Court isn't whether Cigna deceived employees—Cigna isn't appealing that decision. Instead, the company is arguing that to qualify for the benefits, the employees would have to prove they relied on the information the company provided, to their detriment. For example, a person would have to prove that if he knew his pension was frozen, he would have retired or taken another job.

Advocates for retirees say that if the court agrees with Cigna, the ruling would effectively preclude employees from bringing class-action suits and make it almost impossible for employees to win a claim, since they would have to prove they would have acted differently if they had known. 

This, they say, would essentially remove any penalty for employers that deliberately mislead employees about their benefits. "Is this court going to say it's OK to lie to participants?" asks  Mary Ellen Signorille, senior attorney at AARP, which, along with the U.S. Department of Justice, filed briefs on the employees' behalf, as they also had done in the Xerox case. 

Cigna declined to comment.

The outcome of the case also will affect the Xerox retirees, by making it more difficult for them to challenge the calculation. 

Mr. Frommert initially left Xerox in 1985, taking his profit-sharing payout of about $140,000. When he was rehired in 1989, he got credit from his earlier years toward his pension, and understood that his earlier payout would be subtracted from the total. 

But he didn't know that Xerox created what it called a "phantom account" for his 1985 payout, credited it with hypothetical interest pegged to stock-market returns—often in the double digits—and subtracted the total from his pension. Mr. Frommert's phantom account, like that of dozens of other rehired employees, exceeded his pension, so he received nothing for his second period of service. 

Mr. Frommert, who was laid off in 2002, says that had he known he would receive no pension for his second, 13-year stint at Xerox, he could have taken a different job back in the 1980s, or saved more money. By the time he discovered the truth, he says, it was too late to do anything. 

In the Supreme Court's April 2010 decision in the Xerox case, Chief Justice John Roberts, writing for the majority, said a "single honest mistake" in administering and interpreting its pension plan—such as not including details about how benefits were calculated—wasn't enough reason to take away the company's right to determine how to administer its plan. 

The ruling meant that Xerox now has a second chance to calculate the pension benefits at issue. If the company again uses a method that erases much of the value of the pensions, the retirees can still challenge it in court. 

But if Cigna wins its case, it would be difficult for the Xerox employees to prevail. Each would have to file a case individually—and prove if they had known their pension would be so small, they would have taken another job, say, instead of returning to the company.

Mr. Frommert says he long ago drained his 401(k) and spent his life's savings. He and his wife, Linda, who had stayed home raising their four children, sold their house of 23 years and borrowed money from a daughter whose home they are renting. Last year, they declared bankruptcy. 



The Pension Protection Act, which took effect in 2007, requires plans either to provide individualized pension statements every three years, disclosing the total benefits earned, or notify participants every year that benefit statements are available upon written request. (Quarterly statements must be provided for 401(k) and similar accounts, and annual statements for profit-sharing plans.)

The only way to be sure the benefit is accurate is for the employee to check the plan's calculation against the terms of the pension plan and the formal plan document. "Since plan documents are extremely complicated, it's a good idea to ask for help," says  Karen Ferguson, director of the Pension Rights Center. The American Academy of Actuaries' Pension Assistance List will provide up to four hours of free help to individuals interested in checking their plans' calculations.

If it looks as though a mistake was made, residents of 29 states can look to the U.S. Administration on Aging's six regional pension-counseling projects. The projects provide free legal advice on retirement plans and help people pursue their benefit claims. "They have recovered millions of dollars in benefits for thousands of people," Ms. Ferguson says. (Go to www.pensionrights.org/counseling-projects for a list of projects and the states they cover.)

Help is also available from the toll-free hotline at the Labor Department's Employees Benefits Security Administration (866-444-3272, or at askebsa.dol.gov/SecInit) and through PensionHelp America, an online referral service, at www.pensionhelp.org.

 Write to  Ellen E. Schultz at ellen.schultz@wsj.com 