PARIS—Militiamen and soldiers loyal to Ivory Coast's defeated president, Laurent Gbagbo, started surrendering their weapons, his rival's camp said, but it may be months before his successor, Alassane Ouattara, can restore security to the shattered city of Abidjan.

The new government of President-elect Ouattara plans to launch an arms amnesty, said a military spokesman. Ahead of the amnesty, young people in the southern cocoa port town of San Pedro and the eastern town of Abengourou already have begun surrendering arms, he said.

Five generals have pledged their loyalty to President Ouattara on Tuesday, the Associated Press reported. 

But Abidjan presents a more complicated proposition. For the past several weeks, the cosmopolitan commercial hub of the world's largest cocoa producer has been an urban battleground, mainly pitting rebels from the north against youth militias steadfastly loyal to Mr. Gbagbo. 

The new government now has to ratchet down tensions that stoked the street violence, and alleviate fears of reprisals. "Until we can convince the population it is not a witch hunt, they won't come forward," said the spokesman for the military, known as the Republican Forces. "We're working on it. But once the amnesty expires, we will let the law deal with anyone who doesn't cooperate."

Mr. Ouattara's forces captured Mr. Gbagbo on Monday, after the former incumbent leader had resisted months of diplomatic pressure, sanctions and a heavy military assault aimed at forcing him to accept the results of an election he lost in November.

Late Monday, Ivory Coast television broadcast footage of Mr. Gbagbo in which he said he wished all parties to lay down arms and "step into the civilian part of the crisis."

France, which played a central role in the capture of Mr. Gbagbo and has troops stationed in the country, has pledged to support the country's reconstruction. 

On Tuesday, France said it would provide Ivory Coast with a €400 million ($577 million) aid package to help the country meet urgent humanitarian needs, notably in Abidjan. 

"France stands by Ivory Coast to go through this period of reconciliation and reconstruction," French Finance Minister Christine Lagarde said in a statement.

The United Nations estimates at least 1,500 died in fighting.

U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon spoke Monday with President Ouattara and asked there be "stressed in particular the need to ensure that there is no retaliation against Mr. Gbagbo's supporters," a U.N. spokesman said. Mr. Ban said the U.N. will continue "to protect civilians and stands ready to support the efforts to address the critical humanitarian situation in the country, and the forthcoming domestic and international investigations into human-rights violations." 

The bloodshed isn't over. In the town of Yopougon, a Gbagbo stronghold, at least 13 people were executed overnight, witnesses and residents said. Many militias loyal to Mr. Gbagbo have surrendered or vanished into their neighborhoods, but some say they want to keep fighting, despite the ex-president's appeal for a return to normality on Mr. Ouattara's television channel late Monday.

"Personally I don't believe they have caught Gbagbo. They're pulling the wool over our eyes," said Ble Ble, a pro-Gbagbo soldier in Youpougon.

Looting and lawlessness have accompanied the fighting in Abidjan. Many of the young people Gbagbo has rallied to his cause over the years are unemployed and frustrated in a country where economic opportunities have stagnated. Meanwhile, Mr. Ouattara's forces—most of whom are an assortment of former rebels integrated into the national army—have come under attack from human-rights organizations for killing and raping civilians. 

"I will be staying at the French army base camp until the whole city is secure," said Mamadou Senogo, a resident at the camp where thousands were evacuated over the last few weeks. "There are too many hotheads running around with guns outside." 

—Joe Lauria at the United Nations contributed to this article.