NEW YORK—The year-end rally that drove some commodities to multiyear highs stalled on Tuesday, sending gold to the worst price decline in six months and wiping out recent advances in everything from silver to oil to sugar.

Gold recorded the biggest single-day percentage decline since February 2010, tumbling from Monday's record close to lead Tuesday's selloffs. Investors had bid up gold prices 2.7% in the previous two weeks in thin holiday trading, culminating in Monday's record close at $1,422.90 an ounce. 

Tuesday, the price of the futures contract for February delivery fell back below $1,400, shedding $44.10, or 3.1%, to $1,378.50 a troy ounce on the Comex division of the New York Mercantile Exchange. That is where the yellow metal started December, though prices remain up 23% from a year ago. 

January silver shed $1.6040, or 5.2%, to $29.4920 a troy ounce, also on Comex. It was the largest price and percentage decline since November; prices are up nearly 66% from a year ago.

"You're getting traders coming back into the market and a lot of money managers are cashing in last year's gains and starting a new year," said  Ira Epstein, director of the Ira Epstein division of the Linn Group.

It was the same across the commodities spectrum, including industrial bellwethers such as copper and oil and agricultural staples such as wheat and soybeans. All had climbed on Monday to the highest prices in years as the enthusiasm about the global economy that spurred December's advance spilled over into the new year. But those rallies came to an abrupt halt Tuesday on concerns that the rush into commodities may have pushed prices too high too fast.

"I think the asset class itself just got a little ahead of itself going into year-end," said  Luis Rangel, a vice president at ICAP Futures. "I view this as a correction against the year-end boom."

January copper fell 8.80 cents, or 2%, to $4.3635 a pound on Comex to snap a three-session win streak. The most active March contract fell 2% to $4.3690 a pound. It was the largest drop in percentage and dollar terms since November. Prices remain up 28% from a year ago.

February crude oil swung to a two-week low from a 27-month high in falling $2.17, or 2.4%, to $89.38 a barrel. Oil is up 9.3% from a year ago.

A stronger dollar also put pressure on commodities, as futures contracts priced in the U.S. currency became more expensive to purchase. The dollar strengthened to as much as $1.3433 against the euro on Tuesday before settling back to $1.3297, compared with $1.3351 late Monday in New York.

Commodities were strong performers in 2010, as demand for raw materials outpaced early predictions, particularly in China and other emerging markets. Physical assets also appealed to investors with lingering concerns about the stability of global currency and stock markets, particularly as the economies of the U.S. and euro-using nations struggled to get back on their feet.

Both the optimism and uncertainty are likely to continue this year, meaning Tuesday's losses could be quickly recouped, traders and analysts said. Oil prices are widely expected to hit $100 a barrel this year for the first time since 2008.

"A lot of people have been touting 2011 the year of commodities—you had to be invested," said  Andy Lebow, an analyst with MF Global, adding, "I think when it's all one way markets become vulnerable."

Some commodities markets also were pressed by the potential impact of large investment funds lining up their holdings with the commodities indexes that they track, which are adjusted each January.

Losses weren't confined to industrial commodities and energy. Agricultural markets also experienced steep losses.

On the ICE futures exchange, March coffee fell 2.3% to $2.3495, while March sugar fell 3.5% to 31 cents a pound.

March corn sank to a two-week low before ending down 1.9% at $6.0850 a bushel at the Chicago Board of Trade. The soybean market backpedaled after touching 29-month highs intraday Monday, with January soybean falling 0.7% to $13.61 a bushel.

Declines hit even coal. Central Appalachian coal on Nymex hit a 25-month high above $83 a ton on Monday, but fell 2% to $81.77 a ton Tuesday. The benchmark contract climbed 11% last week, as flooding in the Australian coal-exporting state of Queensland shut down mines and some transportation arteries.

—Tatyana Shumsky and Matt Whittaker contributed to this article.