Col. Moammar Gadhafi's inner circle is debating whether the man in charge of Libya since 1969 should remain in power or relinquish his role, as his government invited rebels and tribal leaders to negotiate a political solution and Western nations took steps to prepare for a possible military intervention.

The rebel-led governing council, based in Benghazi, in eastern Libya, rejected the invitation and said it wasn't sincere.

As forces loyal to Col. Gadhafi launched airstrikes to check the opposition's advance west toward his hometown of Sirte, his second stronghold outside the capital, President Barack Obama said the U.S. was discussing military options with allies in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. 

Britain and France, permanent members of the United Nations Security Council, began drafting a U.N. resolution supporting a no-fly zone over Libya—a move that would require military intervention. A British diplomat said the draft would be ready in the event of a serious attack on civilians by Libyan air power.

Libyan Foreign Minister Moussa Koussa repeated his government's assertions that its military has acted within the law and hasn't been indiscriminately shooting at civilians. Mr. Koussa said that his government would welcome international fact-finding missions to investigate these allegations.

An assessment by NATO of what would be necessary to impose a no-fly zone and how to enforce an arms embargo on Libya should be ready for consideration by alliance defense ministers in Brussels on Thursday, said U.S. Ambassador to NATO Ivo Daalder.



Track events day by day.

See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

A look at the economic and political status of selected countries facing unrest in North Africa and the Middle East.

Mr. Daalder said a no-fly zone wouldn't have much of an effect on Libyan government helicopters and ground assaults, the military operations doing the most damage to the rebels. 

He said NATO decided to start round-the-clock surveillance of Libyan air and ground traffic using aircraft that had been operating 10 hours a day.

"I can't imagine that the U.N. and international community will stand idly by," said NATO Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen. 

The Gulf Cooperation Council, a grouping of Arab states allied with the U.S., on Monday called on the Security Council to approve a no-fly zone over Libya.

A U.S. official said the U.S. was "in discussions" with allies at the U.N. and NATO about the possibility of a no-fly zone, but stressed that it wasn't the only option on the table.

China and Russia, permanent members with veto power at the Security Council, have been cool to the idea of foreign military intervention into the Libyan crisis. Chinese and Russian officials in New York couldn't be immediately reached to comment. NATO member Turkey has also opposed such a move.

In Libya, rebel forces appeared to be consolidating their positions and assuming a more defensive posture in the oil refinery city of Ras Lanuf. 

Libyan warplanes launched at least three airstrikes near checkpoints and rebel positions on the outskirts of Ras Lanuf, according to witnesses, but the bombs appeared to have fallen harmlessly in the nearby desert. 

In Tripoli, reform-minded officials in the government were lobbying for a plan that calls on Col. Gadhafi to cede power to a council of technocrats who could shepherd a transition toward democratic reforms and a government based on modern institutions, according to a person familiar with the situation. 

Under this plan, Col. Gadhafi would be given an honorary title reflecting his service to the country, but be removed from day-to-day decision-making, according to this person.

Members of Col. Gadhafi's family have been briefed on the plan, according to this person. The threat of prosecution at an international criminal court could deter Col. Gadhafi from agreeing to a negotiated solution, a U.S. official said.

It is unclear which camp within Col. Gadhafi's inner circle—hard-liners or reformists—has more sway. Two of the leader's sons are commanders of the brigades leading military assaults against opposition-held positions. 

U.S. officials said Western allies of the U.S. are trying to step up pressure on aides close to Col. Gadhafi to force him from power. European diplomats have also tried to reach out to members of his inner circle to urge them to pressure the colonel to leave office, U.S. officials said.

Mr. Obama on Monday repeated that those close to Col. Gadhafi are in a position to decide which side they are on, and would be held accountable for their actions.

"People around [Gadhafi] are getting nervous, and they should," said a U.S. official.

The person familiar with the government reform proposal said "more than 60%" of officials within government were supportive of a change in government and national reconciliation.

One sign that the reformist camp could be gaining ground was the appearance Sunday night on state television of former Prime Minister Jadallah al-Talhi to invite the Benghazi-based rebels for political negotiations.

Mr. Talhi's appearance on the national broadcaster, which answers to Col. Gadhafi, implied that his invitation had the approval from the leader, according to Libyan officials. It also marked a sharp change in tone from previous official statements in which rebels were described as al Qaeda supporters, drug users and criminals.

Mr. Talhi, who served as Libya's Ambassador to the United Nations in 2008, asked the rebels to "give a chance to national dialogue to resolve this crisis, to help stop the bloodshed, and not give a chance to foreigners to come and capture our country again."

Members of the rebel council in Benghazi said they didn't trust Mr. Talhi's intentions.

It was unclear where the proposed national dialogue would take place or how many people have been invited to attend. Government officials have told foreign journalists that they weren't allowed to cover the event.

U.N. aid officials launched a $160 million appeal to international donors on Monday for humanitarian assistance for up to one million people.

"This appeal is based on planning scenario projecting up to 400,000 people leaving Libya—including the 200,000 who have left to date—and another 600,000 people inside Libya expected to need humanitarian aid to varying degrees," said Valerie Amos, the U.N.'s emergency relief coordinator.

—Charles Levinson, Joe Lauria and Stephen Fidler  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Margaret Coker at margaret.coker@wsj.com and Charles Levinson at charles.levinson@wsj.com 