Europe's single currency has had a tumultuous 18 months, but the outlook is brighter now than it has been for some time.

Read the full  Foreign Exchange report .

Indeed, some analysts are saying that if the region's politicians can avoid disaster at a key summit later this month—admittedly by no means a certainty—the worst of the euro crisis may be over.

Since the start of the year, the euro has risen by 1.3% on a trade-weighted basis and by 3.5% against the dollar. Its level of $1.3773 late Monday in Europe is just above the $1.35 level that many analysts have as their year-end forecast.

"The financing challenge looks much less serious than it did a couple of months ago," John Normand, head of foreign-exchange strategy at J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. in London, says of Europe's sovereign-debt crisis. "The big change has come from euro-zone leaders realizing that they need a more comprehensive solution to the debt problem."

Much now hinges on a March 24-25 summit in Hungary, at which the 17 euro-zone governments will discuss Germany and other core euro-zone nations funding a permanent and larger financial safety net for weaker partners in return for more say in the zone's economic policy.

It's unlikely any deal that emerges will be comprehensive enough to end market concerns about European sovereign debt. But Mr. Normand thinks an agreement that meets the core nations' requirements might be enough to convince markets that the current state of sovereign financing is "manageable."

But something else has changed, too. Euro-zone inflation, at an annual rate of 2.3% in January, is above the European Central Bank's medium-term target for the first time since the 2008 financial crisis, and is putting pressure on the ECB to raise interest rates.

ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet argues that inflation has risen largely due to energy and food prices, which are determined at a global level. But there are growing signs of concern among the ECB's governing council.

Board member Lorenzo Bini Smaghi said in a recent speech that inflation "is likely to be of a different nature than in the past," while Dutch central-bank chief Nout Wellink said recently, "The overall picture is not a picture I like very much."

Jacques Cailloux, chief euro-zone economist with Royal Bank of Scotland in London, says this kind of rhetoric "argues for a premium to be priced [into forward-rate euro contracts] already in the first half" of 2011.

The implied forward curve for three-month money rates reflects expectations that the ECB will raise its main refinancing rate around the end of the third quarter. That rate, at 1% since May 2009, accounts for nearly a third of all ECB credit to the banking sector, and much of the rest is indexed to it. It is the single biggest factor in determining the price of credit in euros.

There may, however, be more than meets the eye to some recent comments out of the ECB. The race to succeed Mr. Trichet in October is wide open after Deutsche Bundesbank President Axel Weber's decision to step down in April. Possible candidates such as Mr. Wellink, Italy's Mario Draghi and Luxembourg's Yves Mersch have all aired scrupulously Germanic views on monetary policy in recent days.

"It risks more confusion…creating expectations that aren't warranted," RBS's Mr. Cailloux says of such posturing. He says he thinks the ECB won't actually need to raise rates until the fourth quarter. "If it's genuine, that's fine," he says of the tough talk about inflation. "But if it's not, it's a dangerous game."

Any interest-rate increase is likely to widen the rate differential with the U.S., supporting the euro against the dollar, analysts say. Roberto Mialich, a foreign-exchange strategist with Unicredit in Milan, thinks the U.S. won't need higher interest rates before 2012.

Even the best-case scenario would leave the euro zone a high-debt, low-growth economy with an aging population and no convincing strategy for competing with emerging markets. But that's better than the prophecies of doom and breakup that dominated last year and still circulate, especially in London and New York. 

 Mr. Smith is a reporter for Dow Jones Newswires and The Wall Street Journal in London. He can be reached at geoffrey.smith@dowjones.com. 