CHICAGO—A Pakistan-born doctor with alleged ties to the 2008 Mumbai terrorist attack will be tried in a Chicago federal court starting Monday in a case that threatens to test already strained relations between the U.S. and Pakistan.

Prosecutors say Tahawwur Hussain Rana helped his high-school friend, Pakistani-American David Coleman Headley, conduct surveillance ahead of a three-day attack that killed more than 160 people, including six Americans. Mr. Rana also is accused of helping Mr. Headley in a bomb plot against a Danish newspaper.

Mr. Headley, who pleaded guilty in connection with his role in the Mumbai attacks, will testify against his old friend in return for being spared the death penalty. What makes the case potentially explosive is the chance it will provide an inside look at the Pakistani government's posture toward terrorism. The question has taken on greater urgency since U.S. Navy SEALs killed al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden in a home in Pakistan two weeks ago.

Mr. Headley is expected to testify that the Pakistani Inter-Services Intelligence agency, or ISI, was directly involved in plotting the Mumbai attacks carried out by the Pakistan-based Lashkar-e-Taiba terror group in November 2008. Mr. Headley is also expected to testify that Mr. Rana knew of his work on behalf of ISI and allowed Mr. Headley to use Mr. Rana's immigration business as a cover.

Defense attorneys have signaled in court filings that Mr. Rana's defense relies heavily on his assertions about the ISI's role in aiding the Mumbai terrorists. Court filings remain sealed, but in an April ruling, U.S. District Judge Harry Leinenweber quoted from a defense motion that Mr. Rana had acted "at the behest of the Pakistani government and the ISI, not the Lashkar terrorist organization."

Bin Laden's hiding place two miles from the elite Pakistan Military Academy has prompted U.S. and Indian accusations that some elements of Pakistan's military helped shelter him. The U.S. has given Pakistan $20 billion of aid since 2001 and U.S. lawmakers recently have called for rethinking U.S. strategy there.

Prosecutors have charged six other men besides Mr. Rana. In court filings, defense lawyers identified several as Pakistani intelligence officers. All are fugitives. Mr. Rana, 50 years old, will be the only defendant in court.

U.S. prosecutors refer to the co-defendants only as being leaders of Lashkar-e-Taiba. Co-defendant Ilyas Kashmiri is a former Pakistani commando who U.S. officials say leads a terror group believed to be allied with al Qaeda. Another defendant is identified by the U.S. as a retired former major in the Pakistani military.

A spokesman for the Pakistan embassy in Washington said the allegations of Pakistani involvement in the plots were being "made up for the sake of defense.…There is no involvement, or complicity, by any state institution, or any Pakistani security official."

The potential of ISI ties has been front-page news in India, where attention has focused on what Mr. Headley will say about his interactions with ISI. Indian authorities, who were allowed by the U.S. to conduct interviews of Mr. Headley in prison, produced a dossier that identifies Mr. Rana's co-defendants as ISI officers.

Lashkar-e-Taiba was founded 20 years ago as a proxy for the Pakistani military to battle forces of India in the disputed Himalayan territory of Kashmir. Pakistan's military says it has since cut ties to the group.

U.S. authorities arrested Mr. Headley in 2009 in Chicago as he allegedly prepared to depart to Pakistan to plot an attack against the Jyllands-Posten newspaper in Copenhagen, which had published unflattering cartoons of Muhammad. In 2010, Mr. Headley pleaded guilty to a dozen counts, including plotting the Mumbai attack and the attack on the Denmark newspaper that never happened.

The trial is expected to include secretly recorded conversations, emails and Mr. Headley's testimony.

Mr. Rana, who wears glasses and a graying beard, said he was duped into helping an old friend, whom he thought was working with ISI.

Charles Swift, Mr. Rana's attorney, said, "Nothing that Mr. Rana did in and of itself is criminal; he didn't go and buy guns; he didn't go and provide funds. The question is, did he hire an old friend and not know what he was up to, and or did he know what David Headley was up to?"

The jury must also decide whether Mr. Headley, 50 years old, is a reliable witness. Born in Washington to an American mother and Pakistani father, he was raised in Pakistan and met Mr. Rana at an elite military boarding school there.

After graduating from high school, he returned to the U.S. and was twice arrested for selling drugs. He became an informant for the Drug Enforcement Administration. In the late 1990s, he opened two video-rental stores in New York City and immersed himself in Islam.

Mr. Rana became a military doctor and later moved to Canada before buying a home in Chicago. He started a number of businesses, including First World Immigration Services.

 Write to  Douglas Belkin at doug.belkin@wsj.com, Evan Perez at evan.perez@wsj.com and Tom Wright at tom.wright@wsj.com 