  Johnson & Johnson
JNJ


0.95
%




 signed a consent decree with the Food and Drug Administration on Thursday that puts three key manufacturing plants under years of tight regulatory scrutiny, but doesn't levy any fines or shut down two of the three plants that are still running. 

Manufacturing problems at the New Brunswick, N.J.-based J&J have led to recalls since late 2009 of over-the-counter medicines, as well as certain contact lenses and hip-repair parts. Just this week, the company recalled leaky insulin cartridges, as it reviews the quality of its operations and finds more deficiencies.



The consent decree involves J&J's McNeil Consumer Healthcare unit, the home to many of the problems. It will subject the company to at least five years of regulatory oversight, a J&J spokeswoman said.

Under the decree, J&J must hire an outside expert to investigate the problems that prompted the FDA to formally warn the company about violations of good manufacturing practices and to develop a plan for fixing the issues. Moreover, the company will have to make sure it's complying with the detailed terms of the 29-page document, including orders for retraining employees and for investigating all returns and consumer complaints.

With the decree, the company can't make any products at its Fort Washington, Pa., plant until the FDA certifies its problems are fixed. The company doesn't expect to reopen the plant this year, a J&J spokeswoman said. J&J had closed the plant last April after recalling more than 135 million bottles of Tylenol and other popular over-the-counter medicines. Since then, the company has been refitting the plant.

"This is a strong, but necessary, step to ensure that the products manufactured by this company meet federal standards for quality, safety and purity," said  Deborah Autor, director of the FDA's Office of Compliance, part of the agency's drug division. 

Nevertheless, J&J avoided harsh terms required of other companies. The agency has required companies including  Abbott Laboratories,
ABT


-1.43
%




 Schering-Plough Inc., now owned by  Merck & Co.
MRK


0.18
%




, and Wyeth, now part of  Pfizer Inc.,
PFE


-0.09
%




 to pay tens of millions of dollars in fines. By contrast, J&J didn't have to pay a penalty, though it could face fines of up to $15,000 per violation per day if it doesn't fully comply with plans or timetables for ensuring the plants adhere to all of FDA's manufacturing rules.

Meantime, J&J's plants in Las Piedras, Puerto Rico, and Lancaster, Penn., can keep running. The Puerto Rico plant makes over-the-counter pain and cold medicines such as Benadryl and Motrin. The Lancaster plant, owned by a J&J and Merck joint venture, makes heartburn medicines Pepcid and Mylanta; Merck is not subject to the decree.

The manufacturing problems have affected some of J&J's best-known products like the allergy medicine Benadryl and hurt the company's reputation with many consumers, who, for instance, found metal particles in bottles of Tylenol children's medicines. Company sales plunged about $900 million last year due to the recalls. The company has continued making withdrawals, as it reviews its operations.

In addition, CEO  William Weldon has come in for criticism. Early this year, the Change to Win pension funds, which hold about 13.5 million J&J shares, chastised Mr. Weldon for not doing enough to protect the reputation of J&J products.

Mr. Weldon has reorganized manufacturing, establishing a companywide team to oversee the supply chain and upgrade standards and facilities. "The consent decree requires additional quality-assurance measures, and is a reminder that important work remains to be done," Mr. Weldon said in a message to employees. The company declined to make him available for comment.

 Write to  Jonathan D. Rockoff at jonathan.rockoff@wsj.com and Jennifer Corbett Dooren at jennifer.corbett-dooren@dowjones.com 