The Obama White House is sharing its internal polling with private Democratic audiences to explain its remarkable detachment from the federal budget debate on Capitol Hill. White House aides say that the polling shows the public isn't focused on the battle over continuing resolutions to fund the government and is confused by the details.

That inattention will allow Democrats to delay responding to GOP demands for spending cuts until House Budget Chairman Paul Ryan reveals the GOP's spending priorities for next year's budget in early April. "That's when we jump 'em," a Democratic strategist told me. "There will be Medicare cuts and other things we'll be able to talk a lot about."

President Obama has apparently decided to borrow some political plays from Bill Clinton, who after his party's defeat in the 1994 mid-term elections began running ads attacking Republican plans to reform Medicare. At the same time, Mr. Clinton focused on a series of granular policy initiatives—promoting school uniforms was one memorable example—that were politically safe and popular with independent voters. Mr. Obama appears to be following the same strategy—offering little in terms of policy substance, remaining disengaged in budget negotiations and waiting for Republicans to present a target for him to shoot at. Until then, Mr. Obama is filling the time with foreign travel and speeches touting alternative energy. He leaves for a five-day trip through South America this weekend.

Former Democratic pollster Pat Caddell isn't so sure the strategy will work as well for Mr. Obama, given what's going on with the economy and jobs. He said that when he served in the Carter White House as a presidential advisor, White House aides were surprised by public anger over higher gasoline and energy prices. "You now have administration spokesmen saying that 'core' inflation is basically zero, except for fuel and food," Mr. Caddell said. "But those are precisely the two things people respond politically to when prices go up."

Mr. Caddell said the president is clearly following a strategy designed to minimize his political exposure and provide him with the maximum opportunity to slam the GOP as extremist. "But that only works if events don't alter the basic political landscape," he said. "This White House doesn't understand [that] the rules of the game are being rewritten over higher prices and continued stagnation in job creation."

To read more stories like this one, please subscribe to Political Diary.