 Bank of France Governor Christian Noyer, who sits on the European Central Bank's governing council, urged euro-zone governments to make their €440 billion ($602 billion) crisis fund more flexible so that it can buy bonds of fiscally distressed governments and offer them short-term credit lines, a signal that the ECB wants to reduce its role in fighting the currency bloc's debt crisis.  

The Irish parliament narrowly passed legislation authorizing steep tax increases and spending cuts required under the country's international bailout, a bill that had been threatened by the collapse of the governing coalition. 

The decision paves the way for Prime Minister Brian Cowen to dissolve parliament early next week and call elections. 

Two of the Bank of England's nine policy makers voted in favor of a rise in the bank's key interest rate in January, while for the remainder the decision not to raise rates was "finely balanced," according to minutes of the bank's Monetary Policy Committee's January meeting.

 The U.K's largest banks defended their business models in submissions to a bank-review commission, their latest attempt to head off a break-up or other radical reforms for the sector.  

 U.K. police are reopening an investigation into the alleged widespread use of dubious reporting tactics by the News of the World tabloid, a development that came as the newspaper announced it has fired one of its editors. 

The British Broadcasting Corp. said it plans to cut 650 jobs in its World Service as part of efforts to slash costs annually by £46 million ($72.8 million) by 2014. The corporation has said it plans to close five foreign-language services and scale back radio programming in seven languages. 

France will introduce new rules on net short positions of stocks starting February 1 to comply with future European regulations on short-selling, the country's market regulator said. 

Germany failed to attract enough bids at its first ultra-long bund auction in six months, catching investors somewhat off-guard, as the bund line was considered overvalued despite its recent cheapening against euro-zone peers. 

In contrast, in a separate tender, Italy sold €8 billion ($10.9 billion) of six-month treasury bills and €2.5 billion of December 2012-dated zero-coupon bonds amid strong demand. 

 Turkey's deputy prime minister for the economy Ali Babacan said the country's central bank should wait before making further changes to monetary policy, the government's first public sign of concern over the bank's unorthodox strategy of cutting interest rates amid booming demand.  

 The governor of Sweden's Riksbank, Stefan Ingves, believes the soaring krona is long overdue and won't hurt the country's competitiveness. His stance contrasts sharply with Switzerland's deep concerns at the growing strength of the Swiss franc. 

 Russian President Dmitry Medvedev fired a senior transport police commander for failure to prevent Monday's suicide bombing at the country's busiest airport. He gave officials two weeks to devise new plans to prevent such attacks against airports, trains, subways and buses. 

 The Federal Reserve will continue to buy government bonds to boost the recovery, even as it acknowledged that the U.S. economy looks in better shape. The Fed also kept interest rates unchanged. 

 The Congressional Budget Office painted a grim picture of the federal government's finances, saying the budget deficit would jump to almost $1.5 trillion in the current fiscal year, largely because of a tax-cut extension enacted last year. 

In its twice-annual forecast of the U.S. economy, the nonpartisan agency said the gross domestic product would grow 3.1% in 2011 but the jobless rate would remain stubbornly high for the foreseeable future. The new forecast compares with a $1.3 trillion deficit in fiscal 2010.

 A proposal to extend liability for an oil spill to contractors such as Halliburton and Transocean was among ideas floated at a Senate hearing on the Deepwater Horizon incident. The liability cap, which currently applies to operators like BP and not their contractors, is one of the central issues being debated in Congress in the wake of the spill. 

 The 2008 financial crisis was "avoidable" and brought on by the actions of government officials and private-sector players, according to a blue-ribbon panel's draft report that spreads blame broadly for the meltdown.  

 The U.S. is set to record a net $312.2 million from its sale of its final 465.1 million warrants to purchase common shares of Citigroup, the Treasury Department said. Taxpayers are expected to end up with a $12.3 billion profit on the government's $45 billion investment in the company during the 2008 financial-sector bailout.  

U.S. Representative Gabrielle Giffords was transferred from a Houston hospital to a rehabilitation facility as she continues to make progress after being shot in the head Jan. 8. Since she was transferred to Texas from a Tucson, Arizona, facility on Friday, Giffords has remained in Memorial Hermann Hospital's intensive care unit because of continued fluid buildup in her skull.

New-home sales surged 17.5% last month but 2010 was still the worst year on record for the battered homebuilding industry.

 Two former employees of hedge-fund firm Galleon Group became the 18th and 19th persons to plead guilty to criminal charges in a closely watched insider-trading investigation that has ensnared Galleon founder Raj Rajaratnam. 

 The chairman of China's Lenovo Group predicted increased investment in the U.S. from China's companies and its sovereign wealth fund as they seek opportunities in the world's largest economy despite its recent troubles.  

 Chinese prosecutors filed only light charges against a man who police say killed a college student while driving drunk and who witnesses say then tried to use his father's position as a police official to avoid punishment, an incident that has come to symbolize rampant abuse of power among the families of officials. 

South Korea proposed holding a preliminary meeting with North Korea in two weeks' time to lay the groundwork for high-level defense discussions, in what would be the rivals' first official contact since the North's deadly shelling of a South Korean island late last year. 

South Korea's economic growth slowed in the final quarter of last year, but the pace of expansion is likely to pick up again due to healthy exports and a rebound in local demand, adding to inflationary pressures.

Afghan President Hamid Karzai inaugurated the country's newly elected parliament, ending a six-month power vacuum during which the he ruled by decree.

A group of top U.S. military officers is close to completing a review designed to reduce civilian casualties in Afghanistan, one of the biggest sources of friction between Washington and Kabul. It is expected to brief findings to Pentagon leaders in the spring. 

Israel hopes to establish its first sovereign-wealth fund with revenues from recent offshore natural-gas finds within one year, the head of Israel's National Economic Office, Eugene Kandel, said. 

He also outlined some of the policies the government is pushing in its bid to keep the shekel's value down, including new measures to stem inflows of capital.

 Leaked documents show extensive collaboration between Palestinian security forces and their Israeli counterparts, a relationship Israeli commanders say has been key to security gains in the West Bank. 

 In Egypt, protests continued for a second day in the capital of Cairo and other cities, with police breaking up groups marching in defiance of an official ban on gatherings.  

 Egyptian stocks slumped 6.1% Wednesday and the cost of insuring the country's debt against default rose to the highest level in around 18 months amid concerns about escalating political tensions.  

 Tunisia's interim government has issued an international arrest warrant for deposed President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali and his wife on charges of illegal enrichment, Justice Minister Lazhar Karoui Chebbi said. Officials have also started investigations into alleged abuses committed by the former leader, who fled to Saudi Arabia on Jan. 14 after month-long protests against his 23 year rule.  

Laurent Gbagbo's government in Ivory Coast has seized the Ivorian offices and staff of the Central Bank of West African States. His move comes after the internationally recognized president-elect, Alassane Ouattara, took control of the BCEAO Saturday, when West African heads of state forced the pro-Gbagbo bank governor to resign. 

New Zealand may sell as much as US$6 billion worth of its holdings in state-owned energy companies and the nation's flagship airline as well as cut spending in a bid to bring its budget back to surplus a year ahead of schedule. 