The selection of gorgeous, pricey designer clothing for children has vastly expanded in recent years. But it can be hard to justify buying such items when little kids stain, rip, and outgrow their clothes so fast.

"It's pretty mad to splurge on children's clothes," says  Johnnie Boden, the London-based founder of the Boden clothing label—and the father of three daughters between ages 10 and 16. 

So how does he decide what clothes are worth spending more on? For Mr. Boden, who buys between five and 10 new items for each of his daughters per season, it depends on the type of garment. Coats, he says, are worth paying more for. They are kids' winter uniform—worn everywhere from school to the playground to playdates. A good-quality wool jacket, puffer or spring coat that's made of a sturdy fabric and stitched together well enough to withstand wear and tear "can be handed down to several children in a family," he says. "It is testament to the fact that a little extra expense is worth it." 

Mr. Boden also thinks that well-made shirts are "worth the money," as they are versatile enough to be worn often. High-quality, machine-washable knitwear tends to have longevity as well. Fabric with a high cotton content is less likely to pill, he says. 

In general, when buying pricier children's clothing, Mr. Boden likes to feel how heavy the item is. "Fabrics need to be substantial enough to withstand some heavy-duty action," he says. "I often think, where children's clothes are concerned, that weight equals quality." 

But he also looks out for small details that will set a garment apart from less expensive clothing. "It's very pleasing when there are a few surprises: a lovely colorful lining, a fun button or a hidden pocket," he says. "It's always nice to see a bit of quirk and personality." 

While parents often see special occasions as times to buy pricey outfits, Mr. Boden considers party dresses "least important to splurge on, as these dresses are worn so infrequently." 

Instead, Mr. Boden prefers looking for pieces that "combine smart with special." Velvet, he says, is a "big winner." It is available at many prices, has a luxe sheen and "takes color very well"—showing off strong, vibrant hues, while cheaper fabrics can look washed-out. 

Mr. Boden also shuns pricey hats and gloves for his children. "They have a habit of disappearing into thin air," he says. 

Mr. Boden encourages his children to experiment with their own style, which means he winds up buying clothing items that are in vogue. But he draws the line at trends "which I know will be a flash in the pan and completely impractical," such as three-quarter-sleeve coats and "expensive small bags." He adds, "I won't splurge on throwaway fashion."

He notes that it is "madness" to buy clothing items a few sizes larger with the idea that it be used longer. "The child hates wearing them and then goes off them overnight, so the 'clever trick' does not work," he says. Instead, Mr. Boden likes items with adjustable waistbands that can be expanded as a child grows. This is particularly useful for boys; they're less driven by fashion so they may wear clothing over a longer period of time.

The most important thing to consider when contemplating a child's outfit is comfort, Mr. Boden says. Often, a child will simply refuse to wear an item that has a stiff fabric, a scratchy tag, hard-to-use buttons, or a tight neck—making the purchase a complete waste. "Children are addicted to comfort," he says

—  Cheryl Lu-Lien Tan 