They stood on the outfield grass on a sun-soaked morning in March, a new catcher getting to know a pitcher. Ronny Paulino and R.A. Dickey were playing catch for the first time, a routine warm-up for their first bullpen session together. But for Paulino, it was a minor catastrophe.

The catcher had left most of his protective gear in his locker, thinking a mitt and a pair of shin guards would suffice. But from the outset, Dickey's knuckleball flustered him.

Some balls ricocheted off Paulino's glove. Others eluded him entirely. One plunked him on the knee. And that is how Paulino learned the first lesson in catching baseball's most unpredictable pitch.

"You have to wear everything," he said, "or you're going to get hit."

After missing most of spring training and the start of the season because of a visa problem, a suspension and a bout with anemia, Paulino must adjust quickly to his new role with the Mets. He must familiarize himself with every pitcher. But no one presents as great of a challenge as Dickey, whose signature pitch is unlike anything Paulino has ever caught.

Paulino scurried back inside for his helmet, mask and chest protector that day at the Mets' spring training complex in Port St. Lucie, Fla. And if he starts with Dickey Sunday against the Los Angeles Dodgers—a move manager Terry Collins said he was considering Friday— he will no doubt be fully padded.

But only experience can teach him how to corral a pitch whose final destination is unknown even to Dickey. Paulino has caught Dickey during bullpen sessions twice since that initial spring training misadventure, but has yet do to so in a game.

"To be perfectly honest, I don't know that there are many guys who can give any instruction with that," said Mets catching instructor and bullpen coach Jon Debus. "I think you just have to get comfortable and put yourself in a position and wait for the ball to come to you. That's about as much knowledge as I got."

The Mets didn't sign Paulino last winter for his glove. They signed him because of his knack for hitting left-handed pitchers, a skill that was on full display Sunday. With lefty Cliff Lee starting for the Philadelphia Phillies, Paulino set a career high with five hits in his first start for the Mets.

To fully utilize that ability, though, the Mets need to be able to start Paulino in place of Josh Thole anytime they are facing a lefty—including games started by Dickey. That requires Paulino to be able to handle the knuckleball.

Because the pitch is such a rarity in baseball, few catchers are ever required to catch it. Those who learn how to do so still often watch the ball bounce to the backstop. Of Thole's 11 passed balls since the start of 2010, seven have come with Dickey on the mound. When Geno Petralli set a modern-day record with 35 passed balls with the Texas Rangers in 1987, 32 were on pitches thrown by knuckleballer Charlie Hough.

Doug Mirabelli, who became knuckleballer Tim Wakefield's personal catcher with the Boston Red Sox, twice led the majors in passed balls. And he is regarded as the best knuckleball-specialist catcher of all-time.

When he was first traded to Boston in 2001, Mirabelli said he was so nervous about catching Wakefield, he would lose sleep the nights before games. But he became adept at catching him in two ways.

The first had to do with technique. Rather than holding his glove out like a target, Mirabelli would start with it between his knees, keeping his hand loose. He would also tilt his body toward first base, making it easier for him to reach over to his right with his glove, which he wore on his left hand. The second part was mental.

"You just have to be able to free your mind," Mirabelli said by phone from Traverse City, Mich., where he works as a real estate agent. "Once I was able to let go of the fact that passed balls were going to be part of my game and I wasn't going to be able to catch all of them, it allowed me to relax a little bit, which in turn lessened my amount of passed balls."

Like Mirabelli did with Wakefield, Thole and Paulino use an oversize mitt to increase their margin for error. It is the same glove used by catchers in women's softball. But they still must rely on soft hands and quick reflexes to avoid costly mistakes. And because of Dickey's velocity, they face a more difficult task than Mirabelli did. On average, Dickey throws his knuckleball around 75 mph, about 10 mph faster than Wakefield does.

Dickey said a good receiver can help him get five to 10 more called strikes per game by framing pitches at the edge of the strike zone. 

The Mets won't know for sure how adept Paulino will be until they pair him with Dickey in a game. But if he struggles, there's a real estate agent in northern Michigan willing to offer advice.

"If Paulino needs any help," Mirabelli said, "let him know, he can call me."

 Write to  Brian Costa at brian.costa@wsj.com 