BLAGNAC, France—Commercial plane maker Airbus said Monday it took 644 aircraft orders worth a total of $84 billion at list price last year, beating U.S. rival  Boeing
BA


-0.26
%




 Co thanks to unexpectedly robust demand from airlines in Asia, the Middle East and emerging-market countries. 

For the eighth straight year, Airbus remained the world's leading manufacturer of commercial jets with 100 seats or more in terms of deliveries thanks to a new annual record for deliveries of 510 aircraft compared to U.S. rival Boeing's 462. In 2009, Airbus delivered 498 aircraft. Airbus had trailed Boeing in the race for orders for most of last year, but a flurry of activity at the end of the year added more than 200 planes to the order tally in December alone. After taking into account 70 order cancellations, Airbus had 574 net orders worth $74 billion, giving it a 52% share of the global market. 

The Toulouse, France-based company booked revenue in 2010 of roughly €30 billion ($40.13 billion), Chief Executive  Tom Enders said. 

Last year's performance reflected robust demand from carriers in Asia, the Middle East and other emerging markets that even the most optimistic forecasters hadn't foreseen one year ago, Mr. Enders said. 

He noted wryly that the International Air Transport Association, which represents the world's main international airlines, had predicted in early 2010 that the year would be the worst in commercial aviation history, when in fact airlines are now expected to turn record profits. At the same time, he said, some industry commentators one year ago were predicting a slump in aircraft deliveries as orders dried up and airlines canceled their orders in droves. 

"We didn't expect the economy and aviation would recovery so quickly as it did in 2010," Mr. Enders said. 

Chief Commercial Officer-Customers  John Leahy noted that his team saw a flurry of activity at the end of the year, with more than 200 orders finalized in December alone. Last week, Airbus announced a preliminary deal worth $15.6 billion at list prices for 180 A320 medium-range planes from Indian low-cost carrier IndiGo, a contract that is the commercial aviation industry's largest jet order to date in terms of number of planes and one of the biggest by value. 

Short-term prospects are looking good, too, Mr. Enders said. "I'm more optimistic going into 2011 than I was at the beginning of 2010," he said. The only cloud on the horizon is the rising price of aviation fuel that could crimp airlines' finances, Mr. Enders said, but in fact that could help Airbus by encouraging them to replace fuel-thirsty jets with more economical ones. 

Deliveries will continue to rise in 2011, and orders are likely to continue outstripping deliveries, Mr. Enders said. That will add to the company's already massive backlog that stood at 3,552 aircraft at the end of last year, equivalent to six years of future production and worth some $480 billion at list prices. 

To whittle down the backlog, Airbus management is mulling another increase in production rates of its narrow and wide-bodied jets, Mr. Enders said. Last year, the company decided to ramp up production of its A320 family of single-aisle aircraft from 36 a month at present to 38 by August this year and to 40 by the first quarter of next year. 

He said an increase to 42 or even 44 planes a month is possible, as is an acceleration in production of wide-bodied A330 and A340 aircraft from nine a month to 10 or even 11. However, this will depend crucially on the ability of suppliers to keep up. Airbus plans to hire up to 3,000 people this year after recruiting 2,200 in 2010, Mr. Enders said. 

Production of the flagship A380 superjumbo has been disrupted in recent months by problems with the  Rolls Royce
RYCEY


0.98
%




 PLC engines that power some of these planes. But Mr. Enders said he's confident that three of the double-decker planes will be rolling off the production line a month by next year, one more than the present rate. 

 Write to  David Pearson at david.pearson@dowjones.com 