  Heidrick & Struggles International Inc.
HSII


0.85
%




 gave an unusual explanation for depressed third-quarter profit at the executive-recruitment firm.

Heidrick, a company that makes money poaching talent for employers, partly blamed poor results on rivals raiding its own staffers. "It is no secret in the industry that certain of our competitors have targeted us," Chief Executive  L. Kevin Kelly complained during an earnings call in November. "They have gone to great lengths to pry away our talent."

Rival  Korn/Ferry International,
KFY


0.00
%




 in particular, is prying away plenty. One recent hire is  Grace Nida, who headed Heidrick's consumer-industry practice for Japan before joining Korn/Ferry in Tokyo this fall, a Korn/Ferry announcement said.

Heidrick's dilemma reflects talent fights heating up in pockets of the economy, even though hiring overall remains slow. In Silicon Valley, for example,  Google Inc. is fighting off Facebook Inc. and other fast-growing Internet firms that are hiring its staff. Google is giving its employees a 10% raise in January.

Talent raids represent especially high stakes in service industries whose growth largely depends on the creativity and knowledge of their key employees. Within the fiercely competitive search business, an exodus of senior recruiters is especially worrisome because they typically take business with them and big-name departures chip away at a firm's brand. Publicly held Heidrick and Korn/Ferry are the world's two biggest executive-search firms by 2009 revenue, said  Tom Rodenhauser, a search-industry consultant.

Among the recruiter firepower joining Korn/Ferry was  Jane Stevenson, who had been one of Heidrick's top U.S. billers. She became a senior client partner focused on CEO and board assignments, Korn/Ferry said in a May release.

In late July, Korn/Ferry announced it had snared  Paul Legvold, who ran Heidrick's asset-management practice for North America, to help lead its global asset-management practice.

Between June 2009 and November 2010, 36 Heidrick recruiters joined Korn/Ferry, including 25 partners and practice leaders, concludes an analysis for The Wall Street Journal by industry consultant  David Lord. The analysis was largely based on information from the firms' websites. Korn/Ferry confirms the study's head count and names, but not every new hire's start date.

An outside spokeswoman for Heidrick says the Lord study contains a number of inaccuracies, including that "the majority of those listed were not partners at the time of their departures." She wouldn't identify anyone, however. 

Heidrick recruiters jumping ship to Korn/Ferry "leave for their own personal reasons," says  Wendi Taylor Nations, Heidrick's chief marketing officer. She declined to discuss specific individuals. But "we're not in a fight to the death with Korn/Ferry," she adds.

During the third quarter, staff exits hit Heidrick especially hard in Europe. "Our operations in Europe suffered disproportionately from consultant turnover and this has obviously been quite disruptive to the business," Mr. Kelly said during his November conference call.

Heidrick's overall net income fell about 73% to $1.18 million during the third quarter while its European unit had a $1.4 million operating loss.

Korn/Ferry CEO  Gary Burnison spent 11 weeks working in Europe this summer. Among other things, he met recruiter candidates from competitors, recalls  Michael Distefano, chief marketing officer.

"We have made an effort to attract some of the best people we can from other search firms and service industries"—without specifically targeting Heidrick recruiters, says  Joe E. Griesedieck Jr., a Korn/Ferry vice chairman.

Mr. Kelly also complained that rivals' poaching tactics have included "large sign-on bonuses and multi-year guarantees." The Heidrick CEO said the company is being "responsive about retention," and revamping pay "where we feel we are not being competitive."

In April, for instance, Heidrick issued about $12.5 million in special awards designed "to incentivize future service," a regulatory filing said. "We wanted to make sure our top performers stayed with us," Ms. Nations remembers.

Some Heidrick recruiters recently landing at Korn/Ferry say they quit due to their frustration with Mr. Kelly. The CEO "ignored the care and feeding of the senior consultants and big billers," one such former Heidrick partner says.

The ex-partner says Korn/Ferry made him whole for pay left behind and promised "a fair guarantee of compensation" for 2010. But he didn't join "because somebody was pulling a wheelbarrow full of money to my front door," he insists.

A Heidrick spokeswoman said Mr. Kelly declined to comment about criticism of his leadership.

Fellow directors believe he is performing well, according to people familiar with their thinking.

Heidrick is ramping up its own recruiting efforts. "Numerically, we will more or less offset our losses" in 2010 and will mainly choose experienced search consultants, mostly from boutiques, Mr. Kelly said in the conference call.

Some new Heidrick recruiters are recruitment novices.  Dan Mullin previously spent 21 years at  Accenture,
ACN


0.19
%




 a major management consultancy, Heidrick said in an Oct. 5 release announcing his selection as a partner in its financial-services infrastructure practice.

Like Korn/Ferry, Heidrick wants to beef up its leadership consulting services, which involve helping employers to assess and groom executives over a longer period than a single search. Mr. Kelly's strong interest in diversification—and recruiters who can also coach and counsel the 

top brass—largely explains why Heidrick avoids pursuing stars from top-tier firms, says someone familiar with his strategy.

 Write to  Joann S. Lublin at joann.lublin@wsj.com 