LONDON—Manufacturers in the 17 countries that use the euro are more optimistic about their prospects, but that sentiment isn't shared by consumers, service providers and retailers. 

The European Commission said Thursday its overall economic sentiment indicator, or ESI, for the euro zone fell to 106.5 in January from 106.6 in December. Although slight, it was the first decline in the ESI since May and was a surprise.

The commission's measure of confidence among manufacturers rose to 6.0 from 4.9, driven by rising orders, particularly export orders. 

However, measures of confidence in the services and retail sectors fell, as did the measure of consumer confidence, which declined to -11.2 from -11.0, in line with expectations. 

The drop in consumer confidence was driven by a more pessimistic assessment of the euro zone's economic prospects, and a sharp pickup in expected inflation. 

That will worry the European Central Bank, since the survey also found that manufacturers and retailers expect the prices they charge to rise in coming months. 

The ECB's goal is to maintain price stability, which it defines as an inflation rate of just below 2% over the mid-term. The annual rate of inflation in December was 2.2%, the first breach of the ECB's target since late 2008. 

The survey points to a widening divergence between the performance of the export-oriented manufacturing sector, which is being buoyed by strong demand in other parts of the global economy, and the more domestically focused services and retail sectors. 

A more detailed quarterly survey of manufacturers found that factories were operating at 79.7% of their capacity in January, up from 78.3% in October and close to the long-run average of 80%. 

Consumer spending grew just 0.1% in the third quarter of last year, while business investment fell. The commission's survey suggests domestic demand isn't picking up enough, leaving the euro zone's recovery largely dependent on developments its borders. 

Germany has been at the forefront of the manufacturing-focused, export-led recovery in euro-zone growth. But the ESI for the currency area's largest member fell in January, with only the construction industry recording a slight improvement in confidence. 

By contrast, there was a pickup in the ESIs for Greece and Spain, two of the countries that have suffered most from the financial crisis and the ensuing fiscal crisis. 

A separate measure of the environment for manufacturers in the euro zone—the business-climate indicator—rose to 1.58 from 1.38 in December, and is now approaching the all-time highs reached in early in 2007, before the financial crisis. 

