A retired U.S. Army major pleaded guilty Wednesday to one charge of money-laundering for his role in participating in a ring of corrupt Army contracting officers accused of stealing millions of dollars via rigged defense contracts at Kuwait's Camp Arifjan. 

Maj. Charles J. Bowie Jr., 45 years old, is the sixth major implicated in a probe known in Pentagon and Justice Department circles as the Cockerham Case, which now has snared at least seven other soldiers ranging in rank from private first class to colonel. Maj. John L. Cockerham pleaded guilty in 2008 to his role and currently is serving a 17-year federal prison sentence in Texas. In an interview earlier this year Mr. Cockerham denied directing other officers in the scheme.

Court papers in this latest case describe a spring 2005 meeting where Maj. Cockerham instructed Maj. Bowie, then a contracting officer about to be deployed to Iraq, to set up a consulting company called Triad United Technologies LLC to serve as a conduit for kickbacks from a $13 million deal Maj. Cockerham planned to award. That contract was to provide nearly 1.5 million cases of bottled water. Maj. Bowie was to receive a "consulting fee" of $100,000 per month for seven months.

The first delivery of the water took place in July 2005, prosecutors say, and Maj. Bowie began receiving cash payments from the contractor, who is unnamed in court filings. Writing in code, Maj. Bowie sent Maj. Cockerham an email stating "I have 4 eggs that is sitting in the fridge, need your assistance to get them out." Each "egg" represented $100,000 prosecutors say.

Criminal attorney Robert M. Phillips, Maj. Bowie's counsel, advised his client not to comment before sentencing. Maj. Bowie of Georgetown, Texas, faces a maximum sentence of 10 years, however his attorney said his client is cooperating with the ongoing investigation and as a result could receive a lighter sentence.

Triad United Technologies, the consulting firm Maj. Bowie allegedly established to help launder the ring's illegal payments, was incorporated in Texas near the U.S. Army base at Fort Hood. At least one other co-conspirator, Dorothy Ellis, operated a contracting firm called Total Government Allegiance that has been linked to the Cockerham group. Mrs. Ellis, a retired U.S. Army veteran, pleaded guilty to bribery charges last year and was sentenced to serve 37 months in federal prison.

The case of Maj. Cockerham's crew is ongoing. Bribes and kickbacks allegedly involved relatively routine contracts to provide drinking water, laundry and latrine services to military bases, awarded by a small group of officers who seemed to be barely supervised by senior officers. In 2005, the Army's Criminal Investigations Division heard about improper ties between Gloria Davis, a 45-year-old major, and Kuwait-based Lee Dynamics International, a contractor run by a retired soldier named George Lee. LDI allegedly provided gifts to Maj. Davis, and put her son on its payroll. LDI also sent regular cash payments to bank accounts opened for Maj. Davis in Asia. 

In December 2006, CID agents met Maj. Davis at Camp Victory in Baghdad's Green Zone to ask about $225,000 found in her offshore accounts. Sometime after midnight, the CID investigators escorted Maj. Davis to her quarters, agreeing to resume debriefing next morning. Before dawn, she used her own sidearm to commit suicide. 

Within days, CID agents were searching the quarters of her colleague, Maj. Cockerham. Eventually, they seized enough evidence to start building a case against officers at Camp Arifjan. 

Since then, reams of court documents from overlapping cases reveal a pattern of corruption. By the time investigators were closing in, the Cockerham scheme allegedly had spread to new players: new contractors launched by retired soldiers. Maj. Cockerham allegedly hoped to harvest future bribes from them.

 Write to  Joel Millman at joel.millman@wsj.com 