If  Steven Rinella had suggested we hunt blacktail deer in Alaska or octopus in Hawaii—putting the mollusk out of its misery by biting it behind the eyeball as he does in the third episode of "The Wild Within," which debuts on the Travel Channel Jan. 9—my answer would have been a flat "no." These animals had done nothing to harm me and I would do nothing to hurt them. Besides, I have a particular fear of things with tentacles lurking under rocks. 

I'm not sure what the difference between blacktail and whitetail deer is, except that if he said we should kill a few whitetail his offer might have been more appealing. Each season they decimate our magnolia bush before I manage to get the deer fencing up, and their talent for turning our yews into a food source—even with fencing—provides one of the many reasons our home will never be a candidate for shelter magazinehood. 

As far as I'm concerned, it would be a fair fight. I don't think deer get the credit they deserve. Their problem-solving skills—nuzzling under the deer fencing or going around it or over it when it's weighted down with snow—suggest to me that with the proper training they could be taught to swipe a MetroCard, apply for a checking account and reach middle management in IT. 

However, despite all the sadness and expense they bring me, I wouldn't kill them either. They're beautiful animals, and when they cross our lawn I can't help but stop whatever I'm doing to watch.

Squirrels, however, are a different matter. And it was squirrels that Mr. Rinella was proposing we exterminate and then eat. I'd have nothing against squirrels if they had nothing against me. I'm not sure they hate me, though it often feels that way. But they have no respect. It would be one thing if they just spent the whole morning at, and inside, our bird feeders, dislodging the birds and gorging on my expensive black-oil sunflower seed. But they also vandalize the feeders, finding ways to knock them out of the trees and onto the ground. Then they gnaw away at the plastic to get at the remaining morsels, rendering the feeders useless because the next time you try to fill them the seed simply pours out onto the ground.

Our dog, Mimi, used to instill fear. But Mimi can hardly make it down the stairs these days, let alone chase a squirrel up a tree. When I shout at the little beasts from the back porch, they give me the squirrel equivalent of the finger—looking up from their feast and muttering, "If it's that important to you, put on your coat and boots and show us you mean business." Then they go right on eating. Squirrel "baffles" seem to baffle no one except, perhaps, the homeowner trying to install them. 

So I might have been receptive to Mr. Rinella's offer to dust my rodent adversaries with a little buckshot. However, my family would have none of it. My older daughter fancies herself something of an  Annie Oakley. Her boyfriend even bought her a BB gun one birthday and on Valentine's Day took her to a shooting range. But when push came to shove, she was just as weak-kneed as the rest of them, agreeing that Mr. Rinella, the author of "The Scavenger's Guide to Haute Cuisine" and "American Buffalo: In Seach of a Lost Icon," should not be allowed to set foot on our property. 

To be honest, I was somewhat relieved by their edict. I have nothing against hunting, especially if you do it to feed your family. Mr. Rinella's argument is that those of us who eat meat are responsible for the loss of millions, billions, of lives; we just have others do our killing for us. He says going out and shooting your own food is actually a more honest and moral way of gaining nourishment. 

I'd agree with him except I wouldn't want our woods filled with multitudes of city folk stalking dinner; and but for one small incident when I was no more than 12 or 13 years old. 

I'd gotten a BB gun myself, went off into the woods with it and took aim at a bird high in a distant tree, having no expectation of hitting it. 

But hit it I did. 

It came crashing through the leaves and landed on the forest floor with a thud. I'll never forget the spontaneous wave of guilt that washed over me. It didn't feel like a learned response. It came gushing up from the subconscious. Whatever it was, the message was loud and clear: gratuitous violence is wrong.

On the other hand, I can understand the hunting tradition that runs in families. I even enjoy reading hunting columns, though there's an element of transgressiveness to the behavior. And while driving upstate Friday nights I used to listen to an AM radio hunting show out of Ohio, losing reception just as the story was reaching its dénouement, the hunter about to pull the trigger on a mountain lion or a magnificent, 18-point buck.

Part of my pleasure in birdwatching is that it's a form of hunting without killing. And I suspect it incorporates some of the same elements that make one a successful hunter. Knowledge. Self-discipline. And most of all stillness. Coming into harmony with your prey. At best it's a form of meditation. The difference, of course, is that birding ends in the silent satisfaction that comes with a positive identification. Hunting with a rifle or shotgun, on the other hand, seems to rend the very fabric of the forest. 

In the end, I agreed to take up Mr. Rinella on his squirrel-hunting offer—but on someone else's property. And I wouldn't shoot anything myself. I figured worst case (or best case) scenario, word would have gone out, the squirrels made themselves scarce and the TV hunter would be left to give me a tutorial on identifying animal tracks in the snow. Even if he managed to shoot something, I doubted my family was going to join us in squirrel hasenpfeffer, or stew, one of Mr. Rinella's signature dishes.

  Tomorrow: The Squirrel Hunt. 

— ralph.gardner@wsj.com 