FLORHAM PARK, N.J.—The score has loomed over the Jets' locker room like smog for more than a month, no matter how much the players dismiss it as ancient history, no matter how many game balls their coach buries. On Dec. 6, the Jets lost to the Patriots 45-3.

On Sunday, the Jets will return to Gillette Stadium—the scene of the crime—for a divisional playoff game against the Patriots. At stake is nothing short of vindication and a second straight trip to the AFC Championship Game. 

The real question: Do the Jets stand a chance? With that in mind, we present four reasons the Jets believe they can beat the Patriots—or at least avoid getting blown out by 42 points on national TV for the second time in five weeks.

 1. The Jets already beat them once this season. It was a long time ago. On Sept. 19 at New Meadowlands Stadium, the Jets bounced back from a rough season-opening loss to the Baltimore Ravens with a 28-14 victory over the Patriots—despite the second-half absence of cornerback Darrelle Revis, who sustained a hamstring injury defending Randy Moss. (Remember him?) The game launched the Jets on a five-game winning streak.

Of course, both teams are different now. The Jets have had to cope with injuries. The Patriots jettisoned Mr. Moss and re-acquired Deion Branch to take his place. The move has worked out well for New England, which has played near-flawless football since the Cleveland Browns upset them on Nov. 7.

 The Patriots have won eight straight, averaging 37.4 points per game during the stretch while outscoring their opponents by an average of 21.8 points.

Wait, what was the argument we were making? Moving along…

 2. The Jets should be better prepared. Amid the early stages of The Capitulation at Gillette, the Patriots built such a big lead that they changed their defensive alignment in the secondary, shifting from man-to-man coverage to Cover-2. In this scheme, the Patriots' safeties divided the field in half and played zone defense. The Jets seemed completely baffled by this turn of events. They could never recover.

"Who the hell has three quarters' worth of Cover-2 plays?" wide receiver Braylon Edwards said. "We just didn't have that. So if we take advantage of them early on against their man-to-man coverage or Cover-3, now they're forced to play our game. Now we go back and forth. Now we fight, as opposed to just being there and trying to get the game over with."

On Monday, Rex Ryan, the Jets' inimitable head coach, shouldered the blame for what he described as his team's lack of preparation. He said he got "outcoached" by the Patriots' Bill Belichick. Mr. Ryan also said he felt as if his game plan had been too complicated.

"The plan may have looked good on paper, but it wasn't realistic," he said. "When he had to make adjustments, we couldn't execute them."

To their credit, the Jets' offense had few problems handling the Chicago Bears' Cover-2 scheme in a 38-34 loss on Dec. 26. Quarterback Mark Sanchez completed 24 of 37 passes for 269 yards, and the Jets accrued 393 yards of total offense. What tricks does Mr. Belichick have left?

 3. The Jets have recovered from the loss of Jim Leonhard. This is the hope, anyway. Mr. Leonhard, the Jets' top safety, broke his right shin on Dec. 3—three days before The Capitulation. His loss had a psychic impact on the team, and the Jets were ill-prepared to defend Patriots quarterback Tom Brady without him. Mr. Brady eviscerated the Jets' secondary, throwing for 326 yards and four touchdowns.

But the Jets have slowly recovered. Two huge factors: Safety Brodney Pool has elevated his play, and Mr. Revis has been …Mr. Revis. In Saturday's first-round win over the Indianapolis Colts, the Jets limited quarterback Peyton Manning to 225 passing yards and Mr. Revis held Reggie Wayne, the AFC's leader in receptions, to one catch for one yard. Last week, Mr. Ryan bristled when he was asked about Mr. Leonhard.

"Unfortunately, we don't have Jimmy, but we're past that," Mr. Ryan said. "Jimmy understands as well as anybody that we've had to move on."

 4. The Jets know how to win, and win with flair. The Jets won 11 games in the regular season, and many of them came down to white-knuckle finishes. They made NFL history by winning back-to-back road games in overtime against the Detroit Lions and Cleveland Browns. There was a dramatic last-second victory over the Denver Broncos. And how about their 22-17 victory over the Pittsburgh Steelers at Heinz Field on Dec. 19?

"I believe it's our resolve," Mr. Edwards said. "We have that resolve about ourselves that we have the talent, we have the team, we have the plays—we can't lose in those situations. We own those situations.''

The latest example came last weekend against the Colts, when Nick Folk connected on a game-winning, 32-yard field goal as time experienced. 

The point being: If the Jets can keep things close against the Patriots, there is little reason to doubt them.

 "If" is the problem.

 Write to  Scott Cacciola at scott.cacciola@wsj.com 