Legislation is brewing in Congress to put more money into the hands of small, craft beer breweries. But its definition of a small brewery would allow even some publicly traded beer companies to benefit.

The Brewer's Employment and Excise Tax Relief Act—or BEER Act—was introduced last week by Sens. John Kerry (D., Mass.) and Mike Crapo (R., Idaho), and as of Wednesday, it had gained support from 17 other senators.

Under the bipartisan bill, small, craft brewers would pay an excise tax of $3.50 a barrel on the first 60,000 barrels of beer they produce each year—half of what they pay today. 

Those breweries would then pay $16 a barrel on beer production above 60,000 barrels, until they hit two million barrels. Currently, brewers both large and small must pay $18 a barrel once they exceed 60,000 barrels.

The government defines small, craft breweries as those that produce less than two million barrels of beer a year. But the bill seeks to push that ceiling to six million barrels, which would mean that businesses like Boston Beer Co., a public company, would qualify for the tax relief. D.G. Yuengling & Son Inc. could also benefit.

Boston Beer, maker of the Samuel Adams label, produces roughly two-million barrels of beer a year.

—Emily Maltby

Recent efforts to encourage smaller U.S. businesses to explore global markets appears to be paying off, recent data show.

The Export-Import Bank reported an increase in small business export financing between October and January, rising to $1.5 billion from $1.4 billion in the same period a year earlier.

An independent federal agency, the bank provides financing to U.S. firms of all sizes to compensate for the added risks of trading goods and services in foreign markets. From October and January, the agency authorized a total of $8.25 billion in export financing.

Earlier this month, the Small Business Administration unveiled a three-year $90 million-funding program to encourage small-business exporting through the Small Business Jobs Act. The funds will back state-sponsored trade missions, foreign-sales trips and marketing campaigns, among other efforts. Officials from a half dozen federal agencies also launched a cross-country tour this month to encourage small-business exporting.

—Angus Loten

Clean-technology companies—driven by low costs and government subsidies—are booming in China, India, Korea and other overseas locations, said  John Denniston, a partner at venture-capital firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, in a keynote speech at the Cleantech Forum in San Francisco earlier this week. Of the top 30 companies in solar, wind and advanced batteries, four are based in the U.S., Mr. Denniston said, "This is a global game." 

Kleiner has made some big bets so far, carving out $100 million from its $400 million 12th fund raised in 2006 for clean-tech investments, later raising more than $750 million for a fund devoted solely to capital-intensive clean-tech plays. That cash goes alongside a $700 million Fund XIII raised in 2008 and a recently closed $750 million 14th fund that also are making clean-tech bets. 

Nine of 23 Kleiner companies listed in its "greentech" portfolio are located in the San Francisco Bay Area and many have operations in China. The balance is spread across the U.S. and India.

—Lizette Chapman