  Sony Corp. moved to restart its PlayStation Network and Sony Online Entertainment videogame services outside Asia, following a hacking attack that compromised personal information for more than 100 million user accounts last month.

The Japanese company late Saturday said it would begin a phased restoration of its PlayStation Network in the Americas, Australia, New Zealand and the Mideast following the release of a mandatory software upgrade for all PlayStation 3 videogame consoles. 

The network's operation will be limited at first, the company said, offering Internet-based game play, movie rentals and music services through Sony, and restored support for online video streaming through companies such as  Netflix Inc.
NFLX


-2.23
%




 The PlayStation Store, which allows users to purchase games and additional content, is one service that won't be available at the outset.

U.S. customers were able to access most of the phased-in features Sunday morning. Full service is expected to be restored by the end of the month, the company said.

Sony will wait to restart the PlayStation Network in Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Thailand, Singapore, Indonesia and Malaysia. The company didn't give a precise timetable for restoring service in Asia but said it aims to have the region fully operational also by the end of the month.

"We know even the most loyal customers have been frustrated by this process and are anxious to use their Sony products and services again,"  Kazuo Hirai, head of Sony's game division, said in a written statement. "We are taking aggressive action at all levels to address the concerns that were raised by this incident and are making consumer data protection a full-time, companywide commitment."

The attack, which occurred last month, led to the theft of names, addresses, passwords and possibly credit-card numbers. Sony shut down the PlayStation Network and Sony Online Entertainment services as it investigated the attack, which the company said was highly sophisticated.

The events led to inquiries from U.S. lawmakers and lawsuits against the game maker, which has been producing videogame consoles for nearly two decades. 

Sony's image also took a hit, according to surveys by YouGov's BrandIndex, dropping significantly following the shutdown and revelations of the data breach. 

Sony said it will provide its customers with free identity-theft services for a year, including a $1 million insurance policy. In the U.S., identity-theft protection will be through Debix Inc. which is based in Austin, Texas.

As part of the restoration, Sony said all PlayStation 3 customers will need to download a security patch before regaining access to online gaming services. Sony said customers also will be required to change their passwords.

Sony will offer "welcome back" packages, including access to premium services, such as discounts on new content and early access to game demos, and other freebies in attempts to appease frustrated users.

PlayStation Network has about 77 million accounts world-wide, including roughly 31 million in the U.S. 

The first phase of the restart doesn't include Asia because Japan's industry ministry has asked Tokyo-based Sony for a more detailed explanation on how the online service works and what security measures the company is implementing. And because Japan doesn't have a local equivalent of Debix, which has services that cover theft and misuse not only of credit cards but also of other personal information, Sony and the ministry are figuring out how best to protect Japanese customers, according to a person familiar with the situation.

"There were similar cases in the past that were caused by other firms, and we are asking Sony whether their measures are good enough when compared to countermeasures taken in the past," said  Kazushige Nobutani, director of media and content at the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry.

As the vast majority of Asia's PlayStation Network users are in Japan, service in the region is dependent on the Japanese service being ready to restart. 

—Takashi Mochizuki  contributed to this article.