On a recent afternoon, Alex and Martina Davidson, a young couple from Detroit, stepped out of an elevator in San Francisco's Financial District with puzzled looks on their faces. 

"Are you here for the Jejune Institute?" asked receptionist Shirley Zhou.



"Yes," said Mr. Davidson, a 22-year-old college student whose brother told him to show up at 580 California St. without giving details. "What exactly is it?" 

"I'm not supposed to tell you too much about it," replied Ms. Zhou, who handed the couple some forms to fill out. A short while later they were back on the sidewalk studying a list of hints as they searched for their first clue in an elaborate scavenger hunt-like game that thousands of people have played.

The game is almost free—more on that later—and there are no prizes for completing it. The reward, said Jejune Institute founder  Jeff Hull, is the "sense of discovery."

Mr. Hull launched the tongue-in-cheek Jejune Institute in summer 2008 as a project that is half art and half business. The art part is clear: He and two employees created a storyline and hid whimsical clues on public property. The hunt is promoted by a website, www.jejuneinstitute.org, that seems to be a parody of human-potential organizations. Mr. Hull calls it a tribute to the "kookiness" of San Francisco.

The business aspect is less obvious. Mr. Hull said the Jejune Institute is his pilot project for an entertainment company that will design games that use the real world as playing boards. He hopes eventually to create similar treasure hunts for which he charges players or that are sponsored by a company such as an airline.

"Part of me is I just want to do art," said Mr. Hull, a 41-year-old Oakland native who started Oaklandish, an artist collective in his hometown. "The other part of me is I want to have a billion dollars. So I'm trying to fuse those things."

Mr. Hull, who previously worked with his father, investment banker Blair Hull, used some of the windfall from the sale of the family's financial company to fund the Jejune Institute. He said the organization has had operating costs in the low six figures for its 2½-year existence, including salaries and office space. Some of the expenses are recouped from a clue that has to be purchased for a couple of dollars from a store along the scavenger-hunt route.

More than 7,000 people have played the Jejune Institute's first leg, which is the two- or three-hour hunt in the Financial District and Chinatown, Mr. Hull said. Those who complete the first part can play the subsequent four legs in other San Francisco neighborhoods.

The game is especially popular among 20-somethings and fans of Web-based alternate-reality games, or ARGs.

Throughout the hunt, participants search for clues embedded in street fixtures, telephone polls or walls of buildings. One clue requires players to buy an item from a Chinese gift shop, with the store and Mr. Hull's company sharing the proceeds; another sends players through a dimly lit parking garage.

A challenge the game's organizers face is maintaining clues on public property. For example, the Jejune Institute staff once hid a clue near a pay phone. One day, the phone disappeared. So the staff put up a life-size poster of a pay phone, along with the clue, as a temporary fix. Mr. Hull said the staff conducts twice-weekly checks to make sure the clues are still in place.

Back on the sidewalk, the Davidsons were trying to figure out the game. "I don't even know what we're looking for," said Ms. Davidson, a 23-year-old college student. 

"I think that's the point," her husband replied. All they had to go on with their first clue—the words "Timecraft Loading Anchor 13," along with an instruction to search a curb two blocks from the office building where they started.

Fifteen minutes later, Ms. Davidson spotted something on the curb. The couple inspected a small mooring in the ground. Attached to it was a ring that said, "Timecraft Loading Anchor 13." An inscription on the back of the ring provided a portion of their next clue, which eventually sent them to a nearby alley, where they found the next clue on a utility pole. 

Newcomers who want to try the Jejune Institute hunt must do so soon, since the game will end April 10. Mr. Hull said he wants to move on to other projects.

 Write to  Stu Woo at stu.woo@wsj.com 