With a little more than a minute left on Tuesday night, after the Knicks had sealed a win over the NBA's best team, the Garden crowd rose to its feet. After a foul that Knick fans thought would bring Amar'e Stoudemire to the foul line, the crowd started chanting "M-V-P!" 

Instead, reserve guard Toney Douglas took to the line, and the crowd just kept chanting M-V-P, anyway. On a night like Tuesday, they'd give the award to any of the hometown favorites.

The Knicks defeated the San Antonio Spurs 128-115 with an incredible offensive explosion in their first game without injured star Danilo Gallinari. Wilson Chandler led the way with 31 points and nine rebounds, and Raymond Felton and Mr. Stoudemire scored 28 apiece for a team that 54.9 percent from the field.

Coming into the game, the Spurs were a league-best 29-4 and were 10-2 on the road. 

"It's a big win for us," Mr. Stoudemire said. "We had great energy from the start. But it wasn't as easy as it may seem. It was a game where we had to play smart because they are a great defensive team."

The Knicks scored 36 points in each of the first two quarters, and made 12 of their first 15 shots. They were nearly unstoppable on the offensive end.

Though it was not a defensive masterpiece by the Knicks, they did limit the Spurs to 20 points in the decisive fourth quarter. They handled the Spurs' stars, including Tim Duncan, who has haunted Mr. D'Antoni since the Knicks coach's days running the Phoenix Suns.

Mr. Duncan scored just 14 points on Tuesday, nothing like the vintage forward of old. He did not grab a rebound in the first half and had just six first- half points. He looked discouraged and Mr. Stoudemire dominated the matchup on defense down the stretch. 

The Knicks led by as many as 10 points in the third quarter. But with eight minutes left in the fourth, the Spurs had cut the lead to 108-105. From there, Mr. Felton hit two free throws and Mr. Chandler hit a layup to give the Knicks a seven-point lead. Mr. Felton hit a 3-pointer from the corner, then a jumper near the free throw line on consecutive possessions to give the Knicks a 120-111 lead they would never give up. 

In a game in which height was mostly irrelevant, including long stretches with 6-foot-8 Shawne Williams playing center and 6-foot-7 Wilson Chandler playing his normal power forward spot, the most successful undersized player on the court was 6-foot-8 Spurs forward DeJuan Blair, who scored 17 points and grabbed eight rebounds, despite being matched up with Mr. Stoudemire for much of the game.

It was also a comeback game for rookie Landry Fields, who scored 13 points and grabbed six rebounds after being held to three combined points in two road games last week.

There were low points: Ronny Turiaf was called for a technical when he threw a shoulder at Mr. Blair during a confrontation in the lane after Mr. Blair dunked over him. Later in the first half, Mr. Stoudemire was called for a technical when he complained about a foul call. Mr. Stoudemire now has 10 on the season, six short of a one-game suspension. 

Tuesday's game was the Knicks' first without Mr. Gallinari, their sharpshooting small forward who will miss two to three weeks with a sprained left knee, suffered in the fourth quarter of Sunday's win against the Indiana Pacers. In an interview before Tuesday's game, Mr. Gallinari said he didn't feel the injury would cost him so much time, but when he woke up a day after the injury, there was considerable pain. Mr. Gallinari said he will make the trip out west, but only in an effort to get more treatment from team doctors. 

With Mr. Gallinari out, Tuesday was an opportunity to see the new Knicks rotation. Mr. Turiaf got the start at center, moving Mr. Stoudemire to power forward and Mr. Chandler to small forward. Mr. Williams, as expected, continued to receive playing time, getting 20 minutes. But the biggest surprise was small forward Bill Walker, who played 18 minutes and scored six points.

 Write to  Kevin Clark at kevin.clark@wsj.com 