NEW YORK—Philanthropist  Bill Gates Monday called for governments to continue investing in foreign aid, saying that failure to do so would destabilize the world. 

In an annual letter he has written the beginning of each of the last three years, Mr. Gates promoted the key initiatives he is pursuing as co-chair of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, the world's largest private philanthropy. 

Woven throughout his letter was Mr. Gates's concern that the global financial crisis is crimping foreign-aid budgets. 

"I believe it is in the world's enlightened self-interest to continue investing in foreign aid," Mr. Gates wrote in his letter. If societies can't provide for their people's education and basic health, "then their populations and problems will grow and the world will be a less stable place," he wrote. 

Mr. Gates underscored his letter at an event in New York he hosted to raise awareness for the global fight against polio, which cripples and can kill.

Government aid budgets are "under attack" as pressure from the global economic crisis is forcing them to find areas to cut. Aid, is an easy target, he said. "It's got in a sense the weakest constituency," he said. 

Between 2004 and 2008, global health assistance rose by an annual average of 13%, but between 2008 and 2010, the rate of growth slowed to 6% annually, according to the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation at the University of Washington. Health aid totaled an estimated $26.87 billion in 2010. 

Mr. Gates is betting that making strong gains against polio will have a halo effect on future global health work. The eradication of smallpox—the only human disease to be killed off by man—in the late 1970s helped generate interest and funding in other diseases. The polio eradication effort was sparked at that time. 

Achieving eradication of polio can "not only help us get vaccination rates up but also help us add in some new vaccines," he said. 

Mr. Gates and his foundation are latecomers to the polio fight, which was started over two decades ago by Rotary International, the World Health Organizations and others. 

The effort made quick progress, radically reducing the number of polio cases in the world. But for the past decade it has struggled to end the disease.

The disease, remains entrenched in four countries: India, Nigeria, Pakistan and Afghanistan.

Mr. Gates and his partners are emboldened by recent success in Nigeria, where polio bounced back after religious leaders stifled vaccination efforts. Mr. Gates and his partners have helped bring dramatic declines in the number of cases in the past two years, in part by working more closely with Muslim leaders there.

"It is really in these next few years that we've got to keep the pressure on and get it down to zero," Mr. Gates said at the briefing.

Such new attention on the disease has paid off: At the end of 2010, there were 874 reported cases of polio in the world, down from 1,503 cases a year earlier, according to the WHO.

In Pakistan, though once, nearly gone, polio has bounced back as unrest and other problems have delivering the polio vaccine to children.

"For us this has become a public embarrassment," His Excellency Owais Ahmad Ghani, governor of Pakistan's Khyber Pakhutunkhwa district, said at the Gates event. 

 Write to  Robert A. Guth at rob.guth@wsj.com 