International relief organizations are raising donations, delivering water and blankets, and setting up children's centers to aid victims of the earthquake and tsunami in Japan. 

But compared with last year's earthquake in Haiti or the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami that killed more than 200,000 people, they are holding back much of their most ambitious aid-giving. 

They say that is partly because Japan, one of the world's wealthiest nations, has the ability to deal with the disaster's aftermath largely on its own—and partly because the government hasn't asked for much aid from many groups. 

Still, harsh conditions, including destroyed infrastructure and fears of radiation, are hampering relief efforts, and despite Japan's considerable skills, many needs aren't being met. Nearly half a million people are camped out in about 2,500 refugee centers that have been set up in public buildings such as schools and are surviving on basic rations.

International aid agencies "are not giving—it's very small," said Oliver Lacey-Hall, head of the regional office for Asia and Pacific of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, or OCHA, in Bangkok, which helps to coordinate aid efforts in the region.

So far, he said, "big humanitarian agencies recognize there is probably sufficient capacity" in Japan, unlike some poorer developing countries like Haiti, Myanmar or Sri Lanka that needed massive airlifts of food, water and shelter in the aftermath of disasters in those places in recent years.

Japan also hasn't been asking for as much aid even though many international groups, including the United Nations, have offered. OCHA estimated Wednesday that Japan has so far received offers of aid from 113 countries and has accepted 14, mainly for search-and-rescue aid. The U.N. has sent its own team of about seven people to help. 

Some experts on humanitarian relief believe it may be better for Japan if not too many aid groups get involved. Humanitarian relief such as food and water is almost always needed in major disasters, but many aid groups have come under heavy criticism in recent years for failing to coordinate their activities, getting in the way of governments and saddling nations with unwanted supplies, such as winter coats for tropical climates. 

Many aid organizations haven't been sending staff or supplies into Japan because they already have large affiliates based there. The International Federation of Red Cross hasn't sent teams from outside Japan because the Japanese Red Cross has as many as 1,000 medical people on the ground and can draw from two million trained local volunteers, ranging from cooks to helicopter pilots. "The urge to send people from outside quite often can be very counterproductive," said Paul Conneally, a spokesman for the relief group in Geneva. 

 Meanwhile, Japanese disaster victims are surviving on minimum rations of one daily serving of rice and water in some of the more remote refugee centers as relief workers struggle with damaged infrastructure, including roads, says the International Federation of Red Cross.

People not only in the earthquake-stricken northeast but also in Tokyo were scrambling to grab what's left on the emptying shelves at groceries and convenience stores.

In Iwaki, a city on the northeastern coast, almost all of the convenience stores had been shut down while the few open supermarkets are devoid of fresh food and daily necessities, according to a local public-relations officer. Those wanting to leave the town have been stymied by a shortage of gasoline.

Even people in Tokyo have been hoarding supplies amid concerns the winds may carry the radioactive materials to the capital. 

"I went to the supermarket to buy bread, instant noodles and canned food, but there was very little left on the shelves," said Mieko Saiki, 29, an employee at a Tokyo consulting firm. 

The nation has survived massive earthquakes in the past and has one of the world's most sophisticated distribution systems. Yet, retailers say the current trial they face is unprecedented.

 Relief staff isn't working in exclusion zones but there also aren't civilians in those areas, he noted.The Japanese Red Cross has distributed more than 100,000 blankets amid below-freezing temperatures in some areas, in addition to helping with search-and-rescue missions, medical aid and the distribution of food and water. One challenge has been getting medicine to elderly, displaced residents. The Red Cross also is monitoring the radiation situation "very closely," Mr. Conneally said.

Wednesday's OCHA assessment report noted that thousands of households remain without electricity and many survivors still lack protective clothing or blankets amid snow and extraordinarily cold weather. 

Emergency teams haven't been able to reach all the affected areas because of logistical problems, it noted, and some 1.6 million households still lack water.

If it was clear Japan was suffering beyond its ability to respond, "we'd reiterate our offer" to help more, Mr. Lacey-Hall said. But institutions like the United Nations "are in no position to impose" themselves on Japan, he said. 

—Kana Inagaki contributed to this article.

 Write to  Patrick Barta at patrick.barta@wsj.com and Mike Esterl at mike.esterl@wsj.com 