At this point, the Jets could charge admission to head coach Rex Ryan's press conferences. 

On Monday, the indefatigable Mr. Ryan was at it again, cranking up the hype machine for Sunday's divisional playoff game against the Patriots. It was 19 minutes, 42 seconds of pure, unfiltered Rexisms. 

As the Jets prepare to take on the Patriots for the third time this season, one thing is safe to say: Mr. Ryan and his larynx are prepared for battle. 

After a season of covering the colorful coach, here are a handful of sound bites from today's proceedings, decoded for a general audience. 

 Rex says: "After watching that tape, that was great."

 Behind the bluster: These were the first seven words out of Mr. Ryan's mouth. He was referring, of course, to the Jets' 17-16 victory over the Indianapolis Colts on Saturday. It provided a huge jolt of confidence for a team that had closed the regular season by losing three of its last five games.

 Rex says: "The play of Darrelle Revis was—well, I mean, quite honestly, he's the best player in football."

 Behind the bluster: On Saturday, Mr. Revis, the Jets' All Pro cornerback, held Reggie Wayne to one catch. Not only that, quarterback Peyton Manning only targeted Mr. Wayne once. (Mr. Wayne, the Colts' leading receiver, was not particularly pleased about this, but we digress.)

 Mr. Revis is a rare talent, no question. But containing the Patriots' wide receivers, as well as their rookie tight ends, figures to be more of a challenge. Mr. Revis can only defend one player at a time, and Patriots quarterback Tom Brady proved as much in the Patriots' 45-3 victory on Dec. 6, spreading 21 completions around to eight receivers.

 Rex says: "For whatever reason, I never had my team prepared the way it should've been prepared, and that falls right down on me."

 Behind the bluster: Mr. Ryan continues to take the responsibility for that loss. And to his credit, he seldom, if ever, blames his players for poor performances. It is one of the reasons he seems beloved in the locker room. Even if his players recognize this as an obvious ploy to take the pressure off of them, they appreciate the gesture. "He cares for his players, and he cares for this organization," cornerback Antonio Cromartie said.

 Rex says: "This is about Bill Belichick versus Rex Ryan. There's no question it's personal. It's about him versus myself."

 Behind the bluster: If this sounds familiar, it should. Mr. Ryan framed the Colts game as a "personal thing" with Mr. Manning. That actually worked out pretty well for the Jets, so we can't blame Mr. Ryan for going back to the well this week. 

 Rex says: "I also told Belichick after the game, 'We'll see you in Round 3.' He just looked at me."

 Behind the bluster: Getting clobbered by 42 points would humble some coaches, if not humiliate them. But there was Mr. Ryan, in the immediate wake of that catastrophe, chirping away at Mr. Belichick, the Patriots' stone-faced coach, during the postgame handshake. Love him or loathe him, at least Mr. Ryan is consistent in his approach.

 Rex says: "Every day."

 Behind the bluster: This is how often Mr. Ryan said he plans to watch film this week of the Jets' 45-3 loss. Remember when he buried one of the game balls from the bludgeoning? It was a symbolic gesture aimed at mending his players' self-esteem. But he did not dispose of the game tape.

 Rex says: "They were probably getting ready for someone else."

 Behind the bluster: New England earned a first-round bye for winning the AFC East, and Mr. Ryan was asked if he felt that the extra time would give the Patriots an advantage when it came to game-planning. Not so much, Mr. Ryan said, leaving everyone to draw the obvious conclusion: The Patriots thought the Jets would lose to the Colts. Oh, such blatant disrespect! Keep in mind, the Patriots never actually said a word about this.

 Rex says: "Peyton Manning would've been watching our game."

 Behind the bluster: So it turns out that Mr. Brady, rather than watch the Jets' game against the Colts on Saturday, opted for a night at the theater, taking in "Lombardi" on Broadway. 

We might need a flowchart here, but last week Mr. Ryan appeared to take a shot at Mr. Brady when he said that no quarterback studies more film than Mr. Manning. Mr. Brady might "think" he does, Mr. Ryan said, but he would be wrong. In either case, it was another jab directed squarely at Mr. Hair—er, Brady. Subtlety has never been Mr. Ryan's forté.

 Rex says: "I understand how it's going to (come across) that I took a shot at Brady and all that. He took a slap at me with his antics on the field."

 Behind the bluster: Okay, we're slightly confused here. What were those antics, exactly? Throwing for 326 yards and four touchdowns? Mr. Ryan indicated that Mr. Brady pointed at the Jets' sideline after one of those passes, and proceeded to "sprint off the field" after the game. What was he supposed to do? Jog? Walk? Hop aboard a Segway? Lest we forget, this is all calculated. Mr. Ryan enjoys few things more than creating enemies and adversaries as a means of cultivating the Jets' us-against-the-world mentality. Then again, maybe he really does hate Mr. Brady.

 Rex says: "We just beat Peyton at Indy. I don't know how many teams have done that. This team has won three road playoff games in two years. So, hey, we win this one, we'll be right back where we always were: Same old Jets, right in the AFC Championship game."

 Behind the bluster: No translation needed.

 Write to  Scott Cacciola at scott.cacciola@wsj.com 