The four remaining space shuttles will make their final landings in Los Angeles, New York, Washington and Florida's Kennedy Space Center, NASA said Tuesday. 

The winners beat more than a dozen bidders in cities around the U.S. and capped off months of maneuvering by lawmakers seeking to win possession of the spacecraft once the 30-year-old shuttle program ends with a final flight this summer. 

More than hometown pride is at stake. The shuttles are expected to increase visitors and prestige for the museums that will display them.

NASA chief and former shuttle commander Charles Bolden said that after 130 flights, the final mission will be "bittersweet for all of us." He said the winners all have some historic connection to the shuttle program. 



The Endeavour, slated to make its final trip later this month, will be displayed at the California Science Center in Los Angeles. 

The shuttle's prime contractor, North American Aviation, was based in Los Angeles County. It merged with Rockwell International in 1967 and the combined company was acquired by Boeing Co. in 1996.

New York City will get Enterprise, the prototype shuttle that was used for test flights in the 1970s. It is currently displayed at the Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center of the Smithsonian's National Air and Space Museum in suburban Virginia, the future home for Discovery, the shuttle that was retired last month.

The Enterprise will be exhibited on the West Side of Manhattan, at the Intrepid Sea Air and Space Museum. The Intrepid was used as a recovery vessel for NASA in the days when astronauts returning to Earth in space capsules had to be plucked from the ocean. 

Atlantis, slated to fly the last planned shuttle mission this summer, will stay at the Kennedy Space Center Visitor's Complex in Florida.

The results were particularly upsetting to Ohio Democratic Sen. Sherrod Brown, who said in a statement that NASA "ignored the intent of Congress and the interests of taxpayers," and requested a federal probe "into a flawed selection process."

Mr. Bolden told a congressional panel Monday "the process has been as pure as I can make it."

There were some consolation prizes. The U.S. Air Force Museum in Mr. Brown's home state will be able to put some nose-cap assemblies and crew compartment interiors on display. Houston, home of the Johnson Space Center where shuttle astronauts train, will get some shuttle seats. And Seattle's Museum of Flight will receive a full-fuselage trainer.

But Congress has passed legislation calling for most of those dollars to be used to continue development of the Orion spacecraft and a proposed heavy-lift rocket largely based on existing shuttle-propulsion technology. Orion's development is led by Lockheed Martin Corp.

At the Senate Appropriations subcommittee Monday, Mr. Bolden said he expected to soon reveal detailed design and spending plans for multibillion-dollar heavy-lift rockets and spacecraft. He said some of the details could be released as early as this week.

The NASA chief was greeted with bipartisan criticism of the agency's efforts. As lawmakers prepare to trim the agency's budget below the previously established level of $18.7 billion for the current fiscal year, the political tug-of-war over NASA's direction appears headed for a climax.

But NASA critics contend the agency is angling to develop an alternative to Orion, or wants to slow down the program to shift funds elsewhere. "We see no movement from NASA to continue the [Orion] program at all," Republican Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison of Texas complained to the NASA chief. Ms. Hutchison said the agency's plan so far "deliberately hamstrings the ability for Orion" to meet a goal of being operational by 2016.

Orion originally was slated to get more than $2 billion in annual funding. But that was reduced to $1.4 billion by Congress, and NASA's latest budget projects it to decline to $1 billion a year through the middle of the decade.

• Enterprise, a prototype rolled out in 1976, never flew in space.

• Columbia flew the first mission April 12, 1981; a 2003 re-entry accident killed 7.

• Challenger broke apart Jan. 28, 1986, killing 7, including teacher Christa McAuliffe.

• Endeavour is set to launch April 29; Atlantis's last liftoff will be this summer.

 WSJ Research 

With thousands of jobs in Florida, Texas and elsewhere expected to disappear when the last shuttle is retired, Sen. Barbara Mikulski, the Maryland Democrat who heads the appropriations panel, appeared to warn the NASA chief about further funding cuts from shuttle derivatives that rely on solid propellants. Congress has called for those derivatives to be the backbone of any future heavy-lift rocket design.

Instead of concentrating on jobs that eventually could be created by NASA's commercial-space initiatives, Ms. Mikulski said that "every member is concerned about jobs today." 

Mr. Bolden responded that the agency's forthcoming plan will demonstrate that "we are not stalling" and "we are not wasting time nor money" in coming up with future technologies.

 Corrections & Amplifications 

NASA decided that the Smithsonian Institution's companion site in Chantilly, Va., a Washington suburb, will display the retiring space shuttle Discovery. This article incorrectly said that the shuttle was headed to Washington.

 Write to  Andy Pasztor at andy.pasztor@wsj.com and Devlin Barrett at devlin.barrett@wsj.com 