Radio host Don Imus and his wife, Deirdre, have trimmed the price on their waterfront compound in Westport, Conn., by 17%, to just under $25 million.

The four-acre property, listed in 2005 and 2009 for $30 million, has a 10,000-square-foot Georgian Revival-style main house with six bedrooms, a guest house and a gatehouse. The property has 215 feet of sandy beach frontage. The Imuses bought the property in 1997 for $4.6 million and completed the home in 2000. Listing broker  Darlene Letersky of Coldwell Banker says the couple is selling because they use the property infrequently. 

Former AOL executive Ted Leonsis, owner of the NBA's Washington Wizards and the NHL's Washington Capitals, has paid $20 million for Marwood, a historic 13-acre estate in Potomac, Md.

Mr. Leonsis bought with his wife, Lynn. The sellers, telecommunications executive Chris Rogers and his wife, Nalini, also bought the Leonsis family's McLean, Va., home for $9 million. The new Leonsis estate, above, once the home of Joseph P. Kennedy, is a 1926 20,000-square-foot chateau-style riverfront mansion. There's a gate house, pool and pool house. 

The new Rogers home is an approximately 20,000-square-foot mansion with eight bedrooms and 11 full baths.  Mark McFadden of Washington Fine Properties represented the Leonsis family in both deals and represented the Rogers family in its purchase of the McLean home.  Marc Fleisher of Long & Foster Real Estate represented the Rogers family in the sale of Marwood, which wasn't on the market.

Barbara Picower, the widow of Madoff-scandal figure  Jeffry Picower, has sold their 28-acre Fairfield, Conn. estate for $6.6 million, 12% less than the just-under $7.5 million asking price earlier this year.

Mrs. Picower, who recently agreed to pay $7.2 billion to benefit the victims of Bermard Madoff's Ponzi scheme while maintaining her husband's innocence in the fraud, bought the property in 1981 with Mr. Picower. It's located in the rural Greenfield Hills area and has a contemporary main house, a guest house and a caretaker's cottage. 

  Todd Gibbons of William Pitt Sotheby's International Realty represented Mrs. Picower and  Christine Magliocco of the Higgins Group represented the buyers,  Stefan Sonnenfeld, founder of a Los Angeles post-production company called Company 3, and his wife, Missy Papageorge. 

—Juliet Chung

—Email privateproperties@wsj.com 