It's a bright, spring-like morning at the Great Pyramid, peak time in the peak season for Giza. There is one person climbing the huge stones on the structure's front face: My 9-year-old son, Jonah. He has a wonder of the ancient world all to himself. 

My wife and daughter, meanwhile, are creeping up the steep tunnel to the burial chamber where King Khufu believed he would become a God. Tourists normally line up early for tickets, as only 300 are sold each day. But the booths were empty that morning, and now they are alone. 

"It felt like he was still in the room" because of the eerie echoes, said Georgia, age 6, of Khufu, age 4,600-plus.

For the intrepid, there may never be a better time to visit the land of the pharaohs. Cairo's hotels are offering deals, flights are largely empty, tour companies are discounting, crowds are non-existent and, make no mistake, Egyptians want you here. 



"Thank you for coming to our revolution," said one of the protesters still in Tahrir Square in early March, who clamored to pose for pictures with our children. Another burly protester wept as he lifted them onto his shoulders. 

Truth may be the first casualty of war, but when it comes to social unrest, tourism must be a contender. Egypt's popular revolt began on Jan. 25; within nine days, according to then-Vice President Omar Suleiman, 1.1 million tourists had fled the country. The revolution turned largely calm when President Hosni Mubarak resigned on Feb. 11, but travelers are just beginning to trickle back. 

It's a common pattern. After the war in Yugoslavia, it took four years for tourists to crowd Croatia's Dalmatian coast again. Louis O'Neill, a former diplomat, visited Cambodia as a tourist in 1997, after the Khmer Rouge were crushed. "It was awesome—no tourists, no hawkers, cheap, good food. We spent a whole day in Angkor Wat and saw a total of seven people." 

Egypt, fortunately, has not descended into civil war, and local agencies expect recovery to take months rather than years. 

Still, more than 300 people died in the pro-democracy uprising and life is hardly back to normal. Tanks are still stationed around Cairo, and there are few police in the streets. Though we never felt unsafe, while we were visiting the ancient sites, blissfully unaware, protesters attacked secret police offices in central Cairo and Giza.

The U.S. State Department has yet to lift its travel advisory discouraging all but essential travel to Egypt and the few foreign tourists we met were on pre-booked tours from Europe. 

My wife, Brenda, had wanted to visit Egypt during our children's mid-semester break in the first week of March. We abandoned those plans when the protests began. But as the school break approached, it suddenly seemed that we might be missing an opportunity to see the country at a unique point in history. 

We used Expedia to book flights and a hotel room for the four of us for three nights, and discovered deep discounts. Flights from Istanbul, where we live, were $280. A room at the five-star Intercontinental Semiramis Hotel, just off Tahrir Square, was around $185 per night. The Novotel at Giza cost $100. A suite with breakfast at the luxurious Kempinski Hotel is currently $267, down from $400. 

The Turkish Airlines flight was less than a quarter full, the airport a breeze. The kids learned to read Arabic numbers from the license plates in one of Cairo's infamous traffic jams. (They scored 100% on a test when we got home. I failed.) Even so, it took just 45 minutes to reach the Egyptian Museum in central Cairo.

"You will be treated like kings and queens…and see history while it is being written," said Mohamed El Awady, director of the museum, home to the treasures of Tutankhamun. This was true. He wasn't able to connect us with the tourism ministry because "they all resigned this morning."

The Egyptian Museum is comparable to the Louvre and the British Museum in its collection, but visiting feels a lot like rummaging around in your great aunt's over-stuffed attic. The display cases are Victorian-era affairs with descriptions typed up on paper. Of course, the family attic doesn't have Tutankhamun's glittering funeral mask, sculpted into  his likeness so that his soul would recognize him in the  afterlife, nor the mummified remains of nine pharaohs. There were just two other people in the main hall with us.

The next morning was a Friday, the day when crowds still descend on Tahrir Square after prayers each week. We wanted to see where the revolution started—but early, before the crowds got big. We arrived around 10:30, and were frisked by apologetic young people at security check points. 

Already about 1,000 people were milling around. The mood was friendly, but, understandably, still raw with emotion. Pictures of the dead were plastered around the tent city in the center of the square. People were celebrating the dismissal of the Mubarak-appointed prime minister a day earlier. They thrust Egyptian flags into our hands and crowded around to have their pictures taken with Jonah and Georgia. 

"They aren't strangers— they're Egyptians," Georgia reassured Jonah, who was overwhelmed by all the people trying to hold him.

After lunch we took the kids to the Pharaonic Village, a 1980s theme park devoted to Egyptian history, built on an island in the Nile. The park is a little dog-eared and there are certainly better things to see in Cairo. But the kids loved the dramatizations of ancient Egyptian village life, and there is a fascinating recreation of Tutankhamun's tomb as it was found, with copies of the boy king's treasures and toys, piled up as if ready for a trip. 

On Saturday, we set out for Giza and the great pyramids. The hotel concierge arranged a van with driver ($60) and licensed guide ($40), for the day. To say this was good value doesn't begin to cover it. Hanan Omara spent four years at university studying for her license and reads hieroglyphics. She had worked just three days since the turmoil began. "It was worth it," she said. 

Beside the pyramids, Ms. Omara took us to a viewing platform, where the camel ride salesmen were waiting for business. We took Casanova, Mickey Mouse and Charlie Brown for a 15-minute ride into the desert, at $6  per camel. 

The kids had been talking for days about seeing the Sphinx. In person, they mainly wanted to know where its nose had gone. During a normal high season, Ms. Omara said, it can take 20 minutes to shuffle through the narrow passageway that leads to the funeral temple, the closest viewing point for the Sphinx. It took us seconds.

The highlight of the trip was the oldest pyramid of them all, the so-called step pyramid at Saqqara, and behind it a nobleman's tomb with astoundingly beautiful reliefs of hieroglyphs and ancient life. The kids tried to build sand pyramids in the arena outside. 

But for a handful of aggressive souvenir hawkers, for these three days in Egypt, we weren't treated as tourists at all. Strangers repeatedly stopped us in the street just to shake our hands, or kiss the kids, and say earnestly: "Welcome to Egypt. Welcome." 

 Write to  Marc Champion at marc.champion@wsj.com 