New York City property owners at a public hearing on Monday blasted the city's Department of Finance over changes in valuation methods that resulted in property assessments skyrocketing by as much as 140% in a single year.

Those assessment increases could lead to increases in property taxes of as much as 40%—amounting to hundreds of dollars in additional taxes—for condos and co-ops owners. 

Queens co-op owners got hit the hardest. Nearly one third the large co-op buildings in Queens saw their property assessments jump by more than 50%. 

"This will create enormous hardships for co-op owners," said  Robert Friedrich, president of the board of Glen Oaks Village, a co-op in Queens with about 2,900 apartments. Glen Oaks Village was initially hit with an assessment increase of 86%. 

The Department of Finance began making changes to the way it assesses co-ops and condos last year. It started using a different valuation method and also began using a new computer program to assist with analysis of the assessments. 

The new system resulted in the discovery that many co-op assessments in Queens—and to a lesser degree in other boroughs—had been undervalued by the city in previous years. 

That discovery troubled local officials. "It raises significant quality control concerns about the work of the department," said City Council Speaker  Christine C. Quinn. 

The Department of Finance's changes to the assessment process were also done without alerting homeowners, which drew more criticism. "Homeowners felt ambushed because these changes literally took place over night," said Council member  Domenic Recchia Jr. 

The Department of Finance has been taking steps to mitigate complaints from property owners. In March, the department capped property assessment increases at 50% for this year for co-ops and condos after property owners in Queens howled over the steep rate jumps. 

Additional steps to alleviate higher assessment rates were announced Monday. Some of the affected properties are going to have their property assessment increases capped at 10% for this year, said Finance Commissioner  David M. Frankel. Eligibility will be determined by other tax factors, he said. 

The Department of Finance says the change announced on Monday and the measures taken in March will cover about 906 buildings citywide. 

There are several bills in Albany looking to tackle the property tax question. 

One bill proposed by State Sen. Toby Ann Stavisky would reclassify co-ops and condos in the same tax class as single-family homes. Under current state law, co-ops and condos are assessed as rental income property. She proposed in another bill to cap increases in assessments on condos and co-ops at 6% for one year. 

Mr. Frankel, the finance commissioner, said the department was considering recommendations to make broader changes to property-tax law. 

But he said he wouldn't support Ms. Stavisky's property tax bills in their current form. 

 Write to  Joseph De Avila at joseph.deavila@wsj.com 