Pulses raced and hearts fluttered when auction house Sotheby's announced last summer the sale of 20 jewels and precious objects formerly in the collection of the late  Wallis Simpson, the Duchess of Windsor.

Read the complete  Watches and Jewelry report.  

It was a rare opportunity to have a second crack at acquiring some of the key pieces that had captivated collectors when they were first auctioned in 1987. This first sale raised a whopping $50 million (€36 million) and set a record for the most valuable single-owner jewelry collection ever sold. The second auction of Wallis Simpson's jewelry, in November, was no less exciting. The sale, which raised almost £8 million ($12.5m), included items that evoked not only one of the most scandalous love affairs in history, but a constitutional crisis in the U.K. and the abdication of a King –  Edward VIII. 



The star piece of the collection was a Cartier onyx and diamond panther bracelet set with emerald eyes and articulated so as to curl seductively when worn around Simpson's wrist. The bracelet provoked a furious bidding war between four potential buyers, eventually selling to an anonymous buyer via a telephone bid for £4.5 million, making it the most expensive bracelet sold at auction and setting a new record for Cartier. Wallis had bought the panther bracelet in 1952 when she and Edward were living in exile in Paris as the Duke and Duchess of Windsor. It was designed by Cartier's jewelry director,  Jeanne Toussaint, and is reputed to be one her finest "great cat" jewels.

Also by Cartier, a Flamingo brooch ablaze with rubies, sapphires, emeralds and diamonds, bought by the Duchess of Windsor in 1940, sold for £1.7 million. Cartier bought the Flamingo for its private collection. 

The sale of the Windsor jewels illustrates the continued spectacular demand for fine jewelry with provenance - a demand that has not been dimmed by financial crisis and recession. "It's the combination of the great jewels, a magnificent royal connection and also the greatest romance of the 20th century, so it had all the right ingredients to attract the world's attention," says  David Bennett, chairman of Sotheby's Jewelry in Europe and the Middle East.

The story behind an object is hugely important in such sales and can add value even to pieces that have little or no intrinsic value. A costume black stone necklace worn by  Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis when she met President de Gaulle was sold in 1996 for $101,500 - over 400 times the pre-sale estimate.

However,  Harry Fane, a leading authority on vintage Cartier and owner of the Obsidian Gallery in London, says that not everyone wants pre-owned jewelry. Some buyers are even wary of the intimacy of a woman's private jewelry collection. "Some people are fascinated by the provenance and only care about that, while others wouldn't buy second-hand jewelry for all the tea in China," Mr. Fane says. "There's an element of superstition and fear that somehow those pieces may have been imbued with characteristics of the previous owner." Mr. Fane loves the story behind an item and tells of his delight at buying a collection of Louis Cartier's family papers. "For me it was an intensely intimate connection with the man I'd been such an admirer of."

  Geoffrey Munn, managing director of London jewelers Wartski, describes the excitement that contact with a piece of jewelry owned by someone famous has. It is a bit of magic that has a deep, almost primeval appeal, he says. This is especially the case when that item contains stunning precious gemstones, has a royal link, a story and is also made by a significant designer.

A Fabergé brooch with a huge Siberian aquamarine sitting regally on top of a glittering rim of interwoven diamonds symbolizing eternity and union is breathtaking enough, but when Mr. Munn starts to tell the story of the piece it takes on an otherworldly quality. For the brooch is an engagement present from Tsar Nicholas II, the last emperor of Russia, to then Princess Alix of Hesse who was to become his wife in 1894. It brings to life a tragic tale of a doomed royal family so wealthy they could commission such stunning pieces, but ultimately unable to stop the course of history and prevent their own downfall after the Russian revolution. "I'm not even going to attempt to value this," Mr. Munn says. 

 Ms. Williams is a reporter at Dow Jones in London. She can be reached at selina.williams@dowjones.com. 