Intel Capital, the venture capital arm of the world's largest chip-maker, plans to invest at least $45 million in India this year, matching its play last year. 

The firm already has deals in the works, and expects to invest in two companies by the end of March, said Sudheer Kumar Kuppam, managing director of Intel Capital in India. 

Intel is among the dozens of funds looking to invest in Indian firms. India was the second-largest market for Intel Capital last year in terms of investments outside the U.S., and it participated in eight transactions. But the company adds that it lost half a dozen opportunities because of competition and high valuations. 

Overall, venture capital firms in India made 92 investments worth $449 million last year, compared with 99 transactions worth $356 million in 2009. This year is projected to see an increase in venture funding flowing into Indian companies. 

"We expect this year to be more competitive than last year because there were many inactive funds last year which are under pressure to invest this year, which will drive up valuations," Kuppam said. 

Intel Capital has invested about 65% of its $250 million India Technology Fund that was set up in December 2005. This brings the firm's total India investments to $230 million across 70 companies, since Intel Capital started investing here in 1998. 

"We will raise another fund only after fully deploying this money, as we don't need to go out and raise money from a third party," Kuppam said. 

For Intel Capital, Indian investments offer good returns and access to technology companies that can boost processor sales. 

Its portfolio companies include Tejas Networks India Pvt. Ltd, a telecom infrastructure products provider; July Systems Inc., a software developer for mobile handsets; Persistent Systems Pvt. Ltd, a software products developer; and Global Talent Track Pvt. Ltd, a vocational education services company. 

The company plans to sell at least two or three investments this year, including One97 Communications (P) Ltd, a mobile value-added services company. One97 had deferred its initial share sale to the current quarter from Dec. 1. 

"The IPO (initial public offering) market is giving a cold shoulder this year," Kuppam said, attributing the delay to the volatile stock market. 

Last year, Intel exited its investment in 123greetings.com through the latter's IPO. It also sold its investment in Maya Entertainment Ltd., a digital content-creation company, to Aptech Ltd. for 760 million rupees.