  (See Corrections & Amplifications item below.)  

Smack dab in the middle of Iowa, a basketball coach in his first season, who had absolutely no prior coaching experience, is threatening to do something miraculous: take an ailing Division I program from the dumpster to the NCAA tournament.

Ever since an unusual combination of circumstances propelled Fred Hoiberg, a 10-year NBA veteran, to the helm at Iowa State, his alma mater, he has led the team to a hope-inducing 13-3 record. 

Saturday, his team showed up on Nebraska's home court and nearly beat one of the strongest Cornhuskers teams in years (Nebraska prevailed with a last-second free throw). On Wednesday, Mr. Hoiberg's Cyclones will take another shot at the headlines against No. 3-ranked Kansas.

Mr. Hoiberg's success is anything but heartwarming for the legions of college coaches trying to clamber up through the system, or to just maintain their seats on the coaching carousel. Though a tournament spot is far from a foregone conclusion, Mr. Hoiberg's running start is raising a provocative question for college basketball: is coaching experience necessary?

After 10 seasons in the NBA with Indiana, Chicago and Minnesota, and three years in the Timberwolves' front office, Mr. Hoiberg got a call last spring from Iowa State athletic director Jamie Pollard, who offered him the job. It was, by any standard, a gutsy hire. But the risks for Mr. Pollard were mitigated by the fact that it was also an immensely popular one. Mr. Hoiberg was so well-regarded during his time at Iowa State he was known as "the Mayor."

Jay Bilas, a former player and assistant coach at Duke who is an ESPN college basketball analyst, said he's not sure how much experience matters. He says more schools might be well served if they ignored the orthodoxies of hiring. "You'd hate to miss out on a guy like Fred because of an arbitrary standard or pecking order," he says.

Head coaches with no prior coaching experience are relatively common in the NBA. Larry Bird took over the Indiana Pacers as a novice in 1997 and the team gave Isiah Thomas a try in 2000. The Boston Celtics' current coach Doc Rivers, hadn't coached before he started as head coach for the Orlando Magic, either. Earvin "Magic" Johnson even tried his hand at coaching for the Lakers in 1994, though he finished 5-11 after taking over midseason and resigned in frustration.

College is a different story, largely because of the broad responsibilities that come with running a Division I program. In addition to recruiting, which is crucial, college coaches must constantly keep an eye on their players' grades while managing a budget, overseeing NCAA compliance and dealing with school officials and boosters. 

Previous experiments of this kind haven't worked out enormously well. Clyde Drexler became head coach at his alma mater, the University of Houston, in 1998 with no prior experience. He quit after posting a 19–39 record over two seasons. Arkansas legend Sidney Moncrief was hired as the head coach at Arkansas-Little Rock in 1999—he owned a car dealership at the time—and departed one season later for a better offer to be an assistant coach for the Dallas Mavericks. 

Mr. Moncrief says that with experience, he would probably have been able to win four or five more games. Among his rookie mistakes: working his players so hard in practice that "they didn't have any energy to play in games," and underestimating the importance of talent.

"That was probably the most shocking thing—even if you have experience, if you don't have talented players you're not winning," says Mr. Moncrief. "We didn't have a very good team."

NBA veteran Reggie Theus took over at New Mexico State in 2005 with two years of experience as an assistant for Rick Pitino at Louisville, but none as a head coach. He says that although the job is incredibly difficult, "it's not brain surgery." He guided New Mexico State to the NCAA tournament his second season before taking a job with the Sacramento Kings. 

Still, he adds, most coaches who get jobs have a long list of credentials, primarily, he says, because athletic directors "have to cover themselves."

"If the coach fails, you start looking at the guy that hired him," says Mr. Theus, now an assistant for the Timberwolves.

Mr. Hoiberg says it was a childhood dream to coach the Cyclones. He says he planted a seed four years ago with Mr. Pollard by calling to express his interest. At the time, Mr. Hoiberg had undergone heart surgery and was named a "special assistant" by the Timberwolves while he tried to get back in shape (that job didn't require any real coaching, he says). 

When it was clear a comeback wasn't in the cards, he took a job as the team's general manager—scouting games, making trade calls and tweaking rosters. Still, he says, he pined for a more "hands-on" experience.

Even after the previous Iowa State coach, Greg McDermott, said he might leave the program for Creighton, Mr. Hoiberg says he was still surprised to get the call from Mr. Pollard. "I didn't get much sleep that night," he recalls. He says he stayed up putting together a plan for how he intended to turn the program around. He says he was nervous, but that he'd learned some rookie coaching tricks from Mr. Bird, his former coach at the Indiana Pacers, and from Kevin McHale, who took over head coaching duties for the Minnesota Timberwolves in the second half of the 2005 season.

"Neither of those guys had experience, but they were great at communication and surrounded themselves with the right people," says Mr. Hoiberg.

One of the people Mr. Hoiberg drafted for support was Bobby Lutz, who'd been fired last March after 12 seasons as head coach at the University of North Carolina at Charlotte. Mr. Lutz says he was planning to take a year off because he was still getting paid for the four years left on his contract, but he was touched by Mr. Hoiberg's enthusiasm.

Among the pointers Mr. Lutz has given his new boss so far: how to "tell people 'no' from time to time" in order to balance his coaching, recruiting, public speaking, administrative and family responsibilities; and when to play the tough guy.

Recruiting, perhaps the most unfamiliar aspect of the position, is so far proving relatively easy, Mr. Hoiberg says, thanks to his impressive NBA rolodex and local hero status in Ames. Not only was he named the state's Mr. Basketball after leading Ames High School to a championship in 1991, he was the quarterback of his high school football team.

Mr. Hoiberg says he paid careful attention as a player to coaching tactics that motivated him, as well as those that hurt his confidence. He handles discipline behind closed doors instead of "tearing a guy apart with a minute and a half left in the game" and avoids long, drawn-out practices if there's a big game coming up.

Diante Garrett, a senior guard from Milwaukee, says he didn't know that much about Mr. Hoiberg or what to expect before the season, but any doubts he had were assuaged during a shooting drill over the summer, in which Mr. Hoiberg decided to participate.

"He didn't miss any shots—he took more than 10 and swished every last one. I was like...he's definitely been doing this for a long time."

 Write to  Hannah Karp at hannah.karp@dowjones.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications:  The Indiana Pacers hired Isiah Thomas as head coach in 2000. An earlier version of this article incorrectly said that the New York Knicks hired Mr. Thomas in 2000.