 Philadelphia 

Marc Chagall (1887-1985) is among the most familiar of the artists included under the "School of Paris" label. His richly hued dream worlds with their floating figures and bouquets of flowers are instantly recognizable. (See: Metropolitan Opera murals.) So are his wistful images of Eastern European Jewish culture, seemingly dredged from memories of his early life in Russian Vitebsk. (See: "Fiddler on the Roof.") Chagall is often viewed as a charming, inspired innocent who worked out of pure instinct and talent—a perception he encouraged, referring to himself as a "painter-poet" and claiming that he had had little or no art training before he moved to Paris in the spring of 1911. But there is another Chagall, an audacious, sophisticated artist who was part of the Paris vanguard during the yeasty early decades of the last century and whose innovative works are far tougher and more surprising than his better-known fantasies and fragile evocations of a vanished past.

This less familiar incarnation is the subject of "Paris Through the Window: Marc Chagall and His Circle," a delightful, informative show organized by the indefatigable Michael R. Taylor, the Philadelphia Museum of Art's Muriel and Philip Berman Curator of Modern Art. Assembled mainly from the museum's own extensive collections, with a few key additions, the exhibition draws upon the latest scholarship to expand and correct our conceptions of Chagall and his work, reminding us of how daring his efforts could be and placing him in the wider context of his peers.

Two celebrated canvases set the tone: Philadelphia's "Half-Past Three (The Poet)" (1911), and the 1913 painting, now in the Guggenheim Museum's collection, that gives the show its title. Both pictures established Chagall as a leading member of the avant-garde when they were exhibited in Berlin in 1914 to critical and commercial acclaim. Both are notable for their wit, imagination and formal adventurousness, and for announcing many of what would become Chagall's signature conceits. In "Half-Past Three," everything fragments, tips and levitates; the poet's head is inverted; his face is green, like the fur of the cat beside him. In "Paris Through a Window," a human-headed yellow cat perches on a window sill; the Eiffel Tower looms above mansard roofs; a parachute-jumper descends from the tower; an upside-down train and two figures float past; a blue-faced, Janus-headed man lurks in a corner, holding a heart in his blue palm. Both paintings include the requisite, delicate flowers and saturated, full-spectrum colors, but what makes both truly memorable are the slashing Cubist-inspired planes that slice and animate the images.

The exhibition tracks the origins of these and other startlingly fresh, bold Chagalls from the artist's first years in Paris. We are reminded that when he arrived in the city, far from being an untutored talent, he had already studied in Vitebsk with a well-known portrait painter. Later, in St. Petersburg, Russia, he encountered progressive attitudes along with an appreciation for folkloric themes when he enrolled in the school run by the mystic/archaeologist/poet/painter Nicholas Roerich (best known for designing Sergei Diaghilev's original production of "The Rite of Spring"). Further exposure to nontraditional ideas came when Chagall studied painting with the celebrated designer Léon Bakst, as a selection of brilliantly hued, stylized stage and costume designs of the period attests.



Just what Chagall responded to in Paris, as he formed his distinctive identity, is suggested by works made by his friends and colleagues, many of them his neighbors in a utopian, subsidized artist's-studio building where he lived from 1911 to 1914. Residents and frequent visitors to La Ruche (the beehive) during Chagall's stay included Moïse Kisling, Fernand Léger, Amedeo Modigliani and Chaim Soutine—many of them, like Chagall, Eastern European and Jewish. Primed by these works, we begin to connect Chagall with his peers—seeing, for example, the Eiffel Tower in "Paris Through a Window" as both emblematic of Paris and related to his friend Robert Delaunay's prismatic, many-hued images of the motif.

Through fine works in many mediums, we watch Chagall's characteristic imagery evolve. We chart his optimism on returning to postrevolutionary Petrograd in 1915 to propose a mural project, and then on to Vitebsk to found a forward-looking art school. A stark, black-and-white 1919 self-portrait with an inverted head and "Oh God" written in Cyrillic embodies his despair when Kazimir Malevich, the radical abstract painter Chagall had invited to join the faculty, forced his resignation. Other works, many of them brooding responses to the deteriorating political climate of Europe between the wars, allow us to follow Chagall back to Paris in 1920 and to New York during World War II. The exhibition ends in 1943, before Chagall returned definitively to postwar France, with "In the Night," a tender vision of the artist and his wife, improbably young, embracing on a moonlit, snowy street in Vitebsk. Overhead in this nostalgic idyll is a burning oil lamp. Suddenly we are in the horrifying realm of Pablo Picasso's vast antiwar painting, "Guernica." Chagall is tougher than we think.

 Ms. Wilkin writes about art for the Journal. 