Like unwelcome party guests, a few U.K. economists warned the royal wedding will come at a price.

The national holiday surrounding the festivities could cost the country between $2.5 billion to $10 billion in lost productivity, according to a number of analysts. Some prominent media reports put the figure as high as $50 billion.

But wedding enthusiasts needn't fret: Other economists say most of the predictions fail to hold up to scrutiny. In fact, the union of Prince William and Kate Middleton might boost some sectors of the economy as tour operators, champagne purveyors and pubs tap into the frenzy.

Some half-dozen analysts and consultants have offered assessments of the nuptials' supposed economic impact, echoing a long-running debate in the U.K. and the rest of Europe about whether workers have so many days off that the economy suffers. And in the rush to quantify the wedding's impact, some media outlets reported figures incorrectly or out of context.

Like wedding planning itself, economic predictions can sometimes get out of hand. One forecast for a matrimonial setback originated with a report by an economist who now says he doesn't anticipate a major impact. Samuel Tombs with research company Capital Economics released an analysis Monday suggesting the wedding could knock off as much as 1.5 percentage points, or about $9 billion, from the U.K.'s gross domestic product in the second quarter, a figure cited in many media reports. But that was a "very crude calculation," Mr. Tombs says in an interview, based on the subtraction of one work day's output, or about 1.5% of the quarter's total, from the calendar. "We think the effect will be minuscule, and will come out in the wash in the end," Mr. Tombs says.

  Philip Shaw, chief economist at Investec Bank in London, expects the economy will suffer a slight dent from the addition of another holiday to the calendar, to the tune of about 0.25% of quarterly GDP, or around $1 billion to $2 billion. That's the equivalent of subtracting one-fifth to one-sixth of a work day from overall output. At many businesses, work not done during the matrimonial holiday will be made up in subsequent days and weeks, he explained, so the loss to the economy won't be very significant.

Also, while some businesses closed Friday, others—notably retailers and travel companies—expected to enjoy unusually robust sales as consumers took advantage of the day off to shop. The typical British bank holiday boosts retail sales, and wedding parties and memorabilia should add to the consumer boom.

"In practice, the economy doesn't grind to a halt for one day," Mr. Shaw says.

The forecast claiming the most extreme matrimonial damage came from U.K. consulting firm RSM Tenon, which predicted that the wedding, coupled with the four-day Easter break and a May 2 bank holiday, would lop as much as £30 billion, or about $50 billion, from economic output. The figure wound up in numerous news reports ahead of the wedding

The problem with that lofty projection, several economists say, is that three of those holidays occur every year, so the cost can't all be laid at the feet of William and Kate. "I would be surprised if it's that's much, and quite worried as well," says Mr. Shaw. RSM Tenon didn't respond to requests for comment.

Forecasts of losses from a unique event such as the royal wedding are tough to make accurately because it is difficult to separate out the holiday's influence from other economic trends. Economists in the U.K. have tried to model the impact by studying similar events, but there aren't many parallels. The most recent royal-related national holiday was the celebration of Queen Elizabeth II's Golden Jubilee in 2002. While the additional daylong holiday came during a month when manufacturing activity fell, economists say it isn't clear if the downturn was a result of having one fewer work day that June.

While Friday's festivities undoubtedly boosted sales of beverages and party gear, estimates of the wedding's economic upside are as nebulous as those predicting its drag. Verdict Research, a retail consultancy, predicts a spending boost of £620 million, based in part on a survey of 4,000 U.K. consumers of how much they plan to spend. Neil Saunders, Verdict's consulting director, calls the number "a rough estimate."

Another retail research firm experienced the peril of jumping on the wedding bandwagon too soon. A few days after the royal engagement was announced in November, the Centre for Retail Research predicted a big jump in consumer spending surrounding the event. But that was based on the assumption of a summer wedding, when warmer weather would encourage block parties and other feasts around the country. Once the April date was announced, the center scaled back its forecast slightly to £521.7 million.

"On something like this, if you get to within 10% or 15%, you're doing pretty well," says  Joshua Bamfield, director of the center. "It isn't economic science. Well, it is, but that's because economics isn't really science."

 Write to  Carl Bialik at numbersguy@wsj.com 