The Federal Reserve's net income surged to $80.9 billion in 2010, largely due to a boost in earnings from securities it acquired during the financial crisis and its aftermath, according to preliminary unaudited results the central bank released Monday.

Most of that income will go back to the U.S. Treasury, as is the Fed's custom. The Fed will transfer a record $78.4 billion to the Treasury Department, including income earned from interest on bonds issued by the Treasury itself. It marks a 65% increase over the $47.4 billion the Fed paid the Treasury in 2009. 

Fed officials said the bulk of the payments have already been distributed to Treasury. "The increase was due primarily to increased interest income earned on securities holdings during 2010," the Fed said in a statement.

During the financial crisis, the Fed super-sized its balance sheet by creating a slew of unprecedented, emergency programs through which it bought securities and debts and lent to banks and other firms. The Fed has been criticized for taking too many risks with taxpayer money and putting itself in a position to rack up big losses.

So far, the Fed's lending and credit programs look like a profitable effort. "I think from a purely fiscal point of view…this is most likely to be beneficial, not harmful, to the government's financial position," Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke said at a Capitol Hill hearing last week. "Our cost of funds is very low, so the interest that we are receiving, we are remitting back to the Treasury."

One can view the payments returned to Treasury on interest from Treasury bonds as "interest that the Treasury didn't have to pay the Chinese," he added.

The Fed's assets increased from less than $900 billion before the financial crisis to more than $2.4 trillion today. The Fed could still lose money on the holdings. 

For instance, if inflation rises and the central bank needs to push interest rates higher, its own cost of funding would rise and it could be forced to sell long-term government bonds at a loss. If that were to happen, the Fed's remittances to the government would drop, or possibly halt for some time. Central bank officials play down the risk.

The Fed said the estimated 2010 net income was derived primarily from $76.2 billion in income from mortgage bonds and Treasury debt. In 2009, it earned $48.8 billion from securities holdings, Fed officials said on a conference call with reporters Monday.

The Fed said $7.1 billion in income came from limited liability companies created during the financial crisis for different rescues, including one holding commercial paper loans made by the Fed and another holding assets from Bear Stearns. Another $2.1 billion in interest income came from credit extended to  American International Group
AIG


0.30
%




 (AIG); $1.3 billion of dividends on preferred interests in AIA Aurora LLC and ALICO Holdings LLC; and $800 million in interest income on loans extended under the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility and loans to depository institutions.

Fed officials said they expect to release final financial results this spring. 

 Write to  Maya Jackson Randall at Maya.Jackson-Randall@dowjones.com 