 European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet scrambled to counter an unexpected rise in euro-zone inflation, signaling that he won't hesitate to raise rates if recent signs of price pressures become firmly entrenched.  

He also appealed to European leaders move quickly to increase the size and flexibility of a €440 billion ($578 billion) rescue fund aimed at stemming contagion from the currency bloc's widening debt crisis, though Germany's government rejected an immediate increase on the fund's size. 

The ECB said its governing council decided to leave all the bank's official interest rates unchanged at its first meeting of 2011. 

Spain, Italy and Hungary all carried out successful bond auctions, as investors showed strong demand for the bonds following Portugal's better-than-expected bond auction on Wednesday. 

The results failed to dispel worries about debt levels in the euro zone's fiscally frail countries, as investors focused on the higher yield Spain had to pay and the potential for weaker demand at the next round of bond sales. 

 Slovakia's top finance official said efforts to defend Europe's common currency by bailing out indebted countries are failing, and that financial stresses could increase over the next two years. 

 European Union authorities are gearing up for a new round of stress tests for the region's biggest insurance companies and banks, building on tests last year that in the case of banks particularly were criticized in some quarters for being too weak.  

 The chief executive of Ireland's National Asset Management Agency said the financial regulator is probing information provided by banks relating to overly positive loan-to-value ratios banks gave to the agency prior to transferring loans.  

Ireland's Prime Minister Brian Cowen told his Fianna Fail party that he would not resign, despite widespread pressure for him to step down following revelations about his relationship with a former official from the now-nationalized Anglo Irish Bank. 

During a parliamentary party meeting, Cowen acknowledged that there are issues remaining with his leadership and told lawmakers that he would meet with senior party members over the coming days. 

The euro's exchange rate against the dollar is still too strong and is hurting the competitiveness of companies in the euro zone, French President Nicolas Sarkozy said.

The U.K. government's "ambitious" program to pare back the budget deficit means the country should maintain its triple-A credit rating despite slower than expected economic growth forecasts, Moody's Investors Service said. 

The Bank of England kept its key interest rate at a record low, but pressure is growing on the central bank to respond to building price risks. 

 The U.K.'s former envoy to Afghanistan, Sherard Cowper-Coles, said British Army commanders committed troops to operations in the country because they feared that the Army would be cut in a future defense review if they were not redeployed. 

In Germany, a tanker loaded with sulfuric acid capsized on the Rhine river and two crew members were missing, authorities said. Two other crew members were rescued from the ship.

Germany's foreign minister criticized a Greek government decision to support claimants in an ongoing dispute over a World War II Nazi massacre. 

 An Italian high court struck down a key pillar of a law that postpones criminal trials facing Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi and other top government officials—a ruling that could revive the billionaire leader's trials. 

Italy's Mount Etna has come back to life with a brief eruption that sent lava down its slopes and a cloud of ash into the sky, forcing the overnight closure of a nearby airport. 

 Russia said further cuts in nuclear weapons sought by the U.S. can be achieved only as part of a multinational accord limiting other types of armaments. 

 The Czech Republic gave political asylum to a former Ukrainian economy minister, a sign of increasing disquiet over the Ukrainian government's investigations of opposition figures.  

 Two leading credit-rating agencies cautioned the U.S. on its credit rating, expressing concern over a deteriorating fiscal situation they say needs correction.  

 The U.S. trade deficit unexpectedly narrowed for the third straight month in November, though the gap with China rebounded a week ahead of President Hu Jintao's state visit.  

The number of U.S. workers filing new claims for jobless benefits jumped last week, while producer prices jumped higher in December on the back of higher energy and food costs. 

A federal judge signed off on a settlement in which the widow of a longtime investor with convicted Ponzi scheme operator Bernard Madoff will return $7.2 billion to the victims of Madoff's fraud.

The Environmental Protection Agency is granting an exemption under its controversial greenhouse-gas requirements, saying that it will provide a three-year reprieve for facilities that burn wood chips and other biomass products to generate electricity. 

 Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff flew over the rain-drenched mountains northwest of the beachfront city of Rio de Janeiro, surveying the damage from floods and landslides that have claimed at least 355 lives.  

U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates attempted to reduce pressure on the Japanese government to move quickly on relocating a U.S. military base on Okinawa, instead focusing his discussions here on the threat from North Korea.

Japan's prime minister said he will reshuffle his cabinet, a move aimed at placating opposition parties and boosting his flagging support ratings as he tries to smooth the passage of the next fiscal year's budget through parliament. 

China launched a pilot program to allow domestic companies to use the yuan to invest overseas, an expansion of its efforts to foster the yuan as a global currency and another step in opening the country's capital account. 

China's inflation can't be blamed on capital inflows, because the country has effective capital controls, a senior economist at the World Bank said, adding China's own expansionary monetary and fiscal policies, as well as surging food prices have been the cause of its inflation. 

U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton blasted Arab governments for corruption and stalled political reforms and warned that extremist groups were exploiting this lack of democratic development to promote radical agendas in the Middle East and North Africa. 

In Sudan, three Bulgarians flying aircraft for the World Food Program were kidnapped in the troubled western Darfur region. Bulgaria's Foreign Ministry identified the air crew as three of its citizens working for an airline contracted to the United Nations.

Tunisia's autocratic president, facing deadly riots that have rocked his nation, ordered prices on food staples slashed and suggested he will leave the presidency—but not until 2014.

 Brisbane residents face a rebuilding task of "postwar" proportions after floods swamped thousands of homes in Australia's third largest city, adding to the mounting cost of the deluge across Queensland.  