HONG KONG—Two clean-energy businesses—Beijing Jingneng Clean Energy Co. and the solar-glass unit of Xinyi Glass Holding Ltd. —plan to raise a total of roughly US$1.1 billion from Hong Kong initial public offerings this year, highlighting the rapid growth of demand for renewable energy in China. 

Chinese property developer Top Spring International Holdings Ltd. also plans to raise as much as US$260 million in initial public offering ahead of its listing in Hong Kong on March 23, according to a term sheet seen by Dow Jones Newswires on Wednesday. 

The first Chinese clean-energy company aiming to list in Hong Kong since China Datang Corp. Renewable Power Co.'s US$682 million IPO in December, state-owned Beijing Jingneng plans to raise about US$500 million in an IPO in the second quarter, people familiar with the situation said Wednesday. 

At the end of December, Beijing Jingneng, a clean-energy unit of the Beijing municipal government, had a total installed capacity of 1.19 gigawatt of gas-fired power. It accounted for 70% of Beijing's total gas-fired power capacity, according to the website of its parent, Beijing Energy Investment Holdings Co. 

Meanwhile, Chinese integrated flat-glass maker Xinyi Glass plans to list shares in its solar-glass business in Hong Kong in the third quarter and will seek about US$600 million from an IPO, people familiar with the situation said Wednesday. 

In 2010, Xinyi Glass's revenue from solar-glass operations soared to 1.08 billion Hong Kong dollars (US$138.6 million) from HK$208 million in 2009, as demand grew. 

Xinyi Glass sells solar glass used to cover the top of solar panels, which convert sunlight into electrical energy. Beijing Jingneng uses natural gas to produce electricity. 

Last year, four Chinese clean-energy operators raised a total of US$2.4 billion from IPOs in Hong Kong, according to data provider Dealogic. 

Apart from wind-farm operator China Datang Corp. Renewable Power, the others were China Suntien Green Energy Corp.'s US$425 million October IPO, Chinese wind-turbine maker Xinjiang Goldwind Science & Technology Co.'s US$1.05 billion IPO in October, and Trony Solar Holdings Co.'s US$257 million September IPO. 

Huaneng Renewables Corp., the wind-power unit of China Huaneng Group, may come to the market sometime this year after scrapping plans in December to raise up to US$1.28 billion in a Hong Kong IPO, people familiar with the deal said earlier. 

China has been rapidly expanding its use of clean power as it moves to reduce its dependence on coal and crude oil, widely blamed for making Chinese cities among the most polluted in the world. 

China plans to source 15% of its energy requirements from renewable sources by 2020 and is now encouraging investment in wind, solar and nuclear power. 

Beijing Jingneng has hired Goldman Sachs Group Inc. and Bank of China International Holdings Ltd. to handle the listing, the people said. J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. and Citigroup Inc. are handling the solar-glass unit listing of Xinyi Glass, other people said. 

Activity in Hong Kong's IPO market has begun picking up after a slow start to the year. In the market currently are financial firm Far East Horizon Ltd., which is set to seek Hong Kong listing approval Thursday for a US$600 million deal, and a US$3 billion IPO by Australian miner Resourcehouse Ltd. and a US$260 million one by Perth-based lithium concentrate miner Galaxy Resources Ltd. in the premarketing stage. Most advanced is a US$249 million deal by China Kingstone Mining Holdings Ltd., which has been giving investor presentations known as a roadshow and is set to list on Mar. 18, people familiar with the deal have said. 

Top Spring plans to sell 250 million shares in an indicative price range of HK$6.23-HK$8.10 each, the term sheet said. According to an indicative timetable, the roadshow is expected to begin Thursday and run through March 16. 

Macquarie Group Ltd. is the sole global coordinator for the deal, while HSBC Holdings PLC, Nomura Holdings Inc. and Macquarie are the joint bookrunners. 

 Write to  Yvonne Lee at yvonne.lee@wsj.com and Prudence Ho at prudence.ho@dowjones.com 