MUMBAI—State-run Oil & Natural Gas Corp. has appointed six investment banks for its share sale in March, as India's federal government proceeds with divesting a 5% stake in the country's largest oil explorer by volume. 

The six bankers are JM Financial Services Pvt.,  Morgan Stanley,
MS


0.38
%




 HSBC Holdings PLC,  Nomura Holdings Inc.,
C


0.59
%




 Citigroup Inc. and  Bank of America Merrill Lynch,
BAC


2.74
%




 ONGC Chairman  R.S. Sharma said Monday. 

"The list of bankers is subject to confirmation and certain validation checks," Mr. Sharma said. 

The share sale will be through a public offering. The Indian government owns a 74.14% stake in ONGC. 

The company is likely to raise as much as $3 billion to $4 billion, the federal oil secretary, S. Sundareshan, said Friday. 

The government plans to sell a stake in two oil-sector companies: ONGC and Indian Oil Corp. It postponed Indian Oil's share sale to the financial year that begins April 1 amid concerns about the impact of rising crude-oil prices. 

The government aims to raise as much as 400 billion rupees this fiscal year by selling stakes in state-run companies to fund social-welfare and development projects. 

ONGC's share sale is being conducted amid a higher subsidy burden because of rising crude-oil prices, a royalty dispute with the government and the company's pending approval of Cairn India Ltd.'s stake sale to  Vedanta Resources
VED


2.92
%




 PLC. 

ONGC and two other state-run exploration-and-production companies, GAIL Ltd. and Oil India Ltd., share one-third of the subsidy burden that goes to refining-and-marketing companies that sell fuel products at government-mandated prices.

The burden is likely to rise as crude-oil prices climb. 

ONGC's profits are also being squeezed by high royalty payments. The explorer is paying a 100% royalty to the government on oil produced from the RJ-ON-90/1 block in the northwestern state of Rajasthan as part of the government's strategy to attract private investments in the sector. 

Total royalty payments over the life of the block are likely about $2 billion. ONGC now wants to split royalty payments with Cairn India, which also has a working interest in the block. 

Mr. Sharma said Monday that ONGC won't continue to pay a 100% royalty for the Rajasthan oilfields. 

"We have assurance from the government" for a settlement, Mr. Sharma said. "It is a sensitive issue from the investor's point of view and will definitely get resolved before the [follow-on public offering] gets launched," he added. 

Executives from China National Petroleum Corp., a state-run oil major, will meet ONGC officials in February to discuss potential areas of partnership in oil and gas exploration, Mr. Sharma said. 

"They are already partners in three countries in producing fields of Sudan, Syria and Columbia, so [the meeting] is only to further this partnership for joint bidding," Mr. Sharma said. 

He declined to elaborate on the nature of bidding or whether CNPC will invest in exploration acreage in India. 

"ONGC is talking to them for partnering in various parts of the world," Mr. Sharma said. 

 Write to  Eric Yep at eric.yep@dowjones.com 