CHICAGO—Former President Bill Clinton stumped for mayoral candidate Rahm Emanuel here Tuesday with 35 days to go before the city chooses a successor to longtime Mayor Richard M. Daley.

"You need a big person for the job," Mr. Clinton told a packed room at the downtown Chicago Cultural Center. Mr. Emanuel, who stands about 5'7'', "is a very big person," Mr. Clinton said.

"I consider meeting Rahm one or two of the three most pivotal facts in my becoming president," Mr. Clinton said.

Polls show Mr. Emanuel, a Democrat running in a nonpartisan election, holds a big lead. The vote is set for Feb. 22 and if no candidate wins a majority a runoff between the top two contenders will be held April 5.

So far, Mr. Emanuel has successfully fought off a lawsuit brought by two city residents challenging his candidacy filed last year with the Chicago Board of Election Commissions. The suit claims he forfeited his city residency when he moved to Washington to become President Barack Obama's chief of staff. 

The commission and a circuit judge have ruled in Mr. Emanuel's favor. Those decisions are being appealed and a ruling is expected this week. Whatever the outcome, the case is expected to go to the Illinois Supreme Court.

Mr. Emanuel became Mr. Clinton's finance director during his first presidential bid and then served in the Clinton White House. He was later elected to Congress from Illinois and surrendered his House seat to take a job in the Obama White House. Mr. Emanuel Tuesday described Mr. Clinton as a "mentor, a teacher and an inspiration." 

Democratic Rep. Danny Davis has said Mr. Clinton's visit could harm the former president's relationship with Chicago's African-American community. Mr. Davis dropped out of the mayor's race earlier this month and backed former Democratic U.S. Sen. Carol Moseley Braun, an African-American. A spokesman for Mr. Davis declined to comment. A spokesman for Mr. Clinton couldn't immediately be reached.

 Write to  Lauren Etter at lauren.etter@wsj.com 