The Rangers, who have been on a season-long streak of bad injury luck, finally got some good luck this week: the arrival of the All-Star break and the rest that comes with it.

"For our team, oh yeah, we're beat up, even the guys that are playing are beat up,'' Rangers coach John Tortorella said. "But they are beat up for the right reasons.''

Mr. Tortorella said he feels good about his team despite its poor health. The Rangers are in sixth place in the Eastern Conference, 10 points shy of the first-place Philadelphia Flyers and four points clear of the eighth-seeded Atlanta Thrashers. Even with the success, the Rangers have yet to be completely healthy this season, and questions linger about how good this team can be when they are finally at full strength.

"I hope to find out. I don't wonder," Mr. Tortorella said. "I think we'll see it if we continue to try to stay healthy and get some of these guys back. It's not wondering—it's hoping that we have an opportunity for some of these guys to play."

The Rangers' injury list doubles as a listing of most of their best players. Going into the break, there are injuries to defenseman Dan Girardi (rib), star forward Brandon Dubinsky (leg), assistant captain Ryan Callahan (hand), center Erik Christensen (knee), wing Ruslan Fedotenko (shoulder) and enforcer Derek Boogaard (shoulder). 

Forward Vinny Prospal (knee) hasn't suited up this season and Alex Frolov (torn ACL) is out for the rest of the season. Star scorer Marian Gaborik and captain Chris Drury missed long stretches with injuries at the beginning of the season. 

Mr. Tortorella has indicated that a return to health seems just around the corner after the All-Star break. He said Mr. Callahan is the closest to a return, which should happen just after the break ends on Tuesday against the Pittsburgh Penguins. 

Mr. Tortorella will not rule out an early return for Mr. Dubinsky, who last week was ruled out for four weeks. Mr. Dubinsky is still the team's leading scorer with 38 points. Second on the team is Mr. Gaborik, who has missed 14 games with shoulder and groin injuries. 

"We've got points. We've won games. We've done well. We are what we are, regardless of where we are with injuries,'' center Brian Boyle said.

Mr. Boyle leads the Rangers with 18 goals, and along with rookie Derek Stepan, has carried an injury-depleted offense. Both players have played 52 games this season. Rangers players have missed a total of 193 games this season. 

"I give them a lot of credit," Mr. Tortorella said. "They've battled through this year and hung together, and the most important thing, as we've gone through the first almost three-quarters of the season here, they've played really well as a team. The lines have been moved around a bit through injuries, and people have played with a lot of different people, but I think we've played pretty good as a team."

 Write to  Kevin Clark at kevin.clark@wsj.com 