MUMBAI -- India Tuesday rejected a plea by Satyam Computer Services Ltd. to lower its tax liabilities by restating past income tax filings, creating a hurdle in the fraud-hit company's road to recovery.

India's Central Board of Direct Taxes refused to withhold an income tax claim of 6.16 billion rupees ($136.9 million) served on the Hyderabad-based company, a company release to the local exchanges said.

Authorities also rejected a plea to restate its tax filings for the assessment years 2003-2004 to 2008-2009 and determining the actual income of the company based on the findings of the government's investigating agencies instead of the fictitious income declared by its founder, Ramalinga Raju.

Satyam, which once ranked as India's fourth-largest software company, was plunged into crisis after Mr. Raju confessed in January 2009 to overstating profits for the past several years and creating fictitious cash of more than $1 billion.

After Raju's confession and a subsequent government takeover, Tech Mahindra Ltd. bought a majority stake in the company through an auction in April 2009. The company was later rebranded Mahindra Satyam, although it continues to trade under its old name.

"It is curious that whereas the government and its two important agencies--namely CBI [Central Bureau of Investigation] and SFIO [Serious Fraud Investigation Office] are prosecuting Mr. Raju for showing large fictitious income, that CBDT believes that income will be the basis of imposing tax," Satyam Chairman Vineet Nayyar told local news stations in Delhi.

Satyam said it has appealed against the order in a local court.

Criminal proceedings initiated by the CBI are under way against founders Mr. Raju and his brothers, as well as other Satyam senior executives who have stepped down from their duties at the company.

While the company is yet to report its earnings under U.S. standards, it has reported them under Indian rules. The company reported results for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2009 and March 31, 2010, as well as reports for the quarters ended June 30, Sept. 30 and Dec. 31, 2010.

For the three months ended Dec. 31, it reported a profit of 589 million rupees on revenue of 12.79 billion rupees.

At 0520 GMT, the company's shares pared early losses to trade down nearly 1% at 66.40 rupees on the Mumbai market, where the benchmark index was trading up 1%.