 New York 

Every jukebox musical rises or falls on the mass appeal of the songs out of which its score is stitched. If you don't care for 1960s girl-group pop, then you're likely to find "Baby It's You!" tedious—but you'll be more exasperated by the book, which takes a real-life story that even a Stephen Sondheim buff could love and turns it into a live-action comic strip so relentlessly simple-minded as to make "Anything Goes" look like a differential equation set to music.



"Baby It's You!" is mostly about Florence Greenberg (Beth Leavel, who is terrific), a nice Jewish housewife from New Jersey who got tired of doing dishes and started her own record label. One day Mrs. Greenberg's daughter (Kelli Barrett) told her about four black girls who sang together for fun at the neighborhood high school, and presto! The Shirelles were born. Likewise Scepter Records, which Mrs. Greenberg turned into one of the great money-making music machines of the '60s, thanks to her knack for knowing a hit when she heard one. Along the way she fell in love with Luther Dixon (Allan Louis), who wrote and produced most of the Shirelles' records, and their scandalous love affair (Dixon was black) broke up Mrs. Greenberg's marriage.

That, as they say, is a story, and in "Baby It's You!" it's told to the accompaniment of slick cover versions of the Shirelles' greatest hits, sung stupendously well by Erica Ash, Kyra Da Costa, Crystal Starr Knighton and Christina Sajous. Ms. Leavel and Mr. Louis are no slouches in the vocal department, either. In fact, this is the best-sung show to hit Broadway since the 2009 revival of "Finian's Rainbow," and if that were all it took to make a good show, that's what "Baby It's You!" would be.

Here comes the catch: Floyd Mutrux and Colin Escott, who wrote the vapid book for "Million Dollar Quartet," have done even worse by "Baby It's You!" Every line is as predictable as tepid canned soup. (How do we know that Mr. Greenberg is a Jew? Because he says "Oy!" a lot.) As if that weren't bad enough, Messrs. Mutrux and Escott have neglected to characterize the four Shirelles, instead turning them into a squealing quartet of interchangeable parts who exist only to sing songs, change costumes, smile and shake their collective booty.

That's what is most irksome about "Baby It's You!": It's a wasted opportunity to tell what really happened when a nice Jewish housewife took four nice black Jersey girls and made them very, very famous. I'd happily pay to read a book in which that story was told honestly and well—but I wouldn't pay a dime to see a musical that doesn't even try to do so, no matter how slick it sounds.

Donna Murphy is one of the best musical-comedy actresses who ever sang a showstopper, and anything she does is worth seeing, at least while she's on stage. That said, "The People in the Picture" is yet another addition to the seemingly endless list of Lousy Musicals of 2011, an exercise in button-pushing that takes a pair of serious subjects—Alzheimer's disease and the Holocaust—and uses them to prove the well-known fact that even on Broadway, two wrongs don't make a right.



The recipe for "The People in the Picture"? Take Bubbie (Ms. Murphy), a Jewish grandmother who doesn't get along with her divorced daughter (Nicole Parker). Add Jenny (Rachel Resheff), the perky little granddaughter to whom Bubbie is telling the story of how she once led the Warsaw Gang, a touring troupe of Polish actors who ran afoul of the Nazis. Hint at a Terrible Secret that explains why Bubbie and her daughter don't get along. Then give Bubbie a conveniently timed case of Alzheimer's, thus forcing her to spill the beans before it's too late. What do you get? Two and a half hours of retch-worthy glop, set to the greeting-card lyrics of Iris Rainer Dart ("It's never been easy / It's always been rough / I give her my life / But it's never enough") and the perfectly serviceable music of Mike Stoller (who is better known as the other half of Leiber & Stoller) and Artie Butler. Ms. Dart also wrote the book, which actually contains the phrase "Doctor schmoctor" and a joke about Josef Mengele.

Much talent has been squandered on this stale confection, starting with that of Ms. Murphy, who switches from youth to old age and back again so deftly that you'll smile each time she does it. The cast is full of pros (it's always a joy to see Lewis J. Stadlen at work), and Andy Blankenbuehler, lately of "In the Heights," has staged the musical numbers with pleasing skill. If you have an unusually high tolerance for sentiment, you might find "The People in the Picture" barely endurable.

—Mr. Teachout, the Journal's drama critic, blogs about theater and the other arts at www.terryteachout.com. Write to him at tteachout@wsj.com.