Snow shoveling: U.S. hospitals treat on average about 11,500 injuries and medical emergencies a year related to shoveling snow, according to a study in the American Journal of Emergency Medicine that analyzed data from 100 emergency departments from 1990 to 2006. 

The study, the first national survey of snow-shoveling injuries, said the activity places extraordinary demands on the cardiovascular system and can raise heart rates above recommended upper limits after only two minutes. Freezing temperatures also constrict peripheral blood vessels, further stressing the heart. Two-thirds of shoveling injuries occurred in men, and 15% of injuries were in children under 18 years old. More than half of injuries resulted from acute musculoskeletal exertion, 20% from slips and falls, and nearly 7% from cardiac problems, such as heart attack. 

The study said most shovels contribute to injuries because of their non-ergonomic design, which hasn't changed in over a century. Researchers recommend shovelers under 18 be supervised, people should warm up with light exercise before shoveling and sedentary individuals should consider hiring someone for the task. 

 Caveat: Researchers said their findings underestimate the number of injuries and medical emergencies associated with snow shoveling because only cases treated in emergency departments were included.

Title: Snow shovel-related injuries and medical emergencies treated in US EDs, 1990 to 2006.

 Infertility: When women undergo in-vitro fertilization, two embryos are usually implanted at the same time, which can result in twin births. 

A study in the British Medical Journal found that women were as likely to give birth to a healthy baby from a single-embryo transfer, followed by the transfer of a fresh or frozen embryo in a subsequent cycle if the first embryo failed. 

A meta-analysis of eight clinical trials involving approximately 1,400 women who underwent IVF found that transferring embryos one at a time had a 38% success rate. That compared with a 42% rate when two embryos were transferred simultaneously, a difference the researchers said wasn't statistically significant. Single-embryo transfer on its own had a 27% success rate. The new technique reduced the number of premature births and low-birth-weight babies, primarily because of fewer twins, researchers said. The study recommends further research be carried out, especially on older women. 

 Caveat: The meta-analysis focused on women with a good prognosis so the results may not apply to everyone.

Title: Clinical effectiveness of elective single versus double embryo transfer: meta-analysis of individual patient data from randomised trials 

 Vitamin D and Newborns: High levels of vitamin D appear to protect newborns from respiratory infections and wheezing but have no effect on rates of asthma, according to a study in Pediatrics. The researchers said previous studies linking vitamin D and respiratory problems have prompted speculation that a deficiency of the vitamin could be responsible for the current high rates of asthma, which affects seven million children in the U.S. and an estimated 300 million people world-wide. The study looked at 922 New Zealand newborns, recruited from 1997 to 2001 and followed for five years. It found that low levels of vitamin D doubled their risk of developing respiratory infections by 3 months of age, compared with infants with higher vitamin levels. Low vitamin D was also associated with increased wheezing at 15 months. There was no apparent effect on asthma, which usually develops by age 5. The researchers said that in helping to reduce respiratory infections, vitamin D might help lessen conditions that exacerbate asthma. Caveat: The findings were based on interviews with mothers rather than medical evaluations, leaving the criteria for identifying respiratory infections open to interpretation.

Title: Cord-Blood 25-Hydroxyvitamin D Levels and Risk of Respiratory Infection, Childhood Wheezing, and Asthma  

 Pre-eclampsia: Researchers developed and tested a model that allows doctors to identify pregnant women at increased risk of major complications from pre-eclampsia, which is a leading cause of maternal deaths, according to a report in The Lancet. Pre-eclampsia, or dangerously high blood pressure, occurs in 5% to 8% of pregnancies; obese and diabetic women in their first pregnancy are at highest risk. From 2003 to 2010, researchers tested a model called fullPIERS on 2,023 women with pre-eclampsia admitted to hospitals in Canada, New Zealand, Australia and the United Kingdom. Adverse outcomes were recorded in about 13% of the women, though none died. By measuring several signs, including gestational age and blood oxygen level, researchers were able to identify 75% of women at increased risk of serious complications up to seven days before complications arose. Researchers said the model will help doctors better understand the progression of pre-eclampsia and identify and treat women based on their level of risk for complications. 

 Caveat: The model was tested in urban areas of developed countries. Its effectiveness in other settings might vary.

Title: Prediction of adverse maternal outcomes in pre-eclampsia: development and validation of the fullPIERS model 

 C. difficile: Hospital-acquired Clostridium difficile infections are usually associated with elderly and frail patients but a new study in the Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine found that infection rates in children admitted to hospital in the U.S. have been increasing by about 15% a year. An analysis of a national database of 10.5 million children discharged from hospital showed the number of C. difficile cases increased from 3,565 in 1997 to 7,779 in 2006. The study also found that children with C. difficile had a 20% higher risk of dying, 36% higher rates of surgical colectomy (removal of a section of the intestine), and were hospitalized more than four times as long. This is the third study in two years to note an increasing trend in pediatric C. difficile infections but the first to look at its effects on children. 

 Caveat: Researchers had little access to clinical information and were unable to verify the strain of C. difficile or the medical treatments given to children.

Title:  Clostridium difficile Infection in Hospitalized Children in the United States 

***

 Lymphedema: Weight lifting after breast-cancer surgery doesn't increase a woman's risk for lymphedema, a painful swelling of the arm caused by the removal of lymph nodes, according to a study in the Journal of the American Medical Association. About a third of breast-cancer patients have one or more lymph nodes removed to determine if the cancer has spread. Most patients are told to avoid lifting heavy objects to minimize their risk for lymphedema, which develops in up to 50% of women. The study looked at 154 breast-cancer patients in Philadelphia who had two to 26 lymph nodes removed. Half the women lifted weights during a one-year program, in 2007 and 2008, and the other half didn't exercise. Lymphedema developed in 11% of the weight lifters and 17% of the control group. Among women with five or more nodes removed, 7% of the weight lifters developed lymphedema compared with 22% of non-exercisers. The weight lifters lost body fat and became stronger, leading researchers to conclude that slowly progressive weight lifting is a safe activity for breast-cancer survivors.

 Caveat: The study aimed to test the safety of weight lifting for breast-cancer patients, not any potential benefits. The researchers said additional investigation is needed before concluding that weight lifting prevents lymphedema.

Title: Weight Lifting for Women at Risk for Breast Cancer-Related Lymphedema, A Randomized Trial 

***

Opioids: A little-known drug derived from morphine, which along with other opioids is the most common treatment for chronic and acute pain, could be a more potent, versatile pain killer with potentially fewer side effects, according to a study in the European Journal of Pharmacology. Researchers at the University of Kentucky tested morphine-6-0-sulfate on laboratory rats and found it was as much as 10 times as potent as morphine, depending on how it was administered. Morphine-6-0-sulfate was especially effective in treating neuropathic and inflammatory pain and maintained its maximum analgesic effects for three hours, or twice as long as morphine. Side effects, one of the driving forces behind the search for new pain killers, were also fewer with the derivative drug. The drug could cause constipation, a big problem with opioids, but only at doses that far exceeded what was needed for effective pain control. But more study is needed to determine its effects on respiratory depression, a serious side effect of opioids. Researchers said the derivative drug warrants further study. 

Caveat: Since the drug was tested on rats, researchers can't be sure of its effect on humans. 

Title: Antinociceptive effects and toxicity of morphine-6-0-sulfate sodium salt in rat models of pain 