The U.N. Security Council authorized military force against Libyan leader Gadhafi's security forces, opening the way for European and U.S. airstrikes within days. The action, pushed aggressively by France and the U.K., came as Libyan forces continued their push toward Benghazi, the de facto capital of rebels trying to end Gadhafi's 42-year rule. U.N. members, sensitive to perceptions of such a campaign in a Muslim country, stressed that the resolution barred a foreign military occupation of Libya. Obama, for his part, had to decide between adding a third military commitment to the wars already under way in Afghanistan and Iraq and the likelihood of brutal defeat for a rebellion sparked by regional pro-democracy uprisings, as well as the chance Gadhafi would resume his support for international terrorism. Across the Red Sea in Yemen's capital, armed men opened fire on crowds of anti-government protesters, killing an estimated 45 people and injuring hundreds, in the biggest escalation of violence in the capital since protesters in January began to call for the end of President Ali Abdullah Saleh's 32-year regime.

Crucial efforts to tame Japan's crippled nuclear plant were delayed by concerns over damaging valuable power assets and by initial passivity on the part of the government, people familiar with the situation said. The death toll from Japan's earthquake and tsunami reached about 7,000, with more than 10,000 others missing, as authorities made modest gains in their efforts to tame a heavily damaged nuclear power plant. The twin disasters and the subsequent threat of radiation exposure have displaced hundreds of thousands, triggered an exodus of foreigners and split U.S. and Japanese officials over how big a buffer zone is needed. The U.S. struggled to sustain diplomacy in dealing with a proud and close ally, but moved to evacuate U.S. citizens and set up its own channels of information, flying a military drone aircraft and a U2 spy plane over the plant to get a first-hand assessment of the damage. Some American companies laid plans to trim their operations in the stricken country. Aid still isn't getting through across wide swaths of Japan's disaster zone, given blizzards, blasted-out roads and radiation fears. Companies around the world are reporting disruptions to supply chains. 

Influential unions are demanding the EPA soften new rules aimed at pollution associated with coal-fired power plants, as the Obama administration's environmental agenda, long a target of business, starts to take fire from some of the Democratic Party's most reliable supporters. The unions fear that half a dozen rules expected within the next two years could put thousands of jobs in jeopardy and damage the party's 2012 election prospects. On Wednesday, the administration proposed requiring power plants that use coal or fuel oil to reduce emissions of mercury and certain other hazardous pollutants by 91%. 

Millionths of a second by which the Japanese earthquake has shortened the day, by speeding up the planet's rotation through the redistribution of Earth's mass at the fault line. 

Years since Arabica coffee was as expensive as it is now, amid strong demand, a weak dollar and hot speculation. The percolating prices join those of gasoline and other staples of life, with wholesale food up 3.9% in February, the biggest spike since a 4.2% increase in November 1974. 

Pints of Guinness sold in the U.S. on St. Patrick's Day. For the perfect "settle" in pouring, the nitrogen bubbles are allowed to "create the theater and wonderful surge event" for "the beautiful creamy head." 

Bands from New York's hip borough of Brooklyn performing at the buzzy South by Southwest (SXSW) arts festival in Austin, Texas, this week, out of a total of 2,008.

Amount that defaults have lopped off U.S. household debt since mid-2008. 

 One of the puzzles of the economic recovery has been how U.S. households have managed to shed some $658 billion in mortgage, credit-card and other consumer debt over the past 2½ years. Are they really paying it down, or are they just giving up and defaulting? The latest data from the Federal Reserve suggest defaults have played a big role. By our own estimate, based on the Fed data, banks' and investors' charge-offs, the result of defaults, have lopped $822 billion off households' debt load. In other words, net of defaults, consumers actually borrowed $163 billion, after rounding. 

 That calculation alone, though, doesn't give the full picture. Americans may be adding debt, but they're doing so at a much slower pace than during the housing and credit boom. Net of defaults, household debt has grown at an average annualized rate of about 0.5% from mid-2008 to the end of 2010, down from the 10.5% or so of the preceding decade. So U.S. consumers deserve some credit for getting their debts under control.

 —Mark Whitehouse 

 Sources: NASA (shortened day; preliminary theoretical calculations); Rabobank, Bureau of Labor Statistics (food inflation); Diageo, Master Brewer Fergal Murray (Guinness); Elizabeth Derczo, SXSW Music Conference & Festival (SXSW).  

House Ways and Means Chairman Dave Camp (R., Mich.) proposed to cut the top U.S. tax rate to 25% and cut or eliminate popular deductions, laying down a marker in the long debate to come and providing Republicans with a position to pitch in the 2012 election. 

A Wisconsin circuit court judge put on hold Friday a new law that would curtail collective-bargaining rights for public unions, delaying for now the implementation of bitterly contested legislation that drew thousands of protesters and shut down the legislature. 

Student applications to law schools this year are down about 12% from a year earlier, as college seniors grow leery of a degree that promises certain debt and uncertain job prospects. "The rising cost of a legal education and the realities of the legal job market mean that going to law school may not pay off," the American Bar Association warned in a 2009 report.

A gentle spring rain of liquid methane, detected by NASA's Cassini spacecraft, fell from the equatorial clouds on Titan, Saturn's largest moon, in the first documented example of extraterrestrial rain.

A national janitorial company will lose more than half its Minnesota work force after a government audit, with employers now the cornerstone of federal efforts to crack down on illegal immigration.

Microsoft and federal law enforcement agents seized computer equipment from Internet hosting facilities across the U.S. in a sweeping legal attack designed to cripple the leading source of junk email on the Internet. Microsoft launched the raids as part of a civil lawsuit against unnamed operators of the Rustock "botnet," a vast network of computers around the globe infected with malicious software that allows its masterminds, whose identities aren't known, to distribute enormous volumes of spam, peddling everything from counterfeit software to pharmaceuticals. Separately, a new version of Microsoft's Internet Explorer became the first major Web browser to include a tool that helps people keep their online habits from being monitored. That makes Google and Apple the only big providers of browsers that haven't come out in support of a do-not-track system. 

Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway will buy chemical maker Lubrizol for $9 billion, in its latest expansion into the industrial sector as an avenue of growth. Analysts think Berkshire, with $38 billion in cash and cash equivalents at the end of 2010 and billions more expected to pile up this year, will make several more acquisitions.

Renault CEO Ghosn apologized to three senior managers the company fired after wrongly accusing them of espionage. 

PepsiCo plans to spend 30% more to pitch its beverages on U.S. television in 2011 than in recent years, after losing more ground last year to Coca-Cola in their decades-old cola wars. Much of the money is aimed at propping up the sagging Pepsi-Cola brand after Diet Coke overtook it last year for the first time to become the No. 2 soda in the U.S., behind regular Coke. 

CEO bonuses at 50 major corporations jumped by a median of 31%, the biggest gain in at least three years, as bonuses rebound in general.

An FDA panel said removing menthol cigarettes from the U.S. market would benefit the nation's health, suggesting the full FDA should at least consider a ban. Menthol-flavored cigarettes account for about 30% of all cigarette sales in the U.S. and are favored by adolescents and African-Americans. The leading menthol-flavored brand, Newport, accounts for roughly 90% of Lorillard's sales. Altria and Reynolds American aren't as reliant on menthol for overall sales. 

U.S. regulators accused International Business Machines of a decade-long campaign of bribery in Asia, saying employees handed over shopping bags stuffed with cash in South Korea and arranged junkets for government officials in China in exchange for millions of dollars in contracts. IBM agreed to pay $10 million to settle the civil charges.

National Football League officials said team owners had set aside enough money to get by if the 2011 season is canceled, as owners and the players union dig in for a potentially lengthy legal battle. 

BP blocked an attempt by its billionaire Russian partners to join its planned $16 billion alliance with Russian state oil giant Rosneft, deepening a conflict that threatens BP's fortunes in the region.

Wal-Mart Stores, Target and other large retailers are ratcheting up a political campaign to force Amazon.com to collect sales taxes, sensing opportunity in the budget crises gripping state governments. 

Netflix is in advanced talks to distribute a television series directed by "Social Network" director  David Fincher and starring Kevin Spacey. The deal would add a competitor to the TV industry by increasing the degree to which Netflix vies with premium-cable television channels like Time Warner's HBO. 

Stocks in Japan tumbled on the national crisis. The benchmark Nikkei Stock Average posted its biggest weekly percentage drop since October 2008, falling 10%. The Group of Seven nations banded together in an attempt to curb an unwelcome rise in the yen. The currency rocketed to an all-time high against the U.S. dollar Wednesday, possibly on speculators closing out short positions or Japanese households bringing money home from abroad—but still a puzzle to officials. U.S. stocks weathered a rocky week, with global markets rattled by the news from Japan, concerns about the global economy and unrest in the Mideast and North Africa. The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 83.93 points on Friday but shed 1.5% for the week. 

The Nasdaq Stock Market's owner moved closer to making a competing bid for the New York Stock Exchange, as bourses around the world continue to gobble each other up. As of Monday, Nasdaq OMX Group was in talks with banks, including  Bank of America,
BAC


3.77
%




 to line up financing for a bid that could include new debt of as much as $5 billion. A proposal, if one is framed, is sure to face antitrust hurdles in the U.S. as well as financial obstacles.

U.S. investigators are probing whether U.S. and European banks manipulated the London interbank offered rate, or Libor, one of the world's most important benchmarks. 

Federal investigators have conceded that Lehman Brothers executives probably won't face charges for an accounting tactic that obscured the Wall Street firm's true financial condition. Lehman's auditor, on the other hand, has already been hauled into court and is fighting fraud charges filed in December by the New York attorney general. 

U.S. banking regulators have paid out nearly $9 billion to cover losses on loans and other assets at 165 failed institutions that were sold to stronger companies during the financial crisis. FDIC officials expect to make an additional $21.5 billion in payments from 2011 to 2014. 