BEIJING—Defense Secretary Robert Gates arrived here Sunday for three days of talks aimed at smoothing out the turbulent relationship between the U.S. and China.

But Mr. Gates's message will not simply be one of better cooperation. He also clearly signaled in a roundtable with reporters before his arrival that the U.S. will match or exceed Beijing's military modernization programs. Mr. Gates said he was concerned with some of China's new weapons programs, including its advancing antiship technology and its stealth fighter. 



Mr. Gates last traveled to China in 2007, hoping to end the cycle of on-again, off-again military relationships. During that trip, Mr. Gates aimed to begin a long-term strategic dialogue with China, modeled in part on the U.S. talks with the Soviet Union.

Instead of four years of talks, there has been mostly silence between the U.S. and China, as a series of disputes, most importantly over U.S. arms sales to Taiwan, prompted Beijing to cool cooperation with the Pentagon.

In the roundtable with reporters, Mr. Gates again discussed his intention of building a stronger relationship between the U.S. military and China's People's Liberation Army, ties that won't be cut with each political disagreement between Washington and Beijing.

"I would like to see this relationship go forward in a way that is sustained and reliable, that despite the ups and downs that come with any relationship that these channels remain open," Mr. Gates said.

Some defense analysts and Pentagon officials believe both the China stealth fighter and antiship missile are designed to limit America's ability to operate freely in the Pacific and East Asia. On Thursday, the Pentagon announced it would invest in a new generation of ship-based jamming technology, a long-range penetrating bomber, a new generation of sea-borne unmanned aircraft and improving the radar on the older F-15 fighter planes.

Defense officials said those weapons systems could help counter weapons systems meant to prevent American access to international waters near China. 

After images of what appears to be China's stealth fighter, or a prototype, appeared on Chinese websites in the days leading up to Mr. Gates's visit, some military officials have said that they might have underestimated the pace of some parts of China's military modernization, which Mr. Gates also acknowledged.

"We've known they were working on a stealth aircraft," Mr. Gates said. "I think what we've seen is that they are somewhat further ahead than our intelligence had earlier predicted." Mr. Gates said the Pentagon has doubts about exactly how stealthy the new aircraft might be. He also said he stood by his statement that even by 2020 or 2025, there would be a vast disparity between the U.S. fleet of stealth aircraft and that of any other country.

The defense secretary acknowledged that during his 2007 trip he had laid out some of the same goals. This time, he said, China has both said it wants to be more cooperative, and demonstrated it can be. 

Mr. Gates referred to behind-the-scenes assistance by China in pressuring North Korea to ease its belligerence and reduce military tensions between Seoul and Pyongyang, as a sign of mutual interests shared by Beijing and Washington, and a potential signal of the two country's ability to work together. 

Administration officials told The Wall Street Journal last month that the government believes China intervened with North Korea to tamp down growing tensions on the peninsula.

Mr. Gates believes his recent conversations with Chinese officials, most notably in Hanoi last October, have been successful, and that he may be making progress in persuading some Chinese officials that military cooperation should not be halted whenever political disagreements arise or Washington sells arms to Taipei.

Officials in Beijing wanted the defense secretary to visit Beijing just ahead of Chinese President Hu Jintao's visit to Washington, scheduled for Jan. 18-21. Mr. Gates is counting on Beijing's desire for the visit of Mr. Hu to go smoothly to improve the prospects for his own visit.

Some analysts have suggested China's civilian leadership is more anxious than its military counterparts for better relations with the Pentagon. Mr. Gates said he did not know if that is the case.

But he noted that his recent talks with Chinese officials have been cordial. "My hope is this visit strengthens what both presidents believe is an underdeveloped portion of the relationship," he said. "From the time of their first meeting, President Hu and President Obama have wanted to see the military-to-military relationship strengthened."