An old adage says it is expensive to go broke. It sure was for mall owner  General Growth Properties Inc.
GGP


0.45
%






The fee committee in the company's 19-month bankruptcy stint, which ended in November, recently released its final tally of fees and reimbursements for law firms and other advisers in the case. The bill: $229.2 million in fees and $6.5 million in reimbursements.

The totals are roughly what General Growth officials had expected. Most analysts say the company's costs in exiting bankruptcy were worth it, considering that all creditors were paid in full and shareholders recouped significant value. 

Still, with $27 billion in debt, General Growth's was the largest real-estate bankruptcy in recent history, so the fees dwarf other cases. The bankruptcy of hotel chain Extended Stay Inc., which concluded last year with the chain's sale, yielded fees of $20 million and reimbursements of $194,154, court records show.

The big earners in the General Growth case were the mall owner's two bankruptcy-law firms and its restructuring advisers. Weil Gotshal & Manges LLP sought $54.7 million in fees and $1.5 million in expense reimbursements. Kirkland & Ellis LLP sought $26.5 million in fees and $872,725 in reimbursements. Advisor AlixPartners LLP sought $29.6 million in fees and $1.2 million in reimbursements. Miller Buckfire & Co. LLC sought $28.9 million and $207,754, respectively.

—Kris Hudson

A group of opportunistic investors who took control of a troubled portfolio of five luxury resorts and immediately put it into bankruptcy is looking to lighten its load.

The group led by hedge fund Paulson & Co. and  Winthrop Realty Trust
FUR


0.13
%




 is planning to sell the high-end Doral Golf Resort and Spa near Miami, multiple people familiar with the matter said. 

In January, it took over the five debt-laden resorts that had been owned by a  Morgan Stanley
MS


-0.05
%




 real-estate fund. The group put the properties into bankruptcy in February as part of its strategy to rework its hefty $1.5 billion in debt. 

The 49-year-old Doral is something of a golfer's dream, with a 692-room hotel and five courses, one of which hosts an event on the PGA tour. The owners aren't looking to get completely out of Florida. They are planning to hold onto a piece of the Doral property that has real-estate-development rights attached to it, the people familiar with the matter said. A Paulson spokesman declined to comment. 

—Eliot Brown 

Fannie Mae's loss has become Freddie Mac's gain.

Fannie closed the sale earlier this year of three multifamily properties in California's Inland Empire that it took over in a foreclosure auction and upgraded. The buyer, Phoenix Realty Group, financed its $21.5 million purchase of the 432 units of low-to-moderate income rental housing in San Bernardino and Highland, Calif., with financing from Fannie's smaller rival, Freddie. 

Both firms are being propped up by $134 billion in taxpayer aid. The deal illustrates Fannie's appetite for putting more money into foreclosed multifamily properties in order to generate a better sale price. "They smartly foreclosed and then immediately installed professional management to get the property in better shape and up to full occupancy," said  Edward Ratinoff, Phoenix's managing director of national acquisitions

Fannie, which financed the top-of-the-market sale in 2007, took back the properties in 2009. Mr. Ratinoff says Fannie would have faced challenges getting "full price for the property" without making it eligible for lender financing.

—Nick Timiraos