Washington has been buzzing since November with speculation over whether House Republicans will eventually force a government shutdown to make their point about fiscal responsibility. A bigger surprise by far is that similar speculation is astir in Japan. 

Yet there is a key, and disappointing, difference. Whereas in America this kind of showdown results from a broader and very public debate about fundamental policy issues, Japan's deadlock is about, well, nothing. That makes it easier to resolve in the short term, but hardly good for Japan in the long run.

Tokyo's immediate problem is that as of right now, the government will lack the authority to borrow to cover its deficit come the new fiscal year on April 1. Prime Minister Naoto Kan can push through his budget plan without support in the Diet's Upper House thanks to a procedural quirk, but the borrowing legislation is much harder. The opposition Liberal Democratic Party sniffs the unpopular Mr. Kan's political blood in the water and is threatening to nix the debt law if its demands aren't met (more on those later).

Not passing the bill could force a large-scale government shutdown. Tokyo uses the bonds at issue to fund some 44% of its total annual spending (other types of bonds not covered by this legislation push the total of deficit financing nearer 50% of spending). By some estimates, the government could use various tricks to stay afloat until around June, but after that revenues would just about cover debt service and pension payouts and nothing else—including the military, other social spending, infrastructure or the like.

Given the potential consequences, you would think some major policy disagreements between Mr. Kan's Democratic Party of Japan and the LDP had brought the two sides to this pass. Hardly. The LDP's demands consist primarily of scaling back the DPJ's ballyhooed expansion of per-child payouts to families and reversing Mr. Kan's plan to cut the top corporate income tax rate by five percentage points to 35%. The exercise is more about political point-scoring than it is about fiscal principles—the LDP's real goal is to topple Mr. Kan and force an early election, in which they may or may not succeed.

In the short term that lack of principle will probably make resolving the debt impasse easier. Mr. Kan could simply agree to the LDP's demands in some form. Whether he has the political capital to do otherwise is an open question—his approval rating is around 20%—and neither of the policies he'd be backtracking from are so popular with voters that they'd punish him at the ballot box. 

And besides, the LDP is barely more popular itself, one reason its demands aren't more ambitious. Voters may be annoyed with Mr. Kan and the DPJ for not getting them out of Japan's fiscal and economic mess, but they also remember that the LDP got them into the morass in the first place.

Over the longer term, however, Japan desperately needs a grand policy showdown, and the great shame of the current fiscal kabuki is this isn't it. While Washington politicos debate the tactical merits of a government shutdown, at heart it signals vigorous disagreements between the two parties that give voters a choice. Japanese voters, in contrast, still have few choices among their major parties when it comes to economic policy—as shown by the trivial differences over which the DPJ and LDP are bickering.

Such a debate would home in on the question of why Japan is so dependent on debt in the first place. The answer is a combination of reckless spending in the past (two decades' worth of wasted Keynesian infrastructure stimulus) and unsustainable promises for the future (a generous pension system threatened by an aging workforce), plus policies that have stifled the economic growth that could have given Tokyo a larger tax base (suffocating regulation and high marginal tax rates).

And, especially relevant for a discussion about the government's functioning, there's the matter of civil servant pay. Public employee salaries—unlike private-sector wages—have been increasing at about 1% per year in nominal terms for a decade despite chronic deflation that has eaten into tax revenue. This amounts to a 20% raise in real (deflation-adjusted) terms over that span. The DPJ promised in 2009 to cut civil service costs by 20%, but looks unlikely to deliver.

The country may yet get the policy debate it needs, and voters may at last get a choice, thanks to the small parties that are starting to bubble up while the DPJ and LDP wallow in disarray. From this perspective, at least, the DPJ has done Japan a big favor. Before the party broke the LDP's 55-year stranglehold on power in 2009, a shutdown over even petty disagreements would have been unthinkable. So the current situation is progress.

But how long the economy can stand to wait is another matter. Yesterday came news of a larger-than-expected contraction in the last three months of 2010 on weak business investment and consumption. With debt at around 200% of GDP and no fiscal discipline in sight, rating agencies have been downgrading Japan's sovereign debt. The country is rapidly running out of politicians of prime-ministerial stature or ability if Mr. Kan—the sixth prime minister in five years and no political genius himself—goes. The Japanese may soon be looking enviously at America, where government shutdowns mean something.