Repairs and testing will delay the launch of space shuttle Endeavour for at least another week, until May 8 at the earliest, as NASA resolves an electronics problem that halted Friday's planned liftoff.

Work to replace an electronics box that routes power to one of the heaters on an engine fuel-line—and time to test the new installation—together will take at least several days, according to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. But agency officials said the process could take longer.

Friday's launch from Florida's Kennedy Space Center was set to be viewed by President Barack Obama, his family and Rep. Gabrielle Giffords, the Arizona Democrat who was shot in the head during a January assassination attempt. It would have been the first time a U.S. space launch was attended by the entire first family. 

The blastoff was scrubbed when electricity wasn't flowing properly to the fuel-line heater. Initially, NASA officials hoped they could simply replace a thermostat or another part and begin the countdown by Monday.

The shuttle has duplicate fuel-line heaters, but agency officials won't launch if one system is down. But the problem turned out to be more complex than originally expected, requiring a longer time to fix and test.

The extra delay prompted Endeavour's six-man crew—including Commander Mark Kelly, the husband of Ms. Giffords—to return to Houston's Johnson Space Center for some additional training. 

Ms. Giffords is also back in Houston at her rehabilitation hospital. The family members of the other astronauts who also came to attend the highly anticipated launch have also left Florida.

"We're really not even setting the [launch] schedules today," Mike Moses, a NASA manager, said Sunday. 

NASA said it would also take time to determine specifically what caused the malfunction. The heaters are needed to keep fuel from freezing in the cold vacuum of space.

If the repair work drags on longer than expected, Endeavour's schedule could conflict with a planned Air Force rocket launch. That blastoff is tentatively slated for May 9, but it also could slip and the Air Force typically has top priority to use the Florida launch facilities.

 Write to  Andy Pasztor at andy.pasztor@wsj.com 