 Glencore International is in advanced talks with sovereign-wealth funds from Singapore and the Middle East about potential purchases of its shares, to be listed on the London and Hong Kong stock exchanges. The commodity-trading firm has been looking for big investors to turbo-charge its $12.1 billion IPO.  

 U.S. stocks struggled after an ECB official said a Greek debt restructuring was "not on the table," helping to renew worries about euro-zone debt. Shares rose across Asia.  

 The dollar fell to a 2½-year low against the euro as pessimism over the U.S. economic outlook outweighed euphoria over bin Laden's death.  

 Spot silver prices lost 12% in a matter of minutes in thin Asian trading. Silver regained some ground as the dollar weakened and New York futures trading began.  

 Asian economic data confirmed that the region's breakneck growth is slowing, but analysts said growth should pick up again in the second half of the year.  

 Facebook's business is growing faster than it forecast several months ago, raising the stakes for an initial public offering as early as the spring of next year.  

 Chrysler Group reported a small profit on rising vehicle sales, its first since splitting from Daimler in 2006 and completing the comeback of the Detroit Three.  

 India gave final environmental approval to Posco's proposed $12 billion steel plant, a possible signal to overseas investors that environmental concerns won't derail manufacturing projects.  

 Guangdong Nuclear Power's bid to buy Kalahari Minerals, giving itself access to an huge African uranium deposit, is facing headwinds ahead of a Tuesday deadline.  

 New auto sales in Japan fell 51% in April in their biggest monthly drop to date, as a parts shortage caused by the March 11 earthquake cut supplies of cars to dealerships.  

 Honda will stop taking orders for Japan-made vehicles and delayed the introduction of a restyled CR-V cross-over because of parts shortages stemming from the March earthquake. 

 The U.S. raid that killed Osama bin Laden marks a new low in relations between the U.S. and its ally Pakistan.  

 Bin Laden's death came as the aging Saudi fugitive had become increasingly irrelevant to an Arab world transformed by popular uprisings.  

 World leaders cheered bin Laden's death as a victory for the global effort against terrorism, even as they prepared for possible retaliatory strikes.  

 At the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear complex, a project to install air filters to reduce airborne radiation at a the No. 1 reactor building began, a move aimed at allowing workers to enter the building for the first time since the start of the crisis to make needed repairs.  

 Japan's parliament passed a $49.31 billion disaster-relief budget Monday.  