MOSCOW—Belarus's central bank on Tuesday halted the sale of foreign currency to the country's banks, the latest sign of increasing financial pressure on authoritarian leader Alexander Lukashenko.

The Belarussian president, isolated after recent controversial elections, is facing heightened economic problems that could force him to turn to Moscow following a period of rocky relations with the country's eastern neighbor.

Tuesday's move by the Belarus central bank, confirmed by a spokesman, comes a week after Standard & Poor's cut its long-term foreign-currency debt ratings for the country to the highly speculative single-B from single-B-plus, warning that Belarus was rapidly running out of cash.

Higher prices for Russian oil imports and a sharp boost in government spending have left Belarus with a large trade deficit and depleted its foreign-exchange reserves by 20% since the end of last year. Belarus is counting on a possible $3 billion loan from Russia and a Moscow-led emergency fund for ex-Soviet states to save it from a devaluation, though analysts have said the cash would offer only temporary relief.

"The situation seems to be escalating rapidly. We see no other reasonable alternative but for a devaluation against the currency basket," said  Sanna Kurronen, an analyst at Danske Research.

The National Bank last week issued a statement denying that it plans to devalue the currency and saying rumors to the contrary were politically motivated "provocations."

Belarus also asked Moscow on Tuesday to lower crude oil prices from the already-preferential rates it pays for Russian oil, which is bought using the country's dwindling supply of dollars. 

Moody's ratings agency said that it was "closely monitoring" the situation in the country, and that "the likelihood of adverse changes on the macroeconomic side is high." Belarus is rated B1 by Moody's.

The National Bank said it won't stop commercial banks in the country from acquiring and trading foreign currency among themselves and has asked lenders to keep their exchange rates within several percent of those set by the central bank. 

At least one bank, the Russian unit of Italy's UniCredit SpA, has suspended operations in the Belarussian ruble, citing recent restrictions on the trade of foreign currency by the National Bank of Belarus. 

"The restrictions have made the [Belarussian] ruble practically a non-convertible currency," UniCredit said in a note to clients. 

A devaluation would hurt Belarus's ability to repay foreign debt. Minsk sold an $600 million, five-year bond in July, which is now trading at a yield of about 9.6%, up from an initial coupon of 8.75%.

Not everyone agreed that Belarus faces an imminent devaluation, and the authorities "prefer to avoid this step," Renaissance Capital economist Anastasiya Golovach said. Instead the government, led by President Alexander Lukashenko, has proposed selling state assets including its approximately one-half stake in the local unit of Russia's OAO Mobile TeleSystems.

—Olga Tomashevskaya in Minsk and Clare Connaghan in London contributed to this article.

 Write to  William Mauldin at william.mauldin@dowjones.com 