The 10-room apartment in the  San Remo where the late music icon  Mitch Miller lived to the age of 99 has been sold for $13.5 million to another figure in the entertainment industry:  James L. Nederlander, the Broadway theater owner and producer. 

Mr. Miller, a goateed musician, conductor and high-powered record producer, was best known for his folksy "Sing Along With Mitch" records and television show in the 1950s and 1960s. He died in July, 2010.

He moved into the twin-towered San Remo on Central Park West and West 74th Street a half-century ago when it was still a rental, and purchased his apartment in the celebrated building when it was converted to a cooperative in the 1970s.

The sprawling 12th-floor apartment fronting on Central Park, with three-bedrooms plus library and about 4,000 square foot of space, was in uncommonly pristine condition, according to  Andrea Daniels, a broker at Warburg Realty, who represented the Miller estate. 

It had the original layout designed by the building's architect,  Emery Roth, in the 1930s, including three maid's rooms, the original steel-and-glass St. Charles kitchen cabinets, and a 1930s-era food warmer in the pantry, she said. 

Mr. Nederlander is president of the Nederlander Organization, a century-old operator of theaters and music events including nine Broadway theaters, as well as other theaters across the country and in London's West End.

He has lived in the San Remo for more than a decade, property records show, trading up from a second-floor co-op to a seventh-floor unit, both lacking the much-coveted direct views of Central Park. Mr. Nederlander declined to discuss his real-estate dealings through a spokesman.

His seventh-floor apartment, a smaller three-bedroom unit, went on the market in March for $7.6 million and went into contract two weeks later. It closed on Thursday.  Catherine Harding, the broker at Stribling and Associates, who represented Mr. Nederlander in both recent transactions, declined to comment. 

The 27-story San Remo has attracted an eclectic mix of celebrities and stars over the years, from  Stephen Sondheim to  Steve Martin and  Bruce Willis to  Steve Jobs. 

A few years ago, Bono, the lead singer of U2 became involved in a dispute with some of his neighbors at the San Remo, including  Billy Squier, another rock performer, over smoke from fireplaces. Mr. Miller, who was 95 at the time, observed: "If people want fireplaces, let them go live in the country." A moratorium on the use of fireplaces is still in effect, according to broker familiar with the building. 

The Miller apartment went on the market in late January, in a listing by Ms. Daniels and  Frederick Peters, the president of Warburg, for $14 million; it was reported in contract within a month. 

Ms. Daniels said the listing immediately trigger multiple bids both from neighbors in the building, and other would-be buyers. The transaction closed May 4, according to property records.