  (See Corrections & Amplifications item below.)  

The problem-plagued Broadway musical "Spider-Man: Turn Off the Dark" is delaying its opening night for the fourth time, putting off the first official performance until March 15, the show said in a statement Thursday night.

The show said it needs time to work on a new ending. The creative team, led by director  Julie Taymor with music by U2's Bono and the Edge, is also working on the second act, which some theatergoers have found confusing. 

Lead producer  Michael Cohl blamed the delay on the technical demands of the musical and limited rehearsal time for the cast during previews.

"We simply need more time to fully execute the creative team's vision before freezing the show," Mr. Cohl said in the statement. "I picked a date in March that allows me to ensure that this will be the final postponement."

To allow the cast additional time to rehearse, the production also said Thursday that performances on Jan. 18 and Jan. 25 were cancelled.

Last month, the $65 million production pushed its opening to Feb. 7 from Jan. 11.

The move extends the already unusually long preview period to more than 15 weeks. 

A production source said changes to the show were significant enough to warrant an additional delay of more than a month. 

Typically, critics do not review a show until after it opens, though recently some have written up their take on "Spider-Man." 

With the latest delay—coupled with the fact that many theatergoers are spending top price for their seats anyway—it's possible that more critics will do the same.

In an interview with The Wall Street Journal last week, Mr. Cohl left the door open to a delay. 

"It's life—I don't expect it to [change], but it's life," he said. He compared the likelihood of a postponement with the chances of a test misstating the gender of his future grandchild: "The doctor told me that my grandchild's a daughter, and if somebody said, 'Can it be a boy?' it's like, it could be, right?" 

On Wednesday, the show's spokesman,  Rick Miramontez, said "all systems are absolutely go" for the planned Feb. 7 opening. 

On Thursday evening, Mr. Miramontez said the decision to delay the show was made after a meeting with the creative team during the day on Thursday. 

 Write to  Ellen Gamerman at ellen.gamerman@wsj.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications:  "Spider-Man: Turn Off the Dark" on Thursday delayed its opening night for a fourth time. An earlier version of this article incorrectly said that the delay was for a fifth time.