A New York investment firm has purchased more than $13.5 million of debt on a prime Upper East Side development site with an eye toward foreclosing on the property and eventually building a condominium tower.

The firm, Minuit Partners, paid more than $8.5 million for the debt on the site, according to people familiar with the matter. The site, on First Avenue and 89th Street, currently houses three small walk-up apartment buildings, but its real value is in its development potential. 

Still, Minuit doesn't plan on breaking ground anytime soon. Rather, once it takes over, it plans to rent the units out until the development climate improves.

Jason Enters, one of Minuit's founders, estimates that might be in about three years. 

"It's a cash-flow play and a development play; but we feel it would be a better development play," Mr. Enters says.

Minuit's plan for the properties on First Avenue at 89th Street is a reminder that most condo developers are taking a wait-and-see attitude for now. While prices have clearly rebounded off their lows, they haven't reached the point to justify launching new projects.

At the same time, the Minuit deal is a sign that the market for development sites is coming back to life for buyers who have patience. 

Many sites, especially those that were purchased at the top of the market, have been tied up in battles between owners and their lenders.

But now lenders increasingly are selling off the debt on the sites—often for a loss—to buyers who are moving to take control. In another high-profile example of this, a group led by developer Douglas Durst just took control of a site on Sixth Avenue between 30th and 31st streets.

Banks are becoming more "realistic" about selling loans, says  David Schechtman, of Eastern Consolidated, who was the broker on the sale of the properties to Minuit. Meantime, buyers are re-entering the market because they realize the bottom of the cycle had passed and prices were unlikely to fall any further, he says.

 "People realize that in New York, Rome isn't burning," Mr. Schechtman says. 

The properties on First Avenue and 89th Street had been owned by  Uri Foxbrunner, who purchased them in late 2007 also with the view of developing them. 

The buildings, comprising 30 apartments and three shop fronts, have been partially vacated since then. Mr. Foxbrunner and his attorney couldn't be reached for comment.

The debt on the property, held by Brooklyn Federal Savings Bank, is more than $13.5 million, including unpaid interest. The bank began foreclosure proceedings last spring, according to Mr. Enters. 

Minuit was established a year ago by two former property executives at a small private-equity group named Madison Capital. Mr. Enters says that the firm would attempt to work out a deal with Mr. Foxbrunner, but said such an outcome would be difficult and appeared unlikely.

Mr. Enters said that if Minuit succeeds in taking control, it would spend about $300,000 conducting minor updates to the apartments and stores, and then lease them out, delivering a yield of about 7% on the money it invested.

Minuit would then look to build a tower with about 100 apartments on the site in about three years. A development would depend on demand for condos as well as whether Minuit would be able to buy adjoining properties, he says.

Under current zoning a skinny tower could be built on the site. But a larger building could be developed if a larger site could be assembled, Mr. Enters says.

 Write to  Anthony Klan at Anthony.Klan@wsj.com 