MOSCOW—Late last year, amid an outcry over the brutal beating of a prominent journalist, Russian President Dmitry Medvedev demanded the capture and punishment of the culprits. Then the crime appeared to drop from the Kremlin's agenda.

But on Tuesday, during a visit to the Middle East, Mr. Medvedev met for the first time with the victim of the assault,  Oleg Kashin, and again voiced interest in the case. Mr. Kashin, who took a break from treatment in Israel to cover the visit, said the Russian leader vowed to "tear the heads off" the unidentified men who broke his hands, jaw and legs.

"He asked me about my health and urged me to stick to my positions," said the 30-year-old journalist, whose articles online and in the mainstream newspaper Kommersant have been critical of Russia's leadership. Mr. Kashin gave his account in a Twitter message, and the Kremlin later confirmed the meeting had taken place. 

The Nov. 6 attack caused an uproar in Russia, highlighting the Kremlin's failure to resolve dozens of murders and other bloody attacks on journalists in recent years. A pro-Kremlin youth group had threatened Mr. Kashin before he was beaten, and Mr. Medvedev's initial call for justice met with skepticism after Prime Minister Vladimir Putin received a youth leader allied with the group. No suspect has been arrested, and no senior Russian official visited Mr. Kashin before he left Moscow early this month to undergo rehabilitation in Israel.

Mr. Medvedev's meeting with the journalist took place in the ancient West Bank city of Jericho. Hobbling on a cane, Mr. Kashin waited along the Russian leader's heavily guarded route and spoke with him briefly outside a Russian-funded museum where Mr. Medvedev was to appear with his host, Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas.

Natalia Timakova, a spokeswoman for Mr. Medvedev, said the journalist had applied to the Kremlin and received press accreditation to gain access to the site.

 Write to  Richard Boudreaux at richard.boudreaux@wsj.com and Alexander Kolyandr at Alexander.Kolyandr@dowjones.com 