Despite a busy market for trophy properties, the pace of sales and median prices of Manhattan apartments slipped during the fourth quarter, according to market reports released Monday.

Brokers say that the pace of new deals has been picking up lately, at all price points. But even so, some brokers predicted that prices will stagnate at best through much of the new year. 

"We will be lucky if we are going to move sideways," said  Dottie Herman, president of Prudential Douglas Elliman. "There won't be a big price increase. Everything suggests we are at the bottom of the market and not going anywhere."

  Pamela Liebman, president of Corcoran Group, said that New York was returning to a "normal market" with a lot of new buyers coming in after several tumultuous years. But asked about prices, she said: "I don't see any reason why they should go up." 

Manhattan residential real estate, with its deep concentration of wealth and international cachet, survived the recession much better than most of the country. Yet with city unemployment down but still at 9.1% and with credit still tight, there's little upward pressure on pricing. 

The number of sales fell by 13.8% in the fourth quarter compared with the previous quarter, and 7.2% compared with the year-earlier quarter, according to a report prepared by appraisal firm Miller Samuel Inc for Prudential Douglas Elliman.

The median sale price of $845,000 in the fourth quarter was off by 7.5% from the previous quarter and up 4.3% from a year earlier, the report found.

The average sale price of a Manhattan apartment in the fourth quarter was $1.483 million, the report found, nearly the same as the previous quarter, and 14.4% above a year earlier. 

Some brokers and analysts said they viewed the sluggish results in the fourth quarter as a return to normal seasonality, and a sign of a recovering market.

  Jonathan Miller, an appraiser and president of Miller Samuel, said that the market was now "consistent with historical norms" after the frothy years of the housing bubble and recovery. 

He said that the number of sales and the number of listings on the market had returned to their averages of the past decade. "Now we are exiting this gyration we have gone through over the last two years to a more normal distribution of sales." 

Or as  Hall F. Willkie, president of Brown Harris Stevens, said: "Prices are lower, but there are sales taking place and it is very encouraging. We had a great year."

New York added 51,200 jobs, including 6,000 in the financial sector in the 12 months ended in November, according to  Gregory J. Heym, an economist who prepared market reports for Brown Harris Stevens and Halstead. 

At the same time, the supply of new apartments was shrinking, he said. Permits were issued to build only 505 private housing units in Manhattan in the first 11 months of 2010.

  Diane M. Ramirez, president of Halstead Property, said: "I don't think we are going to see a jump, but I think we will see a nice, steady, strong market."

The Douglas Elliman report put the median coop sale price at $685,000 last quarter, 11.9% below the third quarter and 8.7% above the year-earlier quarter. The median price of a condominium was put at $997,885, 10.9% below the third quarter.

The slowdown in overall sales occurred as a number of celebrated trophy apartments were sold, some at considerable discounts and others at unexpectedly high prices.

Sales record filed Monday showed that developer William Lie Zeckendorf paid $29.1 million for the 11th-floor apartment at 927 Fifth Ave. owned by the late Bruce Wasserstein, the investment banker, $3 million more than the listing price. 

 Write to  Josh Barbanel at josh.barbanel@wsj.com 