Mutual-fund managers have seen better days. More than a quarter of actively managed stock funds trailed the indexes they're measured against by five percentage points or more in the first nine months of 2010 -- their worst performance since 1998, according to J.P. Morgan.

But there are still managers who shine year in and year out. Each year, SmartMoney whittles the 6,800 mutual funds available in the U.S. down to a few standouts that consistently outperformed their peers -- without charging sky-high fees. Here, the top finishers in four major categories.

There's a good reason why CEOs from headquarters as far-flung as Saskatchewan and Brazil regularly touch down in Santa Fe, N.M., to meet with the managers of the Thornburg International Value fund. The fund has beaten its benchmark every year since its inception in 1998. And as more investors discover the fund, its three co-managers get a steady flow of new money to buy stocks -- which helps explain the rush of sunscreen-toting executives.

Founder  William Fries used to manage the fund alone; today, he shares duties with co-managers  Wendy Trevisani and  Lei Wang. The team is flexible about their investing style; although the fund emphasizes lower-priced "value" stocks, they're willing to pay more for companies with high earnings.

"Growth is not a dirty word," says Mr. Fries.

Nor are the managers afraid to kick the tires. Before adding Volkswagen to their portfolio last year, they talked to a Volkswagen dealer on Long Island, New York, about the dealer's perspective on the business.

In all, emerging markets typically make up about 20% of Thornburg International -- nearly twice the average for broad-based foreign-stock funds, says  William Samuel Rocco, a fund analyst at Morningstar.

Unlike many managers of traditional mutual funds,  Bruce Berkowitz uses his Fairholme fund to buy the debt of ailing companies or to participate in initial public stock offerings. He limits the fund to around two-dozen holdings.

And because he builds big stakes in them, Mr. Berkowitz has influence over many of those companies. "We try to treat our investments as if we were silent partners in the business," he says.

In the wake of the financial crisis, Mr. Berkowitz scooped up heavily discounted financial stocks. Some have paid off big: Fairholme was recently the largest investor (after the U.S. government) in  American International Group,
AIG


0.30
%




 whose stock soared after it was bailed out during the financial crisis.

The goal, Mr. Berkowitz says, is to buy companies that seem tarnished, but are in better shape than investors think. "At the end of the day," he says, "a dollar doesn't know how it's made."

Double-digit average annual returns over the past decade sent Fairholme's assets soaring to their current $17 billion. But the onslaught of new money hasn't prompted Mr. Berkowitz to increase the number of stocks he holds.

"What's the point of buying my thirtieth best idea when I can buy more of my best idea?" he asks.

  Marc Halle has spent less time running his fund than the other winners in our survey, but he has 25 years of experience investing in real estate. And since he took the helm at what is now the Prudential Global Real Estate fund at the beginning of 2007, his experience has paid off: The fund has beaten its peers by an average of nearly two percentage points a year.

Mr. Halle says he prefers the developed world to emerging markets because of the greater transparency in accounting and corporate governance and the liquidity of the markets.

He hasn't invested in Russia and prefers to get his exposure to Chinese real estate through companies based in Hong Kong or Singapore.  Sun Hung Kai Properties,
SUHJY


-0.28
%




 based in Hong Kong, was recently the fund's second-largest holding, after  Simon Property Group
SPG


0.38
%




 in the U.S.

Of course, the recent recession has been brutal to real estate in almost every nation. In 2008, Prudential Global Real Estate tumbled only slightly less than the 47% decline of its peer group.

Still, Lipper senior analyst  Jeff Tjornehoj says that if the dollar continues its recent decline, funds like Mr. Halle's could take off.

  Whitney George has a decidedly lowbrow way of describing his investment team at Royce & Associates. He says they're "scavengers" -- focused on small-value stocks that other investors avoid. Still, the trash-bin approach has been profitable.

The average annual returns of Mr. George's  Royce Low-Priced Stock fund exceeded 10% over the past decade -- a time when the broader market posted returns closer to zero.

Mr. George believes inflation might pick up soon because of stimulus spending in developed nations and rising labor costs in countries like China and Mexico. That's led him to scoop up mining and energy stocks, which tend to do well during inflationary times.

Mr. George likes silver -- and silver miners -- because it's used in jewelry and electronics. His emphasis on so-called hard assets like metals and industrial materials has given his portfolio more global exposure than most U.S. small-cap funds: More than 20% of its assets are invested in companies based outside the country.

Mr. George could be in for tougher sledding: Many analysts say large stocks are selling at such steep discounts that they're poised to outperform small-cap stocks.

Mr. George isn't buying it. He says small stocks do better in a slow-growth economy because the companies are more flexible than big corporations.

—Email: editors@smartmoney.com.