A new crop of "alternative" fixed-income mutual funds employs hedge-fund-like tactics to protect against rising interest rates, defaults and other bond-market hazards. So far many have performed well—but they come with their own set of risks.

Launched in recent months by firms such as Loomis Sayles & Co.,  Eaton Vance Corp.
EV


0.04
%




 and Driehaus Capital Management LLC, the funds use a bevy of complex tactics, such as betting against the South African rand or buying credit-default swaps. 

They say they can cushion the downside of bond investing and deliver performance that isn't closely tied to traditional stock and bond investments. And the products fill a gap in the fund world, since most alternative mutual funds have traditionally focused on stocks. 

But the funds allow managers lots of leeway to use complex instruments and dart in and out of market sectors. Many lack long-term track records and often charge hefty fees, posing an even bigger hurdle for managers to deliver decent returns. 

What's more, the funds' complex approach can backfire during times of market stress when amped-up hedge funds using the same strategies are forced to rapidly exit their trades. That is what happened in 2008 to the  Driehaus Active Income Fund, which aims to produce positive returns every year regardless of the direction of the broad stock and bond markets. The fund lost roughly 5% between late June and mid-October that year—a steep slide for a safety-minded strategy, though the fund managed to produce a 0.4% gain for all of 2008. 

While the funds' goals sound compelling, "the hurdles to achieve those objectives are pretty high," says  Jeremy DeGroot, chief investment officer at Litman/Gregory Asset Management LLC. The firm is taking a close look at some of the alternative bond funds, Mr. DeGroot says, but it approaches them "with skepticism and caution." 

The new funds are emerging just as investors anesthetized by a long bond rally begin to feel the sting of rising rates, which hurt bond prices. The average intermediate-term bond fund lost 1.2% in the three months ended Thursday, but still has gained nearly 7% over the past year, according to investment-research firm Morningstar Inc. The 10-year Treasury yielded 3.3% Thursday, up from 2.5% at the beginning of October. 

The alternative funds have an arsenal of weapons to combat rising rates. Many have broad flexibility to adjust their "duration," a measure of sensitivity to interest-rate changes. The greater the duration of a fund's holdings, the more that fund will bounce around as interest rates change. Some use futures contracts or exchange-traded funds to bet against Treasurys. 

For some new funds, success depends almost entirely on the accuracy of managers' interest-rate forecasts. The  American Independence Absolute Return Bull Bear Bond Fund and the  Rydex SGI Long Short Interest Rate Strategy Fund, both launched last summer, are based on an "interest-rate score card" that uses economic-growth measures, inflation expectations and other factors to produce a monthly forecast of the direction and magnitude of interest-rate changes, says  Glenn Dorsey, co-manager of the funds. 

Depending on the score card's rate forecast, the funds' duration can be adjusted within a wide band. Earlier this month, the funds had a sharply negative duration, reflecting an outlook that rates will rise. Currently, they are positioned for rates to hold relatively steady. The American Independence fund is up 2.6% in the three months ended Thursday, while the Rydex SGI fund is up 1.6%. 

Other funds seek simply to tame interest-rate risk, while relying on bond selection to propel returns. In the new  Driehaus Select Credit Fund, "the objective is to have very little interest-rate exposure," says  K.C. Nelson, portfolio manager for the firm's credit strategies. 

The fund hedges away most of the interest-rate risk and focuses instead on corporate debt—buying a company's distressed debt while betting against its stock in hopes of profiting from a perceived mispricing between the two, for example. The fund is up almost 5% over the past three months. 

Some of the funds also seek to profit from currency moves, often matching bullish bets with bearish plays in hopes of reducing risk. In the  Eaton Vance Global Macro Absolute Return Advantage Fund, launched last summer, managers favor emerging-market currencies over the U.S. dollar and the euro. But it gets more complex: Within emerging markets, for example, the fund is betting on the Turkish lira but betting against the South African rand. The fund has gained less than 1% over the past three months. 

For such complex strategies, the funds generally charge significantly higher fees than plain-vanilla bond funds. The average intermediate-term bond fund, for example, charges expenses of 0.95% of assets, while the  Bandon Isolated Alpha Fixed Income Fund, launched at the end of last year, charges 1.95%, while the Driehaus Select Credit Fund charges 1.75%. 

Still, the fees are usually lower than those of hedge funds. The Driehaus fund was born partly out of clients' demand to access the strategy in a cheaper, more easily traded vehicle than a hedge fund, which the firm also offers, Mr. Nelson says. "We fought that for a little while," he says, fearing that investors may gravitate toward the mutual fund. 

 Write to  Eleanor Laise at eleanor.laise@wsj.com 