Great news in the war on obesity! "The 3.9 percent increase in food prices last month is the largest monthly jump since 1974," reports Washington's WUSA-TV: 

If the trend continues, eventually food will get so expensive that you'll no longer be able to afford to shop at Giant supermarkets. Instead you'll go to itty-bitty ones, where you'll pick up a half-ounce of milk, a pair of eggs and a slice of bread, which you'll have to stretch to feed your whole family for a week. You'll never again have to worry about your kids getting fat.

Last week William Dudley, president of the New York Federal Reserve Bank, spoke at a town-hall meeting in Queens, an area east of Manhattan. Reuters reports Dudley "was bombarded with questions about food inflation," which he patiently tried to put into context, explaining, in the reporter's paraphrase, that "the Fed looks at core inflation, which strips out volatile food and energy costs, to get a better sense of where inflation may actually be heading."

He gave an example: "Today you can buy an iPad 2 that costs the same as an iPad 1 that is twice as powerful," he said. To which someone in the audience replied: "I can't eat an iPad."

Damn right you can't! And you know what else is great about an iPad? It's thin!

By now you have begun to suspect that we are being facetious. To an extent, we are. It is true that Michelle Obama has been waging war on obesity, and it is true that the Fed has been feeding inflation, making it harder for Americans to feed themselves and their families. But so far as we are aware, these two efforts are not part of a single coordinated policy.

Which is not to say that no one has ever suggested such a policy. In a widely discussed 2003 article in the New York Times magazine, Michael Pollan blamed a Nixon-era change in farm policy, a "shift from an agricultural-support system designed to discourage overproduction to one that encourages it" for the "obesity epidemic." He urged a shift back to Depression-era farm-subsidy policies:

Now, we are more worried about bloated government than bloated citizens, so our inclination would be to address this dilemma by simply getting Washington out of the business of directing agricultural production rates altogether.

But it seems like a real dilemma for a modern-day liberal--for someone who believes that Big Government should help the little guy. Do you try to keep food prices from rising and consuming a greater share of the little guy's meager pay or benefit check? Or do you encourage price inflation so as to discourage corporeal inflation?

To put it in political terms: Is the way to win the little guy's vote to protect him from getting too big for his own good?

  Bully vs. Belly   One liberal who disapproves of the first lady's war on obesity is Paul Campos, a law professor at the University of Colorado. In an article for the Daily Beast (or maybe it's Newsweek, we're not quite clear on the difference anymore), Campos describes the effort as "a deeply misguided attempt to solve an imaginary health crisis by employing unnecessary cures that in any case don't work."

We're not sure even we would go so far so to describe obesity as "an imaginary health crisis." But we are intrigued by a cultural contradiction of liberalism to which Campos points:

"Get rid of" is a bit tendentious. After all, you don't cease to exist when you lose weight, unless you really carry dieting to an extreme. But Campos is right that society tends to be cruel to the corpulent.

That is not necessarily a bad thing. It does give millions of people an incentive to eat better and exercise more than they otherwise might be inclined to do, which is beneficial for their health and helps keep America beautiful. But when you think about it this way, the notion of government getting into the business of disparaging the overweight is not just mean but unnecessary.

  Another Victory for Mrs. Obama   " 'Fat Pig' Will Not Open on Broadway This Season"--headline, New York Times website, March 15

  Political 'Science'   "House Republicans rejected amendments offered Tuesday by Democrats that called on Congress to accept the scientific consensus that climate change is occurring, it is caused in large part by human activity and it is a threat to human health," the Hill reports:

Two other Democrats offered similar amendments that differed slightly in wording, which were voted down by the same party-line vote.

The Dems' intent is to portray Republicans as "antiscience," but only someone with no understanding of science could reach that conclusion. Scientists attempt to explain the world by formulating hypotheses and conducting empirical observations to test them. "Global warming" is one such hypothesis. By treating it as an ideological doctrine and effectively making it part of their party platform, it is Democrats who are showing themselves to be hostile to science.

 Your Car Will Never Hold You Hostage 

  Just Wait Till Last Year   Barack Obama is far too modest, argues Republican pollster David Hill in the Hill. The headline of Hill's piece is "2012 Will Be About Obama." According to Hill, this is not the message the Obama campaign is trying to deliver to its donors:

This probably overstates the case a bit. Surely the Republicans could lose a winnable election by putting up a candidate with too narrow an appeal--though it's hard to think of a recent election in which that has clearly happened. LBJ in 1964 and Nixon in 1972 surely won big because their challengers were considered extreme, but one suspects they would have won, if more narrowly, against more centrist opponents. 

Perhaps in 2004 the Democrats could have defeated George W. Bush if they had nominated an intelligent, articulate war hero instead of John Kerry.

In any case, Hill's general argument seems right to us, and he cites a number that looks bad for Obama: "The question about deserving reelection is not asked often enough by the public pollsters. The last time The Hill reported Obama's results, in December, only 42 percent said he's worth another term."

It would be interesting to hear a counterargument from a Democrat who accepts the premise that apparent Republican weakness is not a sufficient condition to make Obama's re-election prospects strong.

  Other Than That, the Story Was Accurate   "In an article published in The Daily Telegraph yesterday headlined 'Bully's angry mum wants victim to apologise,' it was written that bully Ritchard Gale's mother Tina wanted her son's victim to apologise for slamming her son to the ground. But she had, in fact, said she wanted her son to apologise to his victim."--Daily Telegraph (Australia), March 18

  Metaphor Alert   "Navy, Coast Guard to Get More Teeth to Tackle Piracy"--headline, Times of India, March 12

  Out on a Limb   "Mixed Signals From US Over Libya Draw Criticism, Praise"--headline, Arab News (Jeddah, Saudi Arabia), March 16

  We Blame Global Warming   "Porridge Is Hot Stuff in Ireland Again"--headline, Times (Munster, Ind.), March 16

  How's That Guacamole Stuff Working Out for Ya?   "GOP Support for Palin Dips"--headline, National Review Online, March 16

  'Baby, Take Off Your Coat Real Slow'   "Kerry Finds His Voice, and It's in 'D' "--headline, Boston Globe, March 17

 Who Knew This Would Actually Work? 

 Life Imitates the Onion--I 

 Life Imitates the Onion--II 

 Life Imitates the Movies 

  'What Are Your Favorite Lines That This Warlock Brain Produced?'   "Legal Blow for Sheen"--headline, FoxNews.com, March 16

  Eh, So Much for the War on Drugs, Doc   "$5M Worth of Pot Found Hidden in Load of Carrots"--headline, WBBM-TV/AM website (Chicago), March 16

  'I'm Gumba, Dammit'   "Clay Woman Shoots, Kills Son Who Stormed Into House, Attacked His Stepfather"--headline, Lexington (Ky.) Herald-Leader, March 17

  If There's a Dog Heaven, Why Not a Dog TSA?   "Privacy, Safety Claims Dog TSA"--headline, TheDaily.com, March 17 

 Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  Dogs Debate Negotiations--Now That Would Be News   "Debate Over Policies, Not Numbers, Dogs Long-Term Budget Negotiations"--headline, TheHill.com, March 16

  Breaking News From Stardate 4513.3   "Securing All Androids Proves Tricky"--headline, TechnologyReview.com, March 17

  News You Can Use   "Don't Confuse Judaism With 'Jersey Shore' "--headline, JewishWorldReview.com, March 17

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  No Badger Solidarity for Obama   The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel quotes a press release from some Arizonans who are rooting for the University of Wisconsin in the NCAA basketball tournament:

Naturally, we wondered where Barack Obama--who, in his most important exercise of presidential authority since signing ObamaCare, released his NCAA picks earlier this week--stands on this question. Turns out that, while he picks the Badgers to beat the Bruins, he has them losing in the next round to Kansas State.

Even E.J. Dionne couldn't spin that as a defeat for Gov. Walker.

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Taylor Dinerman, Ethel Fenig, David Gerstman, Clifford Crouch, Hillel Markowitz, Bob Wukitsch, Merv Benson, Stewart Seman, Joseph Heschmeyer, David Hallstrom, Peter Huntsman, Ron Bales, Bruce Goldman, Ken Alwes, Chris Hayes, Al Vesper, Gil Gibson, Michele Schiesser, Bart Borkosky, Lance Van Auken, Zack Russ, Chris Smith, Bryan Fischer, John Bobek and Bill Briggs. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)