Hoodies are haute.

All manner of hoods made a strong showing on the runways during the marathon of fashion weeks that concluded Wednesday in Paris.

In New York, the looks ranged from a sparkly Lurex hoodie at  Marc Jacobs, to asymmetrical hoods attached to sport coats at Rag & Bone, to a leather hoodie at upscale menswear designer  Simon Spurr. 

The hoodies weren't limited to America, where sportier looks are more common. They showed up in the shows of European designers including Jil Sander,  Gareth Pugh and Hermès, where one model even wore two hooded garments at the same time.

Designers used hoods to create drama around the face, whether by obscuring or framing it. And they experimented with fabrics and textures to reinvent the hood. "Executing this silhouette in raw-edge black leather gave the hood a more modern, luxurious edge," Mr. Spurr said of his design.

Some designers took inspiration from other cultures. Marcus Wainwright, co-designer of Rag & Bone, said the label was inspired in part by the enormous hoods worn by the Inuit.

For women, hoods play to the "tech-active-Juicy Couture-meeting-Lululemon mindset of sleek, yet sexy and feminine," said  Tom Julian, head of brand consultancy Tom Julian Group. For men, incorporating the hood into looks beyond outerwear or jersey cotton makes it a cool-looking, sporty hybrid for indoors or out, he said.

A hood adds a youthful element. And due to its associations with menacing types—hoodlums!—as well as witches and the Grim Reaper, "there's an edge to popping up a hood and hiding," Mr. Julian said.

These haute hoodies come as hoods are enjoying the spotlight in pop culture. Ads for the big-budget "Red Riding Hood" movie, which opens Friday, feature the title character in a luxurious, flowing, hooded red-silk cloak that looks like it could have just floated off the runway. 

Hoodies got ample screen time in last year's Oscar best-picture nominee "The Social Network," sported by  Jesse Eisenberg as a fictionalized version of Facebook chief executive  Mark Zuckerberg—an avid hoodie wearer in real life.

Teen sensation Justin Bieber seems to have closets full of hoodies, based on what he wears onstage and off. 

Hooded garments are believed to have come about during the height of the Roman Empire, growing popular well into the Byzantine period, according to  Daniel James Cole, a professor of fashion history at the Fashion Institute of Technology in New York.

"During the Roman Empire, we see big development in outerwear as the area covered a large territory with varying weather conditions," he said. 

A child's tunic with hood dating back to seventh-century Egypt is part of the permanent collection at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York. 

In the 1930s, the hooded sweatshirt was popularized by activewear brand Champion, Mr. Cole said. It grew to become a default layering piece for men working outdoors and people engaging in athletic activities.

By the 1980s and 1990s, hoodies and hooded overcoats had become widely adopted in hip-hop, eventually spreading into streetwear more broadly.

The hoodie's streetwear edge has increasingly attracted high-fashion types, culminating in this coming fall's reinterpretations. 

Though the idea of a luxury hoodie could prompt eye rolls from the casual observer, designers are banking that it isn't a stretch to go from a parka, windbreaker or sweatshirt with a hood to a more luxe version. 

 Write to  Ray A. Smith at ray.smith@wsj.com 