The Senate is the Democratic bastion of power in the new Congress, but it will be a sometimes-shaky platform for President Barack Obama's agenda as lawmakers in his own party prepare for their re-election bids next year.

An unusually large group of 23 Democrats must defend Senate seats in 2012, many in conservative and swing states such as Nebraska, Missouri and West Virginia. Republicans, by contrast, will defend only 10 Senate seats.

Many of the Democrats were first elected in a far different climate four years ago, when then-President George W. Bush was losing favor and an anti-GOP windstorm swept Democrats into office. Now facing different political currents, some Democratic senators are taking steps to chart a course independent of Mr. Obama—to appeal to political independents and fiscal conservatives.

The president, for example, is pushing legislation to allow some children of illegal immigrants to become citizens. That appeals to Latino voters. But when the bill came up in December, senators opposing it included Democrats Jon Tester of Montana, Ben Nelson of Nebraska and Joe Manchin of West Virginia. Mr. Obama has pledged to try again.

The White House says it will craft a tight federal budget, but swing-state Democrats might demand even deeper spending reductions. Sen. Claire McCaskill (D., Mo.) last year led efforts to cut $30 billion from Mr. Obama's 2011 budget request.

See the average age of the House of Representatives and the Senate, from 1949 to 2011.

Take a look at Republican lawmakers who are taking the reins of key House committees.

Democrats facing re-election in economically struggling states such as Ohio and Michigan have said they would fight the White House's trade-liberalization pact with South Korea, potentially undercutting the president over a major economic issue.

In the November elections, Democrats lost their majority in the House as well as six Senate seats, bringing their ranks well below the 60 votes it usually takes to pass major legislation in the Senate. The new Senate will have 47 Republicans and 53 Democrats and allied senators.

Democrats from conservative and swing states are not likely to coalesce and vote as a bloc, but their fate as a group in the 2012 election will make or break the party's ability to retain or expand its narrow majority in the Senate. 

They include Jim Webb of Virginia, whose home state ousted three Democratic congressmen in 2010, and Bob Casey of Pennsylvania, where the governor's office and a Senate seat switched to the GOP. In Ohio, where Sen. Sherrod Brown faces re-election, Democrats last year lost control of the governor's office and five House seats.

Ms. McCaskill of Missouri barely won election to the Senate in 2006 with the political winds blowing at her back. A close ally of Mr. Obama, she is facing re-election at a time when more than half the voters in her state disapprove of the president, according to recent polls.

In a television interview after the November election, Ms. McCaskill was asked how her support for the pillars of the Obama agenda—health care, economic stimulus and Wall Street regulation—squared with her efforts to portray herself as a political independent. 

Ms. McCaskill briskly countered with a list of issues on which she and the president differ: immigration, environmental measures and the "cash for clunkers" auto-sales program.

There will be broad swaths of policy on which Mr. Obama and fellow Democrats share political interests heading into the 2012 election, especially in seeing the economy rebound. 

But Republicans are hoping that swing-state Democrats will be less inclined to hold to the party line on other issues, such as GOP efforts to repeal parts of the new health-care law or to make spending cuts.

"They are going to look over their shoulders at their own re-election prospects," said Sen. John Cornyn (R., Texas), chairman of the National Senatorial Campaign Committee.

Senate Republican Leader Mitch McConnell said just after the midterm elections that he expected to see more Democrats "peel off" from their party. 

"Every one of the 23 Democrats up [for re-election] in the next cycle has a clear understanding of what happened" Nov. 2, he said.

Sen. Casey said Pennsylvania voters would judge him independently of Mr. Obama, and he shrugged off suggestions that he would be any more inclined to vote with Republicans now. "I don't think I buy that theory," he said. "I don't think a candidate can vote a certain way for four years of a term and then for the last two terms start teaming with Mitch McConnell and expect voters not to notice."

Sen. Charles Schumer of New York, a senior Democratic leader, is planning to intensify efforts to frame floor debates with an eye to the needs of Democrats up for re-election.

One example of how that might work—and how it might conflict with White House goals—came during last month's tax-cut debate. Mr. Obama initially held fast to his proposal to extend tax breaks only for families with income up to $250,000. Mr. Schumer pushed an alternative that would have allowed tax breaks for family income up to $1 million.

Among other reasons, Mr. Schumer believed the higher limit sent a clearer political message and was more palatable to small businessmen who are especially important to moderate Democrats. 

In a deal with Republicans that resolved the issue, tax cuts were extended for people at all income levels.