Two government reports to be released Wednesday will lay out recommendations to help employers and participants better understand the risks of "securities lending" in 401(k) plans, a practice that prevented some employers and investors from withdrawing their money during the financial crisis.

The Senate Special Committee on Aging and Government Accountability Office conducted separate investigations into securities lending. The hearing and the reports will focus on how securities lending affects plan sponsors and investors in employer retirement plans.

Mutual funds and other investment pools sometimes lend securities in their portfolios to other investors. The strategy can boost returns in normal times but can expose investors to losses and leave funds unable to meet redemptions in market routs. Some say the practice isn't appropriately disclosed to employers, plan sponsors and individuals in 401(k) plans.

The Dodd-Frank Act calls for the SEC to propose rules by July 2012 to increase the transparency of information. The Financial Industry Regulatory Authority is considering rules that will ensure that broker-dealers disclose potential conflicts and any restrictions firms may have on liquidating securities. 

The Senate Aging Committee surveyed the 30 largest 401(k) plans, asking them to provide data about their plans from 2006 through 2010. While all the employers offered at least one investment option that participated in securities lending in their plans at some time from 2006 to 2010, five no longer offered an option that engaged in the practice in 2010. Changing market conditions and liquidity restrictions were among the reasons cited.

According to the report, more than one-third of employers surveyed indicated they had been restricted at the plan level from withdrawing from at least one investment option that participated in securities lending. 

In lending stock, funds get cash that they typically invest in safe, liquid holdings. The goal is to generate a small but reliable return that can help offset fund expenses. After some of those supposedly safe holdings froze during the credit crisis, many money managers restricted plans' withdrawals. 

Though the managers who coordinate the funds' lending programs share in profits from securities lending, any losses fall entirely on the funds that lent out the securities and, ultimately, the fund's investors. In 2008, for example, four of the employers surveyed experienced average losses per investment option from securities lending ranging from $171,753 to $1.67 million.

The Senate Aging Committee will recommend that employers provide plan participants with clearer disclosures about the benefits and risks about securities lending in their plan options. It also will ask the Labor Department to develop tools and guidance for employers on the benefits and risks of securities lending, and recommend that companies in the business of securities lending report information on their practices to the SEC and bank regulators.

 Write to  Jane J. Kim at jane.kim@wsj.com 