MUMBAI – After a brisk pick-up in gold exchange-traded funds, or ETFs, several Indian mutual fund houses are planning to launch silver ETFs as soon as regulatory authorities give them clearance. 

Indians typically buy gold and silver jewelry with their savings, but with prices rising to new highs almost every month, demand for jewelry is fast being replaced by growing interest in investment products such as gold ETFs. 

"Indians prefer to hold gold in a physical state, so the penetration of gold ETFs is still not that high," said  Prithviraj Kothari, president of the Bombay Bullion Association. 

"But silver is more of an industrial metal, and the inclination to hold it physically is less. So the scope in silver ETFs is higher," he said. 

Spot silver in Mumbai, the largest bullion market in the country, hit an all-time high of 54,970 rupees ($1,221) per kilogram Monday, up 21% since the beginning of 2011. 

As many as 10 mutual funds have launched gold ETFs in India, the world's largest consumer of the precious metal, since permission was granted in 2007. 

According to the latest data from the Association of Mutual Funds in India, the assets of gold ETFs in India had more than doubled in January from a year earlier to 35.81 billion rupees. 

The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI), the country's capital markets regulator, also regulates gold ETFs, which are currently traded on the National Stock Exchange. 

Regulators are trying to decide whether silver ETFs should be overseen by SEBI or the commodity markets regulator, the Forward Markets Commission ( FMC
FMC


-0.75
%




). 

B.C. Khatua, chairman of the FMC, said silver ETFs shouldn't be launched on the stock exchange because they are a commodity-based product and not a stock. 

FMC will meet SEBI soon, once the new chairman settles down, he added. Last month, U.K. Sinha took over as the new chairman of SEBI, succeeding C.B. Bhave. 

Benchmark Mutual Fund, which has the largest assets under gold ETFs in India, has already submitted an application with SEBI to launch silver ETFs. 

"We will launch the product as soon as the issue of regulation over silver ETFs is resolved as we are ready with our product," said  Rajan Mehta, executive director of the fund house. 

Another mutual fund has also applied to SEBI to start silver ETFs, said a SEBI executive, who didn't want to be identified. He didn't name the fund house. 

The Bombay Bullion Association is also looking at launching both silver and gold ETFs, although it will first have to launch a mutual fund before starting the ETFs under current rules, said Mr. Kothari. 

Mr. Kothari added that physical holdings in silver ETFs globally are almost 14,000 metric tons, highlighting the scope for silver ETFs in India. 

Once regulatory clearance is given, one or two more funds are also likely to launch silver ETFs, industry officials said. 

 Write to  Swansy Afonso at swansy.afonso@dowjones.com and Arpan Mukherjee at arpan.mukherjee@dowjones.com 