Nike shares dropped sharply in March, after the athletic-shoe giant reported disappointing third-quarter results. But Nike has devised a sound game plan to raise prices and control costs that could get the stock up and running again in the next year.

The drop, from an all-time high of $92 to a recent $82, is giving investors the chance to snap up shares of the dominant player in the growing athletic sneaker and apparel markets for a still-reasonable 17 times estimated 2012 earnings.

Nike's long-term goals -- which include boosting revenue to $27 billion by the end of its 2015 fiscal year, from $19 billion now -- remain realistic. The balance sheet, ironclad. The company's operations threw off close to $3 billion in free cash flow last year.

On March 17, Nike said its gross profit margin fell by 1.1 percentage points due to, among other things, higher freight costs incurred, ironically, to satisfy strong demand for its products.

Despite the near-term headwinds, the Beaverton, Ore., company's earnings per share are likely to grow by double digits this year, to $4.33 a share from $3.86, on around $21 billion in revenue.

Demand for Nike's swoosh-emblazoned products remains hot world-wide, especially in emerging markets such as China. Concerns over rising materials costs have obscured its 9% third-quarter increase in orders for products scheduled for delivery over the next five months. And that figure excludes the currency-exchange boost a weaker dollar is providing.

Nike acknowledges that its bills for oil, cotton and labor could continue to rise over the next year. But management expects to offset this by pushing through across-the-board price increases on sneakers and apparel in the coming months. In the meantime, Nike is leveraging its supply chain and controlling costs to bolster its bottom line. It also is increasing production modestly, which should help stabilize results.

Some analysts look for Nike's overall profit margin to recover to 46.1% by fiscal 2013, which begins June 1, 2012, from an estimated 45.7% this fiscal year.

"We're using our size and scale to leverage our supply chain and negotiate costs to help maintain profitability in challenging environments," CEO  Mark Parker said during a conference call with analysts.

After slipping to $75 following the disappointing earnings report, Nike shares are down 6% for the year. Bulls, like  Marie Driscoll of Standard & Poor's, think the stock could surpass its previous high over the next 12 to 18 months, if the price increases stick and consumer spending remains stable.

"Nike is one of the better-situated companies to deal with cost pressures, given its strong brands, deep relationship with vendors, pricing power and economies of scale," Ms. Driscoll says.

In other words, Nike's still got game.

—  Christopher C. Williams is a Barron's staff writer. For more stories, see barrons.com.