TUCSON, Ariz.—Doctors said critically wounded U.S. Rep. Gabrielle Giffords continued "to make all the right moves in all the right directions," but the bigger challenge ahead was her ability to speak and write.

Ms. Giffords, who sustained a bullet wound to her brain last Saturday in a mass shooting outside a supermarket here, has been showing promising signs. One of her eyes was bandaged after being damaged by the bullet. On Wednesday, she first opened her unbandaged eye, and has opened the eye more often since.

When assisted, she has been able to sit up and dangle her legs over her bed, and has also been rubbing an eye and yawning. 

"She is beginning to carry out more-complex sequences [of movement] in response to our commands, and even spontaneously," said Michael Lemole Jr., chief of neurosurgery at Tucson's University Medical Center, at a news briefing there Friday.

Neurologists who specialize in severe brain injuries such as Ms. Giffords's said each sign so far has been positive, demonstrating a general trajectory forward, yet not conclusive. But the true test will come, they said, when the breathing tube is removed.

Ms. Giffords's ability to speak hasn't yet been tested because of the tube, which could be removed very soon. 

"She'll maybe say her first words and it could be a Neil Armstrong moment," said Stephan A. Mayer, chief of neuro-intensive care at New York-Presbyterian Hospital/Columbia Medical Center.

Lori A. Schutter, director of neuroscience intensive care at the University of Cincinnati Hospital, said that if Ms. Giffords "has limited speech, there could be damage to a section called Broca's area, or connections from there to other areas of the brain." Dr. Schutter said young adults and children have better chances to develop new brain pathways to improve speech and other functions, but that it might be possible for the 40-year-old lawmaker to do so as well.

It would be a key development "if we start getting signs that she is writing her husband notes," Dr. Schutter said.

Ronald Barber, Ms. Giffords's Tucson district director, was released from the hospital Friday morning, marking a joyous and sad occasion, his two grown daughters said at a news conference. 

Mr. Barber's first stop Friday morning afterward was the funeral service for U.S. District Judge John Roll, who was killed in the shootingsSaturday. 

Another Giffords staffer, Pam Simon, who was shot in the chest, was released from the hospital Thursday. 

Three more shooting victims are still hospitalized and listed in good condition, doctors said.

The suspect in the shooting, 22-year-old Jared Loughner, has been charged with two counts of murder, two counts of attempted murder and a count of attempted assassination of a member of Congress. Five people in addition to Judge Roll were killed and 14, including Ms. Giffords, were injured.

Ms. Giffords's staff held an impromptu meeting in Mr. Barber's hospital room Thursday, his daughters said. Their father, who can move slowly with the help of a walker, was eager to get back to work. In a statement read by his daughters, Mr. Barber thanked the hospital staff and the people of Tucson for their support.

Mr. Barber's daughters said their father insisted on seeing the candles, balloons and messages in front of the hospital. 

"We walked the entire memorial yesterday," said Mr. Barber's daughter, Jenny Douglas. "He wanted to see the whole memorial. He was sad but it was uplifting."

Ms. Douglas read a statement from her father: "To the people of Tucson who brought their words of encouragement to the front of the hospital, I saw their tributes for the first time yesterday and was deeply moved."

 Write to  Tamara Audi at tammy.audi@wsj.com 