PHILADELPHIA—Sometime Saturday morning, Chris Young will sit down in front of a computer, open a word document and begin one of the most meticulous habits of any pitcher in baseball.

In advance of his start here Sunday night, Young will pore over video, statistics and scouting reports for every hitter on the Philadelphia Phillies.

"Start with fastball down and away or backdoor slider. Work fastball up middle. Throw off-speed down. Fastball up and in ties him up and is always a good pitch. Will chase fastball up and off-speed in the dirt."

"If I go out there and I get beat, I want to get beat because I didn't execute pitches, not because I wasn't prepared."

"My notes consist of one line: You're getting a knuckleball."

"I don't want to write down any more info than I can remember out there."

 When he's finished, he will produce a two-page document summarizing how he plans to approach them.

 For each hitter, Young will type a paragraph, followed by a series of numbers to remind him of their tendencies.

All pitchers study opposing hitters, to varying degrees, and some take notes in the process. But few, if any, produce such an intricate memo before every start.

Young, a Mets right-hander and Princeton graduate, keeps a copy of every game plan he has written since 2008 in a black binder in his locker. His latest, written before his start Tuesday in Washington, began with this paragraph for Nationals leadoff hitter Danny Espinosa:

"Start with fastball down and away or backdoor slider. Work fastball up middle. Throw off-speed down. Fastball up and in ties him up and is always a good pitch. Will chase fastball up and off-speed in the dirt."

Under that was a series of numbers: the percentage of first pitches Espinosa swings at, the percentage of first pitches he swings at with runners in scoring position and his batting average on every pitch type.

There is no way Young can memorize all the statistics, but typing and re-reading them before starts helps him decide how to attack each hitter.

 Glancing over his game plan for the Nationals, Young pointed to a pair of numbers beneath the entry for a utility infielder named Brian Bixler.

Bixler, Young said, is 11% more likely to swing at the first pitch with runners in scoring position than he is in all situations. So in the improbable event that Young found himself facing Bixler in that situation, he would be more likely to start with an off-speed pitch or something at the edge of the strike zone.

He types the same statistics for each hitter. After he prints the pages, he marks the most revealing ones with a yellow highlighter.

"If I go out there and I get beat, I want to get beat because I didn't execute pitches, not because I wasn't prepared," Young said. "It gives me the confidence of knowing, especially in big situations, that hey, this is the right pitch. The stats confirm it…and therefore, the pitch is better because of that."

Preparation is not a substitute for command, as the Mets saw when Young surrendered three home runs against Washington.

 And if shoulder issues land him back on the disabled list, his note-taking habits will be largely irrelevant. 

But when he is healthy, they underscore the analytical ability that helps make him effective.

"The top 15% of pitchers have that," Mets pitching coach Dan Warthen said. "They know exactly what they want to do, and they've already pitched the game in their mind. Then there's another tier that do it somewhat but don't do it as diligently as he does."

Chris Capuano is the only other Mets pitcher who takes any kind of notes when preparing for a start. He scribbles down his game plan on loose sheets of paper, which he saves in a journal. But it is neither as extensive nor as organized as what Young does.

"I don't want to write down any more info than I can remember out there," Capuano said.

Because he relies heavily on one pitch, R.A. Dickey takes no such notes. "My notes consist of one line: You're getting a knuckleball," Dickey said.

Mike Pelfrey and Jon Niese said they just make mental notes while they look over video and scouting reports.

Earlier in his career, that's what Young did. But when the San Diego Padres called up a minor-league catcher named Nick Hundley in July 2008, Young —a Padres starter at the time—decided to put his game plan on paper.

"It was just to make things a little easier on him and take the pressure off him," Young said. "I started doing it just to let him have it all right there, and I liked it."

Now, Young essentially runs his pre-game meetings with Warthen and catcher Josh Thole. He prints three copies of his game plan— one for himself, one for Warthen and one for Thole. 

There is room for discussion, but there isn't much need.

"Not many pitchers are as precise as he is," Thole said. "A lot of pitchers just sit and listen. He comes in and says, 'This is what I want to do.' And me and Dan just listen.''