 MONTGOMERY, Ala.— Joseph Borg has never mounted his Kawasaki motorcycle in pursuit of a fraud figure. But Alabama's securities commissioner once sent investigators by armored personnel carrier to close down a Florida church.

The 59-year-old regulator's strategy for cracking down on financial crime is as straightforward as his recipe for making deep-fried Thanksgiving turkey in 42 minutes: Punish wrongdoers with hefty prison sentences and big financial firms with much bigger fines.

"You've got to have tougher sanctions for Wall Street," he says in a barely veiled jab at the Securities and Exchange Commission and Financial Industry Regulatory Authority. Fines of just "several million dollars when a firm has made $100 million" leave the culprits "waving from their yachts on the Caribbean."

On the job for 16 years, Mr. Borg is a well-known tough guy among state securities regulators. He has a conviction rate of more than 95%, largely from cases involving mini-Madoff investment schemes, unregistered brokers and penny-stock firms. Because of death threats against him, armed guards are on duty at Mr. Borg's office in downtown Montgomery, a short stroll from the first White House of the Confederacy.

Mr. Borg's mettle is about to face a new challenge. Under the Dodd-Frank financial-overhaul law passed by Congress, state securities regulators throughout the U.S. will inherit responsibility this summer for oversight of thousands of investment advisers with assets of $25 million to $100 million. Such advisers will no longer be overseen by the SEC.

Skeptics say the regulatory track record in many U.S. states is discouraging. The additional responsibilities also come just as state officials are scrambling to close ballooning budget deficits.

And even fans of Mr. Borg say his lock-'em-up-and-throw-away-the-key approach isn't practical for U.S. regulators now trying to hold Wall Street accountable for its behavior before and during the financial crisis. "The jobs are in many ways fundamentally different," says  Barbara Roper, director of investor protection at the Consumer Federation of America, a consumer advocacy group.

For example, state securities regulators like Mr. Borg can focus on outright fraud, she says, while U.S. officials are wrestling with the aftermath of a financial crisis where "there are things that companies did that stink to high heaven but were perfectly within the law."

Mr. Borg, a two-time president of the North American Securities Administrators Association, says that even though some state regulators are strapped for cash, there should be "no one sheriff of Wall Street." If securities regulators across the nation work together more effectively, Mr. Borg adds, they could reverse the traditional calculation by ne'er-do-well securities firms and brokers that "the reward has always outweighed the risk, even on bad products."

In contrast to securities regulators in many U.S. states, the budget for the Alabama Securities Commission, which has 49 employees and pays Mr. Borg less than $145,000 a year, increased for the current fiscal year. The rise will allow Mr. Borg to add three employees to handle the investment-adviser work being outsourced by Washington.

The agency funds its operations from license fees and fines, contributing $12.5 million to the state in fiscal 2010 and ordering the repayment of slightly more than $1 million to alleged fraud victims. Mr. Borg is appointed by the agency's commissioners, making him relatively immune to political pressures. He is serving under his fifth Alabama governor, and his endurance partly reflects willingness by state-court judges to enforce Mr. Borg's view that white-collar felonies should be prosecuted as aggressively as street crime.

"A mugger on the street who knocks you down and steals your purse is going to get a 10-year sentence. Why should someone who steals your purse with a pen and a piece of paper be less guilty?" Mr. Borg said in an interview.

In one typical case, a former Alabama resident was sentenced last month to a 10-year suspended prison term after pleading guilty to one count of securities fraud related to an investment of less than $10,000 by a single investor.

According to the agency, Jack Deck Weight III guaranteed to triple investors' money in less than a week by investing in gold or mutual funds. Mr. Borg went after Mr. Weight despite the small sum and his move to Maryland. The securities regulator recalls with relish the case of "one guy who thought Maui was a foreign country. We got him back."

Lawyers for Mr. Weight, who faces a court hearing on similar charges in Pike County, Ala., couldn't be reached for comment.

Born in New York to immigrants from Malta, Mr. Borg moved to Alabama after graduating from law school at Long Island's Hofstra University and coming to Montgomery to work as a defense lawyer in a product-liability case.

He says he fell in love with Alabama's "clean air" and "fresh trees." After working as a partner at a local law firm and in-house counsel at a bank that is now part of  Regions Financial Corp.
RF


0.88
%




, Mr. Borg was named securities commissioner in 1994. By now, he looks like an Alabama lifer when eating ribs at the Montgomery outpost of Dreamland Bar-b-que, which opened the same year football coach Paul "Bear" Bryant began at the University of Alabama.

As state officials gear up for their new oversight powers under Dodd-Frank, Mr. Borg said that pursuing criminals is "only half the equation." Regulators also need to take a pragmatic stance toward licensed local brokers and other financial firms that make honest mistakes.

Mr. Borg's record during the financial crisis isn't perfect. Investors in some bond funds run by the Morgan Keegan & Co. brokerage unit of Regions, based in Birmingham, Ala., had suffered steep losses by the time the Alabama securities commission, three other states, the SEC and Finra launched legal proceedings last April. The cases are continuing. Morgan Keegan declined to comment.

Still,  Jacob Zamansky, a former prosecutor at the Federal Trade Commission who now represents investors and brokers in arbitration proceedings, said the SEC could help rehabilitate its damaged reputation by taking "a page out of Joe Borg's book."