Federal Reserve officials, who meet next week to ponder monetary policy, have signaled they aim to stick with Chairman Ben Bernanke's plan to buy $600 billion in long-term U.S. Treasury bonds. But they are struggling to find a coherent way to explain that—and other touchy issues they face in coming months—to the public.

Mr. Bernanke has promoted more open discussion of policy issues, both inside the Fed and outside, in contrast to predecessors Alan Greenspan and Paul Volcker. Most Fed officials welcome that. But following stiff criticism, both domestically and internationally, to the new round of bond-buying—some of it fueled by public misgivings by some Fed officials, including Fed governor Kevin Warsh and some regional Fed bank presidents—the central bank is reviewing its communications practices.

Among the options: Agreeing that Mr. Bernanke will be the first Fed official to talk publicly after each policy meeting to explain the committee's consensus. Now, individual members of the Federal Open Market Committee sometimes air their personal views about monetary policy without regard to whether the Fed chairman has spoken publicly on a decision.

With no immediate policy decision to make at its Jan. 26-27 meeting, the FOMC—the Fed governors in Washington and the presidents of the 12 regional Fed banks—is planning to focus on long-term growth prospects for the U.S. economy. Committee members will also share their own updated economic forecasts, in preparation for the Fed's semi-annual report to Congress next month.

Fed officials spent several months ahead of their formal November meeting signaling they were to going to launch a new round of bond-buying to push down long-term interest rates and bolster a struggling recovery. Despite this, the announcement triggered sharp criticism, both domestically and internationally.

The backlash has since quieted, but Fed officials remain unsettled by the attacks. Markets generally understood the Fed's goals, but criticism from some lawmakers—mostly Republicans—spurred doubts among bond traders about the Fed's ability to expand its bond-buying beyond the $600 million, if necessary. That, some Fed officials say, damped the beneficial impact of the move on long-term interest rates.

"I think part of the challenge for the Fed is we're used to communicating with the markets because it's very important for us to make sure that we have the right impact on markets," Narayana Kocherlakota, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, said in a recent interview. "I'm not sure we're as gifted and talented at explaining for a broader set of Americans. Especially when you're doing something new, that kind of communication is very, very important."

At their mid-December meeting, according to minutes released subsequently, a number of officials said long-term interest rates had risen, in part, because investors had scaled back their expectations of the eventual size of the Fed bond-buying program. "Several meeting participants mentioned the communications challenges faced in conducting effective policy, including the need to clearly convey the Committee's views while appropriately airing individual perspectives," according to minutes of the meeting released early this month.

Fed officials also have been troubled by accounts—in The Wall Street Journal, among other places—that revealed some of their internal deliberations. In early November, according to minutes, the committee agreed to "a review of...communications guidelines with the aim of ensuring that the public is well-informed about monetary policy issues while preserving the necessary confidentiality of policy discussions." Fed Vice Chairman Janet Yellen is heading a subcommittee to conduct the review.

In October, during a videoconference, officials discussed whether Mr. Bernanke should hold "occasional press briefings to provide more detailed information to the public regarding the committee's assessment of the outlook and its policy decision making," according to minutes of that meeting.

Having the Fed chairman speak first after a committee decision would allow him to highlight the group's consensus in public, delivering a coherent message before other officials speak. To that end, the president of the European Central Bank holds a press conference after each of its meetings.

Fed officials also are looking for ways to encourage central-bank policy makers to present the group's rationale—essentially delivering something akin to talking points—before offering their individual views. They want to ensure that members can still debate policy issues in public without hindering the group's communications about the Fed's direction.

Since the announcement of the Fed's bond-buying program, the Fed has returned to alternative forms of communicating with the public that it began using during the financial crisis. Mr. Bernanke last month offered a second interview to CBS's "60 Minutes," in which he sought to explain the bond-buying program to the general public. His first interview on the program came in March 2009.

A week after the Fed's next policy meeting, on Feb. 3, Mr. Bernanke plans to field questions from journalists at the National Press Club. He also appeared there in February 2009.

 Corrections & Amplifications  The Federal Reserve purchased about $225 billion in long-term U.S. Treasurys between Nov. 10 and Jan. 14, some as part of its plan to expand its Treasury holdings by $600 billion and some as part of its plan to replace mortgage-backed securities that have been paid off. A Jan. 11 story on WSJ.com said all $225 billion was part of the $600-billion purchase. 

—Jon Hilsenrath contributed to this article.

 Write to  Sudeep Reddy at sudeep.reddy@wsj.com 