Warner Bros. says it has grounds to fire actor  Charlie Sheen from hit the sitcom "Two and a Half Men." Mr. Sheen says the studio does not, and now owes him over $10 million.

The outcome of their dispute could help determine just how far a major star can go before he turns from an asset to a liability. 

For 12 days, Mr. Sheen has been locked in an increasingly public battle with Warner Bros., a unit of  Time Warner Inc.,
TWX


0.18
%




 over his role on television's most popular sitcom. The fight could hinge on how well Mr. Sheen had been able to do his job, despite his erratic off-screen behavior, lawyers say.

The legal dispute has already gone public in a way that is rare in the clubby world of Hollywood. That makes this clash in some ways without precedent, lawyers say.

"I've been representing talent in disputes with networks for years, and I've never had a situation get as out of hand as this has gotten," said  Stanton "Larry" Stein, a veteran Hollywood litigator, who represented the actors who starred in "The Dukes of Hazzard" when they were replaced in the early 1980s.

"It isn't unusual that talent has difficulties that have to be dealt with, but they're usually dealt with in a more cooperative and less public manner," he added.

Late Tuesday, Mr. Sheen launched another salvo in an online-video broadcast where he described the decision to fire him as "completely and entirely illegal," and attacked the executives involved as "nothing shy of traitors," among other personal insults.

The outcome of the fight could come down to a legal decision about the actor's contract—and whether Warner Bros. can prove that his actions give them grounds to terminate it, some employment lawyers say.

"It's going to be for a fact-finder to determine whether they had the ability to discharge him," said  Barry Peek, an entertainment labor lawyer at Meyer, Suozzi, English & Klein.

A key question could be Mr. Sheen's performance on set, lawyers said. If Mr. Sheen's admitted partying behavior affected his ability to work, Warner Bros. could have cause to terminate his contract. In its Monday letter to Mr. Sheen's lawyer, Warner Bros. said that it has filming outtakes that show "Mr. Sheen had difficulty remembering his lines and hitting his marks."

"If they can establish it, that will be the case—whether he can perform his job," Mr. Stein said.

There is also the question of Mr. Sheen's off-screen behavior. Mr. Sheen's attorney has said the star is not subject to a traditional "morals clause," which typically allows an employer to fire a star for embarrassing behavior.

But Warner Bros., in its letter Monday, quoted a section of Mr. Sheen's contract that offers a narrower standard: If producers believe the star has committed felonies involving "moral turpitude."

Some Hollywood agents and lawyers suggest Mr. Sheen may have an uphill battle against the studio. "It's going to be particularly difficult for Sheen to run away from the admissions he's made in these various interviews about things that he's done that Warner Bros. contends are breaches of his contract," said Scott J. Witlin, a partner specializing in Labor and employment law at Barnes & Thornburg in Los Angeles.

Marty Singer, Mr. Sheen's attorney, didn't immediately reply to requests for comment.

The two sides are fighting over a franchise that has made them rich. Warner Bros. has brought in roughly $1 billion in license fees for the program since the show's debut in 2003, according to estimates from Screen Digest.  CBS Corp.
CBS.A


0.12
%




, which airs the show, meanwhile charges more than $200,000 for 30-second commercials in new episodes of the show, making it one of the priciest programs on television, according to estimates compiled by Nielsen Co. Mr. Sheen is paid $1.2 million per episode, plus a share of "back-end" profit that brings his take close to $2 million per episode, according to people familiar with his contract.

Because the show is so important to both companies, Warner Bros. and CBS are beginning to consider possible ways to keep the show going without Mr. Sheen, according to a person familiar with the deliberations. One option could be to  find another star of Mr. Sheen's popularity to take a similarly central role; another could be to have a version of the show continue mostly with its existing stars. The two companies could take until May, when CBS announces its fall schedule, to decide, the person said.  

Hit TV series have outlived stars in the past, several Hollywood talent agents note, including shows like "Cheers" and "Three's Company." Mr. Sheen himself replaced Michael J. Fox on the ABC show "Spin City" before starring in "Two and a Half Men."

Warner Bros. has moved to push the dispute into arbitration, something that would keep it more private. In its letter to Mr. Sheen's attorney Monday, Warner Bros. said the actor's contract has a provision stipulating disputes should be arbitrated, and it has submitted the dispute for arbitration.

Mr. Singer, Mr. Sheen's attorney, said in an interview Monday night that he would push for a public airing. 

"They don't want a jury to look at the facts," he said in an interview. "They're desperate to stay away from the courts and the jury system in America."

 Write to  Sam Schechner at sam.schechner@wsj.com 