There are new Honda Civics. A new Chevy Malibu. And a new Kia Soul. Decent looking, all of them (yeah, I like the Soul), but that's not what made this New York Auto Show different from the others this season. Those cars are expected. Safe. No, the real measure of a show's worth is always the stuff on the fringes.



There was a healthy amount of over-powered outrageousness: Chrysler's new SRT performance lineup; Ford's Taurus SHO; Mercedes's C63 AMG. The sporty image-remakers: the Scion FR-S; the Nissan Leaf Nismo RC. The big comebacks: GM's booth, decked out in the new, angular North Pavilion, was like something out of the World's Fair. 

The big bets on small cars: the Mercedes Concept A; the Fiat 500C convertible. Despite high gas prices, lilliputian offerings feel like bolder moves than sport-tuned SUVs—at least stateside. But those blind risks are the stuff that make for a great auto show. For the first time in a long while, the convention floor wasn't shrouded in economic/geopolitical gloom. Perhaps that's because there was enough of that talk at Geneva and Detroit and L.A.—the New York Auto Show, which closes Sunday, is the last of the season. And, for the most part, things felt normal. And by normal, I mean exciting.

—Kevin Sintumuang

There was a time when Scions were meant for younger, tuner types. The kind of folks who wanted to give the cars paint jobs to match their Ed Hardy shirts. But word got out that Scions, underneath all of the marketing, were great cars. Almost too good—quality-wise, they edged up to parent company Toyota's standards and it wasn't uncommon to see khaki-wearing folks roll by in a boxy xB. This FR-S (stands for Front engine, Rear-wheel drive Sport) is meant to liven things up again. A model based on this concept is expected next year with a 2-liter, four-cylinder boxer engine. If you buy one, just don't paint a tiger on it, okay?



Quick Taurus history: In the '80s it was America's best-selling car. Then came the Accord and Camry. Withering, it was replaced by the Five Hundred and the Fusion. Five Hundred? Horrible name. Redubbed Taurus. 

And in 2009, rebooted. Not just on paper, but in sheet metal and pound-feet of torque. The SHO, the sedan's latest performance variant, is the pinnacle of Taurus's (and Ford's) amazing comeback. What about the Mustang? I'll take a 365-horsepower Taurus. Subtlety is cooler.



The new Beetle wants to be a masculine car. Yet it made its debut—well, at least its roofline did—on "Oprah." 

So whatever millions were spent beveling its flower-power profile into a hot rod without delving too much into PT Cruiser territory will be negated when Ms. Winfrey's studio audience members receive their Beetles this fall. Still, you have to admit, it is more macho. Or maybe I'm just looking at its GTI-derived, 200-hp, 2-liter turbocharged engine.



Daimler gave the compact car a shot here with the Smart Fortwo. Fortunately, that won't be its sole offering. In about three years, four cars will be developed from the Concept A.

The first will arrive in European showrooms toward the end of the year—hopefully, we'll get ours soon. Looks-wise, it uses the same dynamic design language (introduced in the stunning new CLS) that will make its way throughout the Benz family. The bed-of-nails-like grill is mesmerizing. Don't stare too long.



Looking at Chrysler's amped-up SRT performance lineup (the new 300C gets the SRT treatment as well), you couldn't have guessed this company had to be rescued just a few years ago. Wasn't making fuel-efficient cars part of the bailout deal?

Perhaps the company's paying enough gas-guzzling penance with the elfin Fiat 500. Gas, schmas—you have to love the throwback absurdity of an SUV with a 6.4-liter Hemi V8 that churns out 465 horsepower and goes 0-60 in under 5 seconds. 



Range Rover knows the closest most folks will get to taking their vehicles off-road is on a grass parking lot at a polo match. And hence: the Range Rover Autobiography Ultimate Edition.

Think of it as the an off-roading Rolls. Grab Jeeves—it's meant to be driven in. The back seat has iPad mounts, fold-down tray tables made of exotic wood and the pièce de résistance: a fridge just large enough to chill a bottle of Champagne. They must have forgotten one for the Grey Poupon.



In 2001, VW unveiled a Microbus concept, a re-envisioning of the quintessential hippie van. Car geeks swooned, but it was never made. Instead, a decade later, we get another Microbus concept: the electric-motored Bulli.

Shown for the first time stateside—it debuted in Geneva—it's only 156 inches long, putting it in the same company as the Scion xB and Kia Soul. Maybe it's unfair for VW to dip into the retro well again, but line the Bulli up with the competition and it's clear who's the winner.











