 China's economic planning agency implemented regulations to prevent price collusion and monopolistic pricing practices, giving the government more tools to rein in inflation pressures. The rules, which take effect Feb. 1, come after Beijing said that ensuring price stability will be a priority.  

 Brazil's overvalued currency may prompt the country's new government to shift policies and start pressuring China to let its own currency strengthen to address global trade imbalances.  

 Japan's Kan said he wants to begin talks with opposition parties on raising the consumption tax, which could further erode the government's approval rating.  

 GM's sales rose 29% in China last year, making the firm the first foreign auto maker to surpass the two-million-unit mark. Toyota's China sales increased 19%.  

 GM said its U.S. light-vehicle sales climbed 8% in December due to continued strong demand for crossovers and pickups. Ford and Chrysler also reported sales gains.  

 Seven insurance firms filed suits against Toyota to cover the cost of claims paid for accidents related to unintended acceleration problems in Toyota vehicles. 18 

 A court rejected Hyundai Group's attempt to salvage its bid for a controlling stake in Hyundai Engineering & Construction.  

 South Korea's national pension manager said it plans to team up with domestic conglomerates to invest in overseas resources and energy assets.  

 Sinovel Wind plans to raise up to $1.44 billion through a Shanghai IPO, which could make it the biggest mainland stock listing by a company in the sector.  

 State-owned airline Garuda Indonesia began pre-marketing its planned IPO that could raise $500 million next month.  

 China supports Spain's economic overhauls and will keep buying Spanish government debt, Chinese Vice Premier Li Keqiang wrote in a newspaper editorial.  

 The former CEO of CapitaMall Trust plans to raise about $778.5 million through a Singapore IPO of a still-unnamed real-estate investment trust.  

 South Korea's benchmark set another record, and Chinese stocks rose for the fourth consecutive session, but U.S. stocks were stuck in neutral.  

 Telekom Malaysia and Axiata Group are conducting internal probes into alleged improper payments by French firm Alcatel.  

 Morgan Stanley named strategy head Jim Rosenthal to become its chief operating officer.  

 Iran said it will supply India with crude oil uninterruptedly through January and proposed a temporary payment channel through a bank based in Germany, a senior Indian official said. 

 Rising water levels in northeastern Australia threatened to cut off the city of Rockhampton, in Queensland state, while the U.S. offered aid to some 200,000 people affected by the floods. 

Rescuers found more victims of landslides and floods from heavy rain in the Philippines, raising the death toll from the past few days to at least 17.

A bomb blast in the Afghan capital killed a police officer and injured three other people, on the day marking the adoption of the nation's post-Taliban constitution.

 The new speaker of the U.S. House, Republican John Boehner, said he will offer a package of rule changes to give minority-party members more say. 

Sudan's President Bashir vowed to respect the outcome of Sunday's referendum on whether the south should become an independent nation.