TOKYO—A senior Japanese government official raised questions Sunday over last week's surprise cut in the country's debt rating, while also seeking to use the cut to push a recalcitrant opposition to work with the government to get Japan's fiscal house in order.

The remarks by Senior Vice Finance Minister  Mitsuru Sakurai represented the latest attempt by the government at a consistent line on the rating change by Standard & Poor's, following a series of missteps that included widely criticized initial comments from Prime Minister Naoto Kan suggesting he did not fully understand the issues.

The ratings agency had surprised the markets Thursday by cutting Japan to AA- from AA, criticizing the government for lacking a "coherent strategy" for tackling deepening fiscal problems. Japan's total government debt is now near 200% of its annual economic output, the worst among major industrialized countries.

"While we aren't in a position to comment on a rating decision by a private-sector company, I think there should be a debate on... whether this rating is really appropriate," Mr. Sakurai said on a television program.

Political analysts said the government should capitalize on the rating cut to get opposition backing for its fiscal overhaul, but instead it has largely been trying to defend itself from the storm that followed Mr. Kan's initial response. When informed by reporters of the downgrade, he said he was "unfamiliar" with the matter. Some news agencies translated his comments as saying he was "ignorant" of the matter.

Political critics, many analysts and a hostile local media jumped on the comments, portraying him as a leader ignorant of basic economic concepts

Mr. Kan tried to cover his tracks on Friday in remarks at the parliament, which last week began its winter session, meant to hammer out the budget for the fiscal year that starts April 1. The proposed budget projects that for the second year running, borrowing will represent a larger part of overall revenue than taxes.

"I used the word 'unfamiliar,' but I meant to say that information wasn't at hand at that moment," Mr. Kan said. He also said that his time as finance minister—five months—had given him the chance to gain full knowledge about credit ratings.

"Kan's statement will only become ammunition for the opposition to attack him in parliament," said Hirotada Asakawa, an independent political analyst. "The downgrade took the wind out of Kan's sails. It gave the impression that the DPJ has yet to act like the ruling party."

Mr. Sakurai attempted to push the issue onto opposition parties, calling on them to participate in the parliamentary debate on public finances as the government aims to pass a budget.

"Regardless of what has been said by the ratings agency, both the ruling and opposition parties realize that we need to restore fiscal health," he said.

The government needs the support of the opposition parties to enact a fiscal overhaul, but the main parties have made clear that their legislative agenda is to push Mr. Kan out of office and return to power themselves. To that end they have raised a series of objections about various scandals, censured top government officials and then refused to cooperate with the administration on virtually anything.

"We will take part in consultations if the prime minister prepares himself to go to the people,"  Sadakazu Tanigaki, the leader of the main opposition Liberal Democratic Party, said Wednesday in Parliament, implying that the opposition is open to talks only if Mr. Kan agrees to hold a snap election.