Italian fashion brand Dolce & Gabbana is planning to fold its secondary D&G brand into the main label, according to people familiar with the matter, in an effort to limit cannibalization between the two lines.

The D&G label will disappear, but the Dolce & Gabbana line will extend its price range to carry lower-priced clothing in addition to its more expensive, tailored collection, people familiar with the strategy said.

D&G's last runway show will be held in September, and the line will cease in August 2012, the people said. One person close to the company cautioned that a final decision to merge the lines hasn't yet been made. 

However, Dolce & Gabbana has begun notifying its retail partners of the change. 

A Dolce & Gabbana spokeswoman declined to comment. 

The move is risky. Consumers could confuse the top-tier brand known for it sexy ultra-tailoring with the secondary line known for its youthful buzz, say some in the fashion industry. 

The brands' catwalk shows last month during Milan Fashion Week demonstrated the differences: D&G playfully used letters of the alphabet to make colorful patterns; Dolce & Gabbana sent out a sultry ensemble of suits and lace dresses. Both lines are designed and owned by  Domenico Dolce and  Stefano Gabbana.

In addition, D&G is a major contributor to the company. For the financial year that ended in March 2009, the latest figures available, D&G accounted for 45% of the company's €1.59 billion ($2.22 billion) in wholesale revenue. 

A person close to the company says D&G is "highly profitable." 

Fashion brands have long expanded into lower-priced, secondary brands as a way to attract a wider group of consumers. But they have been careful to distinguish the different labels—in both look and prices.

Still, Brunello Cuccinelli, another luxury Italian label, recently did something similar, folding its Gunex and Rivamonte labels into the main line and expanding its main line of clothes and accessories.

It has been hard to keep D&G separate from Dolce & Gabbana. Because of their similar names, consumers often confuse the lines, unlike other secondary lines with different names, such as Versace's Versus and  Donna Karan's DKNY. 

Messrs. Dolce and Gabbana decided to buy the D&G license back six years ago to improve its positioning. The designers wanted to make the label, created in 1993, a democratic fashion brand, something that everyone could afford, to better compete with fast-fashion brands such as Zara and H&M. 

Dolce & Gabbana poured nearly $100 million into D&G's development. D&G got a new headquarters, separate from Dolce & Gabbana.

The company expanded two of its Italian factories to accommodate D&G, even though most of the production was to take place in Asia and Mediterranean countries such as Morocco and Turkey. 

The designers hired 300 people to work on D&G's production. Yet the heavy investment sent D&G in the opposite direction. The company raised prices to help pay for the investment. That led to some overlap with Dolce & Gabbana, according to two of the people close to the matter. 

About six months ago, faced with increasing cannibalization of the two labels, Messrs. Dolce and Gabbana began to consider radically changing D&G's strategy. 

Dolce & Gabbana is hoping to convert many of D&G's stores and wholesale distributors to the main line, according to the two people. The company also plans to retain most of D&G's employees, but there will be some layoffs, according to one of the people.

 Write to  Christina Binkley at christina.binkley@wsj.com and Christina Passariello at christina.passariello@wsj.com 