Trumpeter Dave Douglas was just out of high school when he heard a new Lester Bowie LP, "The Great Pretender," 30 years ago. "Lester was playing the trumpet in unorthodox ways that no one else was doing," Mr. Douglas recalled recently at a SoHo cafe. "He had a beautiful tone, yet he used it in strange ways. He wasn't afraid to include ugly sounds. I found that exciting and interesting. Plus, there was this sense of mystery to his music."

Mr. Bowie, who died in 1999 at 58, was a singular jazz figure. As a member of the Art Ensemble of Chicago, and with his own bands (especially Brass Fantasy, a brass-and-drums nonet), he embraced both avant-garde values and the techniques of jazz's earliest trumpeters, employing smears, blats, growls and half-valve winces in new ways. He covered jazz standards and pop trifles.

Mr. Douglas, through his playing, has revealed Mr. Bowie's influence from the start. Brass Ecstasy, the quintet he has brought to the Village Vanguard for a six-night run ending Sunday, makes overt reference through its name and its three former Brass Fantasy members: French horn player Vincent Chancey, trombonist Luis Bonilla and tuba player Marcus Rojas.

Mr. Rojas said he was touring in a Douglas band in 2005 when the trumpeter "wanted to know what Lester was like. So I started telling him stories." Two weeks later, Mr. Douglas called Mr. Rojas with the idea for Brass Ecstasy. "I'd been writing some music," Mr. Douglas remembered, "and I suddenly realized—this is for Lester." 

Despite obvious differences between Mr. Bowie and Mr. Douglas, Mr. Rojas sees one strong similarity. "They're both doers," he said, "incredibly disciplined people who eat and breathe music and make things happen." Indeed, Mr. Douglas was a powerful and prolific force in jazz by 2005. Since arriving in New York City in 1984 (he moved to Croton-on-Hudson in 2004) he has recorded more than 30 albums. At any given point, he has six or so groups going, each with a distinct sound and body of music, often inspired by his immersion in one artist's work: "In Our Lifetime" (1995) evoked trumpeter Booker Little; "Soul on Soul" (2000), pianist Mary Lou Williams. The projects honored heroes mostly through original music that further defined Mr. Douglas's voice. 

With Brass Ecstasy, he employs Mr. Bowie's joyful, catholic approach to repertoire. On the group's 2009 debut CD, "Spirit Moves," Mr. Douglas transformed a few popular songs into instrumental playgrounds. Better still were his originals: "Bowie" began with catchy riffs and parade beats, dissolved here and there into an ersatz march, and suggested Mr. Bowie's smirk and swagger. On Brass Ecstasy's next CD, "United Front," recorded at last year's Newport Jazz Festival and scheduled for release on April 5, these tunes mostly double in duration, enriched through interlocking parts and collective communion. In June, Mr. Douglas will inaugurate the Greenleaf Portable Series, released through his independent company, Greenleaf Music, with recently recorded studio tracks from Brass Ecstasy.

Mr. Douglas will perform this new material at the Vanguard, and it charts a fresh and subtle space between jazz brass band and chamber ensemble. The music is brilliantly conceived, yet appealingly unsettled at its core. The sound is Mr. Douglas's; all that's left of Mr. Bowie is a whiff of mystery.