Designers are dishing up the details. 

Among the trends emerging from New York and Milan fashion weeks are highly-embellished looks with intricate beadwork and dazzling embroidery. 

The style dominated the fall 2011 shows of some established American and European brands including  Carolina Herrera, Dolce & Gabbana, Ralph Lauren, Emilio Pucci and  Oscar de la Renta as well as rising stars like  Jason Wu and  Joseph Altuzarra. 

"We were going through a time of minimalism for quite a few seasons and it was time for an optimistic feeling, something more decadent," said Mr. Wu, who used more embroidery in his fall collection than ever before. 

The looks ranged from shimmery velvet-beaded dresses at Ralph Lauren to an embroidered sleeveless dress worn with silver-glitter goat-fur pumps at Joseph Altuzarra to a wool flannel anorak embroidered with Swarovski crystals at Jason Wu.

The emphasis on lavish ornamentation could be good news for retailers. The clothes may excite consumers who toned down their looks during the recession, when more ostentatious fashions were deemed less appropriate. 

After stocking up on classic staples for fall 2010 and spring 2011, "Women are not wanting those basic items, they want special items to add to their wardrobe," said  Colleen Sherin, senior fashion director at Saks Fifth Avenue. "We're excited to see anything that makes a piece look special or one of a kind. [Decoration] is something that gets noticed and adds an element of value to the piece."

For consumers, the additional labor required to create these garments could mean higher price tags, said  Catherine Moellering, executive vice president of trend-forecasting firm Tobe. "Designers have to make a garment feel more expensive and embellishment is one thing that registers as luxury," she said. "It's definitely a way to make a product seem richer. It helps justify the expense." 

Designer  Carmen Marc Valvo said prices for cocktail dresses in his fall 2011 collection will cost a little more than $2,000 due to the embroidery and beading he used, compared with between $1,600 and $1,800 for dresses without those details. His show featured more embroidery and beading than usual, he said, to convey a "more opulent look for fall," so prices will be as much as 25% higher on average than is typical. He added that he has gotten a favorable response from retailers. "Nobody has really balked at price," he said.

Aware of the high cost of hand embroidery, Mr. Wu said he made less expensive versions of some runway looks, including a $1,500 embroidered day dress that was inspired by a beaded gown in his show, which could retail for $13,000. "Obviously we'll sell much more of [that] version than the gown version." 

Mr. Wu said the embroidery in his collection required many more hours of work. "If it took three days to make a dress, it was three days plus generally 600 to 800 hours on the embroidery for every item," he said. Some of the work was done in Paris, but to keep expenses down, some was done in India, where labor and production costs are significantly lower.

Mr. de la Renta said costs were a factor in the embroidery methods used for his fall 2011 collection. "Some of the embroideries look unbelievable, and in fact some of them are machine made," he said. "Many times, it was a combination of machine and hand."

The designer said prices for his fall collection would be more expensive than usual if all the embellishment was done by hand. "You have to face the reality that if [the embroidery is] totally, completely handmade, you are not going to find a consumer for it," said Mr. de la Renta. "It doesn't mean that my clothes are inexpensive. But most of our clothes are made in America. When you are competing with clothes made in China, you have to offer something more than what can be made at that price."

To make decorations look fresh, designers sometimes used embroidery in different, more subtle ways than they had in the past. Messrs. de la Renta and Lauren each gave their embroidered looks an exotic, Far East twist. For the theme for Mr. de la Renta's fall collection, he envisioned "going back in time and the thought of Silk Road."

In other cases, designers such as Messrs. Altuzarra and Wu went beyond merely decorating evening dresses to adorn daytime and more casual pieces of clothing, suggesting a broader effort to keep the embellishment tasteful rather than veering off into Vegas show-girl territory. Mr. Wu showed a silk tee with leaf-patterned lace embroidery, for example. Though the luxury market is rebounding, it may still be too soon to go back to styles that are too showy or look-at-me.

The emphasis on details is also an effort by designers to demonstrate craftsmanship, to distinguish themselves from their competition and to thwart fast-fashion purveyors.



To be sure, some consumers who don't know the intricacies of clothing construction might not even care if the embroidery and beadwork are handcrafted or not, as long as it looks special.

In fact, a consumer would need a magnifying glass to tell the difference between embellishment that is hand done or done by machine, said  Ann Frank, an assistant professor who teaches fashion history at Parsons The New School for Design in New York. "Just look at the stitches: There will be irregularities if it's hand embroidery. It might look a little bumpier. No two stitches would look the same," she said. "Anything machine made will look uniform or flatter to the touch."

She added that advances in technology by embroidery companies such as Bischoff Textil AG of Switzerland have led to some machines that can turn out high-quality stitching that rivals stitching done by hand.  Désirée Koslin, an adjunct assistant professor at the Fashion Institute of Technology in New York, said another way one can tell if the ornamentation was done entirely by machine, is by looking at the back of the garment. If the bottom thread is thin and has no color, then chances are it was done by machine. 

 Write to  Ray A. Smith at ray.smith@wsj.com 