The White House announced a flurry of small-business initiatives Monday, including a proposal to extend permanent capital-gains tax relief to investors who put money into small companies.

Angel investors and venture capitalists have long pushed for a permanent tax break, which they say would encourage professional investors to strike deals with promising start-ups. The latest proposal for a 100% capital-gains tax break, which President Barack Obama is expected to introduce next month in his 2012 budget, would extend a temporary measure originally introduced in September's Small Business Jobs Act. 

Investor groups say they welcome the proposed tax relief, though they aren't sure if it will result in a noticeable uptick in investment. 

"Permanency is definitely preferable," said Payson Peabody, a tax policy attorney at the law firm Dykema in Washington, and advisor to the Angel Capital Association. Investors won't be as motivated to invest in early-stage companies if they think tax policy will change down the road, he says. "The policy needs to be certain, and that's what you get with permanency."

But investor groups also say they want to read the fine print of Mr. Obama's proposal, which must be approved by Congress before becoming law. 

"The devil is in the details," says Mark Heesen, president of the National Venture Capital Association in Arlington, Va.. In the past, similar tax breaks have contained technical provisions that disqualify investments in hotels, restaurants and other businesses. Also, some high-growth technology firms, which fall in venture capitalists' sweet spot, may not qualify for the full exemption if their revenue and rate of growth is outside certain tax-code parameters, he said.

 For New Tax Breaks, Act Fast 

Mr. Peabody also expressed concern that a permanent capital-gains tax break, while helpful to angels, doesn't go far enough to trigger enough investments to jumpstart the economy. For years, his organization has fought for tax relief at the time of investment, rather than at the back end, when only investors who reap returns will see a benefit.

Monday's announcement from the White House included several other ideas, collectively called "Startup America," which are designed to increase capital access and provide entrepreneurs with education and mentors. They include:

 Write to  Emily Maltby at emily.maltby@wsj.com 