LISBON—Portugal's government Friday pledged a fresh batch of measures to reduce spending and boost revenue, amid growing fears that its high borrowing costs may soon force it to seek a bailout. 

At a news conference, Finance Minister Fernando Teixeira dos Santos reiterated the government's plan to lower Portugal's budget deficit to 4.6% of gross domestic product this year and 3% of GDP in 2012, from an estimated 7.3% of GDP in 2010. 

He promised new measures to accomplish those goals despite expectations that the country will fall back into recession because of the government's previous deficit-reduction efforts. 

Mr. dos Santos said Portugal faces "a situation of difficulty and uncertainty," and that the new measures "obviously require sacrifices" and a "strong, convincing response." 

The new measures will generate revenue equal to about 0.8% of GDP this year, giving Lisbon an extra cushion if the economic outlook worsen.

Separately, government data showed Portugal's GDP grew 1.4% in 2010, and 1.2% on the year in the fourth quarter, compared with a 2.5% contraction in 2009. 

European Commissioner for Monetary Affairs  called the plan "an important building-block of the needed comprehensive response to the sovereign-debt crisis." 

But Mr. dos Santos' comments failed to calm speculation of a possible Portuguese bailout. The yield on Portugal's 10-year bond rose to a recent record of 7.622% after a senior euro-zone official in Brussels said Germany was opposed to allowing the euro zone's rescue fund to buy bonds from indebted countries. 

This would place more pressure on countries on the European Union's periphery like Greece, Ireland and Portugal, which had hoped that the European Financial Stability Facility would buy their bonds to ease their stock of outstanding debt. 

Analysts at BNP Paribas said Portugal's new measures may be a response to pressure from other euro-zone member countries, as Portugal-related jitters are having an effect on global markets. 

The new Portuguese measures will include cuts in operational and administrative costs for the country's state-run health system, as well as in administrative costs in other areas of government and a delay of planned investments. Labor costs and unemployment benefits will also be reviewed, Mr. dos Santos said. 



   

