BERLIN—A German court found retired U.S. auto worker John Demjanjuk guilty of helping murder nearly 30,000 people as a Nazi death-camp guard in Poland during World War II, bringing an end to an 18-month trial that is likely to be the last of its kind. 

Judge Ralph Alt of Munich's district court sentenced Mr. Demjanjuk, 91 years old, to five years in prison after convicting him on 28,060 counts of accessory to murder. 

Calling Mr. Demjanjuk a part of the Nazis' "machinery of destruction," the judge recited a lengthy catalogue of atrocities that occurred at the Sobibor death camp, where Mr. Demjanjuk was a guard. 

Mr. Demjanjuk declined the opportunity to make a final statement and remained silent during Thursday's proceedings. His lawyer, Ulrich Busch, said late Thursday that he had already filed an appeal. 

"We even plan to go to the European Court of Justice if it comes to that," he said in an interview. 

Holocaust victims' groups welcomed the verdict, but said they were disappointed that the court set Mr. Demjanjuk free pending an appeal. 

"As long as he's not in jail it seems to me justice has not been served," said Martin Mendelsohn, a lawyer who represented two plaintiffs who were child laborers at Sobibor. 

Mr. Demjanjuk, a native of Ukraine who emigrated to the U.S. after the war, has been fighting for decades accusations that he was a war criminal. In 1988, he was even convicted in Israel of being "Ivan the Terrible," a notorious concentration-camp guard at the nearby death camp Treblinka. That verdict was later overturned on the basis of evidence that Mr. Demjanjuk had been falsely identified and he was set free. He later faced new charges based on evidence that he was a guard at Sobibor, however. That led to his deportation to Germany in 2009. 

In Germany, a country still struggling to come to terms with its wartime past and responsibility for the Holocaust, people have been divided over whether justice was served at the trial. Some argued that putting an elderly, wheelchair-bound foreigner on trial for crimes that occurred nearly 70 years ago had more to do with German feelings of guilt than justice. 

Concerns that the trial had become a sad spectacle became even more widespread after the proceedings became bogged down by disputes over the authenticity of key pieces of evidence, the 91-year-old's fragile health and deluges of defense motions. 

Legal experts attributed the relatively light sentence given the gravity of Mr. Demjanjuk's crimes to Germany's strict sentencing guidelines, which mandate that courts take a criminal's age, health and capacity for violence into consideration.

"He's stateless, sick, old and confined to a wheelchair. He poses no threat," says  Thomas Henne, a legal historian at the University of Frankfurt. 

Mr. Demjanjuk must remain in Germany pending his appeal. The appeal is expected to take one to two years. Authorities see little risk that Mr. Demjanjuk will try to flee the country. The U.S. has stripped Mr. Demjanjuk of his citizenship, leaving him stateless. 

Mr. Busch, Mr. Demjanjuk's lawyer, maintained that his client was never even a guard at the camp in Sobibor, Poland, but was a prisoner of war throughout World War II. 

Much of the prosecution's case revolved around an alleged SS identity card of Mr. Demjanjuk showing that he was a Sobibor guard. 

"There was definitely little evidence here, especially compared to other Nazi trials," said Mr. Henne. "Many main witnesses were either already dead or were elderly people asked to remember things from 80 years ago."

 Corrections & Amplifications  A German court found John Demjanjuk guilty of helping murder 28,000 people while working as a Nazi guard at the Sobibor death camp in Poland during World War II. An earlier version of this article incorrectly stated that the conviction was for war crimes committed at the Treblinka death camp. 

