Most Asian markets rose Tuesday, with Chinese shares climbing amid hopes coming monthly inflation data might show a moderation and Japanese stocks gaining on some upbeat results.

An overnight advance on Wall Street encouraged investors, although European sovereign-debt worries kept them in a cautious frame of mind.

China's Shanghai Composite Index rose 0.6% to 2890.63, Japan's Nikkei Stock Average gained 0.2% to 9818.76, New Zealand's NZX 50 added 0.3% to 3528.74 and the benchmark Philippine index added 1.1% to 4303.13.

Going the other way, Australia's S&P/ASX 200 fell 0.7% to 4725.8, while India's Sensex slipped 0.1% 18512.77.

South Korean and Hong Kong markets were shut for public holidays.

The increase on Chinese bourses came a day before the scheduled release of April's consumer price index, which analysts say could set the pace for monetary policy. In the past, concern that Beijing might raise interest rates or bank-reserve requirements to cool prices has weighed on markets in China and around the region.

"The market will get a boost if April's CPI growth slows from March's 5.4%," said Amy Lin, an analyst with Capital Securities. On average, economists surveyed by Dow Jones Newswires forecast April CPI would ease to 5.2%.

"With economic growth stabilizing, policymakers signaling they are willing to tolerate faster currency appreciation and global food prices stalling, inflation appears on course to decline over the second half of the year," Capital Economics' China economist Qinwei Wang wrote in a note to clients.

Several interest-rate sensitive Chinese stocks advanced during the session. Agricultural Bank of China added 1.4% and Poly Real Estate Group rose 1.3%.

Some power-sector stocks overcame early weakness to extend their advance, driven by expectations that a short supply of electricity this summer might encourage Beijing to allow them to increase tariffs. Datang International Power Generation rose 2% and Huadian Power International added 0.7%.

Investors looked past other data released Tuesday, showing China's trade surplus surged to $11.4 billion in April, easily topping market expectations on robust exports.

Elsewhere in the region, Taiwan's Taiex declined 0.1%. Indonesian stocks rose 0.4%, Singapore's Straits Times Index added 0.6% and Thailand's SET gained 1.2%.

Dow Jones Industrial Average futures were up 42 points in electronic trading.

Japanese shares were propped up by a 12% jump in Sumitomo Heavy Industries and a 3.7% advance in Toshiba after both reported strong earnings. Chubu Electric Power, which bowed to government demands to shut down its only nuclear plant, rose 1.9% to recover some of Monday's steep loss.

Shares of Toyota Motor added 1.7% as investors awaited the company's fiscal-year results, due Wednesday. The gains were aided by a report in the Nikkei newspaper that the company's production will recover two or three months earlier than expected from the impact of the March 11 earthquake.

Hisatsune Kobayashi, general manager of global investment strategy at SMBC Nikko Securities, said the general mood was still hard to gauge, as the only companies providing earnings guidance were those expecting good numbers.

The drop in Sydney came amid worries about the impact of the strong local currency on corporate earnings. Trading volumes were thin as investors looked to the government's annual budget, delivered later in the day, as well as China's inflation data due Wednesday.

Brambles and James Hardie Industries, both considered sensitive to the strong Australian dollar, gave up 1% and 2.3%, respectively.

"If it weren't for the strong Australian dollar, we would be at 5100 by now," said Bell Potter senior client adviser Stuart Smith.

Nufarm rose 5.2% on news that Japan's Sumitomo Chemical had increased its stake in the company to 21.7% from 20%, heading for 23%.

In foreign-exchange markets, the euro traded in a tight range against the U.S. dollar. Demand for the euro continued to be undermined by Greece's sovereign-debt crisis.

Standard & Poor's on Monday cut Greece's credit rating by two notches, and Moody's put its rating on watch for a potential multi-notch downgrade, spurring speculation Greece might end up restructuring its debt.

"With markets closed in Hong Kong and Korea today, trading has been light and price action limited during the Asia session," RBC said in note to clients. "Speculation about a potential Greek debt restructuring will likely be the main focus of attention over the rest of the day."

The euro was at $1.4335 from $1.4364 in late New York trade on Monday, and at 짜115.71 from 짜115.36. The dollar was at 짜80.64 from 짜80.34.

Among commodities, crude-oil prices declined after CME raised margin requirements on a range of commodities. June Nymex light, sweet crude was down 85 cents at $101.70 per barrel. Spot gold was at $1,514.80 per troy ounce, up $1.70 from its New York settlement.

Lead Japanese government bond futures were up 0.08 at 140.66 points, while the yield on the 10-year cash JGB was down 0.01 percentage point at 1.130%.

 Write to  V. Phani Kumar at phani.kumar@dowjones.com and Colin Ng at colin.ng@dowjones.com 