Japanese officials appeared to regain partial control of an earthquake-damaged nuclear complex, even as new worrying signs in previously unaffected parts of the plant indicated that the worst might not be over.

The apparent shift in the struggle to tame four of the six reactors at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear complex also exposed a rift between the highest levels of Japanese government and the plant operator, Tokyo Electric Power, underscoring the confusion and mixed messages over five days that frightened a nation and put a cloud over a planned global expansion of nuclear power.

 The evolving crisis in the quake-hit Fukushima prefecture of northeastern Japan could add misery to hundreds of thousands of quake victims by possibly forcing relief organizations to withdraw their operations. 

Reports of the nuclear-plant explosion, the fire and spike in local radiation levels provoked a sell-off in global stock markets and prompted some companies to pull workers out of Japan or shift them to more distant parts of the country. 

 Fears about the potential for a transborder nuclear disaster spread across Asia, even as experts and officials sought to calm fraying nerves in countries as far away as Singapore and the Philippines. 

Japan's benchmark Nikkei Stock Average plunged more than 14% at its lows on Tuesday, setting off circuit breakers at the Osaka Securities Exchange to halt trading. The index closed down 11% in its biggest one-day percentage loss since Oct. 16, 2008 during the aftermath of the global financial crisis.

The tumble sparked broad declines in Asian and European markets. Germany's DAX 30 index was particularly hard hit, dropping 3.2%. The Japanese selloff hurt sentiment across Asia, where Hong Kong's Hang Seng index closed down 2.6% and South Korea's Kospi fell 2.4%. 

 Japan's earthquake and tsunami could have an unsolicited benefit for emerging markets, reducing massive short-term investment flows they have struggled to absorb, Turkey's central bank Gov. Durmus Yilmaz said. 

 European Union member states agreed to carry out stress tests on nuclear plants as soon as possible to verify safety, while other nations' nuclear-energy plans—including those of China—are likely to draw greater scrutiny. 

 Cracks remained in the euro zone's package of debt-crisis measures, even as the European Union's finance ministers approved legislation that sets fresh sanctions for budget offenders and puts new focus on broader economic problems that have destabilized weaker countries. 

The new rules still must be debated and approved by the European Parliament, which is likely to try to toughen them.

 European Union finance ministers were deadlocked over whether to tighten rules on short selling, with a number of countries voicing concerns that the proposed rules could make it harder for them to sell debt.  

Finland was the only euro-area country to oppose a proposal to increase the lending capacity of the currency bloc's temporary bailout facility, according to a person close to the situation.

 The number of people employed across the euro zone rose on an annual basis for the first time for more than two years in the final quarter of 2010, official data showed. 

There were marked differences among member states, with Germany seeing healthy employment growth, while France and Italy saw only modest increases, and Spain and Portugal saw the number of people in jobs fall further. 

The U.K. government proposed changes in the law of defamation in England and Wales to provide greater protection for speech and publication and to discourage foreign claimants from seeking an easier ride in English courts. 

German economic expectations deteriorated in March after the European Central Bank hinted that it may raise rates in April and following Japan's devastating earthquake. 

 Germany said it would shut down its seven oldest nuclear reactors—all built before 1980—during a three-month "safety review," a surprise reversal by Chancellor Angela Merkel whose government just months ago vouched for the plants' safety.  

 Standard & Poor's cut its long term ratings for Belarus to "B" from "B+" and warned that the country was rapidly running out of foreign currency, while residents lined up at exchange offices in the capital of Minsk seeking to convert their rubles.  

 The Federal Reserve kept its easy-money policies intact as markets reeled from a series of global shocks that could upset a firming U.S. recovery.  

Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner issued a direct challenge to Congress to tackle the country's deficit, brushing off criticism from Sen. David Vitter, a Louisiana Republican, that the Obama administration hasn't provided a roadmap for addressing the nation's $14.1 trillion debt. 

 North Korea notified South Korea it would accept the return of 27 North Koreans who were on a boat that drifted to a South Korean island in early February.  

Bangladesh's highest court has delayed arguments on whether Nobel laureate Muhammad Yunus can retain his job at the microfinance bank he founded. Yunus's lawyer said the Supreme Court delayed the hearing for two weeks as necessary court papers were not available. 

 Bahrain declared a three-month state of emergency and handed wide powers to the armed forces, as it moved to quell weeks of demonstrations by mainly Shiite protesters a day after the arrival of Saudi troops. 

Bahrain also temporarily withdrew its ambassador from Tehran, after Iran described the arrival of the troops as an "occupation."

Meanwhile, Saudi Arabia denied a report that one of its soldiers had been shot dead by a protester. 

 Israel's navy seized a freighter off the country's Mediterranean coast, saying it was delivering a large quantity of weapons from Syria to Palestinian militants in the Gaza Strip.  

 Gathering opposition to a set of proposed constitutional amendments before a national referendum on Saturday could delay Egypt's military-led transition to democracy. 

 Troops loyal to Libyan leader Col. Moammar Gadhafi seized the strategically important town of Ajdabiya, opening the way to a direct attack on the rebel capital of Benghazi as the United Nations resumed international discussions that have yet to reach an agreement to take military measures against the government. 

Gadhafi stepped up his calls for opposition forces to surrender in an interview in an Italian newspaper in which the Libyan strongman also dismissed pressure from French President Nicolas Sarkozy as a sign of "mental disorder" in the French leader.

 The International Energy Agency said Libyan oil exports, which averaged 1.3 million barrels a day in 2010, have "ground to halt" in the wake of fierce fighting around oil towns in the country's east. 