Ashish Dhawan, the founder of private equity fund, ChrysCapital, has decided to step down from an active position at the firm to focus more on social issues, particularly education. 

A Harvard Business School graduate, Dhawan is known across the private equity industry as a star fundraiser. Under his leadership, ChrysCapital currently manages $2 billion. Although the transition until his exit will be gradual, he will only lead the remaining team at ChrysCapital on investments made until July 2012, his expected time of departure. 

"Nothing changes until July 2012," he said in a statement. "Even thereafter, I will continue to engage with any activities that pertain to any investment recommendations made [until] then." 

He added that he planned to focus on not-for-profit school education in India. 

ChrysCapital's next fund, which will be its sixth, will be raised with Dhawan's assistance, and is expected to launch by middle of next year, more or less coinciding with the time of his departure. 

The last fund, which has only been partly deployed, has a total corpus of $969 million. ChrysCapital has more than 60 companies in its portfolio. While the future fund's size is set to decrease, it will continue to focus on the same sectors. The responsibilities will be redistributed across the remaining six managers. 

No one else at ChrysCapital, apart from Dhawan, is a 'key man,' he said in an interview. 

The key man clause is an element within the partnership agreement between private-equity investors and the fund manager which states that if employees designated as such cannot commit a required level of time to the partnership, that investment activity is halted. 

The clause protects limited partners, the investors in a private-equity fund, in the event that key personnel leave. 

ChrysCapital works in tandem with an advisory service based in Mauritius, ChrysCapital Investment Advisory, which recommends investments to a board of directors, again based on the Indian Ocean island, that takes the final call on all of ChrysCapital's investments. 

None of the current management team, apart from Dhawan, is on the committee or the board of directors. 

The departure signals a change in priorities and lifestyle for Dhawan. 

"This is my training -- my first job was investment banking and then I worked here," he said of ChrysCapital. 

"I studied economics and I went to business school. This is part of who I am. Am I going to miss it? Yes, but I am equally excited to do something new. This is not the case of being burnt out. This is partly a personal challenge." 

