 The European Central Bank stepped up its efforts to stabilize euro-zone government bond markets, purchasing the debt of embattled Portugal to counter heavy sell-offs by investors, according to bond traders.  

But the intervention isn't expected to save Portugal, which financial-market participants increasingly believe will need to ask other European governments for a bailout in coming weeks. 

The intensification of concerns about the creditworthiness of some euro-zone nations raises the risk of contagion or spillover to the U.K. and other big European banking systems, Bank of England Executive Director for Banking Andrew Bailey said.

 Global economic growth appears set to pick up in coming months, led by China, the U.S., France and Japan, according to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development's composite leading indicator. 

It added that the measures for Germany, Canada, Italy, the U.K. and India point to a stable rate of growth in coming months. Of the major economies, only Brazil appears set for a slowdown in economic activity. 

 Central bankers should "closely monitor" global capital flows because they can be a source of instability, particularly for emerging economies, European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet said, speaking as the chairman of the Global Economy Meeting.  

 Basque armed-separatist group ETA declared that it will lay down arms for good, a move that could put an end to a 42-year campaign of violence to create an independent Basque state. The announcement seeks to open the path for the reconstitution of Batasuna, the ETA's political wing.  

 Belgium's king asked the country's caretaker government to draft a new 2011 budget in an attempt to defuse fears of runaway deficits amid a political vacuum. King Albert II will also meet on Tuesday with a political mediator who resigned last week after a failed attempt to find a solution to the gridlock in forming a new executive and agreeing institutional reforms.  

U.K. house prices fell for a second consecutive month in December, but are likely to be relatively steady this year, a report said. Its house-price index fell 1.3% in December from the previous month to an average price of £163,435 ($254,092), following a 0.2% drop in November.

U.K. and Chinese companies signed £2.6 billion ($4.04 billion) worth of deals in the energy and automotive sectors. The deals were announced after a bilateral meeting between British Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg and China's Vice Premier Li Keqiang. 

Pope Benedict XVI urged Pakistan to reverse its blasphemy laws, saying they were a pretext for violence against non-Muslims, and demanded that all governments do more so Christians can practice their faith without fear.

 French President Nicolas Sarkozy said he told U.S. President Barack Obama that he recognizes the importance of the U.S. dollar in a meeting at the White House. Sarkozy and Obama, meeting in the White House Oval Office, said they discussed a range of issues from currency to global finance to terrorism.  

Meanwhile, U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner and French Finance Minister Christine Lagarde also met in Washington to discuss Europe's economic woes and plans to rebalance the global economy. 

 President Barack Obama led the U.S. in a moment of silence to honor the victims of Saturday's shooting rampage in Arizona. 

Doctors in Tucson said U.S. Representative Gabrielle Giffords hasn't suffered abnormal brain swelling, a hopeful sign. 

The suspected gunman made his first court appearance in Phoenix.

The co-founder of hedge-fund Trivium Capital Management, a former senior executive at Polycom and two others have been charged with insider trading by the Securities and Exchange Commission. The civil lawsuit filed in federal court in New York is the latest action stemming from a broad probe into insider trading by hedge funds and others on Wall Street.

 Large sums of money paid to some consultants charged in the federal government's insider-trading case indicate they may have talked with dozens of hedge funds, suggesting the scope of the investigation could widen significantly, people familiar with the expert-network industry say. 

 In Texas, former U.S. House of Representatives Majority Leader Tom DeLay was sentenced in state court to three years in prison for conspiracy to commit money laundering. He also received five years for money laundering, but the judge converted that sentence to probation. 

Haitian and U.S. officials plan to announce on Tuesday a $250 million deal to develop an industrial park in northern Haiti, close to the city of Cap Haitien, which officials expect will create some 20,000 jobs. 

Argentines are starting the new year facing a cash crunch—literally, a shortage of bills at banks and automated-teller machines due to what critics say is faulty planning at the central bank, as well as persistent inflation. The government has promised a quick resolution, saying fresh peso notes are being flown in from a currency engraver in Brazil to augment those produced by the overwhelmed local money printer. 

 China rebuffed a U.S. proposal for a clear timetable of strategic defense talks on the first day of a long-delayed visit to Beijing by Robert Gates, the U.S. defense secretary, and indicated that Taiwan remains the single biggest obstacle to improving the world's most important bilateral relationship.  

China said its trade surplus narrowed for the second consecutive year in 2010, data that could strengthen the country's case that it is gradually reducing the external imbalances that have inflamed tensions with trading partners.

 In Hong Kong, pressure to let expatriate Chinese dissidents attend a memorial for a prominent pro-democracy politician is becoming another test of the former British colony's struggle to preserve freedoms under China's rule. 

Myanmar's new parliament will hold its first session in 22 years on Jan. 31, state radio said, an event the country's military rulers hail as one of the final steps in its self-styled "roadmap to democracy." The new legislature was elected in polls last year decried as unfair by the country's opposition parties.

 U.S. Vice President Joe Biden arrived in Afghanistan for an unannounced visit designed to assess the military's progress toward shifting responsibility to Afghan security forces. Upon landing in Kabul, Biden received an update on the war effort from U.S. ambassador Karl Eikenberry and Gen. David Petraeus, the top U.S. and North American Treaty Organization commander in Afghanistan. 

 U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said an international campaign aimed at slowing Iran's suspected nuclear-weapons program was succeeding, the first time a senior Obama administration official has publicly made the claim. Clinton, speaking in the United Arab Emirates, cited technical problems Tehran was allegedly experiencing in running its centrifuge machines, which produce nuclear fuel.  

Tunisia said it is temporarily shutting all of its high schools and universities as it tries to contain deadly riots over joblessness and poor prospects for youths. 

In Sudan, violence in the disputed region of Abyei has killed at least 30 people along the country's north-south divide. Observers fear the latest unrest could spark more fighting amid an otherwise peaceful and jubilant independence referendum in the south.

Flash floods tore through the center of the town of Toowoomba, sweeping away cars and killing one woman, as severe thunderstorms compounded record flooding that has swept over the country's east coast and hinterland over the past month.