As  Raj Rajaratnam gathers tips on how to survive what will likely be a long stay in prison, barring a successful appeal, investors might want some of their own information, like this: What exactly did this landmark insider-trading case change?

The jury is still out.

On Wall Street, hedge funds, prime brokerages, companies and research-driven investors will have to rethink their relationships. Expect a premium, at least in the short run, on Wall Street's most important commodity: information. It's going to be a little more scarce.

For average investors without Mr. Rajaratnam's access to directors at Fortune 500 companies, the fallout is harder to judge.

The economic losses of insider-trading cases are a matter of debate. Some pros call it a victimless crime. If there are losses, they usually are hard to quantify.

Still, no one would dispute that insider trading fuels the perception among investors that the game is rigged. They either play knowing the score—or shun investing.

It's here where the case against the founder of the Galleon Group can cause the most change. Indeed, it's exactly why these cases are pursued. 

Insider trading "cheats the ordinary investor, victimizes the companies whose information is stolen, and is an affront not only to the fairness of the market, but the rule of law," U.S. Attorney  Preet Bharara said after Mr. Rajaratnam was found guilty on 14 counts of insider trading and conspiracy.

Mr. Bharara's message should find an accepting audience.

Last year, an MSNBC poll found that 90% of respondents believed Wall Street was "rigged" against investors. A Bloomberg poll concluded that 57% of respondents had an unfavorable view of Wall Street. And 56% agreed with the statement that bankers and brokers "enrich themselves at the expense of ordinary people and have a negative impact on the economy."

Just last week,  Citigroup Inc.,
C


0.98
%




 J.P. Morgan Chase & Co.
JPM


0.22
%




,  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
GS


0.38
%




 finished in the bottom 10 among more than 125 companies in a corporate reputation survey conducted by  Harris Interactive.

To put it mildly, the industry doesn't exactly stir confidence. Probably the only institution with an even worse reputation is Washington, which is responsible for policing financial markets.

Last year, a CNN/Opinion Research poll found that 60% of those surveyed favor tougher regulation of Wall Street and a Politico/Public Strategies poll in 2009 found that 68% of respondents favored better enforcement rather than new rules.

One of the most common phrases uttered by investors, securities lawyers, academics and Wall Street traders when asked about the effectiveness of regulators and U.S. prosecutors is "Keystone cops."

Now that the "Keystone cops" have cuffed a good-sized crook, will confidence in the system come roaring back?

Obviously not. Those sentiments, built on the crushing fallout of the financial crisis and years of perceived lawlessness on Wall Street, aren't going away with Mr. Rajaratnam.

Investors are frustrated with lost cases and perceived wrist-slaps:  Angelo Mozilo's $67.5 million settlement to settle fraud charges with the Securities and Exchange Commission, not-guilty verdicts for Bear Stearns & Co. hedge-fund managers accused of misleading clients, and the lack of indictments against Wall Street executives for misdeeds in the financial crisis.

  Bernard Madoff, after all, was turned in by his sons after running a Ponzi scheme for more than a decade.

Even the Abacus case, tied to a soured mortgage-backed investment created by Goldman that resulted in a $550 million fine for Goldman, was criticized by some people as being too light. 

But the Rajaratnam case could be a turning point. 

"Prosecutors went into a shell and didn't bring any other Wall Street indictments," says  Andrew Stoltman, a securities-fraud lawyer in Chicago. "This verdict should be enough to embolden prosecutors to indict additional Wall Street executives and hedge-fund managers."

And that's ultimately what jaded Americans really want. They want to know the police are on the beat and capable of catching the bad guys.

Investors withered by the financial crisis and the flash crash have become increasingly skeptical. Many are reluctant to return to the markets. For them, there is no easy money to be made.

Mr. Rajaratnam's conviction isn't going to change perceptions overnight. But it exposed the truth about a high-profile trader who made big returns look as easy as falling out of bed.

It's a start.

 Write to  David Weidner at david.weidner@dowjones.com 