The shootings in Tucson, Ariz., are being called a "teachable moment" for America. And I agree that there are many things to be learned from them, especially how and when to intervene after people show signs of clear mental instability such as those that Jared Loughner exhibited prior to his picking up a gun.

But another lesson from Arizona is how people can exploit a tragedy for political gain. Tucson Sheriff Clarence Dupnik, the elected Democrat in charge of the investigation, accused the tea party of bigotry last September. Now he has ventured even further afield from his duties by deploring the political critics of Rep. Gabrielle Giffords, the intended victim of Loughner. He told Fox News that there had been "vitriolic statements made night and day on radio and TV about her support of health care, about her support of some of the other things, and some of the vitriol got . . . a lot of people agitated." 

MSNBC political commentator Keith Olbermann even had the chutzpah to go on air Saturday night and call for rhetorical restraint in politics while simultaneously demanding that Glenn Beck and Bill O'Reilly of Fox News offer "solemn apologies" for giving "oxygen to those deep in madness to whom violence is an acceptable solution."

Politico.com quoted one veteran Democratic operative saying that the Obama White House should use the tragedy to score political points. "They need to deftly pin this on the tea partiers," he said. "Just like the Clinton White House deftly pinned the Oklahoma City bombing on the militia and anti-government people." Indeed, at the time of the bombing in 1995, then-Clinton strategist Dick Morris had penned a memo on how the tragedy could lead to a "permanent possible gain" because it "sets up Extremist issue vs. Republicans."

Happily, there have been a few sane voices on the left cautioning against exploiting the tragedy for partisan gain. Some have pointed out that the media and political reaction to U.S. Army psychologist Nidal Hasan's killing spree at Fort Hood, Texas, in late 2009 was highly restrained. Even though Major Hasan had ties to violent jihadists and had yelled out an Islamic religious expression as he set about killing 13 people and wounding 42, everyone urged caution in not jumping to conclusions that he was engaged in terrorism.

Steve Kornacki, the news editor of the left-wing Salon.com, noted that Longhner's "political thinking isn't particularly coherent or organized." He said attempts to link Sarah Palin to the Arizona tragedy because her website once put crosshairs on a map of Ms. Gifford's district along with those of 18 other Democrats may show that Ms. Palin's "opponents are trying just a little too hard to make her the villain."

So perhaps one of the clearest "teachable moments" we can get out of the Arizona carnage is to exercise the same kind of restraint that the media and politicians did with the Hasan killings -- at least until all the facts are in.

To read more stories like this one, please subscribe to Political Diary.

