DES MOINES, Iowa—Former United Nations Ambassador John Bolton, a foreign-policy iconoclast, will take his most tangible step toward a presidential run on Saturday when he attends a Republican presidential cattle call here.

He will bring a striking message: Republicans can't count on a poor economy or soaring national debt to thwart President Barack Obama's re-election. They have to focus on foreign policy. 

In an interview with the Wall Street Journal, Mr. Bolton said that by next year, the economy will have turned around enough to make Americans optimistic about the future. A year-long budget debate in Congress will have eased voter concerns about the federal deficit—especially if a budget deal is struck to dent the projected U.S. debt, as Mr. Bolton thinks is likely.

The result, he argued, is that Republican Party standard-bearers are taking the party down a dead end by keeping a relentless focus on deficits and jobs.

Instead, Mr. Bolton said, the party needs a leader to reverse what he called Mr. Obama's "post-American" presidency, which in his view has marginalized U.S. global leadership and hampered progress on energy independence, international trade and Middle East peace.

"Politicians, like generals, have a tendency to fight the last war," Mr. Bolton said. "We have to guard against solely complaining about the manifest inadequacies of Barack Obama's domestic policies."

Mr. Bolton, the son of a Baltimore firefighter, made his reputation as a pugnacious opponent of arms-control treaties and a critic of multilateral organizations. President George W. Bush granted him a recess appointment to the U.N. after Democrats filibustered his nomination.

The nomination fight was marked by accusations that Mr. Bolton bullied underlings. The White House cast Mr. Bolton's bluntness as an asset.

A Bolton presidential run would be a long shot. Unlike other likely candidates, such as former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney, former House Speaker Newt Gingrich and former Minnesota Gov. Tim Pawlenty, he hasn't been building an infrastructure for a White House bid.

Nor do his views fit neatly into the fold of conservative Republican primary voters. Mr. Bolton said he favors gay marriage as a decision between consenting adults that is "none of the government's business." He supports Mr. Obama's move that allows gays to serve openly in the military.

On abortion, he said his views track those of Ronald Reagan: He opposes it but favors exceptions for pregnancies from rape or incest, or which threaten the life of the mother.

Mr. Bolton would be a foreign-policy specialist in a field heavy on governors and devoid of candidates like Sen. John McCain (R., Ariz.), the party's 2008 nominee, who gained fame as a war hero and in Congress has focused on national security.

"I don't think there's been adequate attention by this president to foreign policy and national security across the board in his administration," Mr. Bolton said. "It's critical in the country for those issues to be addressed, and the most obvious way to do that is to use the opportunity provided by a presidential candidacy."

Some Republicans are resisting Mr. Bolton's warning that the party should not rely too heavily on fiscal matters to carry it in the next election.

"I think John Bolton ought to stick to international predictions and leave economic predictions to other people," said Dave Funk, co-chairman of the Polk County Republican Party in Iowa. "He's brilliant. He's my first choice for secretary of state, but he's not right on this one."

Kevin Madden, a strategist for Mr. Romney, said Mr. Bolton is underestimating the staying power of economic and deficit issues, which go beyond immediate concerns to larger issues of management and "modernizing the economy."

"I would disagree with anybody who thinks that issue is going away or is even going to subside," Mr. Madden said.

 Write to  Jonathan Weisman at jonathan.weisman@wsj.com 