LISBON—Portugal's government is facing political turmoil that threatens to derail its ambition to solve the crisis alone, just as pressure on the country seemed to ease after euro-zone leaders agreed to widen the scope of a bailout fund over the weekend. 

Portugal's main opposition party, the center-right Social Democrats, is opposed to the minority government's austerity measures announced Friday aimed at further spending cuts spending and boosting state revenue by further tax increases. 

The party's leader,  Pedro Passos Coelho, claims the added measures are an indication that the government "either didn't know how to do it or didn't want to do what was necessary to handle the crisis in the first place." 

  Mr. Passos Coelho said his party and others weren't informed of the new measures beforehand. The government also reportedly failed to inform President  Anibal Cavaco Silva, also of the Social Democrats, of the plan. 

While Prime Minister  Jose Socrates has said the government doesn't need Parliamentary approval for the measures, any turmoil at home could derail the country's goal to appease the international markets and European Union leaders during a summit this month to tackle the euro-zone crisis. 

Portugal's assurance that it is addressing its problems as smoothly as possible is seen as key for it to convince the EU it doesn't require a bailout. 

The country is at the center of a storm that hit Greece and Ireland as it is struggling with a high budget deficit that must be brought down to 4.6% of gross domestic product this year and 3% in 2012, from around 7% last year. 

To do that, Socrates's team has launched a series of measures since last year to boost the revenue and cut expenses. Although the plan—and the latest steps—received support from other EU leaders, it hasn't convinced markets, which continue to charge high interest rates to lend to Portugal. 

At home, the government is facing growing discontent over the measures, which will likely push Portugal into recession this year. Unemployment reached a record 11.1% at the end of 2010. 

Over the weekend, 150,000 people in Lisbon alone marched to protest against the new austerity plan. Calls for Socrates to resign have been growing. 

  Manuel Carvalho da Silva, head of Portugal's largest union CGTP, said the new plan "will create an even more severe recession in a country that is already stricken by poverty." 

The new Portuguese measures will include cuts in operational and administrative costs for the country's state-run health system, as well as in administrative costs in other areas of government and a delay to planned investments. Labor costs and unemployment benefits will also be reviewed, Finance Minister  Fernando Teixeira dos Santos said. 

 Write to  Patricia Kowsmann at patricia.kowsmann@dowjones.com 