Nine years ago, the Indian artist Tyeb Mehta set a record when his triptych painting called "Celebration" sold at a Christie's auction for $317,500. It was the highest sum ever paid for an Indian painting at an international auction and an early milestone in a market boom for contemporary Indian art.

On Wednesday, a painting by Mr. Mehta, who died in 2009, set another record, bringing in almost nine times the price of the 2002 sale. His diptych "Bulls" sold for $2.8 million at Christie's. The only contemporary Indian art work that has sold for more is a geometric painting by artist Syed Haider Raza, which sold for $3.5 million last June. 

Mr. Mehta, Mr. Raza and a handful of other Indian artists, including the late Francis Newton Souza and Maqbool Fida Husain, who is still painting at the age of 95, are reviving interest in contemporary Indian art after demand slowed during the recession. "It's the same pattern as China, but delayed," says Hugo K. Weihe, Christie's international director of Asian art. "India is geared to be second to China in Asia."

Behind the rebound are wealthy Indian buyers—some living in the U.S. and the U.K.—who are taking increasing interest in the art of their native country. Mr. Weihe estimates the market for contemporary Indian art is "half from India, plus a large chunk of nonresident Indians in London and the U.S., and to a lesser but growing extent, Westerners." 

At Wednesday's auction, many of the collectors bidding in person at Christie's in New York were ethnic Indians, and many appeared to be no older than their 30s. Out of 133 pieces on offer, 110 sold, bringing in a total of $9.8 million—just under the house's preauction estimate for the sale.

Before the recession hit, sculptor Sudbodh Gupta, who incorporates everyday objects into his sculptures, largely dominated the market for contemporary Indian art. This time around, interest is also building around a younger generation of painters in India. 

Among them is 36-year-old Jitish Kallat, who works in Mumbai. He has 12 solo shows to his credit in cities including New York, Chicago, Amsterdam and Singapore. "My outlet is now a global space," he says. Mr. Kallat works in a variety of media, including painting, sculpture, photography, video and installation art. He's known for his portraits of Mumbai's downtrodden inhabitants.

The highlight of Wednesday's auction, Mr. Mehta's "Bulls," is a work that Mr. Weihe calls the artist's "final and definitive achievement," made in the last few years of his life. On two huge panels, each more than 6 feet wide and 5 feet high, Mr. Mehta painted six brown figures that appear to be bulls floating through the air. 

Many of Mr. Mehta's paintings have incorporated bulls, which he considered to be deeply symbolic on a number of levels, both as a sign of masculinity and strength and as a lowly creature representing the downtrodden. The painting was put up for sale by Mr. Mehta's family. 

In his 83 years, Mr. Mehta completed fewer than 200 paintings. "He was so exacting," says Mr. Weihe, "that he was known to destroy works he wasn't happy with."

 Write to  Stan Sesser at stan.sesser@awsj.com 