BIRMINGHAM, Ala. -- Casandra Leverett was shocked when she returned Saturday morning to Pratt City, a mostly black working-class neighborhood on the western edge of this city.

“When I first saw it I cried,” said Ms. Leverett, a banker, of the destruction she found here three days after powerful tornadoes plowed through. “It looks like a bomb went off, like a third world country.”

Entire neighborhoods of mostly single-story homes have been reduced to rubble in Pratt City. Majestic, century-old oak trees lie broken atop smashed cars and crushed roofs. A 113-year-old soaring brick church at the community’s heart is a skeleton.

On Saturday, Birmingham police officers in blue uniforms patrolled roads shimmering with broken glass alongside National Guardsmen in beige camouflage with black rifles slung on their backs. Squat Hummers carrying four soldiers each sat at most intersections. The only cars on the roads were emergency vehicles. Residents walked around in small groups, speaking in hushed tones.

The liveliest part of town was the Scott Elementary School, which has been closed for years, but opened Friday morning opened as a Pratt City disaster relief center.

Behind the school, the parking lot was backed up with a line of several dozen cars stretching into the street. Each was loaded with bags of old clothes, cases of bottled water and cans of food. The cars inched forward and stopped near a rear entrance, where they were quickly unloaded and the donations were passed hand-to-hand in a 50-person bucket brigade into the school.

“We’re here because we want to help, because it could have been us,” said Anna McMullen, a 56-year-old federal government employee from Birmingham who brought a trunk full of clothes and diapers.

Inside the school the main corridor was packed with volunteers and victims. Classrooms were marked with signs: men’s clothes, women’s clothes, toiletries, water, volunteer check-in. Inside the classrooms, the donations of each type covered tables and were stacked to eye level, with more coming.

“There are thousands in need, thousands,” said Tommy Lewis, the 6-foot, 7-inch pastor of Bethel Baptist, which is organizing the relief effort here. “We will be here for as long as it takes. Until the last person has a roof over their head.”

Inside a room marked “registration,” Tiffany Norman, a 32-year-old youth minister wearing a yellow T-shirt with a crucifix of nails, led a prayer group. Her head, and the heads of the six people holding hands in the circle, were bowed.

“Let us pray that God’s favor will be on us and that God will show us his mercy and grace,” she said. Each in unison replied, “Amen.”

 Write to  Douglas Belkin at doug.belkin@wsj.com 