The first-day equity reaction to Japan's agony was strangely muted.

Naturally, the Tokyo markets plunged, though even there things might have been worse. But composure reigned elsewhere to an extent barely consistent with the awful pictures filtering out of the country's stricken northeast.

It seemed then that the maturing bull market still had plenty of fight in it.

But, with all due respect, this wasn't Pakistan or New Zealand, this was Japan, the world's third-largest economy. It may have been overtaken by China in nominal GDP terms last year, but it's still hardwired into every corner of global finance in a way China isn't, at least not yet.

No country suffers alone in this networked world, least of all one like Japan.

Still, equity markets seemed to hope for containment, no one seemed willing to throw in the towel first. Perhaps the current generation of traders is too young to remember Kobe in 1995. In any case, the Dow and Nasdaq, S&P and FTSE, all recorded falls of less than 1% on Monday.

South Korea's Kospi index actually managed to rise, as dealers there saw opportunity for local firms as Japanese manufacturers struggled. Shares in Hong Kong edged up, too, and the Shanghai composite was only flat. In Europe, the insurers foundered, as did the nuclear energy stocks, but these were merely the names most obviously in the developing Japan story's path. The links were obvious. There was no sense of general panic.

It was the second-day prospect of nuclear disaster that finally put the bulls to rout, and made the indexes match the newscasts.

The question now, as it should have been on day one, is whether Japan's disaster will end the global equity bull market just as it was celebrating the passing of a second happy year, with the lows of March 2009 nowhere in sight.

The omens aren't good. 

Even before Japan was hit, the markets were carrying around heavy burdens, any one of which the bulls would have been unable to ignore for long. 

China, for so long the growth-seekers' banker, was showing signs of a slowdown in both export activity and inflation. Commodity producers, once one-way bets on China's insatiable appetite, were looking riskier.

Then there was Europe. There is always Europe. The most recent summit of euro-zone leaders did throw debt markets the bone of an expanded bailout fund, licensed to buy government debt in the primary market.

Lovely, but we still don't know how the periphery and the core are ever going to live together under one interest rate without constant life support to the former from the latter. Life support that the core's  electorates may well wish to switch off.

Finally, of course, there was the Middle East, with tensions now exacerbated by the Arab League's approval of a no-fly zone over Libya and Saudi troops quelling protest across the causeway in Bahrain.

So, no wonder equity is down. But it is out?

Well, the latest fund manager survey from Bank of America/Merrill Lynch Global Research does little but kick it yet again, indicating that even before catastrophe struck Japan, sentiment was souring sharply.

According to the survey, conducted earlier this month, a net 24% of managers now expect corporate operating margins to fall in the next 12 months. That's the sharpest on-month decline since this question was added to the survey in 2004. And as recently as January a net 10% were predicting expansion.

True, a net 32% of fund managers still think profits will increase in the next year, but even this is down significantly from a net 51% in the previous poll. In any case, companies such as Japan's auto manufacturers weren't facing complete shutdowns of their domestic operations when the survey was taken. It's hard to see scope for improvement now that they are.

A net 31% now view consensus earnings estimates as too high, as well. 

It remains very difficult to work out exactly what equity bulls have to throw back against this dreadful combination of bad news. Better economic numbers? Well, maybe, but there's a high risk that Japan will overshadow any upbeat economic data.

In the end, all there really is to fall back on is the prospect of continued easy policy from the world's central banks. Perhaps this, at least, is made more likely by events in Japan, even if quantitative easing doesn't make a comeback. 

Inflation could take a hit from several directions, especially, it seems, from lower crude prices. Brent futures have shed some $6 on the day at the time of writing, thanks to fears of severely reduced Japanese demand for oil. 

There's no denying stocks have found the low-rate backdrop conducive in the past, even when the economics looked pretty shaky. But easy money, and then printed money, have already papered over a huge number of cracks since the bear market lows of March 2009.

We must be close to the limits of easy money's powers, in which case we could soon be talking about the bull market of 2009-2011.

 Write to  David Cottle at david.cottle@dowjones.com 