MUMBAI -- Consumer-goods company Dabur India is ready to spend 30 billion rupees ($672 million) to buy firms and brands.

"We are looking for acquisitions—large or small—and if the right acquisition opportunity comes up, we can spend even 3,000 crore rupees," said P.D. Narang, group director.

The maker of Vatika oil, Real juices and Babool toothpaste has equity and reserves of 13.91 billion rupees ($311 million) and 6 billion rupees ($134 million) in cash. 

"We have enough cash on the balance sheet for acquisition without any equity dilution," he said.

Dabur has shortlisted 15 target brands and companies and initiated talks with most of them. Merchant bankers are looking for ideal targets, though no mandate has given to any of them formally. Mr. Narang declined to name the targets and merchant bankers.

Last week, the company acquired an over-the-counter multi-vitamin brand called 30-Plus from Mumbai-based Ajanta Pharma for an undisclosed amount. In December, Dabur had withdrawn its bid for Gujarat-based Paras Pharmaceuticals Ltd, which has brands such as Moov pain-relieving cream and Krack foot cream, as it did not want to spend more than 25 billion rupees. Reckitt Benckiser Group Plc paid 32.60 billion rupees to acquire Paras Pharma, which had revenue of 4.01 billion rupees. 

"We are very comfortable with acquisition size in the range of 5 billion to 8 billion rupees as they are easy to digest and easy to absorb," Mr. Narang said. 

Dabur sells its products in Nepal, Dubai, Egypt, Nigeria and Bangladesh. In fiscal 2011, it acquired Turkey-based personal care firm Hobi Kozmetik Group for $69 million and US-based personal-care firm Namaste Group.

Revenue from overseas operations now account for close to 28% of the company's revenues, an increase of six percentage points from 22% a year-ago.

For the fourth quarter ended March 31, Dabur's net profit rose 8.5% to 1.47 billion rupees from 1.35 billion rupees a year ago. 

Most consumer-goods firms seem to be following an aggressive growth strategy through acquisitions both in India and overseas. Godrej Consumer Products acquired seven companies in India and overseas during the year that ended March 31, and overseas revenue now accounts for 35% of its consolidated revenues.

The pace of transactions in India is expected to accelerate further, said Ritesh Chandra, executive director and head, consumer at Avendus Capital. 

"While the interest of acquisitions of multinational companies in India continues to be high, we are likely to see a renewed thrust from domestic companies pursuing transactions in light of recent turbulence in (the) Middle East and Northern Africa," he said.