MEXICO CITY—In March, tragedy struck the household of Mexican poet Javier Sicilia. His 24-year-old son and six friends were found dead near the resort town of Cuernavaca, a massacre that mirrored scores of others in Mexico's brutal drug wars.

But the slaying has already resulted in a different outcome than most in Mexico. Mr. Sicilia used his son's death to rally tens of thousands of protesters in Mexico City's central plaza Sunday to hear him speak during his "March for Peace and Justice."

On Monday, President Felipe Calderón offered a dialogue with protesters, saying the march "represents a just and legitimate drive by citizens to address the problem of insecurity that we suffer from in this country."

Mr. Sicilia hopes to turn Sunday's demonstration into a mass movement to fight not only the drug cartels but also the government's heavy-handed tactics in pursuing them. The leftist academic is a vocal critic of Mr. Calderón's conservative government, which he says is too corrupt to resolve the problem. Mr. Sicilia hasn't offered alternatives.

Mexicans have tried before to create a popular movement against criminal violence. In 2004, just before Mr. Calderón began his crackdown against drug gangs, several hundred thousand people gathered in the capital for a "March Against Insecurity." But momentum stalled. 

Track the increasing violence in an interactive map.

Nearly 40,000 people have died in drug-related violence since then, with authorities saying Monday that another 13 were killed in a shootout between military and drug gangs at a lake on the border with Texas. Mr. Sicilia and his followers hope the mounting toll is enough to create a popular groundswell. This year has been especially terrifying. A mass grave site in Tamaulipas was discovered with at least 183 bodies last month, while a second, in the state of Durango, had more than 160. 

"There are killers in the street, the government's strategy is failed, and we are hasta la madre," said Mr. Sicilia in an interview, using popular Mexican phrase meaning "fed up." 

Some experts point to Colombia as a successful precedent. As the country's main drug trafficking group, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, boasted popular support as it fought the state, demonstrators turned out en masse to counter the claims in 2008. Hundreds of thousands of protesters took to streets of Bogotá carrying banners that denounced kidnappings by the rebel group. 

"They sent a clear message to the FARC that a broad portion of Colombia was against them," said Alexander Wilde, an expert on Latin American social movements at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars.

Replicating that type of broad support may prove challenging for Mr. Sicilia. Some analysts say he muddles his message by attacking Mr. Calderón in stronger terms than the drug gangs themselves. Mr. Sicilia said recently of Mr. Calderón: "He is responsible for the 40,000 dead." 

Last month the president invited Mr. Sicilia to discuss the death of his son, but the poet says the meeting didn't go well. "This is a man who hears but doesn't listen," he said. Mr. Calderón's office didn't immediately comment on the meeting. 

On Monday, Mexican columnist Jorge Fernández Menéndez summed up in his column what he saw as Mr. Sicilia's message: "The enemies aren't the criminals, rather the government." The writer added: "Mr. Sicilia has all the right in the world to ask authorities to stop the killings. But it also happens that his son was killed by criminals, not security forces."

A poll published on Monday showed the president retained a 50% approval rating in its combat of the drug war, up from 46% late last year. 

Mr. Sicilia said he realized the government wasn't behind the vast majority of deaths, but focuses his criticism on Mexico's political leaders because they, unlike drug gangs, "can be held accountable by the people."

Those around Mr. Sicilia acknowledge the risk that a popular movement against drug traffickers could be overtaken by politics. "Javier is a poet, a journalist, his loss is something that appeals to many Mexicans," said Emilio Álvarez Icaza, an organizer and former ombudsman for the Mexico City government. "But we need to keep that appeal as broad as possible, not just among those on the left whose support we already have."

 Write to  Nicholas Casey at nicholas.casey@wsj.com 