In early 1967, Grace Slick's ambulance-siren voice on Jefferson Airplane's "Somebody to Love" and "White Rabbit" ignited a psychedelic-rock revolution that put San Francisco on the map. Her uninhibited persona and Mother Nature fashion sense also helped advance the hippie counterculture and, by extension, the free-love and feminist movements.

On May 13, Ms. Slick will be among more than 70 female rockers celebrated by the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame's "Women Who Rock: Vision, Passion, Power" exhibit, where two of her stage outfits will be displayed. 

In an interview last week from her Los Angeles home, the 71-year-old Ms. Slick spoke about Jefferson Airplane, rock stardom, LSD and her three big regrets:

  The Wall Street Journal: What was your favorite movie as a child?  

Ms. Slick: "The Beautiful Blonde From Bashful Bend" with Betty Grable. I saw it when I was 9 years old. I learned that a woman can defy stereotypes and do anything she wants. I guess Betty Grable set me up.

  Were you rebellious growing up in Palo Alto, Calif.?  

No, I was fairly well-behaved. But in school I learned about artists and how they were free to express themselves. I was allergic to conformity, and the lifestyle attracted me. I wanted to express myself in a way that slammed people up against the wall.

  Where did you learn to sing?  

At home. My mom was a good singer, so we'd sing around the house. My mother sang songs like "Stardust" and "(I'll Be With You) In Apple Blossom Time." [Sings a few lines.] I'd harmonize with her.

  Would you like to be an "American Idol" guest judge?  

[Laughs] I love the show, but no way. I don't have any middle ground like those judges do. I'm a buzzer or a gong. Either I think you're marvelous or I don't and would say so. I'd be more negative than Simon Cowell.

  Your voice always sounded like a warning. Was it?  

Sometimes. For example, on "Somebody to Love," the opening lines are "When the truth is found to be lies, and all the joy within you dies." When you learn that a truth is a lie, anger follows. There's an annoyance in my voice because I'm annoyed. I would add vibrato to drive home points. I liked to get ear-crushing loud but then bring my voice down.

  How long did it take you to write "White Rabbit?"   

About an hour. There were two influences there. I loved the bolero used by Miles Davis and Gil Evans on their 1960 album "Sketches of Spain." I also had a long-standing love affair with "Alice in Wonderland." 

  "White Rabbit"—a metaphor for drugs?  

Not exactly. It's about following your curiosity. The White Rabbit is your curiosity. Alice follows him wherever he goes. He leads her to drugs, though, and that's why the song was written. Hey, all major children's books do this. In "Peter Pan," sparkle dust lets you fly. In the "Wizard of Oz," they awaken in a poppy field to see the beautiful Emerald City. Our parents read us stories about chemicals that make it possible to have a good time.

  What was Jefferson Airplane's obsession with LSD?  

LSD was new then. It opened up our heads and gave us new insight into the fact that reality isn't just one thing. That excited us. But it's also terrifying if your head isn't in the right place. So in hindsight, our advocating for LSD was kind of dangerous.

  What happened at the White House in the early '70s?  

Tricia Nixon went to the same New York girls' finishing school [Finch College, now defunct] that I did, but 10 years later. When I attended, my maiden name was Wing. Tricia invited all the graduates, including me, to a White House tea party. Her people didn't know that Grace Wing was Grace Slick [her first husband was Jerry Slick]. So I called Abbie Hoffman and said, "Guess where we're going." I had planned to spike Richard Nixon's tea with acid. But when Abbie and I were on line, a security guard wouldn't let me in. He said, "We checked and you're a security risk."

  Why do you think you and Janis Joplin had such a big impact on rock?   

The shocking sound of our voices. We weren't glam. We were crazed and enraged, which connected. My voice was icy cool and piercing, and Janis's was shrill and fire hot. We were different but the same.

  How do you spend your days now?  

By painting and drawing. I clean house, shop for groceries and hang out with my daughter and her husband. They both live with me and help care for the house.

  Which female rock singers today do you admire?  

Emily Armstrong of Dead Sara. She has a strong, urgent sound.

  Would you consider a Jefferson Airplane reunion?  

No. Due to health problems, I can't stand for longer than eight minutes at a time.

  A solo comeback?   

Nope. Anyone who's 71 years old would look ridiculous singing rock. 

  Any regrets?  

Yes. That I didn't have sex with Jimi Hendrix, that I've never been to the Middle East and that I never learned to ride a horse. That's about it.