MANAMA, Bahrain—Security forces using tear gas, rubber bullets and bird shot dispersed antigovernment protesters across Bahrain who defied martial law and a ban on public gatherings.

In many of the Shiite villages that surround the capital of Manama, groups of protesters, mainly young men, gathered at prominent intersections, calling for the fall of the Sunni ruling family. 

The protests represented the first significant defiance of a ban on demonstrations imposed during a violent crackdown last week by the Bahraini army and security forces. King Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa announced a three-month period of martial law and invited security forces from Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates into the country.

In the mostly Shiite village of Al Musala, hundreds of protesters formed makeshift barricades of upturned dumpsters and concrete blocks. Police entered the outskirts of the village, firing bird shot and sending protesters scattering into side streets and doorways, witnesses said. 

Sporadic pops from police antiriot weapons could be heard from the neighboring Shiite villages, while a police helicopter circled above.

In nearby Sannabis, witnesses said riot police swept into the village firing bird shot and tear gas to disperse protesters.

Bahraini military and riot police, anticipating Friday's gatherings, had expanded the number of checkpoints across the island. A beefed-up military presence, including tanks and armored personnel carriers, guarded the entrance to many Shiite villages. Bahrain's government says it is protecting law and order and stifling a movement inspired and infiltrated by Iran. 

According to human-rights groups and opposition figures, at least 17 people have died during clashes between demonstrators and security forces since protests started on Feb. 14.

Separately, in Jordan, police fired water cannon to disperse crowds after about 200 government loyalists started hurling stones at thousands of opposition protesters camped in a central square of the capital, Amman.

Jordan's opposition is demanding electoral changes that would see the prime minister directly elected and give more powers to parliament. The protests have been largely peaceful and on a smaller scale than others in the region. Rather than seeking the downfall of the monarchy, many activists have urged the king to take charge of political reforms.

—Joe Parkinson and Hassan Hafidh