It wasn't long after President Barack Obama announced the killing of  Osama bin Laden before New York's landmarks became the sites of raucous street parties celebrating the news.

At Ground Zero and at Times Square, hundreds gathered and chanted "USA" and sang the national anthem well after midnight Monday, as the families of those killed on Sept. 11, 2001, quietly reflected from their homes on the assassination of Mr. bin Laden, the proclaimed leader of Al Qaeda.



New York City firefighters stood atop their rigs at Times Square and posed for photos among jubilant crowds.

"The crowd started cheering us," said FDNY Chief  Jack Joyce. "This is an important moment in our nation and there's lots of pride. The fight is not over but I'm damn glad they got him."

Around Mr. Joyce, hundreds chanted "NYC" and "USA" as bagpipes played "Amazing Grace."

  Stephen Kaliski and  Matt Gorman, sophomore roommates at New York University showed up at Times Square with an American flag normally hung on their dorm-room wall. 

"This is the first major victory the U.S. has had in a long time," said Mr. Kaliski.

For  Laura Rose, a 29-year-old hairstylist from Detroit, the occasion was a bonus to her New York visit.

"This is the best place to be to celebrate," she said at Times Square. "This is a historic moment."

But far away, in the suburbs surrounding New York City, the families of those killed on 9/11 spoke of mixed feelings; relief mingled with raw remembrances of their loss.

"It makes it real again," said  Jane Pollicino of Plainview, N.Y., whose husband, Steve, was a vice president at Cantor Fitzgerald.

"When justice is done, you get a sense of relief," Ms. Pollicino said, her voice shaking with emotion. "But it brings it all back to the surface."

  Jay Winuk, whose brother Glenn Winuk, a partner at Holland and Knight, LLP, was killed on 9/11, hesitated to call the killing of Mr. bin Laden closure.

"My first emotion was a sense of relief," said Mr. Winuk. "That yet another who was directly responsible for my brother's death has been brought to justice—the kingpin, the leader of the pack, the evilest of the evil can no longer bring harm to other people—there's a great satisfaction in that."

  Paula Berry was sleeping when her 17-year-old son Reed knocked on the door. "Mom," he said, "You've got to see this."

Ms. Berry, whose husband David was killed at Ground Zero on Sept. 11, gathered with her two younger sons in front of the television, her 18-year-old son calling in from college to share the news:  Osama bin Laden was dead.

Reed turned to her. "His death doesn't bring back Dad or the time we could have spent together," he said. "But it does ensure he will never play a role in taking an innocent life away again."

"That just sums it up," said Ms. Berry recalling the conversation early Monday morning, who called Mr. bin Laden a "phantom" who had haunted the families who lost loved ones on 9/11 for years. "It's a stunning evening for me."



All night, she said, emails and calls from friends and relatives had poured in, evoking outpouring she felt in the days after the attacks. Now, with the 10th anniversary approaching, "this paves the way for a sense of closure."

"On some level justice as been done," she continued. "It's not going to bring anything back. It's not going to change anything for us personally, but it's a sense of closure."

Debra Burlingame, the sister of Charles Burlingame III, a pilot of American Airlines 77 that was flown into the Pentagon, said she was gratified that Mr. bin Laden was killed by American forces.

"I'm thrilled," she said. "To know that he was taken out by American troops is very, very satisfying."

Still, Mr. Winuk said the elation is tempered by an overarching sadness.

"I have always been optimistic that bin Laden would be brought to justice one way or another," he said. "But my satisfaction with justice tonight is of course mixed with very sad feelings about my younger brother and that justice for him is something he will never of course be able to appreciate."

 Write to  Melanie Grayce West at melanie.west@wsj.com, Monica Williams at monica.williams@wsj.com, Michael Howard Saul at michael.saul@wsj.com and Tamer El-Ghobashy at tamer.el-ghobashy@wsj.com 