TOKYO—-Some of Japan's top corporate leaders predicted a mild economic recovery in the next fiscal year, led by growth in the U.S. and emerging markets, and they said the yen wasn't likely to rise sharply over the next 12 months.

The leaders of the country's three major business lobbies—the Japan Federation of Economic Organizations, the Japan Association of Corporate Executives and the Japan Chamber of Commerce and Industry—said the yen will likely depreciate against the dollar as the U.S. and European economies pick up. 

"I expect the dollar to be around 80 to 85 yen, a relative depreciation compared with this year," said  Tadashi Okamura, the head of the Chamber of Commerce and former chairman of  Toshiba Corp.
TOSYY


1.64
%




 He spoke at a news conference after a New Year's gathering of Tokyo's economic and political leaders. 

The vice chairman of  Sony Corp.,  Ryoji Chubachi, told reporters on the sidelines of the gathering that based on economic fundamentals, "it is unlikely that the yen will become extremely stronger or weaker," without referring to specific levels. 

Mr. Okamura warned that the current quarter may be difficult for the Japanese economy, with businesses facing layoffs and even closures. 

  Masamitsu Sakurai, chairman of the Japan Association of Corporate Executives and of  Ricoh Co.
RICOY


-0.10
%




, said a recovery is likely to come in the second half of fiscal 2011 after a period of adjustment. 

"Hopefully the yen will no longer be a safe haven for investors," Mr. Sakurai said. 

The government forecasts 1.5% growth in the next fiscal year, a slowdown from this year's 3.1%, due to a spending binge driven by government subsidies for purchases of energy-efficient appliances. 

Prime Minister Naoto Kan made a brief appearance at the gathering, encouraging businesses to "stop saving, invest domestically, hire more and raise wages." 

In response, the business community took a jab at Mr. Kan's failure to negotiate with opposition parties in passing the budget. The opposition Liberal Democratic Party threatens to boycott the budget debate scheduled for the regular parliamentary session later this month unless Mr. Kan gets rid of two cabinet ministers that the opposition-led upper house has censured. 

"Politicians don't seem to understand the role of business executives," said  Hiromasa Yonekura, head of the Japan Federation of Economic Organizations and chairman of  Sumitomo Chemical.
4005


0.98
%




 "A quick and seamless policy passage is essential for economic growth," only after which businesses can hire more workers. 

The business leaders supported Mr. Kan's effort to make this year "a year of opening Japan up," a reference to his stated commitment to free trade. 

"This is an opportunity for Japan's small to medium-sized businesses to expand overseas," Mr. Okamura said, calling for collaboration between agriculture and businesses to build consensus on free trade. 