MUMBAI—Tata Steel Ltd., saddled by the debt it took on to fund its India expansion plans and to buy Anglo-Dutch steelmaker Corus in 2007, plans to raise about $1 billion through a share sale, and may file an offer document this week, two people familiar with the matter said. 

The money will help the company lower its net debt, which totaled $10.7 billion on Sept. 30. 

The sale could take place in March, one person said. But the other person said the "timing of the share sale would depend on market conditions and could be held up by volatile stock markets." 

A Tata Steel spokesman declined to comment. 

Tata Steel, the world's seventh-largest steelmaker by capacity, said in a filing with the Bombay Stock Exchange that it plans to sell 57 million shares once it gets regulatory approvals. It didn't give any details about the amount it hopes to raise, or the timing of the issue.

The company's shares ended 0.5% lower at 647.60 rupees ($14.28) on Tuesday in a Mumbai market that edged down 0.1% on the day but is down 6.4% so far this year. At that price, a sale of 57 million shares would bring in gross proceeds of $813.96 million, and new shares generally are sold at a discount to existing shares.

The company has been working to reduce the £3.5 billion ($5.45 billion) of debt it took to acquire Corus for $12 billion in 2007. Recently, it refinanced £3.5 billion of debt, converting term loans to senior debt and expanding its revolving credit facility. 

Tata Steel also has raised funds in the past few years to expand the production capacity of its only Indian plant, in Jamshedpur, to 10 million tons a year from 6.8 million tons. The company, which already has plants in Singapore, Thailand, the U.K., South Africa and the Netherlands, plans to build two new factories in India.

Last month, Managing Director  Hemant Nerurkar said Tata Steel wants to reduce its debt-to-equity ratio to 2.5 from the current 2.8, adding that a planned equity offering could cut it to 2.6.

The company received shareholder approval in December for a share sale. 

Two people familiar with the matter said at the time that the company is planning to raise up to $1 billion though the sale of shares with differential voting rights. 

Shortly after, Mr. Nerurkar said Tata Sons Ltd., which owns 32.69% of the steelmaker, prefers not to allow its holding to be diluted. Instead, Tata Sons may seek to increase its holding in the company by participating in any equity issue, he said. 

 Write to  Bijou George at bijou.george@dowjones.com and Prasenjit Bhattacharya at prasenjit.bhattacharya@dowjones.com 