 Toyota Motor's credit-rating downgrade on Friday meant its expulsion from an unusual club: Japanese companies that are considered more creditworthy than their own government. The emergence of that group reflects the fiscal discipline of some of Japan's best-run companies, and the government's heavy spending over the past decade. 

 China eliminated a key policy tool to control liquidity and inflation: its annual target for new bank lending, overhauling how it looks at lending and changing the way it regulates banks after a year in which a huge volume of credit wasn't factored into the formal lending data. 

 The U.S. stock market has rallied in epic fashion over the two years since it hit bottom in March 2009, yet many investors remain skeptical about the market's strength. 

 A former Goldman Sachs director, Rajat Gupta, was part of an alleged insider-trading conspiracy with Galleon Group founder Raj Rajaratnam, according to a U.S. prosecutor. 

 The Asian Aerospace trade fair starts Tuesday in Hong Kong, and will reflect the sensitivities of mainland China as it reshapes the global aviation industry.  

 Expectations U.S. rates will stay low are likely to keep the dollar in a downdraft this week, as looming rate increases in Europe enhance the euro's luster. 

 Perennial China Retail Trust, a unit of property-investment firm Perennial Real Estate, is deferring its $868 million IPO due to volatile market conditions. 

 U.S. private-equity fund TPG Capital and Japanese consumer lender J-Trust are the likely contenders to take over failed consumer lender Takefuji. A decision could come by the end of the month. 

 Posco, Lotte and CJ Group plan to compete for a controlling stake in logistics firm Korea Express, in a deal that could be valued at more than $1.8 billion. 

 Dolce & Gabbana is folding its D&G brand into the main label, said people familiar with the matter, in an effort to limit cannibalization between the two lines. 

 Christian Dior sought to turn the page on John Galliano, presenting his fall-winter collection in a way that carried little of its former designer's signature flair. 

 Research in Motion's chief marketing officer is leaving the BlackBerry maker, just weeks ahead of a significant product rollout. 

 Japanese Foreign Minister Seiji Maehara resigned over illegal political donations from a foreign national, dealing a blow to Prime Minister Naoto Kan. 

 Tens of thousands of opposition protesters encircled a sprawling Bahrain government compound Sunday in a move timed to coincide with a cabinet meeting as they sought to further escalate pressure on the ruling Al-Khalifa family to accept sweeping change. 

Egypt named Gen. Mansour el-Essawy as its new interior minister in a further sign that ousted President Hosni Mubarak's old guard were being removed from the cabinet.

 North Korea, angry that four of its citizens decided to stay in South Korea after drifting there last month in an unpowered boat, on Friday sent no one to the inter-Korean border to accept the return of 27 others from the same boat.  

A roadside bomb killed 12 civilians, including five children, in eastern Afghanistan on Sunday in an attack President Hamid Karzai condemned as "against all principles of Islam."

Malaysia's ruling coalition won special elections to fill two legislative seats Sunday in another sign of rising support ahead of national polls expected within a year.

Bangladesh's High Court has delayed its ruling on the legality of a government order dismissing Nobel laureate Muhammad Yunus as head of the microfinance bank he founded. Attorney General Mahbub-e-Alam says the court is likely to rule Monday.

Nearly 50 Bangladeshi migrant workers evacuated by sea from Libya to the Greek island of Crete jumped ship during the night, Greek authorities said Sunday, apparently to avoid being sent back to Bangladesh. Three died, 11 remained missing and many others were hospitalized.