All  Rob Goldman ever wanted was to be himself. In the Silicon Valley start-up obsessed world he inhabits, that means being facebook.com/rob or @Rob on Twitter. 

But Mr. Goldman can't get what he wants, even at a website he founded. The 40-year-old chief executive signs up for about 10 new networks and Internet services a week. Going through the online registration process that often, Mr. Goldman says, you want as few user names as possible, and ideally just one. The shorter, the better. 

For a lot of people, social media is about image: the pictures you want others to see, the places you want to be known for frequenting. Nothing is more fundamental than a brand name.

An easy-to-remember user-name is a stylish totem in the tech world. Single-name sign-ins are cool because they're hard to come by. They are the first handles to be nabbed at a start-up, often by employees, their friends and family, sometimes by venture capitalists, angel investors, engineers and executives. Being @you, especially on a social-media site that becomes a mass-market success, proves you are an early adopter, in on the ground floor of the next big thing. 

With the fall 2009 launch of his website Threadsy (which, fittingly, helps users manage email and social media accounts from one page), Mr. Goldman was excited to cast aside his old standby sign-in, Rgold_1999, and to get a little first-name-only recognition with the user name "Rob." But he couldn't claim the prize: A technological fluke during beta testing resulted in a random friend of an employee claiming the coveted sign-in. 

Seeing that "Rob" wasn't actually signing on, Mr. Goldman told employees to delete the account. This sparked a company-wide debate about jimmying with the database. Ultimately, he agreed it was best to keep hands off—but not without regret. "With my own service, I do think I deserved 'Rob,'" he says.

  Megan McCarthy, founding editor of news aggregator Mediagazer.com, heard in 2006 about a social platform where users publish information in 140-character bursts. She registered an account, @Megan, and forgot about it, having no idea that four years later the website would have 190 million registered accounts. "The fact that you have your first name on Twitter should not be a big deal," she says. "But there is nerd cachet to it." 

Status on a public network has its price. Choose a cool name that's too common, or too short, and you may get swamped with messages not necessarily meant for you. "Adam Lambert from 'American Idol' gets all sorts of crazy propositions," says  Adam Rugel, an early Twitter adopter who signed up as @Adam.

Most websites ask you to choose a name, rejecting your choices until you type in something that isn't already taken, whether by an active user or a "squatter," who registers but doesn't use the account much.  John Manoogian III, founder of 140 Proof, of San Francisco, which launches Twitter-based media campaigns for clients like  General Mills,
GIS


-0.21
%




 says he was able to sign up using his preferred name, JM3, on 93% of his 276 online accounts. When he couldn't use JM3, it was usually on sites that wouldn't accept a three-character name. Mr. Manoogian has persuaded some sites to reconfigure and allow JM3. A short and uniform name representing your entire Web presence "is now a part of your social capital," Mr. Manoogian says.

The social-media landscape is, for many, "a personal branding device," says  Tony Conrad, who co-founded About.me. About.me lets users aggregate links to their various social-media presences—LinkedIn, Facebook, Foursquare, Twitter—on one page and access analytics such as which search terms bring in visitors. AOL acquired about.me last month less than a week after its official launch.

Cool email addresses were the precursors to cool social-media handles. When AOL introduced email in 1991, new users could claim any available name of at least three characters. Only user-names deemed to be "foul language" were prohibited, says Kiersten Hollars, a company spokeswoman.

Michael Arrington, founder of the news site TechCrunch, began lobbying AOL in October 2010 to give him the email account mike@aol.com after AOL bought his website. He calls the "mike" address "retro cool." AOL determined it was active. "We told him no," Ms. Hollars says.

On Facebook, members sign in with an email address, then use whatever name they want, even if it duplicates someone else's—which is bound to happen on a network of 500 million active users. Facebook added a layer of exclusivity when it let users connect a discrete Facebook URL to their profiles, in an event known as the "Facebook Land Grab."

At 12:01 a.m. eastern time on June 13, 2009, members could snag what the company calls a "vanity URL" as long as someone else didn't snag it first. Employees had been assigned a Facebook URL in advance to match their company email handles. That's how  Megan Tannenbaum—then part of Facebook's sales operation, email address megan@facebook.com—landed the URL facebook.com/megan. She took a job with online video site Hulu two months ago but still has the enviable Facebook URL. "My grandbabies' grandbabies are going to be talking about the fact that I have 'slash Megan,'" she says. 

Twitter has policies to protect against brand impersonators. To claim the name @Twitter, you would need to prove you have the trademark to the name. Accounts belonging to celebrities and other public figures are often labeled as "verified." But any old Joe can claim @yournamehere, as long as no one else has it.

When Twitter was smaller, a well-placed connection could help you change your name.  Amanda Rose, founder of Twestival, which helps organize charitable fundraising events among Twitter users, made contacts at Twitter through Twestival. After seeing no tweets from the account @Amanda for several months in 2007, Ms. Rose emailed Twitter employees, and they transferred her tweets and followers. The @Amanda account "is a good business card for me," she says.

 Current Twitter policy says an account that is dormant (meaning it hasn't been used much in six months or more) can be reclaimed by Twitter and released to the public. Last week,  Kat Langdon (previously @katlangdon on Twitter) tweeted, "Crazy day, started w/ dentists and doctors and ended with @twitter giving me @kat 5hrs after I asked for it. #solid". 

Says Twitter spokesman Sean Garrett, "In the future, we hope to make getting inactive user names easier. However, right now, as @kanyewest might say: 'It's a process,' and we can't promise that requests will go fulfilled."

Short handles have technical advantages. Until recently,  Brooke Hammerling, a tech-industry public relations executive, was @bhammerling. She felt her 12-character handle was hogging up the 140-character allotment for tweeting. When she realized @brooke had been dormant for more than a year, she emailed a friend,  Dick Costolo, Twitter's chief executive. A staffer directed her to Twitter's name-change request form. "A short Twitter handle lets you say more," she says.

  Andrei Zmievski, a San Francisco software engineer, asked Twitter in 2008 to let him claim the handle @A. After he took over the dormant account, he discovered the downside: Whenever a Twitter user enters @ plus the letter A—"I'm @a bar"—the tweet fills Mr. Zmievski's feed.

The cool name has rendered part of Twitter's function "useless," Mr. Zmievski says. "It's the price I have to pay."

 Write to  Katherine Rosman at katherine.rosman@wsj.com and follow her on Twitter.