The financial crisis dragged sky-high pay packages for top Wall Street executives down to earth. Those days are ending.

  Citigroup Inc.
C


0.82
%




 said its chief executive,  Vikram Pandit, will get a base salary of $1.75 million in 2011, effective immediately, according to a securities filing Friday, up from the $1 salary that Mr. Pandit imposed on himself in early 2009, when he vowed not to accept more than that until the New York company regained profitability.

  Richard Parsons, Citigroup's chairman, said directors are "very pleased with the progress that the company has made under Vikram's leadership. Vikram has worked tirelessly to put Citi back on the right track, spearheading a restructuring that has returned the company to profitability and positioning the company for future growth."

The issue of CEO pay is likely to heat up during proxy season. Unemployment remains high even as profits rebound on Wall Street and at many commercial banks. As part of the Dodd-Frank financial-overhaul law passed last summer, lawmakers required companies to eventually disclose the ratio of their chief executive's overall pay to the typical employee working at the firm.

Citigroup didn't disclose what Mr. Pandit's overall compensation will be. He took over as CEO in late 2007 as the bank's problems mounted. In 2008, Mr. Pandit was paid a salary of $958,333, as part of his total compensation of $10.8 million.

Citigroup started producing profits last year, and Mr. Parsons said the job performance of Mr. Pandit "would merit" higher compensation.

Before Mr. Pandit became CEO, Citigroup paid $800 million to acquire the hedge-fund firm he co-founded, Old Lane LP. The bank has said the after-tax share of Mr. Pandit's $165.2 million in sale proceeds was locked up at Citigroup until mid-2011.

In a separate securities filing Friday,  Morgan Stanley
MS


0.20
%




 said Chief Executive  James Gorman got about $7.4 million in restricted stock and options for 2010. That was down 12% from the $8.5 million stock award that he got a year earlier.

Total compensation for Mr. Gorman, who became CEO at the start of 2010, won't be released until Morgan Stanley files a proxy statement for its annual shareholder meeting. The figure will be smaller than the $15 million in salary and bonus that Mr. Gorman got for 2009, according to a person familiar with the situation. More than 80% of Mr. Gorman's pay will come in deferred instruments such as stocks, options and deferred cash awards that can be clawed back later, the person said. That means Mr. Gorman will get a cash bonus. He didn't get one for 2009, and predecessor  John Mack, now Morgan Stanley's chairman, took no bonus for three consecutive years.

Mr. Gorman got a stock-option grant for 2010 that is valued at $3.5 million and vests in three installments starting in February 2012, according to Friday's filing. He also was granted 129,809 restricted shares valued at about $3.9 million. The company also disclosed stock options and restricted stock granted to 10 other top Morgan Stanley executives. 

In Mr. Gorman's first year as CEO, Morgan Stanley generated its highest net income and revenue since 2006, but the firm's results and stock price still trailed other major banks, which explains why Mr. Gorman's pay is down from last year despite his promotion to CEO from co-president.

Thursday, Morgan Stanley said its overall compensation and benefits for 2010 rose 11% to $16.05 billion from $14.43 billion in 2009. But Mr. Gorman has stressed discipline in pay, and compensation fell 2% in the unit that includes traders and investment bankers. The firm's compensation as a percent of its revenue also fell from 2009. 

At J.P. Morgan Chase & Co., several top lieutenants of  James Dimon, the bank's chairman and CEO, got increases in their equity awards, according to documents filed Friday. Investment-banking chief  Jes Staley and asset-management head  Mary Erdoes, who moved into those posts last year, saw the largest jumps, each about 50%.

Mr. Staley got 182,907 restricted stock units, valued at $8.1 million. He also received 230,770 stock-appreciation rights, which will become more valuable if the bank's share price climbs. Ms. Erdoes received 155,809 restricted stock units, valued at $6.9 million, and 230,770 in stock-appreciation rights

Most of the other executives on Mr. Dimon's operating committee got increases of about 10%, according to securities filings. The bank hasn't disclosed the amount of cash compensation for the executives. Mr. Dimon's overall compensation for 2010 also hasn't been disclosed.

—Dan Fitzpatrick contributed to this article.

 Write to  Aaron Lucchetti at aaron.lucchetti@wsj.com and Randall Smith at randall.smith@wsj.com 