The U.S. and its allies are considering the creation of a trust fund for Libyan rebels opposing the regime of Col. Moammar Gadhafi, according to people familiar with the matter, in an escalation of Western efforts to bolster the struggling revolt.

The potential $4.5 billion fund, which will be on the agenda when Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and other top diplomats meet in Rome on Thursday, would be guaranteed, and partially filled, by assets of the Gadhafi regime that were frozen by the United Nations and European Union this year, these people said.

Part of the rebels' difficulty in their efforts to bring down Col. Gadhafi's regime stems from their lack of financial muscle. Libya's economy is highly dependent on oil exports, and rebels have struggled to maintain control of ports and other facilities that would enable oil sales.

The fund would likely be drawn from frozen Gadhafi assets in Europe as well as aid provided by the U.S. and Arab and European governments. 

The U.S. has allocated $25 million to help the rebels procure supplies, but because of legal issues has declined to release any of the $34 billion in Libyan assets frozen by the Treasury Department this year in the wake of Col. Gadhafi's violent crackdown on protesters, according to U.S. officials. Washington hasn't recognized the rebel leadership council as Libya's rightful government, as France has, complicating its ability to provide funding. 

The trust-fund arrangement is seen as a way for the U.S. and its allies to closely monitor money dispensed to rebels by maintaining oversight of the fund, while involving the rebels' National Transitional Council in its management, said a person familiar with the matter.

While rebels would be able to draw on the fund, it wasn't clear whether they could buy weapons with the money because of a U.N. arms embargo on Libya.

The North Atlantic Treaty Organization-led air campaign against Col. Gadhafi's forces has intensified in recent weeks, with allied jets attacking targets close to the Libyan leader. 

Track the latest events in Libya.

Track events day by day in the region.

Popular demonstrations in Tunisia toppled a president and spread to countries across the region. See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

NATO Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen, who will attend the Rome talks, said Wednesday he supported moves to finance the Libyan opposition. 

"I'm definitely in favor of taking all necessary measures to put the maximum pressure of the Gadhafi regime," he said. "I do believe it would be protecting civilians in Libya if Gadhafi was forced to step down. It would be helpful if the Libyan opposition were to be financed properly."

Mrs. Clinton and her counterparts are expected to hash out a governance structure for the potential fund Thursday, people familiar with the matter said. 

The rebel leadership, in a letter last month to U.S. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner, proposed the creation of such a trust fund that could be audited and co-managed by the rebels and foreign governments as a way to give rebels access to frozen Gadhafi assets. A U.S. Treasury spokeswoman declined to comment on the possible establishment of a trust fund.

The State Department, meanwhile, said Washington was making available an additional $6.5 million for emergency assistance to Libya by the International Organization for Migration, bringing U.S. emergency assistance to $53.5 million.

An IOM rescue vessel evacuated about 700 migrants, 50 wounded Libyans and 20 journalists from the rebel-held port of Misrata on Wednesday amid heavy shelling by Col. Gadhafi's forces, according to the Geneva-based group.

In March, the EU froze foreign assets owned by the Gadhafi family and the dictator's close lieutenants. 

The EU also froze stakes that Libya's central bank and its sovereign wealth fund, the Libyan Investment Authority, hold in large European companies, including a 7.6% stake in Italian lender UniCredit SpA. A spokeswoman for UniCredit declined to comment on the possible use of frozen assets to guarantee a fund.

Mahmoud Jibril, the rebels' de-facto foreign minister, is expected to be in Washington next week and meet with Treasury officials.

Mrs. Clinton was also due to meet separately in Rome this week with Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi. 

Italy, which has deep economic ties to Libya and counts on the country for about a quarter of its oil supply, is pushing the coalition to establish trade ties with opposition forces.

Rome's growing involvement in air campaign over Libya has sown tensions within Mr. Berlusconi's governing coalition. On Wednesday, the lower house of Parliament voted in favor of a motion calling on the government to establish a deadline for Italy's involvement in air strikes.

—Richard Boudreaux contributed to this article.

 Write to  Stacy Meichtry at stacy.meichtry@wsj.com and Jay Solomon at jay.solomon@wsj.com 