In 1932, Harlem was so firmly established as the world capitol of jazz and African-American culture in general that "black cinema" films like "Harlem Is Heaven" were playing on the nation's big screens. Jazz flourished and grew like it could have in no other time and place. "You might have had 15 great clubs on one block, all going at once," said the trombonist and bandleader Wycliffe Gordon. "Imagine going into a joint to check out Willie 'The Lion' Smith, and sitting next to you are Duke Ellington and James P. Johnson."

Harlem was ground zero for jazz from the time it spread beyond New Orleans, around WWI, to the height of the hard-bop era in the 1960s. During the early years, the music proved to be a potent force for breaking down the barriers of racism; ironically, though, the end of segregation also meant the end of Harlem as the unchallenged center of the music. With the great victories of the Civil Rights movement leading to more opportunities, many of the clubs and concert halls in Midtown and below began luring the best from Harlem. Since then, the neighborhood has hosted a thriving local scene, but it is no longer an international destination. 

"I can't believe how many people I meet around the world who tell me they've come to New York, but were warned away from coming uptown," said pianist Jason Moran, a longtime Harlem resident. 

Now Messrs. Moran and Gordon—another Harlem denizen—are aiming, in Mr. Gordon's words, to help "bring the music back home to Harlem" with headlining slots in the inaugural Harlem Jazz Shrines Festival, the most ambitious attempt to present jazz uptown in a long while. Beginning Monday, the weeklong series will feature 35 shows in eight different spaces, including the historic Alhambra Ballroom, the Lenox Lounge and, of course, the Apollo Theater. In addition to music (including performances by drummer T.S. Monk, pianist Geri Allen and the Harlem Renaissance Orchestra) there will be dancers, visual artists and lectures. 

Messrs. and Gordon have envisioned events that combine music and dance, and that address the past and future of Harlem in varying ways. The trombonist's Friday-night show at the Apollo, "Jazz a la Carte," will honor the venue's 75-year history. He will lead the Temple University Big Band plus vocalist Carla Cook, tap-dancer Savion Glover and an eight-member dance troupe. 

Mr. Gordon said he is especially excited to include comedian Robbie Todd, who will serve as emcee ("For years we've been talking about putting jazz and comedy on the same stage together," he said), and to address the future of jazz with three emerging stars: singer Nikki Yanofsky, saxophonist Grace Kelly and trombonist Corey Wilcox—all of whom are under 22. "When you hear them, it's quite evident that the life of this music is in good hands," he said.

Mr. Moran's Friday presentation, "Fats Waller Dance Party," is literally that: a party dedicated to the music of the famed Harlem pianist-singer-songwriter on the dance floor of Harlem Stage Gatehouse. However, he insisted, "This is not your grandmother's dance party. We're putting 'Ain't Misbehavin'' and 'Honeysuckle Rose' into afro-beat, house music, and techno-beat." 

To increase diversity, Mr. Moran will collaborate with singer and bassist Meshell Ndegeocello, who is often classified as an R&B artist but is more accurately described as uncategorizable. "She's very important to the equation," he said, "because she's a great bassist and she sings in a very low register, but mostly because she's got so much funk! We are thinking of these songs as vehicles, not as sculptures that exist in only one form."

For Mr. Moran, who famously reimagined the Harlem stride-piano legacy on his 2002 album "Modernistic," it's obvious that the territory above 110th Street is a thriving artistic community, judging by the dancers, painters, and poets who are his neighbors. But it should, he said, be obvious to everyone.

"This is why I still live uptown," he said. "I didn't want to move to Brooklyn because Brooklyn doesn't have a piano history like Harlem. I love being uptown. I love walking down Duke Ellington Boulevard. I love passing under the statue of Duke. I love being able to see Minton's and the Apollo, and that they are still there. I think we're beginning to see a shift of the music back to Harlem. But it's a long shift."