Gallery owner  David Zwirner has rallied artists like Francis Alÿs,  Marlene Dumas and Philip-Lorca diCorcia to contribute artwork to the Grace Church School's annual scholarship benefit auction.

Mr. Zwirner, 46 years old, of the eponymous Chelsea gallery that specializes in contemporary art, is also the parent of three children who have attended Grace Church School in Greenwich Village. He worked with artists he represents to contribute 23 pieces valued at about $220,000.

The auction, to be held the evening of March 10 at the school, includes items ranging from a private dinner for 35 people at TriBeCa's  Locanda Verde to a Botox session, and is expected to raise about $500,000 for financial aid scholarships. An estimated 30% of the night's proceeds will come through the sale of donated artwork.

Though Mr. Zwirner has donated to the auction in past years, this year is his biggest effort, working with gallerist Christopher D'Amelio, co-owner of D'Amelio Terras gallery, to put on a big show. "This is the last year where I am going to be and an active parent," says Mr. Zwirner, who has been involved with the school since 1999. "So, I realized I have to do it this year. It's much better to do it as an active parent than when you come back as [the parent of] an alumnus." 

This week Mr. Zwirner converted a gymnasium to a gallery, almost. "It doesn't look like my gallery, but I think we are doing the artwork justice and we've had a lot of excited parents and collectors in there," he says. 

Among the works expected to attract the heaviest bidding, is a drawing by Mr. Alÿs, who will have a major retrospective at the Museum of Modern Art that will open in May. The "Study for Gibraltar (Hercules)" has an estimated value of $35,000. "I was very excited to get this," says Mr. Zwirner. The widow of artist  Gordon Matta-Clark contributed a work that depicts the Twin Towers. It is valued at $6,000.

Artists were advised that there might be first-time art buyers at the auction and that children will be admiring the work, so much of it is accessible to all levels of art buyers. Artist  Stan Douglas created a work specifically for the auction—a photograph of an outstretched arm holding a cricket ball. "It's very powerful," says Mr. Zwirner. "It's play, it's sports, so a lot of people can relate to it." The photograph is valued at $20,000.

The participating artists were happy to help and no arms were twisted for donations. Says Mr. Zwirner: "In general, artists are extraordinarily generous."

 Write to  Melanie Grayce West at melanie.west@wsj.com 