 IFC Center  323 6th Ave., (212) 924-7771  Monday-March 18 

The Oscar shortlist. It's where the makers of independent documentaries want to be, in hopes of making it to the next level: An Academy Award nomination. Only five movies get picked from the pool of 15, and it's a fierce competition that has tightened as the form has exploded in recent years. 

Will something as slippery yet crowd-pleasing as Banksy's "Exit Through the Gift Shop," get a nod? Or will voters opt for the more traditional, vérité war reportage of "Restrepo," or the artistic portraiture of "Genius Within: The Inner Life of Glenn Gould." We'll know soon. Meanwhile, the ongoing Stranger Than Fiction series, which has been predictive of Oscar contenders in the past, launches its new season with a pair of shortlisted titles. Their directors will be in the house, so viewers can ask for themselves about the award-season heat.

Alex Gibney's "Client 9: The Rise and Fall of Eliot Spitzer" was one of last year's hot-button titles, catching extra attention thanks to the perhaps surprising involvement of the former New York governor, a crusading crime-buster who got busted himself following an unfortunate affinity for high-end call girls who referred to him by the numerical code name. Tuesday, it's "Enemies of the People," a festival favorite that follows investigative journalist (and co-director) Thet Sambath as he tracks down the Khmer Rouge kingpin who helped orchestrate the slaughter of millions, incuding Mr. Sambath's parents. Co-director Rob Lemkin will talk about his 10-year odyssey shooting the film, which remarkably puts Mr. Sambath face to face with Brother Number Two, Pol Pot's second-in-command.

The series continues with some notable revivals. Directors Albert Maysles and Muffie Myers pay a visit Jan. 19 for a screening of the immortal "Grey Gardens." And a Feb. 15 showing of "Fast, Cheap & Out of Control" will pay tribute to Karen Schmeer, director Errol Morris's favored film editor, who was killed a year ago when she was struck by a hit-and-run driver while crossing a Manhattan street. Other selections include Barbara Koppel's coal-miner classic "Harlan County U.S.A." and Don Argott's "Rock School' (which was reimagined as the Jack Black comedy "School of Rock").





 reRun Gastropub Theater  147 Front St., Brooklyn, (718) 766-9110  Friday-Jan. 13 

Winner of the best feature prize at the Atlanta Underground Film Festival, "Americatown" looks so low-budget you want to give it a quarter. But what director Kenneth Price lacks in means he makes up for with the manic comedic brainstorming of Superkiiids!—the improv duo of Jonathan Guggenheim and Cory Howard, a pair of 20-something wits schooled at the Upright Citizens Brigade. This mash-up of pop culture, tourist-shop Americana, and national mythology has the feel of an absurdist basement tape, or a children's TV show, as the comedians take a virtual road trip through a landscape of their own quirky imagining. Shown with "Lightning Salad Moving Picture," Mr. Price's 2008 debut.





 French Institute Alliance Francaise   55 E. 59th St., (646) 388-6677  Tuesday-Jan. 25 

It may seem funny that this salute to Lino Ventura is called 'Monsieur Gangster,' since the actor was born in Parma, Italy. Of course, it's perfectly right: Ventura (1919-87) became a tough-guy avatar in the 1950s and '60s after French filmmaker Jacques Becker cast the former prize fighter and wrestler in "Touchez pas au grisbi." He had that hard-boiled mug; the prominent nose, asymmetrical enough to recall a few good punches; a strong brow he could cock like a pistol; sealed lips whose downward turn telegraphed intentions that might send bystanders ducking for cover. The French Institute leads off 2011 with a six-film salute to Ventura, reprising vintage French noirs and caper flicks. This week's selection is Louis Malle's 1959 debut "Elevator to the Gallows," with Ventura as an inspector unraveling Jeanne Moreau's scheme to kill her husband (to a sublime Miles Davis score), and Jean-Pierre Melville's World War II classic, "Army of Shadows."





 Tribeca Cinemas  54 Varick St., (212) 941-2001  Tuesday 

Kicking off its second year of free biweekly screenings, the Korean Cultural Service welcomes director Kim Tae-Kyun to Korean Movie Night to field post-show questions about his 2010 film "A Barefoot Dream." South Korea's entry into competition for an Academy Award, the film is an inspirational sports drama based on a true story. A washed-up former soccer champion redeems himself in an unlikely spot: amid the violent unrest of a war-torn East Timor, where he begins coaching a ragtag team of impoverished kids. Astonishingly, they get a crack at the International Youth Soccer Championship in Japan. And the kids in the movie are the actual kids from the soccer team. Mr. Kim has a knack for kinetic narratives featuring young performers. His previous "Volcano" was a high-school martial-arts spectacle set to the stoner rap of Snoop Dogg and Method Man.





 Anthology Film Archives  32 Second Ave., (212) 505-5181  Friday–Jan. 18 

Nobody but nobody does a post-screening Q&A like Abel Ferrara. As fans of films like "Ms. 45" and "Bad Lieutenant" could well expect, the Bronx native likes to mix it up, make a little trouble. Mr. Ferrara will do just that Friday as a much-deserved series assembles a body of recent work that has been overlooked. There are two features ("Mary" and "Go-Go Tales") and three documentaries, including "Napoli, Napoli, Napoli," which explores the lives of former drug addicts imprisoned in a female penitentiary in Naples. Best is the amazing "Mulberry St.," a shot-from-the-hip portrait of Mr. Ferrara and his Italian-American buddies, drinking, eating and talking during the 2008 Feast of San Gennaro. Little Italy lives. Although you'd never expect a film so obviously made up on the spot to be so abundant in charisma, it belongs in the pantheon of great movies about New York City.