 U.S. Representative Gabrielle Giffords, an Arizona Democrat, was in critical condition Sunday after she and 17 others were shot in Tucson in a shooting spree that left six dead, but doctors were encouraged by her response to treatment. 

 The euro zone's debt crisis is entering a new phase as Portugal struggles to persuade investors to buy its bonds and other European governments step up pressure on the country to seek an international bailout. Portugal hopes to raise new funds in a bond auction on Wednesday, despite a market sell-off in recent days that pushed the interest yield on Portuguese 10-year bonds above 7%, the highest level since the euro's creation. 

 ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet used his first major address of the new year to appeal to governments to "turn the page" from a crisis-marred 2010 and redouble their efforts to rein in budgets and apply harsh penalties to deficit rule-breakers.  

 New economic data for the euro zone showed growth was slightly weaker than had been previously estimated in the third quarter of last year and unemployment remains at its highest rate for more than 12 years.  

Lower-than-expected data for retail sales, industrial output and the trade surplus in Germany—which has driven the currency area's recovery from recession—also disappointed economists, although most are confident the country's economy will power ahead this year. 

 The U.K.'s financial sector cut more jobs in the last three months of 2010 than at any time in the past 17 years, a survey showed Monday, putting into question the government's hopes that the economic recovery will stay on track despite its austerity plans. 

 U.K. Prime Minister David Cameron said the government needs a broad settlement with banks over pay and lending, but in comments likely to irritate his junior coalition Liberal Democrats partners he said bankers are an "easy scapegoat" for the economic crisis. He said he wants successful U.K. banks and that the government needs a broad "settlement" with the banks, including promises to reduce bonus payments this year. 

The U.K. raised the security threat level for the country's transport hubs to "severe" from "substantial," according to a person familiar with the matter, the latest reflection of mounting concern over a possible terrorist attack in Europe. The Department for Transport notified the aviation industry about the decision shortly after it was made, the person said. 

 The U.K.'s Financial Services Authority may ask the government for the power to block hostile takeovers in the banking sector to prevent aggressive acquisitions from disrupting financial stability, FSA Chairman Adair Turner said.  

 The Swiss government plans to hold a roundtable talk with key representatives of Switzerland's banking, machinery and tourism industry Friday to discuss the strength of the Swiss franc, which is hurting the economy. 

German authorities blocked sales from thousands of farms that received shipments of livestock feed believed to have been contaminated with high levels of cancer-causing dioxins, renewing concerns about the European Union's food safety system. More than 4,700 farms were ordered to halt sales of meat and eggs, according to the Agriculture Ministry, while officials test whether their products are safe for consumers. 

Spain's leading broadcaster says it will no longer show bullfighting in order to protect children from viewing violence. State network RTVE lists its new ban on transmitting bullfighting programs under a chapter called "Violence with animals" in its latest stylebook, and says it "will not broadcast bullfighting."

 Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan ordered a monument to friendship between Turkey and Armenia torn down, signaling the depth of a freeze in efforts to improve relations between the two neighbors. Erdogan described the monument as "a freak," speaking in the city of Kars in Eastern Turkey.  

 The Justice Department obtained a court-issued subpoena ordering Twitter to turn over information related to accounts related to WikiLeaks, the latest twist in a broad investigation of the controversial document-leaking website.  

Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke ruled out a central bank bailout of state and local governments strapped with big municipal debt burdens, saying the Fed had limited legal authority to help and little will to use that authority. 

Former Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan said the U.S. could face a bond-market crisis if politicians don't act soon to start cutting the nation's debt. He said in an interview that eventually Congress would pass a budget that includes many proposals by a White House debt-reduction panel.

A fight at a Baltimore nightclub spilled onto the street early Sunday and led to an eruption of gunfire that killed a police officer and another man and left four people hurt, police said. One of those wounded also was a police officer, who was shot in the leg, said a police spokesman. Investigators were trying to determine if officers may have fired on a fellow officer whose badge and other identifying markings came off his uniform during the scuffle.

 Chinese Vice Premier Li Keqiang arrived in Edinburgh on Sunday, kicking off a four-day visit to the U.K. aimed at strengthening the two nations' political and commercial ties.  

 U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates arrived in Beijing on Sunday for three days of talks aimed at smoothing out the turbulent relationship between the U.S. and China. His message will not simply be one of better cooperation, as he also clearly signaled that the U.S. will match or exceed Beijing's military modernization programs.  

 In Pakistan, tens of thousands of Islamists rallied in the southern city of Karachi in support of the nation's controversial blasphemy laws, and clerics threatened to kill anyone who challenged them.  

An IranAir passenger jet crashed as it was making an emergency landing in the country's northwest and broke into several pieces. About 100 people were on board and half of them survived with light injuries, but heavy snow hampered rescue efforts, Iranian media reported. It was not clear what caused the Boeing 727, operated by Iran's national airline, to attempt an emergency landing in the city of Orumiyeh, 460 miles (700 kilometers) northwest of the capital, Tehran. 

 In Iraq, anti-American Shiite cleric Moqtada al-Sadr backed the new Iraqi government that he recently joined and suggested he won't violently resist American forces if they withdraw as planned by year-end, though he couched his comments in a homecoming speech in Najaf in his hallmark, anti-American rhetoric.  

 U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton will press key Arab states this week to further open up their political systems, according to U.S. officials, amid what analysts say are growing signs that democratic reforms in parts of the strategic Middle East have stagnated.  

 Construction began Sunday on the first new Jewish housing project in the predominantly Palestinian East Jerusalem neighborhood of Sheikh Jarrah since the land was conquered in 1967, despite longstanding objections from Washington. 

 The Algerian government said it would reduce tax and import duties on some staples in a bid to end days of deadly clashes between police and rioters protesting food prices in the North African country. Officials held an emergency meeting after several days of widespread violence, triggered in part by a sharp rise in the price of cooking oil and sugar. 

 Euphoric southern Sudanese formed long lines to cast ballots in a weeklong independence vote, a dramatic step toward the expected splitting of Africa's largest country. 

 Two French hostages kidnapped in Niger's capital of Niamey were killed by their captors despite a rescue attempt by French forces, France's President Nicolas Sarkozy said in a statement. The hostages were found dead at the Niger-Mali border after French troops there clashed with the kidnappers, killing several of them, a statement from Defense Minister Alain Juppe said. 