MOSCOW—Russia cast full blame on the Poles for the crash that killed their president and 95 others last year, saying the country's air force commander entered the cockpit of the Polish plane under the influence of alcohol and pressured the crew to land in heavy fog. 

Polish officials objected to what they called one-sided conclusions Wednesday by Russian investigators. Responding to an earlier draft of the report, the Polish government said last month there was no evidence in the flight recordings that officials aboard the plane ordered the crew to land. It further said the Russians hadn't provided evidence of alcohol in the air force chief's blood.

Russian officials said the crew feared President Lech Kaczynski's reaction if they failed to land in Russia in time for a historic ceremony. "He'll get mad," a crew member said on a cockpit recording played by Russian investigators Wednesday in Moscow. 

The probe's disputed conclusion puts a strain on ties between the two countries, which had appeared to improve with the outpouring of public and official sympathy in Russia following the April 10 crash near the airport in Smolensk, in western Russia. All aboard the Tu-154 plane died, including the president's wife and dozens of Polish dignitaries.

Officials of both countries had accepted months ago that a decision to land in bad weather at an airport with only basic navigation equipment led to the disaster. 

But there was an expectation in Poland, a country that chafed under Moscow's domination during Soviet times, that Russia would acknowledge some degree of shared responsibility for that decision. 

Instead, the Moscow-based Interstate Aviation Committee's 200-page report found no fault with air-traffic controllers and airport officials at Smolensk. Tatyana Anodina, head of the panel, emphasized that the four-member Polish crew had minimal emergency training, ignored repeated advice from the controllers to land elsewhere and yielded to pressure from Polish leaders.

Poland's air force commander, Gen. Andrzej Blasik, had a blood-alcohol level of 0.06%, enough to impair reasoning, the panel said. It released audio evidence that the general and Poland's protocol chief, Mariusz Kazana, were in the cockpit as the crew approached Smolensk, where the Polish delegation was to commemorate a massacre of Polish prisoners ordered by Soviet ruler Josef Stalin during World War II.

The two officials' presence in the cockpit "had a psychological influence on the pilot's decision to take an unjustified risk by continuing the descent with the overwhelming goal of landing by all means necessary," Ms. Anodina said at a news conference. 

The Russian report concludes that even at the instant the crew initially realized the situation was dire and decided to climb away from the field, the pull on the control column wasn't strong enough to immediately disconnect the autopilot. The report indicates that a more aggressive climb command could have allowed the plane to safely pull up. But the plane continued on its steep descent, with both the autopilot and automated throttle controls engaged, until striking some treetops.

During the final phase of the descent, while the plane lost more than 700 feet of altitude and the crew failed to catch a glimpse of the runway, the report notes that the Polish pilots disregarded three separate automated-voice warnings to pull up. Investigators said flight-data recorders "did not record any crew actions to terminate the descent." 

When the co-pilot finally yanked strongly back on the control column and pushed the throttles to full takeoff power, according to the report, that emergency maneuver was too violent. Even if one of the plane's wings hadn't smashed into a tall tree, the maneuver raised the nose to such a sharp angle and the "avoidance (maneuver) was so abrupt" that the jet most likely would have lost lift and stalled anyway, and then crashed to the ground. 

In Warsaw, Interior Minister Jerzy Miller said Poland didn't dispute its responsibility but added that investigators overlooked Russia's role in the crash. Mr. Miller, who is heading a separate Polish investigation, said both Polish and Russian aviation officials were "unprepared" to ensure a safe landing for the president's plane.

Polish Prime Minister Donald Tusk cut short a ski vacation to oversee a more detailed government response. A lawyer for some of the crash victims called for an international investigation.

Jaroslaw Kaczynski, the late president's twin brother and head of the opposition Law and Justice Party, called the Russian report "a mockery of Poland" and said he would ask parliament to dismiss it. "This is the result of leaving the investigation in the hands of the Russians," he said.

He questioned whether the president had pressured the crew. "My brother did not show suicidal tendencies," he said.

The Polish rebuttal on Dec. 19 said Russian controllers should have closed Smolensk and diverted the plane to a different airport. It said the airport commander was ultimately responsible for letting the plane's crew attempt a landing, even after it had shunned advice to the contrary.

Polish officials asked for a video recording from the control room to learn about deliberations among the Russian controllers. The Russians didn't provide one, but attached Poland's observations to their final report.

Alexei Morozov, head of the probe's technical commission, said Wednesday that Russian norms, which are in line with global air-traffic control standards, give pilots of international flights sole responsibility for deciding whether to land at a Russian airport. 

He said controllers at Smolensk gave the Polish crew permission to descend to 100 meters as the plane approached the airport but no permission to land, as fog had cut visibility to about 60 meters.

"The crew should have started a second [landing] attempt, but instead continued their unauthorized descent," he said, adding that a glitch in one of the plane's gauges led the crew to think the plane was more than 100 meters off the ground.

At its news conference, the panel played a harrowing excerpt from the flight recording as the pilots deliberated whether they could land. Seconds before the crash, an alarm sounded, and an automated voice warned the pilots in English, "Terrain ahead! Pull up! Pull up!"

For unknown reasons, the pilots didn't respond. 

—Andy Pasztor contributed to this article.

 Write to  Richard Boudreaux at richard.boudreaux@wsj.com 