It's a tough time of year to be a parent of a 4-year-old.

City public schools have begun sending out kindergarten acceptance letters, kicking off what for some parents can be agonizing months of negotiating wait lists and plotting strategies that would dazzle a chess master. 

The Department of Education is expected to announce the sizes of individual schools' kindergarten lists next week. A spokesman declined to say whether this year's lists will be longer than last year. 

But in some neighborhoods, parents are already discovering they don't have a guaranteed spot for their kindergarteners, even in their local zoned school.

"I guess I was very shocked, surprised," said  Nancy Lin, who found out her daughter is No. 37 on a wait list of 47 names at P.S. 107 in Park Slope, Brooklyn. "Everybody had expected to get into their zoned school, especially if you moved into that zone for the schools," Ms. Lin said. 

Among schools with the biggest wait lists last year, the problem appears to persist. 

At P.S. 169 in Sunset Park, Brooklyn, 95 prospective kindergartners are on the wait list for the school, which expects to have 191 kindergarten seats. In Corona, Queens, 72 students are on the list for P.S. 143, and 79 are on the list for P.S. 307. 

A DOE spokesman said the initial lists are likely to shrink in coming months. Some families who have a public school spot will learn over the next three months if they've been accepted at private or charter schools or into gifted and talented programs. Others move away. 

Over coming weeks, some schools also may open more kindergarten classes, as well as increase class sizes. The teachers' contract limits the number of kindergartners in a class to 25; the citywide average is 22.3. 

"This is something I'm really worried about," said  Michael Mulgrew, the president of the United Federation of Teachers. The UFT predicts a loss of about 3,000 teacher jobs through attrition this year, causing the average size of classes in kindergarten through third grade to go up 11%. The DOE predicts a loss of 1,500 teachers through attrition. 

The DOE's latest capital plan cuts by a third the number of new seats it plans to build over the next few years, potentially creating even bigger problems for future kindergartners. 

"There was a 46% increase in births between 2005 and 2009" in lower Manhattan, said  Eric Greenleaf, a marketing professor at the business school of New York University and father of two children at P.S. 234 in Tribeca. That school has 37 kindergartners on its wait list.

On the Upper East Side,  Susan Thomsen wasn't happy to learn that her son Preston is on the wait list for P.S. 158, even though she has another child in the school, which should have boosted his chances of getting in. "It's discouraging," she said. 

A spokesman said the waiting list is so small at P.S. 158 that Ms. Thomsen's son's chances are very good.

Kathleen O'Brien is still waiting to hear if her daughter Margo got into P.S. 158. "It's a nail-biter," she said.

—Alison Fox and  Amber Benham  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Barbara Martinez at Barbara.Martinez@wsj.com 