KENNEDY SPACE CENTER, Fla.—NASA postponed the scheduled launch of the space shuttle Endeavour on Friday for at least three days because of a mechanical problem, scuttling plans by President Barack Obama and Rep. Gabrielle Giffords to attend the liftoff. 

A heater for one of the fuel lines failed, launch director Mike Leinbach said at a briefing. The earliest the launch can now take place is Monday, he said. The six-man crew of the Endeavour mission—the next-to-last voyage of the shuttle program—was on its way to the launch pad when the announcement was made.

Friday's scheduled launch had drawn heightened interest because of the planned attendance of the Obama family and Ms. Giffords, the Arizona congresswoman recovering from an assassination attempt, whose husband, Mark Kelly, is commanding Endeavour.

Mr. Obama carried through with his visit, joined by his wife, their two daughters and his mother-in-law. After NASA, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, scrubbed the launch, he and his family got a tour of part of the agency's sprawling Florida launch complex. He met with the Endeavour crew, and told them that in shaping NASA's budget, he wanted to put "a lot more research and energy" into biomedical science to prepare for long missions to destinations like Mars.

Minutes after the first family landed at nearby Cape Canaveral, a helicopter whisked them to the space center's Orbital Processing Facility, where the shuttles are prepared for flight. Terry White, a tile technician on the shuttle Atlantis, being prepared for a June mission, gave the president and his family an informal tutorial. Standing under the wings of Atlantis, he showed how the tiles were attached and made durable under the shuttle's wings.

The president joked that he liked Mr. White's prominent moustache. Mr. White, who works for United Launch Alliance, a joint venture between Boeing Co. and Lockheed Martin Corp. and one of NASA's main contractors, is slated to be laid off and take retirement, according to a NASA spokeswoman.

After the brief discussion, Mr. Obama said to Mr. White: "Thanks for keeping our astronauts safe."

The first family also got to stand under the nose gear of Atlantis, accompanied by Mr. White and astronaut Janet Kavandi. They discussed the speed of the shuttle. Mr. Obama turned to his daughters and said, "Think about that, eight minutes and you're up in space." As space center employees lined the hallways and Secret Service agents mingled among them, the press was taken to the launch control center.

In the lobby, caterers had laid out plates for a buffet of beans and cornbread, the traditional after-launch meal for NASA employees. The empty tables reflected the mood of the employees after the scrub.

The president and Mrs. Obama spent about 20 minutes chatting with the Endeavour crew, all dressed in NASA's bright blue flight overalls. "We couldn't be more excited about what you guys are doing," Mr. Obama said. Cmdr. Kelly said little, letting his crew carry on the conversation. Told that after the two-week Endeavour mission astronaut Michael Fincke would have the U.S. record for the most time spent in space, Mr Obama cracked, "He still has his hair."

The president doesn't plan to return for the rescheduled launch of Endeavour and didn't commit to coming for the June launch of Atlantis, the fleet's last mission. "There is going to be one more chance, and we may come back," he told the astronauts.

During his visit, Mr. Obama also met with Ms. Giffords, according to a White House official. The private meeting lasted about 10 minutes, a person familiar with the details said. Beforehand, Mr. Kelly gave the president an update on Ms. Giffords's condition. 

"I bet you were hoping to see a rocket launch today," Mr. Kelly told the president in a corridor, according to the person. 

"We were hoping to see you," Mr. Obama replied.

Officials at Houston's TIRR Memorial Hermann Hospital, where Ms. Giffords is undergoing treatment, said she would be returning to the facility for rehabilitation. The hospital declined to give specifics and referred questions to her staff. A spokesman for Ms. Giffords didn't return an email seeking comment. A posting on Ms. Giffords's Facebook page read, "So bummed about the scrub! But, it's important to make sure everything on shuttle is working properly." 

The launch was postponed, about two hours before the scheduled liftoff, because of problems with a fuel-heating device for one of the shuttle's auxiliary power units, but NASA officials said gusty winds also could have ended up postponing the launch. Launch delays for the aging shuttle fleet have occurred on roughly half of the program's 133 missions, according to NASA spokesman Allard Beutel. Agency officials had said they wouldn't change safety procedures for the president's visit. 

Officials of NASA had earlier grappled with other issues. Low clouds and strong winds threatened to delay the launch, as did a problem with fuel-tank pressure in one of the rocket engines.

The delay dispirited the throngs of spectators who had descended on the Cape Canaveral area in recent days, cramming into any available strip of coastline to angle for a view of the blastoff. Tourism officials had expected as many as 700,000 people for the launch.

Among them were Doug and Christine Lane and their three children, who camped out on a causeway connecting Cape Canaveral and Merritt Island. Driving overnight from Haines City, Fla., they arrived at 3 a.m. on Friday, intent on witnessing a historic moment. 

"We wanted our kids to be able to look back one day and say they were here," said Mr. Lane.

Once they embark on their two-week mission, Endeavour's crew members are slated to perform numerous duties. They will deliver a sophisticated particle detector to the International Space Station, perform maintenance on the station and make four spacewalks. 

When the orbiter returns from space, it will be retired and eventually transported to its final resting place at the California Science Center in Los Angeles. 

—Daniel Gilbert contributed to this article.

 Write to  Arian Campo-Flores at arian.campo-flores@wsj.com and Andy Pasztor at andy.pasztor@wsj.com 