BIRMINGHAM, Ala.—Tiffany Rutledge survived the tornado that tore up her neighborhood last week by sitting in her grandmother's Jacuzzi with a pillow over her head. When the 190-mph winds died down and she looked up, there were no walls around her and no ceiling above.

"We lost everything," she said on Monday, as she waited in line to pick up donated food, clothes and shoes at an emergency assistance shelter. 

As many as 1,000 homes, churches and shops here were damaged or destroyed by the twisters, according to estimates. Thousands of other homes and buildings were hit elsewhere in Alabama, where 230 people were killed and state officials say total damages could exceed $2 billion.

Now Birmingham faces its greatest challenge in decades: how to rebuild some of the city's most troubled neighborhoods.

Much of the devastation here centers on Pratt City, a struggling, mostly African-American enclave on the western edge of the city that in some areas was reduced to little more than rubble. The tornado that struck Ms. Rutledge's house was 1.5 miles wide and left a trail of destruction more than 80 miles long. Reconstruction will be a huge task, costing many millions of dollars to restore areas that in some cases were dismal, partly abandoned and deeply troubled long before the storm hit. 

City leaders have promised to turn the wreckage into an opportunity to resurrect areas like Pratt City as healthier and more prosperous communities. William Bell, Birmingham's soft-spoken, 62-year-old mayor, and officials of the Federal Emergency Management Agency promised this week that the displaced residents wouldn't be shipped far from Birmingham, as happened to thousands of New Orleans residents after Hurricane Katrina struck in 2005. Many of them never returned. 

"This will give us an opportunity to restructure this entire area and make it a magnet for growth," the mayor said in an interview earlier this week. "I see this as an opportunity to expand."

It won't be easy. Built on steelmaking and coal mining, Birmingham has struggled for decades as its historic economic base disintegrated and the local population plunged to about 212,000 residents in the 2010 census, almost a third fewer than in the 1960s. 

Birmingham's quandary is similar in many ways to the challenges other big cities have faced after recent disasters. Aspirations for massive renewal swept through New Orleans after Katrina, as local officials and cutting-edge urban planners tried to devise ways to revive the city without the poverty and crime that had long afflicted areas far removed from its famous tourist attractions. Tens of thousands of Americans, drawn by its subtropical glamour, flocked there to help rebuild. Even with that outpouring of aid, New Orleans lost more than 140,000 residents, and its recovery is only now gaining real momentum, according to many people there.

But Birmingham lacks the mythic appeal that might motivate greater national interest in its rehabilitation, the way that jazz and the French Quarter did for New Orleans and Motown does for Detroit. Instead, it is still associated outside the region mostly with the civil rights turmoil of two generations ago. More recently, a federal investigation into the financing of $3.2 billion in sewer construction and repair projects led to the conviction on corruption charges of Birmingham's former mayor in 2009. 

Mayor Bell took office last year with strong backing from many business leaders for plans to revitalize the central city. He says Birmingham should be remembered not for racial strife but as a civil rights shrine. 

"I can't speak on whether or not the nation cares about the birthplace of the civil rights movement," Mr. Bell said. "I can't speak on whether or not the nation cares that Birmingham became an international symbol of human rights. I can't determine what other regions feel. But I know the history of this community, and I know my mission is clear—to rebuild the spirit and not to oversee the dismantling of this community."

The mayor has been pushing for Birmingham's first comprehensive citywide development plan since the 1960s and has embraced a proposal to revitalize downtown, where there was little tornado damage. He says that since the storms, he has directed city officials to begin drawing up plans for the reconstruction and improvement of Pratt City, which sits several miles from downtown. 

The post-tornado effort is likely to face some of the same complications that confounded the early work to remake New Orleans.

"On the one hand, someone wants to do a grand planning process where there's a new build-out for the city," said Michael Howell-Moroney, a specialist in urban planning at the University of Alabama-Birmingham. "And on the other hand, you have individual citizens saying, 'Hey, I want to rebuild my house.' " 

Many big cities in recent years have sought to use their powers over zoning, building-code enforcement and long-term urban planning to leverage disasters into opportunities for the fundamental redefinition of neighborhoods. Besides New Orleans, examples include the reconstruction of South Central Los Angeles after the Rodney King riots, rebuilding at the World Trade Center site in downtown New York and the mayor of Detroit's recent suggestion that the city essentially abandon some decrepit sections with few residents. Conflicts with property owners and other individual interests are inevitable. 

Lynes "Poco" Sloss, a New Orleans businessman who sits on that city's planning commission, says that while such tensions obstructed rebuilding in New Orleans for years, it also ultimately helped bring greater energy and unity to the city.

"Out of all the horrible things that happened, I think we found less racial division than there was before," Mr. Sloss said. "People sort of got off their butts and said, 'Hey, I have something to say about saving my neighborhood.' "

Pratt City is ribbed with curving, tree-lined streets that wind over low hills. Before the tornado, the area was dotted with modest, single-family one- and two-story homes and the occasional small brick apartment building. The Rutledge home was a beige, four-bedroom, two-bathroom, single-story house with burgundy shutters. It was built in 1963 and stood at the bottom of a hill across from Bethel Baptist Church, which was the biggest in Pratt City. Now it is a skeleton. 

The neighborhood began as a coal-mining boomtown at the turn of the 19th century, built around a massive complex of mine shafts ultimately acquired by U.S. Steel Corp., which over the next century was the dominant economic engine of Birmingham. For decades, the area was a vibrant business center with shops, restaurants and entertainment. 

As the mines were depleted, operations shut down, and thousands of workers departed. By the 1980s, much of Pratt City had lapsed into empty houses and boarded-up storefronts. Nearby are the overgrown, derelict remains of long-abandoned iron furnaces and coal-processing equipment.

Crime followed. Local officials estimate that in the poorest parts of the neighborhood, as many as 50% of the homes were abandoned before the tornado struck. Currently, about 85% of the children at the elementary school qualify for a free lunch, said Roderick Royal, the city council president who also represents the area. 

"That whole cycle of urban hopelessness is locked in," said Mr. Royal, who is also committed to fully rebuilding the area.

Some residents of Pratt City say there is no reason to expect improvement. City services in Pratt have always been worse than in the wealthier parts of town, said Willie Jackson, 53, who grew up in the neighborhood. He ticked off a list of things the city has failed to provide residents: an underpass so trains don't back traffic up during rush hour, better roads and bus routes so elderly residents can get to the drugstore.

"This has always been a place nobody really cares about except for the people who live here," Mr. Jackson said.

The Rutledge family has made its home in Pratt City for three generations. Tiffany and other family members now staying with relatives say they plan to use insurance proceeds and any government money available to them to rebuild and return as soon as possible to the house her grandfather, a former coal miner, built in 1963. 

"It's where we're from," Ms. Rutledge said. "Our church is across the street, our family is there. Of course we're going to stay." 

 Write to  Douglas Belkin at doug.belkin@wsj.com and Douglas A. Blackmon at douglas.blackmon@wsj.com 