

RAMALLAH, West Bank—Thousands of youthful protesters took to the streets in the West Bank and Gaza Strip on Tuesday to urge a bitterly divided Palestinian leadership to unify the campaign against Israeli occupation.

The number of demonstrators in several cities was the largest in the Palestinian territories during a two-month-old wave of grassroots protests across the Arab world. But it was unclear whether movement, led by independent activists and organized on Facebook, is strong enough to achieve its goal.

Chanting "Our unity is the unity of youth" and "No to factions," the protesters called for reconciliation between Hamas, the militant Islamic group that controls Gaza, and Fatah, the mainstream party that dominates the Palestinian Authority government in the West Bank.

Both factions allowed the protesters to gather for daytime rallies and have their say. But Hamas security forces used clubs to disperse about 2,000 activists who lingered after dark in Gaza City. Hamas officials ordered them to go home and leave it to politicians to discuss the terms of unity.

In both territories, the protesters focused on internal politics rather than grievances against Israel, a mirror of the protests elsewhere in the Arab world. 

``Ending the divide is step number one to ending the occupation,'' said Hamad Nader, a 20-year old university student at Ramallah's Manara Square. ``We will stay here until they end the state of divide.''

Organizers kept politicians at a distance and banned the display of party symbols. Both Fatah and Hamas, however, sought to establish a presence at the demonstrations. 

In Gaza City's Square of the Unknown Soldier, a few thousand Hamas activists unfurled flags and used their own public address system, prompting about 8,000 independent demonstrators to move elsewhere. Rock throwing broke out between the sides. 

A modest turnout of about 4,000 in Ramallah, the West Bank's administrative capital, highlighted uncertainty over the movement's strength.

The leadership rift dates to 2007, a year after Hamas won parliamentary elections, when a power-sharing agreement broke down. Hamas forces expelled Fatah from Gaza after several days of bloody factional fighting. Negotiations mediated by Arab neighbors have failed to produce a compromise, delaying new elections for a Palestinian president and parliament.

In a televised speech Tuesday, Hamas Prime Minister Ismail Haniyeh embraced the goal of the demonstrators and called on Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas to meet him.

At the Ramallah demonstration, Nabil Shaath, a senior member of the Fatah-led Palestine Liberation Organization, said Hamas' past reluctance to accept third-party compromise made the Islamist group the obstacle preventing reconciliation.

Munib al-Masri, a Palestinian businessman who joined the Ramallah demonstration, expressed optimism about the potency of youth movement but noted that both Hamas and Fatah are reluctant to compromise. 

``It's greed for power,'' said Mr. al-Masri, who said he is trying to mediate the conflict. "If they don't listen they risk being swept away.'' 

