NEW DELHI – Indian investigators probing irregularities in a 2008 sale of mobile telecommunication licenses and airwaves Thursday questioned the chief executive of the steel-to-shipping Essar group for a second time, as they stepped up investigations into one of the country's biggest corruption cases. 

The Central Bureau of Investigation has so far arrested 11 people, including former Telecommunications Minister Andimuthu Raja, and questioned top industrialists such as Essar's  Prashant Ruia, Anil Ambani of Reliance Group and Tata group's R.K. Krishnakumar. The case also created a political storm as opposition parties stopped parliament proceedings for weeks, forcing Prime Minister Manmohan Singh to accept demands for a separate probe by law makers. 

The CBI says the sale favored some companies by violating rules and was at below market price, causing a potential revenue loss of 300 billion rupees ($6.73 billion). A government auditor had earlier estimated the loss at as much as $40 billion. 

The agency has already filed two sets of charges including those of giving and accepting bribes in the case and will be filing a third set in June. All named in the case have denied any wrong doing. 

CBI spokeswoman  Dharini Mishra said Mr. Ruia was questioned Thursday in connection with violation of a rule that bars one entity to hold a more than 10% stake in two or more mobile operators in a service area. 

She said Mr. Ruia was asked about the conglomerate's ownership in Loop TelecomPvt. Ltd. when it applied for and got licenses and spectrum in 2008. The Essar group, at that point, had a 33% stake in Vodafone Group PLC's Indian mobile telecom unit, Vodafone-Essar Ltd. 

The CBI is likely to charge Loop for violating cross-holding rules while applying for the license, Ms. Mishra said. 

Mr. Ruia was previously questioned in February. 

"We continue to cooperate with the investigation as we have done in the past," the Essar group said in a statement. "Essar has always been in compliance with all the regulations." 

The Essar group and Loop Telecom have earlier said the Ruia family, which controls the Essar group, owned less than 10% of Loop, as permitted under licensing regulations. 

Loop Telecom, whose CEO  Sandip Basu has also been questioned by the agency, declined to comment. Mr. Basu had earlier denied any wrong doing. 

According to the petitioner in the case, advocate  Prashant Bhushan, the Ruias owned Shipping Stop Dot Com India Pvt. Ltd., which was renamed Loop Telecom after it received licenses to offer services in 21 of India's 22 telecom service areas in 2008. 

The Comptroller and Auditor general of India, the federal audit body, had said the company was ineligible for licenses as it neither had telecom services as part of its incorporation nor the required paid-up capital to apply for the licenses. 

Loop had also suppressed other facts such as its shareholding structure to get the license, the audit body had said. 

Ms. Mishra of the CBI said Prashant Ruia could be called again for questioning after a team of the Enforcement Directorate, which probes violations of foreign exchange laws and money laundering, comes back from Mauritius where it has gone to investigate a money trail related to the telecom case. 

"Another ED team will be going to Mauritius to investigate money laundering basically related to Loop," Ms. Mishra said. 

The CBI had on Tuesday questioned  Vikash Saraf, director of strategy and planning at the Essar group. Mr. Saraf couldn't be reached for comment. 

The agency has also called members of Khaitan Group to enquire about their alleged ownership in Loop Telecom, Ms. Mishra said. 

The CBI, in an earlier submission to the Supreme Court of India, had said  Kiran Khaitan--sister of billionaire brothers Shashi and  Ravi Ruia--has a holding in Loop Telecom. Shashi and Ravi Ruia are the chairman and vice chairman of the Essar group, respectively. 

Kiran Khaitan couldn't be immediately reached for comment. 

 Write to  R. Jai Krishna at krishna.jai@dowjones.com and Romit Guha at romit.guha@dowjones.com 