The top editor of the New York Times's news pages is complaining about Fox News Channel again. At a New York Press Club question-and-answer session last week, Yahoo! News reports, Bill Keller "snarled" that "I think if you're a regular viewer of Fox News, you're among the most cynical people on planet Earth," and that "I cannot think of a more cynical slogan than 'Fair and Balanced.' "

When you run a newspaper whose slogan is "All the News That's Fit to Print," you open yourself up to ridicule by making fun of other news organizations' slogans. Remember in 2009, when the Times was embarrassed by its torpid response to stories that embarrassed the Obama administration--the scandals involving Acorn and the National Endowment for the Arts, as well as the extreme views of Obama aide Van Jones? 

As we noted at the time, the paper did eventually get around to these stories, but in each case it was many days behind Fox. "What Paul Masson himself said nearly a century ago is still true today: We will sell no wine before its time," Orson Welles once observed. That principle does not apply in the news business.

 Clark Hoyt, then the Times's "public editor," reported that Keller and managing editor Jill Abramson had said "that they would now assign an editor to monitor opinion media and brief them frequently on bubbling controversies." The man on the bubble beat was to work in secret: "Keller declined to identify the editor, saying he wanted to spare that person "a bombardment of e-mails and excoriation in the blogosphere." As far as we know, that's the last that was ever heard of this idea.

 James Taranto on Keller and Fox. 

Our colleagues at Fox News seem to have gotten under Keller's skin recently for some reason. As we noted last month, at a National Press Club appearance in Washington Keller responded to a question about The Wall Street Journal by changing the subject to Fox, which he blamed for ruining "the national discourse."

But last week's comment added something new. Keller framed it as an attack not just on Fox but on its viewers: "If you're a regular viewer of Fox News, you're among the most cynical people on planet Earth." That is not even comprehensible. If you think that "Fair and Balanced" is a deceptive slogan, it would follow that Fox's regular viewers are deceived by it--that they're gullible, not cynical.

By putting down Fox viewers, he would appear to be engaging in an awfully odd marketing strategy. It's normal to try to persuade consumers that a competitor's product is inferior. Insulting the competitor's customers, by contrast, seems an excellent way of ensuring that they stay away from your product.

Keller's comment makes sense, though, if you assume that its purpose is not to win over new customers but to keep the existing ones. His message to Times readers is that they are superior to the rubes who watch Fox News Channel. No doubt he preferred the status quo ante Fox, when those rubes had few alternatives but to get their news from networks that let the Times set their agendas. But those days are over, so he has to settle for marketing the Times via snob appeal.

  A Sleeping Giant Is Aroused   "Protesters in Madison have 'aroused a sleeping giant' in the national fight for workers' rights, filmmaker Michael Moore told thousands at the Capitol Square on Saturday," the Wisconsin State Journal reports. For once, we sympathize with Moore. We'd be mad if they woke us up, too.

Of course, it ain't over till the fat lady sings, though The Wall Street Journal reports she may be standing just offstage:

The pro-union site TalkingPointsMemo.com reports that Democrats, including Miller, are "walking back" the Journal report, although the TPM story ends with a quote from Sen. Bob Jauch that suggests they are merely slowing the pace forward: "I think he's [Miller] speaking the truth that at some point--and I don't know when soon is--at some point we have to say we've done all we can." Blogress Ann Althouse, a Wisconsin state employee, explains why TPM may be engaged in wishful thinking:

Some "labor leaders" certainly are thinking wishfully about their strategic position, to judge by this report from the New York Times:

 Michael Barone offers some historical perspective and explains why the "labor movement" today is a fundamentally reactionary one--a throwback to an era in which the ideas of Frederick W. Taylor (1856-1915) dominated industrial management:

Unions developed as a way to protect workers from this abuse: 

Unions may succeed in slowing their decline--at the very least, they've bought themselves a few weeks in Wisconsin--but it's difficult to imagine that these trends are exorable, much less reversible, as they would have to be in the private sector for Big Labor to enjoy anything like a comeback.

  Accountability Journalism   "After years of claiming presidential immunity to avoid legal proceedings, Jacques Chirac is finally facing a court," the Associated Press's Jamey Keaten reports. That sentence could have done without the "finally," which strikes us as a bit of anti-Chirac editorializing. But the second paragraph is much worse:

"Rush to war" is unmistakably anti-Bush, but calling Chirac a "bugaboo"--an imagined or exaggerated object of fear--manages to insult Chirac as well, by suggesting that he was of little importance even when he was president of France.

  'Living History,' the Second Time as Farce   "Tina Brown revealed the first look at the newly redesigned Newsweek magazine [yesterday] on 'This Week with Christiane Amanpour,' " ABC News reports:

Wow, that's cutting-edge! ABC notes that Brown's "career has not been without the occasional disappointment, such as the much-heralded but short-lived Talk magazine--which also featured Hillary Clinton on the front cover of its first issue."

But that was in 1999. Who even knew who Mrs. Clinton was back then? Now, the Newsweek cover excitedly informs us, she is "shattering glass ceilings everywhere." We'll give Newsweek the benefit of the doubt and assume that the secretary of state has been literally shattering glass ceilings, because that's the only way it would be interesting. As Mickey Kaus notes, the magazine also features "a piece by Kathleen Parker that's not about what a jerk Elliot [sic] Spitzer was." Was?

Oh well, we're sure Andrew Sullivan will liven things up. He may be predictable, but at least he's erratic!

  Metaphor Alert   "Like 401(k) plans, the investments made by public-sector pension plans are increasingly on firmer footing as the rising tide on Wall Street lifts all boats."--McClatchy Newspapers, March 6

  Out on a Limb   "Wisconsin Democratic Senators May or May Not Return Soon"--headline, MyStateline.com, March 7

 We Blame Global Warming 

  What DNC in Mind, City Bans Carrying Urine, Feces   "Despite Openness Pledge, President Obama Pursues Leakers"--headline, Politico.com, March 7

  Advice for the Really, Really Lovelorn   "Just Take Out Khadafy"--headline, New York Post, March 5

  Generalissimo Francisco Franco Is Still Dead   "The Further Death of 'Liberaltarianism' "--headline, Volokh.com, March 4

  The Lonely Lives of Scientists   "Japanese Scientists Use Red Wine, Sake to Induce Superconductivity"--headline, Asian News International (India), March 7

  The Lonely Lives of Engineers   "Yale Engineers Blow Molds Metal Alloys"--headline, DesignNews.com, March 4

  It's a Cookbook   "Women in Business Lunches"--headline, TribLocal Wilmette/Kenilworth (Ill.), March 4

  You Can't Buy Guacamole, You Can Only Rent It   "Office Rents Dip on Park Avenue"--headline, The Wall Street Journal, March 7

 Hey, Kids! What Time Is It? 

 Questions Nobody Is Asking 

 Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  It's Always in the Last Place You Look   "Santa Clara County Construction Workers Find Owl Eggs in Once Abandoned Building"--headline, Bay City News Service (San Francisco), March 6

  Someone Set Up Us the Bomb   "Banks Up Profit Bets on the Rich"--headline, TheStreet.com, March 4

  News of the Tautological   "Macy's Parade Route Up in the Air, Again"--headline, Crain's New York Business, March 4

  Breaking News From 1972   "GOP Pollster: Nixon Job Approval at 61 Percent"--headline, Politico.com, March 6

  News You Can Use   "Secret to a Happy Marriage? Delusion."--headline, Boston Globe, March 7

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  Like Attracts Like   Facebook "can have a positive influence on the self-esteem of college students, report social media researchers at Cornell," according to a press release from the university:

Oddly enough, we've never experienced a decline in self-esteem when looking in the mirror. We guess we have a really good mirror.

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Joel Engel, Jameson Campaigne, Jeff Mitchell, T. Young, Ed Lasky, Michele Schiesser, Gary Petersen, Richard Belzer, Ed Grinberg, Rod Pennington, Dave Huber, David Hallstrom, Clifford Crouch, Hillel Markowitz, John Bobek, Zack Russ, Cheryl Sturm, Monty Krieger, Ben Boychuk, William Schultz, Joe Perez, Rick Weisehan, Peter Huntsman, Don Undis, Dan Tracy, Herbert Sorock, John Sanders, Robert Godwin, John Williamson, Ethel Fenig, William McMillan, Steve Obeda, Marion Dreyfus, Larry Seltzer and Taylor Dinerman. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)