India's Chief Economic Adviser  Kaushik Basu 

New Delhi, March 22, 2011 

Kaushik Basu is a hardcore academic with a professorship at Cornell University. He is something of an anomaly in the political labyrinth of New Delhi. Yet, as the chief economic adviser to the Ministry of Finance, he has become an influential voice among the country's policymakers. In an interview, he says he misses academic life and found himself on "another planet" in his early days, around a year ago. But he says he enjoys the chance to do practical work on India. He is closely involved with the government's ambitious plan to make access to food a legal right for every citizen. Mr. Basu spoke to The Wall Street Journal's  Harsh Joshi about his concerns over the fate of the food security bill, which is scheduled to be implemented by the end of the next fiscal year that begins April 1. Here are some excerpts: 

WSJ: How practical is the idea of legally guaranteeing food to everyone in India? 

  K. Basu: I am not in favor of writing down rights widely on every matter because then you also violate those rights, and rights violation becomes a culture. But the broad idea of food security is that the vulnerable, the very poor, should have food as a legal right and along those lines, this is a very justified idea.

My fear is that if we try to deliver the basic food security using the current mechanisms, we will not even succeed, which is bad in itself because the poor won't get the food. But we will also just write down a legal right and then we'll fail to satisfy that right. I feel that we have to give a huge amount of attention to the mechanism of the delivery.

WSJ: What are the problems with the delivery mechanisms that the government must address? Is this repairable?

K. Basu: There's a study which shows that in the present system, approximately 67% of the wheat sent to the poor is dissipated along the way. One third reaches, two thirds vanishes. To use such a leaky bucket to carry a subsidy to me either means the fiscal burden will be huge -- you'll have to send two kilograms of wheat to ensure one kilo reaches -- or you'll not even reach the target population.

I think these problems are repairable. It won't be repaired to a level of no leakage, but from 67% we can bring it down to say 20%. It'll make a huge difference. There are ways to do this. For example, we have made a move towards direct transfer of subsidies for kerosene.

WSJ: What about the challenge of food-grain management? Isn't supply and storage shortfall going to add to the problem, as it is aggravating inflation now?

K. Basu: Our food-grain management is not efficient. We have become pretty good in procurement but the release system is not effective. For example, on the inflation front, we could look at a model where as soon as the price goes up sufficiently on the shortage, the release mechanism from the reserves could automatically kick in. You don't need a government decision, so you don't lose time. Then, the release should be in small quantities instead of the bulk releases we do.

WSJ: On a broader agriculture policy front, are some government initiatives -- like the  Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme -- being counter-productive by eroding agriculture? What steps do we need to ensure production keeps pace with the targets set by the food security plan?

K. Basu: The fact that NREGS is creating a shortage of farm labor is fine. The Indian farm laborer is very poor, the wages are very low, so there should be policies that prop up wages. Productivity has to be boosted by boosting rural infrastructure -- irrigation and power -- not by keeping labor cheap. You need good seeds, and the research and development to produce them. In agriculture, our problem is that 14.2% of our GDP comes out of that sector and about 58% of the country's labor force contributes to this. How to solve this disparity? To imagine that agriculture will become larger, will grow in size relatively to other sectors, that doesn't happen anywhere. Labor has to be drawn in to small-scale industries.

WSJ: The current political turbulence again raises concerns that such reforms could be thwarted or delayed and the economy would bear the brunt. What's your assessment?

K. Basu: It's true that we are in a politically very troublesome period. However, the economy is doing very well. To me, this looks like a decoupling between the Indian economy and Indian politics. That's almost a paradox. Having said that, if political instabilities become huge, it's going to have an impact on the economy.

 Write to  Harsh Joshi at harsh.joshi@dowjones.com 