NEW YORK—A group of human-rights activists, lawyers and media groups can bring a lawsuit challenging new procedures for approving U.S. government electronic surveillance of non-U.S. citizens overseas, a federal appeals court has ruled.

The group, which includes the American Civil Liberties Union, originally sued in July 2008, claiming recent amendments to the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act caused them to fear their international communications with individuals overseas will be monitored and to "undertake costly and burdensome measures" to protect the confidentiality of those conversations.

A federal judge dismissed the lawsuit in August 2009, saying the plaintiffs lacked standing to bring a lawsuit in part because they couldn't demonstrate they had been actually injured by the new procedures. 

"Because standing may be based on a reasonable fear of future injury and costs incurred to avoid that injury, and the plaintiffs have established that they have a reasonable fear of injury and have incurred costs to avoid it, we agree that they have standing," U.S. Circuit Judge Gerard E. Lynch said in an opinion Monday.

A three-judge panel of the U.S. Second Circuit Court of Appeals reinstated the lawsuit Monday and remanded it to the district court for more proceedings. 

The change in the law didn't require the U.S. government to submit an individualized application before a Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court judge seeking to monitor a non-U.S. person overseas. Instead, it allowed the U.S. Attorney General and the Director of National Intelligence to apply for a "mass surveillance authorization" from a FISC judge.

"The government's surveillance practices should not be immune from judicial review, and this decision ensures that they won't be," said Jameel Jaffer, the ACLU's deputy legal director. Mr. Jaffer argued the case before the appeals court. 

The U.S. Department of Justice, which argued on the government's behalf on appeal, declined to comment Monday.

 Write to  Chad Bray at chad.bray@wsj.com 