U.S. Supreme Court Justice Samuel Alito turned down a request from the state of Missouri on Sunday to stop the Army Corps of Engineers from blowing up a levee that would send a wall of water over some 130,000 acres of prime farmland to ease record flooding where the Ohio and Mississippi rivers come together.

The state, which has argued the plan violated its clean-water laws and that the Corps hasn't done enough to consider alternatives, failed last week to persuade the federal district court in Cape Girardeau, Mo., and the federal appeals court in St. Louis to intervene. 

In denying the Missouri petition last week, the federal district court judge found that the Mississippi River Commission's Congressional mandate to protect navigation on the river outweighed Missouri clean water laws and there was no indication that its decision making was in any way capricious. Neither the appeals court or Justice Alito found reason to overturn the decision.

Missouri filed its petition with Justice Alito, who oversees federal courts in Missouri and six other states in the Eighth U.S. Judicial Circuit. 

About 200 residents occupying some 90 homes in the floodway were ordered to evacuate last week.

See the latest data from flood gauges throughout the Midwest and South.

"Although we acknowledge Missouri finds itself in a very challenging legal situation before the Supreme Court, I want to make sure we exhaust all potential legal remedies and ask every possible court to review the plan proposed by the Army Corps of Engineers," Missouri Attorney General Chris Koster said in a statement Sunday before the ruling. 

"In light of the devastation faced by the citizens of Mississippi County—devastation that will persist in the area for years to come—it is the responsibility of this office to pursue every possible avenue of legal review," he said.

On Sunday, the Ohio River gauge at Cairo, Ill., passed its 1937 record. It was expected to continue to rise toward an expected crest on Tuesday a foot over the record, and stay at that level for several days. 

After a few rare dry days, rain returned to the area Saturday and was expected to continue through Tuesday.

The Corps has been making preparations since last week to blow a 2-mile-wide hole in the levee and activate the Birds Point-New Madrid Floodway, which is 35 miles long and as much as 12 miles wide. The floodway is expected to act as a relief valve, handling about a quarter of the flow of the Mississippi and reducing river levels upstream around Cairo by three to four feet. 

The floodway, a mix of public and private lands with easements giving the government the right to let water pass through, is one of four that the Corps has developed since the great flood of 1927 to minimize damage to people and property and maintain the integrity of the Mississippi River's navigation system. 

Maj. Gen. Michael Walsh, head of the Mississippi River Commission and a top Corps commander in the region, said Saturday that all four floodways might be needed to handle the volume of water coursing through the river system this spring.

On Sunday afternoon Gen. Walsh ordered engineers to move barges into position near Birds Point and begin filling pipes inside the levee with blasting agents, a process that is expected to take about 20 hours, according to an update on a Corps Facebook page. 

The next steps include priming the system with explosive charges and finally activating the floodway by artificially breaching the levee. 

But the general said he would continue to monitor the situation and hadn't made a final decision yet on whether he will order detonation of the explosives.

The high water is putting serious strain on the aging levees at Cairo. On Saturday, Gen. Walsh said the city was experiencing numerous sand boils—water flowing under the levees and bubbling up in a combination of water and sand inside the levee wall. He described one such sand boil as the largest he had ever seen. 

If the boils carry away too much sand, it can undermine the levee wall. He said engineers had constructed a sandbag wall around the boil more than 12 feet high. "We're quite concerned about that boil," he said.

A snowy winter combined with intense rains in the last two weeks helped push the rivers to record levels. Normally at this time of year, the Ohio accounts for about two-thirds of the flow of the Lower Mississippi. This year, unusually heavy flows from the Upper Mississippi means the two rivers each account for about half the flow.

Last week, a levee in the town of Poplar Bluff, Mo., breached after water from the Black River began spilling over the top of the levee. About 1,000 people were evacuated from their homes—some by boat as the water flowed behind the neighborhood and prevented them from escaping by road.

 Write to  Joe Barrett at joseph.barrett@wsj.com 