Investors have fretted of late about inflation problems in emerging nations, but they have given central bankers in Britain and the euro zone a free pass. But due to Europe's growing inflationary pressures and concerns that policy makers could be behind the curve, some analysts fear the U.K. pound and possibly even the euro could soon get punished. 

Two forces have revived what some foreign-exchange market experts consider a long-standing prejudice against the abilities of developing-world central bankers relative to their colleagues in the developed world. A jump in food, oil and material prices across the globe, especially in India and Indonesia, has investors worried that runaway inflation will erode the value of some emerging-market currencies. 

Such concerns are strengthening currencies in Europe, where investors are overlooking the threat of "stagflation," a debilitating combination of weak economic growth and high inflation that crippled the U.S. and U.K. in the 1970s. 

Instead of punishing Europe for unexpected inflation, investors are giving central bankers there the benefit of the doubt and expecting them to raise interest rates to cool off price pressures they consider much less severe than in developing countries. Higher interest rates boost the returns these investors get on bond investments. 

The double-standard is the latest chapter in a 15-year-old story in the currency markets, where investors assume inflation won't pose a problem in places like Britain and Germany but could spin out of control in developing economies with a checkered history of dealing with price pressures. The danger is that investors are giving too much credit to European economies that remain fragile after the global financial crisis. 

"The thinking that growth or inflation means higher interest rates, which would equate to a higher currency, belongs to the history of 1994-2007, not to today's world," said  David Bloom, a currency strategist at HSBC in London, in a recent report. 

On Wednesday, the U.K. pound rose to $1.5886 against the dollar—near its recent highs—as traders bet that Bank of England officials will eventually raise their key borrowing rate even though the U.K. economy unexpectedly shrank at the end of last year. The euro, for its part, has risen some 2% this month, despite inflation in the euro zone surging past the European Central Bank's target of just under 2% last month. 

In contrast, the Indian rupee fell on Tuesday after India's central bank raised interest rates by less than hoped to stave off that country's rising prices. The Indonesian rupiah and Philippine peso have also been hammered lately. 

Inflation fears haven't yet roiled many other emerging-nation currencies. And "real-money" investors like pension funds and insurance companies remain generally bullish on emerging markets, analysts say. The euro's latest lift may also turn out to be yet another temporary respite. 

But observers say a key investing theme last year--bearishness on the euro and confidence about emerging-markets--could be reversing, even though the prognosis in Europe isn't that much better and inflation is rising. 

The market's expectations for volatility in the euro-dollar exchange rate over the next month have dropped about 16% this year, to levels reminiscent of the relatively quiet period early last decade. There is also less demand for options that protect investors against sharp moves in major currencies, based on gauges in the currency options market. But it still costs a pretty penny to hedge investments in emerging-market stocks. 

Investors have pulled roughly $1 billion out of Indian stocks recently. The fear: Rising prices will bedevil Indian central bankers, the way they did back in early 2008 when a global food crisis hit the rupee. 

"There's definitely a larger risk premium being placed on emerging-market currencies," said  David Gary, head of FX derivatives at Deutsche Bank, the biggest bank in the foreign-exchange markets. 

Yet European currencies are behaving differently. Prices of German government bonds have jumped, helping send the euro higher, despite news that the euro-zone's inflation rate hit 2.2% in December. That led ECB President  Jean-Claude Trichet to warn about the risk of letting rising prices entrench themselves in the world economy. 

Similarly, minutes of the Bank of England's latest nine-member policy meeting showed that a second official voted to raise rates to tackle Britain's 3.7% inflation rate, which has stayed above the bank's 2% target for more than a year; the pound rose. 

Britain's weak recovery and inflation challenge may provide a test case for whether the link between higher inflation and stronger currencies will fade. 

With the U.K. economy unexpectedly shrinking 0.5% in the fourth quarter, the Bank of England faces a dilemma: It can't raise rates to cool off prices without hurting an economy that has yet to feel the effects of government cutbacks that amount to some 8% of Britain's GDP. 

Failure by the Bank of England to get on grip on growth and prices could undermine confidence in the bank itself. In one sign of concern, prices of credit-default swaps tied to Britain--which investors buy to protect themselves against the risk of a debt default--have jumped roughly 10% since Monday evening, though the cost of insurance remains low. 

The consequences of stagflation would likely be severe: In 1976, Britain asked the International Monetary Fund for a bailout--the closest the U.K. has come to a default in recent years. 

The ECB faces a similar problem, needing to raise rates to keep prices stable in fast-growing Germany without hammering the economies of stragglers like Greece and Ireland by hiking up borrowing costs. 

Major developed world central banks are likely to tolerate more inflation, analysts at  Morgan Stanley
MS


0.29
%




 wrote on Wednesday, which could raise the risk of a "wage-price spiral." 



 Write to  Neil Shah at neil.shah@dowjones.com 