We here at The Wall Street Journal aren't exactly suckers for underdog stories.

When others were saluting Boise State's top-five preseason college-football ranking last August, sanctimoniously cheering the possibility of a small school's reaching the title game, we penned a diatribe headlined "The Boise State Nightmare." When lower-level schools from the Football Championship Subdivision upset a couple of major-conference teams, suggesting the gap between them was narrower than ever, we wrote "Goliath Hasn't Gone Anywhere," a statistical dismissal of the matter.

So when little-known schools make it big, we're generally not rushing to slobber all over them. But even the newspaper of the establishment is blown away by what happened in the NCAA tournament over the weekend.

Virginia Commonwealth's and Butler's advancement to next weekend's Final Four in Houston ranks as one of the great stories in tournament history, though not merely because of the schools' mid-major status.

It should be well-known by now that good high-school recruits often are overlooked by the major powers, that players are increasingly willing to play anywhere because of the omnipresence of TV, and that the sport's current environment is therefore more conducive to schools like these having big success. From 1985 through 2005, only one double-digit seed in the tournament reached the Final Four (11th-seeded LSU in 1986); since then, two more 11 seeds—George Mason in 2006 and now VCU—have done it.

What's fascinating about VCU and Butler isn't the trite "Hoosiers" narrative, but rather how they were able to succeed in the clutch while their opponents faltered. 

With 13 minutes remaining in VCU's Southwest Regional final against the top-seeded Jayhawks on Sunday, it looked like the Rams were doomed to come up short. Their 16-point early-second-half lead had evaporated to two points seemingly instantaneously. The Jayhawks were forcing turnovers and getting to the free-throw line at will.

But it was Kansas that collapsed. The Jayhawks made a quarter of their remaining shots. They didn't make another three-point attempt. The Rams—who also survived Friday's game after Florida State mismanaged two late-game possessions—were by no means the three-point-bombing machine in the second half that they were in the first. But they didn't need to be. VCU 71, Kansas 61. Houston, hello.

A similar dynamic has been evident with Butler, which beat Florida 74-71 on Saturday to win the Southeast Regional. Its ability to perform under pressure, combined with the fact that they are missing star Gordon Hayward, who left for the NBA after last season's Butler team made the championship game, makes this run an even more-impressive achievement.

Last week, Butler coach Brad Stevens noted something odd about his team's tournament success these two years. "We've been behind in the second half of seven of the eight games," he said. It's now eight of 10.

Conversely, two of Butler's victims in this tournament—Pittsburgh, a No. 1 seed, and Wisconsin—both play before vibrant, sold-out crowds and have both made the NCAA tournament every season since 2002. And yet both have acquired a reputation for not playing their best in the postseason.

What Butler excels at during the tournament—Shelvin Mack's near-killer foul against Pittsburgh notwithstanding—is limiting its own mistakes in the final, crucial minutes, while bringing out its opponents' foibles.

In the final two minutes of those eight close games Stevens was referencing (counting both regulation and overtime), Butler made 46% of its shots, a solid, unspectacular figure. But its opponents made 27%. In the Bulldogs' upset of Florida on Saturday, Butler couldn't handle the Gators' interior players. But in the most pivotal moments, Florida's guards, not big man Vernon Macklin (25 points), were firing and missing shots.

There obviously is a feel-good appeal to two lesser-known schools reaching the Final Four, and most people will automatically root for the VCU-Butler winner over the winner of next weekend's other national semifinal between behemoths Connecticut and Kentucky. But from a basketball standpoint, what's remarkable about the two underdogs is how they have kept their cool in the biggest moments—and how their big-name opponents have not.

—Jason Gay's The Couch will return next week.

 Write to  Darren Everson at darren.everson@wsj.com 