MUMBAI –India's JSW Steel Ltd. said Monday its net profit for the January-March period jumped 30% to $177 million, as record product sales outweighed the impact of costlier raw materials. 

Profit for the quarter through March rose to 7.94 billion rupees ($177 million) from 6.11 billion rupees a year earlier, the steelmaker said. 

Consolidated sales rose 32.5% to 72.09 billion rupees from 54.41 billion rupees, while raw-material costs surged 47% to 45.85 billion rupees. 

A sharp increase in prices of iron ore and coking coal is eroding margins at Indian steelmakers, but growth in steel product sales is robust thanks to demand from automobile and consumer goods sectors. 

JSW Steel said it sold 1.73 million tons steel during the quarter, rising 14% from a year earlier to its highest-ever quarterly sales. That included around 1.39 million tons of flat products, used by automobile and consumer goods makers. 

The company said it plans to expand annual production capacity of its Vijaynagar plant in south India to 12 million metric tons from 10 million tons by investing 26.95 billion rupees. JSW will use 9.45 billion rupees from its cash reserves for the expansion and will raise debt for the remaining amount. 

Chief Financial Officer  Seshagiri Rao said at a press conference JSW has arranged a U.S. dollar loan of the equivalent of 17.50 billion rupees for the project from a syndicate of banks, which he didn't name. 

The ongoing work to expand the production capacity of the Vijaynagar plant from 6.8 million tons a year to 10 million tons will be concluded by June 30, when a fourth blast furnace starts. 

Vice Chairman  Sajjan Jindal said the company is also setting up a cold-rolling facility in the Vijaynagar plant, which would become partially operational during the January-March period of 2012. 

"The [cold-rolling mill] will primarily feed the automobile industry. Our strategic partner JFE Corp. will provide technical know-how for the project," Mr. Jindal said. 

He said JSW's plate mill in the U.S. is expected to operate at 40% of the production capacity this financial year, compared with 10% last year, as the U.S. economy recovers. 

Mr. Jindal said JSW Steel plans to spend 50 billion rupees on various expansion projects in the current financial year, half of which it will raise through debt. 

Mr. Rao, the finance chief, added that since April 1, the company has already raised 30 billion rupees via dollar loans, including 17.50 billion rupees for the expansion of Vijaynagar plant. It plans to raise another 19.50 billion rupees through dollar loans in the remainder of this fiscal year. 

Mr. Rao said that over the next few months the company is also seeking to refinance the 70-billion rupee debt it had taken to acquire a controlling stake in Ispat Industries Ltd. "The refinancing will be a combination of dollar and rupee loans." 

He said that high interest cost on rupee loans is the main reason JSW Steel is keen on raising dollar-denominated loans. 

As of March 31, the company had net debt of 142 billion rupees and cash reserves of 23.15 billion rupees. 

 Write to  Anirban Chowdhury at anirban.chowdhury@dowjones.com and Prasenjit Bhattacharya at prasenjit.bhattacharya@dowjones.com 