BEIJING—China said its trade surplus narrowed for the second consecutive year in 2010, data that could strengthen the country's case that it is gradually reducing the external imbalances that have inflamed tensions with trading partners.

Chinese customs data issued Monday showed the surplus narrowed by 6.4% last year to $183.1 billion, even as total foreign trade surged by 34.7% amid a strengthening global economy. In 2009, China's trade surplus fell by roughly a third from record levels, as the world-wide recession cut into demand for Chinese goods.

The latest data from China—which is believed to have become the world's second-biggest economy last year and is already the No. 1 exporter—offered a murky view of the outlook for global trade. China's export growth in December slowed sharply to 17.9% from a year earlier, roughly half the pace of November's rise, a possible sign that global demand for Chinese goods may be cooling.

Import growth also slowed in December, to 25.6%. That was faster than economists expected, but much of the increase was driven by higher prices for key commodities. The volume of iron ore imports in December, for instance, fell by 6.6% from year earlier, even as the total value of those imports rose by more than 50%. Overall, China's monthly surplus in December narrowed to $13.08 billion from $22.89 billion in November.

The new figures come shortly before Chinese President Hu Jintao's visit to the U.S., scheduled to take place from Jan. 18 to Jan. 21, during which China's trade and currency policies are expected to be a major point of contention between the two countries. Washington has complained that China keeps its currency artificially undervalued to help its exporters, by making their good cheaper in dollar terms. U.S. officials have said this contributes to a huge imbalance in U.S.-China trade that is destabilizing for the global economy.

Chinese officials have repeatedly argued that they are gradually rebalancing the economy away from dependence on exports, by encouraging imports and domestic consumption. The 2010 trade figures bolster that view and may help Chinese policy makers counter foreign pressure to allow faster yuan appreciation.

China's government has been moving slowly to address complaints about the yuan. The currency's gains accelerated at the end of 2010—it rose 1.2% against the dollar in December—which many analysts saw as an effort to ease tensions with the U.S. ahead of Mr. Hu's visit. But the yuan has reversed course so far this year, and is now up only about 2.8% since June 19, when China pledged to increase the flexibility of the exchange rate.

The 2010 trade data may do little to cool frustration in Washington over the trade balance. Despite the decline in the overall surplus, China's trade surplus with the U.S. actually expanded in 2010 by 26.4%, to $181.27 billion.

But the broader decline in the China's surplus suggests to some economists that the rebalancing of China's foreign trade is already occurring. "I think there is actually a trend toward rebalancing, but it is happening slowly," said Citigroup economist  Ken Peng. The bank expects China's trade surplus to decline again in 2011 by around 7% to $170 billion, Mr. Peng said.

Some other analysts are less convinced. "Fundamentally, China still has a very large structural trade surplus. That hasn't changed," said UBS economist Wang Tao.

Ms. Wang expects the trade surplus to rebound in 2011, rising to around $210 billion. The decline in the trade surplus last year, she said, was almost entirely due to surging prices for raw materials and other imports. "That will not be repeated in 2011," she said.

 --Liu Li contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Aaron Back at aaron.back@dowjones.com 