HONG KONG --

Religare Capital Markets, the investment banking arm of Indian financial group Religare Enterprises. began an expansion into equities brokerage and investment banking outside India early last year, and is now looking to expand into Africa and Southeast Asia. 

Starting off with a management team of six last year--including Sutha Kandiah, its global investment banking head in India, Hong Kong, Singapore, London, New York, Dubai, Sri Lanka and Australia. 

"Religare as a group is committed to build and grow its investment banking business across emerging markets we have identified; especially those of Africa and Southeast Asia," said Singapore-based Mr. Kandiah, who was formerly joint head of Asian equity capital markets at UBS AG. 

He said the company would like to position itself as the preferred advisor to companies, and sees "high growth rates consistent with the economic and population dynamics of these emerging economies." 

The expansion in Southeast Asia and Africa is based on the view that companies in those emerging markets will need funds for growth; companies there will also likely be targets for Indian firms looking to acquire, he said. 

Mr. Kandiah didn't elaborate on hiring targets in the next year, but said the group has more than 70 investment bankers globally, with 40 people in India and the rest in London and Singapore. 

Its investment bankers have already clinched deals in its key sector focuses, according to people familiar with the situation, including advising on the $1 billion initial public offering of Fortis Global Healthcare Holdings, owned by the founders of India's Fortis Healthcare, in Singapore planned for the third or fourth quarter this year. 

Religare Capital has offices in Mumbai, London, New York, Singapore and Hong Kong, and has been expanding in both investment banking and cash equities, also known as research, sales and trading. It has a total of 300 employees globally. 

"The rest of our head-count expansion will be our sales, trading, research and back office support for our equities roll-out globally," said Mr. Kandiah, who formerly was the joint head of Asian equity capital markets at UBS. 

"Consistent with sector focus, we are hiring and investing in healthcare, energy and resources and consumer sector bankers as well," he said. 

Religare Capital has been expanding organically, and since it bought London-based brokerage Hichens Harrison in 2008, through acquisitions. Last year, it bought Aviate Global Asia, a brokerage with offices in Hong Kong, Singapore, the U.K. and Australia, Sri Lankan brokerage Bartleet Mallory Stockbrokers and and the U.S. and U.K. businesses of South African brokerage Barnard Jacobs Mellet. 

In India, Religare Enterprises has a retail brokerage with more than 10,000 employees called Religare Securities, an India-focused private banking business joint venture with Australian financial services giant Macquarie Group, a private equity unit that invests in small- to medium-sized firms, and an asset-management operation. 

The asset-management business has around $18 billion under management globally and stakes in U.S. private equity firm Landmark Partners and U.S. fund of funds firm Northgate Capital. 



