MUMBAI –  Ford Motor Co.
F


-0.10
%




's India unit plans to build engines locally for some models that it will introduce in the next few years, as the company seeks to keep vehicle costs low in a bid to capture a greater share of the highly competitive Indian auto market. 

Ford India Pvt. also plans to increase its engine exports to Thailand, its manufacturing hub for Southeast Asia, to meet demand in that region, President  Michael Boneham said in a recent interview. 

Expanding its engine portfolio is part of Ford's plans to consolidate its position in one of the world's fastest growing automobile markets. In August, the company said it would launch eight models in various passenger vehicle segments in India by 2015 to take on big local players such as Maruti Suzuki (India) Ltd. and global rivals like  General Motors Co.
GM


0.27
%




, Hyundai Motor Co. and  Volkswagen AG
VLKAY


-2.62
%




. 

"We have defined India as the hub for low-displacement, fuel-efficient gasoline and diesel engines for local needs as well as the Asia-Pacific and African regions," Mr. Boneham said. 

Ford India has an engine manufacturing plant in southern Tamil Nadu state with a capacity of 250,000 units a year. It exports the 1.4-liter and 1.6-liter gasoline engines to Thailand and some to Africa. 

Mr. Boneham said the plant makes six engine versions, including those for the small car Figo, the entry-level Ikon sedan, and the Fiesta sedan. The company imports engines for its Endeavour sport-utility vehicle, he said. 

The company is using more than 70% capacity of the plant, he said. 

"This (portfolio of engines) will continue to grow...we will be bringing new engines as part of the new models coming to India," Mr. Boneham said. He declined to elaborate. 

Referring to the car models that Ford plans to launch, Mr. Boneham said the company will ensure that the new vehicles are in a range of segments. 

"But the small-car segment is important," he said. "We don't want to be continuing as a niche layer with just one product in that segment."

Ford India last year launched the Figo small car to boost sales, as three-fourths of the cars sold in India are in that category. 

To cut its production costs and offer cheaper models, Ford also intends to have a high level of local components in some upcoming models, Boneham said. 

"Localization is going to a key part of our strategy, although not for all models, he said. "The Figo has a localization level of 85% and that's a sensible benchmark. You will see similar levels in some models," he added. 

Mr. Boneham said, however, the company has no plan to bring products from its global commercial vehicle portfolio into India. 

 Write to  Anirban Chowdhury at anirban.chowdhury@dowjones.com 