Media conglomerate  News Corp. and Italian holding company  Exor SpA said they are exploring the possibility of forming a consortium to bid for Formula 1 motor racing.

Though the effort is in its early stages, aligning with Formula 1, one of the world's most popular sports, would bolster News Corp.'s pay-television properties.

 In a joint statement Tuesday, News Corp. and Exor, the parent of Ferrari's owner,  Fiat SpA, said they would hold meetings with potential minority partners and "key stakeholders" in the coming weeks and months. News Corp. owns Dow Jones & Co., publisher of The Wall Street Journal. 

 "There can be no certainty that this will lead to an approach to Formula 1's current owners," the companies said. They said they "are exploring the possibility of creating a consortium with a view to formulating a long-term plan for the development of Formula 1 in the interests of the participants and the fans." 

Exor is the investment vehicle of Italy's Agnelli family, which founded auto maker Fiat. Exor owns 30.45% of Fiat, whose holdings include the sports-car brand Ferrari, a prominent participant in Formula 1. Fiat is also the partner of Chrysler Group LLC.

Neither Exor nor News Corp. would comment beyond their joint statement. 

In 2005, the private-equity firm  CVC Capital Partners agreed to acquire a majority stake in the Formula 1 series. That included the 25% owned by Formula 1's longtime chief,  Bernie Ecclestone, the 80-year-old British billionaire who has maintained tight control over the sport. 

CVC Capital said in a statement Tuesday that it hadn't put the sporting event up for sale, adding an eventual investment in Formula 1 would have to be in the interest of the sporting event and its stakeholders. 

"James Murdoch [of News Corp.] has informed us that the approach is friendly, at a very preliminary stage, and that they acknowledge that Formula 1 is privately owned by CVC and not currently for sale," the private equity firm said in a statement Tuesday. 

"CVC recognizes the quality of Exor and News Corporation as potential investors, but any investment in Formula 1 will require CVC's agreement and will need to demonstrate that it is in the interest of the sport and its stakeholders, taken as a whole," it said. 

Formula 1, considered by aficionados to be the world's premier auto-racing circuit because of its speed and challenging courses, is one of the largest and most glamorous draws in international sports. Formula 1 teams can spend as much as $300 million a year fine-tuning their cars, which are capable of top speeds of roughly 240 miles an hour. 

The sport, which attracts one of the largest global TV audiences, holds about 20 races a year around the world, often in glamourous spots like Barcelona, Spain, and Monte Carlo. It generates billions of dollars in annual revenue from sponsorship deals, broadcasting rights, corporate hospitality spending and fees. 

Tuesday's statement by News Corp. and Exor confirmed a blog posting on the website of Sky News, part of  British Sky Broadcasting Group PLC. It also confirmed earlier news reports about News Corp's interest in Formula 1.

Mr. Ecclestone, who remains Formula 1's boss, has been reported as dismissing the likelihood of a deal. He couldn't be reached for comment Tuesday. 

News Corp. has long had a significant interest in sports, both as an owner and a rights holder to a number of teams and leagues in the U.S. and abroad. In 1998, the company acquired the Los Angeles Dodgers for a then-record $311 million, but later sold the team to Frank McCourt. News Corp. also launched a rugby league in Australia as part of an effort to drive the company's pay-TV business there. 



 Write to  Gilles Castonguay at gilles.castonguay@dowjones.com 