 Havas, the French advertising and media-services group, said Fernando Rodes has resigned as chief executive to pursue other interests and that David Jones, head of the company's Euro-RSCG public-relations agency, will take over.  

Ford awarded Chief Executive Alan Mulally stock awards worth $33.4 million after taxes and Executive Chairman Bill Ford got awards worth $25 million after taxes, as part of a series of grants given to more than a dozen company executives.

Chrysler's Mexico unit and Fiat's Brazil operations are vying to win the job of manufacturing Fiat's current Ducato van, said Chrysler's Mexico President Joseph ChamaSrour. 

 Two months after Renault said it had been the victim of corporate espionage at its electric car unit, there are growing signs that the car company may have pulled the trigger too quickly.  

 Audi, the premium brand of Volkswagen, said full-year net profit rose to €2.59 billion ($3.62 billion) from €1.3 billion in 2009 as demand for luxury cars recovered faster than expected after a steep market downturn. 

AENA, the state-owned company that runs Spain's airports, said workers have announced 22 days of rolling strikes during peak tourist seasons to protest government plans to sell off part of the firm. Company President Juan Lema said the strikes—stretching from the busy Easter season into summer—would take a toll on Spain's key tourism sector. 

Boeing executives got a little breathing room for the newest version of the iconic 747 jumbo jet and a boost to the Dreamliner after two big Chinese airlines—Air China and Hong Kong Airlines parent HNA Group—signaled they would order new planes. 

Royal Bank of Scotland gave Chief Executive Stephen Hester shares currently worth around £4.5 million ($7.3 million) under a long-term incentive plan, adding to a £2.04 million all-share bonus previously announced. He will be entitled to get up to 6 million shares as a 2011 bonus. 

Bankinter will issue a three-year, €406 million ($567.5 million) mandatory convertible bond, driving its main capital ratio above the 8% minimum set by Spain's central bank earlier this year. 

Swedbank said it booked gains of 1.3 billion Swedish kronor ($204.5 million) after agreeing to a deal with the bankruptcy estate of Lehman Brothers, and making loan recoveries in January and February. 

 Bank of America Chief Executive Officer Brian Moynihan said he believes the bank has the ability to earn between $35 billion and $40 billion a year in pretax earnings when the business normalizes, and has no intention of making any more acquisitions—either inside or outside the U.S.  

South Korea's Hyundai Motor Group signed a final agreement to acquire a controlling stake in Hyundai Engineering & Construction from the builder's creditors-turned-shareholders for 4.96 trillion won ($4.43 billion), effectively bringing an end to the drawn-out sale process. 

Brown-Forman, the distiller of Finlandia vodka and Southern Comfort, posted a 30% rise in fiscal-third-quarter profit to $140.7 million as it reported signs of a rebound in its U.S. market. 

 Ecuadorean citizens suing Chevron over environmental damage in their country can't seize the oil giant's assets elsewhere to try to enforce a recent $9.5 billion judgment against the company, a U.S. judge ruled. 

China gave final approval to Kuwait to build an oil refinery as part of a $9 billion project in the city of Zhanjiang in Guangdong province in a joint venture with China Petroleum & Chemical, said a person familiar with the decision. 

Online betting exchange Betfair Group became one of the last U.K. licensed gaming companies to transfer its betting license to Gibraltar in a move that will save the company £20 million ($32.4 million) a year starting in 2013. 

Betfair also said revenue from its betting exchange and other sports-betting and games products, rose 6.2% to £77 million in the three months through Jan. 31.

 The trustee recovering money for victims of Bernard Madoff said he hopes to distribute funds gathered for customers by year's end. 

Man Group said it won a €1.2 billion ($1.7 billion) managed-account mandate from German pension fund Bayerische Versorgungskammer, boosting its assets in this growing area of hedge fund management. 

Old Mutual, the global insurer with a strong focus on South Africa, posted a 14% rise in full-year adjusted operating profit before tax to £1.48 billion ($2.4 billion) and said it remains focused on reducing costs. 

Nomura Holdings said it promoted Tarun Jotwani to head its global markets, as part of a broad management shakeup. It also hired Benoit Savoret as joint head of global equities and named John Phizackerley as chief executive of Europe, Middle East and Africa. 

Morgan Stanley is considering dropping the 73-year-old Smith Barney name from its roughly 18,000-member brokerage force, according to people familiar with the situation. 

Executives from Singapore Exchange are visiting Australia, just days before the company is expected to formally apply for approval of its 8.4 billion Australian dollar (US$8.49 billion) takeover of local market operator ASX. 

Chilean miner Antofagasta recommended a larger-than-expected final dividend after reporting a 58% rise in full-year net profit to $1.05 billion, buoyed by higher copper prices and greater output. 

Australia-based uranium explorer Extract Resources advised shareholders to take no action while it reviews a takeover offer by Chinese state-owned CGNPC Uranium Resources for its largest shareholder, Kalahari Minerals, valued at around £756 million (US$1.23 billion).

 A U.S. advisory panel backed the approval of a Novartis lung drug called indacaterol, although at a lower dose than ones used in Europe.  

McDonald's same-store sales rose 3.9% in February, more than expected, despite U.S. results that missed Wall Street's views. System-wide sales rose 8.1% in February, and were up 5.2% excluding currency fluctuations. 

 Starbucks is launching its instant coffee packets in China, expanding its business beyond coffee stores and entering the Chinese market as a consumer packaged-goods company.  

 Facebook is getting into the movie-rental business through an experiment with Time Warner's Warner Bros., which will allow streaming of "The Dark Knight."  

 Spotify, the Anglo-Swedish digital music service, said it has reached the milestone of 1 million paying subscribers across Europe. Spotify provides unlimited streaming of songs from major and independent record labels into computers and mobile phones. 

 A major software attack that distributed malicious programs to around 260,000 Android phones has put pressure on Google to do more to secure its online store for smartphone apps. 

India's Mahindra & Mahindra and U.S.-based networking major Cisco Systems signed a global partnership agreement to offer technology-based services such as virtual dealerships and cloud computing. The companies also intend to offer technology services in areas such as real estate and sports and entertainment.

 Sprint Nextel and Deutsche Telekom are again discussing options for combining Sprint with the German company's U.S. subsidiary, T-Mobile USA, though a deal is unlikely in the near term, people familiar with the matter said.  

Dynegy reported a fourth-quarter loss of $164 million, compared with a year-earlier loss of $355 million, as it incurred fewer charges. 