LONDON—Eighteen months after U.K. politicians' abuse of expenses claims exploded into the country's biggest political scandal for a generation, parliament is still squabbling over how to police its lawmakers.

The stakes are high. Expenses rules that are too draconian could drive many talented lawmakers out of politics, and leave parliament to the preserve of the independently wealthy. 

But any sense that there might be a return to the bad old days could do irreparable damage to parliament's reputation at a time when the government is telling the public to make sacrifices as part of an austerity drive to pare back the U.K.'s large budget deficit. 

The expenses scandal broke in May 2009 when The Daily Telegraph newspaper started publishing details of years of questionable claims by lawmakers, eventually forcing dozens of lawmakers to stand down. 

On Friday, former Labour lawmaker David Chaytor will become the first parliamentary member to be sentenced, having pleaded guilty to fraud last month. He faces up to seven years in prison. Five other lawmakers are also facing criminal charges. 

Yet even as lawmakers face trial, a battle is still raging over the rules governing what lawmakers can claim for. Spurred on by front-page stories revealing embarrassing claims for cleaning moats and building duck houses, politicians last year handed powers to police their expenses to an independent body, the Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority. 

IPSA announced the new expenses regime in March 2010 and was handed formal control over the system two months later. 

Among the new rules, lawmakers from constituencies in or around London cannot make expense claims to rent a second home, even if they face a significant commute at the end of an often late-running parliamentary day. 

The £10,000 annual allowance lawmakers were granted to communicate with constituents was axed while detailed rules were drawn up on who Members of Parliament could employ as staff and what expenses they could claim for them. 

Lawmakers were told they would only be repaid if they made claims within 90 days. And they were banned from claiming expenses on second homes they bought, but can claim on rent. 

The new system has its fans. Claims have fallen dramatically and there have been few headlines about frivolous expenses. The latest figures showed lawmakers claimed £3.2 million over the period from May to August. That compares with an annual claim of £102.8 million in the 2007/8 financial year. 

Labour lawmaker John Mann complained that "MPs just don't get it." 

"They think they are underpaid. But if they aren't happy about it, MPs should resign and let someone else do the job," he said. 

Mr. Mann said he is confident IPSA can sort out any problems. 

Yet many lawmakers say the current system needs scrapping. Labour lawmaker Tom Harris says the majority think IPSA is a "failed organization" which ties lawmakers up in red tape and prevents them doing their core jobs of passing legislation, holding the government to account and helping constituents. 

Others complain that rules banning lawmakers from in and around London from claiming allowances for a second home make it impossible for parents of young children to stand in those seats. 

During an impassioned parliamentary debate on the expenses system in December, Conservative lawmaker Adam Afriyie said lawmakers must ensure that parliament remains "diverse and welcoming to those who are not as affluent as others and cannot afford to fund their own way here." 

In private, lawmakers are scathing. One Conservative lawmaker who entered parliament last May says he has already spent more than £5,000 out of his own pocket on communicating with constituents. He says lawmakers are using a "significant" portion of their £65,000 annual salary to pay expenses while not making claims for fear of bad headlines. 

He says newly elected lawmakers are especially unhappy since they didn't cause the problem. They account for an unusually high 35% of all lawmakers, partly because so many veterans stepped down as a result of the expenses scandals. 

"There is a sense that we are paying for the sins of the past," he said. 

The unrest seems to have won over David Cameron, whose hard-line stance on expense abuses in 2009 helped boost his popularity ahead of last May's election, when Labour was ousted after 13 years in office. 

A week after a private meeting of his Conservative party lawmakers became the scene of angry complaints about the expenses rules, Mr. Cameron sought to address their concerns. 

In that second meeting, Mr. Cameron said he was giving IPSA until April to get the system right but didn't spell out what action he would take if it failed to do so, according to lawmakers present. 

IPSA says it is flexible but insists it will guard its independence fiercely.

The day after Mr. Cameron's comments, it took aim at the Prime Minister noting that "it is worth remembering that all the main parties and political leaders welcomed the rules and the changes we introduced." 

IPSA can point to public support for the new rules. A November poll by YouGov that was commissioned by IPSA showed that 59% of the 2,599 adults surveyed believe the body will do an effective job of cracking down on frivolous expenses, while only 30% believed MPs could be trusted to make legitimate expenses claims. 

But there are signs IPSA may be preparing to retreat under fire. 

On Wednesday, the organization published a consultation that asked the public, lawmakers and others to give their views on how the expenses system was working.

The consultation puts up for debate almost all the major rule changes that have been introduced, suggesting the system could face a fresh overhaul. It ends February 11. 

In his foreword to the document, IPSA chairman Sir Ian Kennedy signaled lawmakers should not take anything for granted. While he acknowledged the current system is "not perfect," he said the new approach is working. 

"IPSA was created by Parliament to bring an end to the old, discredited expenses system and has introduced an integrity and probity to MPs' expenses," he said.

 Write to  Laurence Norman at laurence.norman@dowjones.com 