A pair of New York visionaries put their heads together at the New York City Opera next week. Since the 1970s, composer  John Zorn has traversed the worlds of jazz improvisation, avant-garde gamesmanship, and contemporary chamber music with a prolific output of work.  Michael Counts is a director and designer who applies his bold, transformative imagination to large-scale, site-specific art and performance installations.

Mr. Zorn's 11-minute opera "La machine l'être" has its world premiere Friday at New York City Opera. It's part of "Monodramas," joining  Arnold Schoenberg's "Erwartung" and  Morton Feldman's "Neither," in a unified program of works each sung by a separate single soprano.  George Steel, the opera's general manager and artistic director, came up with the concept and first introduced Mr. Zorn to Mr. Counts via the Internet. 

"He showed me some things on YouTube and I said, 'That's the guy,'" Mr. Zorn said. The men soon met and convened in person. They found they had a lot in common, like an affinity for the mysterious boxes constructed by artist and filmmaker Joseph Cornell. And, likewise, for the drawings that inspired the opera, made by French literary and theatrical figure Antonin Artaud shortly before his 1948 death in a Paris psychiatric clinic. 

At a recent meeting in the offices of City Opera, the artists talked about their collaboration, which runs through April 8.

 John Zorn: I don't like to use text. I don't set text to music still. I haven't done that since I was 16 or something. I like to let the music go where it goes, and sometimes text defines where the music goes dramatically. I got inspiration from the drawings which I'd loved for many, many years.

 Michael Counts: The three [things] that John gave me were: The drawings of Antonin Artaud, magic and alchemy. A lot of my past work has been interested in illusion and altering peoples' perceptions, shifting perspective in ways that normally you couldn't do theatrically adding cinematic effects in interesting ways.

 Zorn: Intuition is very important. We met, and looked into each other's eyes, and there was a real connection there and a trust there. That doesn't always happen. I said, "Man, this could go in a million different ways. Here are three [things] that sum up what I'm looking for. Go and do your thing." I think the process George told me [Counts was] going through was sitting in the theater, with headphones on, listening to the piece over and over and over, making drawings. His notebooks are works of art, they're amazing. Something magical is going to happen from that kind of ritualistic immersion in something of that intensity.

 Counts: I very much believe in the shamanistic origins of art and theater. I feel like spending a lot of time in that space, spending a ton of time with the music, and seeing where I go with it, and then having the production and the staging be a bridge so that people in their first hearing of it can go the place I went on my hundredth.

 Zorn: It's going to be the most packed 10 minutes of anything you've ever seen or heard. That's the way I kind of conceive of music. I try to put as many ideas or many colors and shapes and forms and feelings into as small amount of time as I can. I think that's what composing is about. I don't take one idea and stretch it out for 60 minutes. If I did I'd probably have the Pulitzer Prize by now.

 Counts: I saw John performing a musical and visual piece that was almost like Joseph Cornell in sequence.

 Zorn: Like a performance of a box, if a box came alive.

 Counts: It helped shape the staging. Building on visual music, the music of events and implied meaning that's sort of ambiguous and draws you in mysteriously. I took a big leap after experiencing that.

 Zorn: I do these private performances for six or eight people at midnight on selected days of the year. I've been doing them since 1974. They're small tabletop performances using found objects. I put the objects out in different timings and a narrative is created. Sometimes there's sound, sometimes there's not. It's very small and intimate. It's only by invitation. You come in. You see this thing. And then you leave. It's a very strange little thing. It's a secret. They draw upon my connection with Joseph Cornell and his love for small objects. 

 Zorn (to Counts): How did you feel about the context you're in now? It's a proscenium stage. It's an old, tried and true format. This is not a happening. This is not some strange place in the Brooklyn docks. You're in a theater. You're doing something that touches tradition. 

 Counts: Every space is weird. Every space has its idiosyncrasies and every space has meaning that's attached to it. Part of the reason I needed to sit in the space and listen to the music is that even this to me is site-specific. I haven't yet done a piece on paper to be plugged into a house. The way we're treating the stage mechanics and rigging is part of the machine, the machine of being. The idea was to reveal that in a way that doesn't just feel like you pulled back the curtain and there's the gear. But in a way that's true and consistent with Artaud's ideas of the theater and its double, the theater of cruelty, putting the audience in the center of the action. If I sit in a warehouse, what's the warehouse asking for? If I sit in an opera house, what's the opera house asking for?