TEL AVIV -- An Israeli couple and three of their children were killed by one or more attackers who slipped into a Jewish settlement in the West Bank and stabbed them as they slept, the Israeli military said.

The killings during the Jewish Sabbath late Friday triggered an Israeli army manhunt in Palestinian districts near the northern West Bank city of Nablus. Soldiers set up road blocks and made dozens of arrests in house-to-house searches Saturday.

The attack in the settlement of Itamar, the deadliest of its kind in three years, ratcheted up tension between Israel and the Palestinian Authority at a time when peace talks between them are moribund. The targeting of an area of Jewish settlers known for vigilantism against Palestinians also threatens to trigger an upsurge in violence.

Israeli officials identified the victims as Udi and Ruth Fogel, their 11-year old son Yoav, 4-year-old son Elad and 3-month-old daughter Hadas. Two of the couple's other young children were left alive, Israeli media reported. The killings were discovered when the couple's 12-year-old daughter, Tamar, returned home after midnight, realized something was amiss, and called for help to get into the house.

There was no immediate claim of responsibility for the attack, which the military said was carried out by at least one Palestinian.

Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu condemned what he called "a despicable murder" and said Israel would "act vigorously" to protect its citizens. In a televised address, he cautioned Jewish settlers against revenge attacks against Palestinians.

Palestinian leaders joined U.N. Secretary General Ban Ki-Moon and the White House issued in denouncing the killings.

Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas telephoned Mr. Netanyahu to convey his condemnation of the attack, the Israeli leader's office said. It added that Mr. Netanyahu had demanded that Palestinian police forces join in the search for the killer. 

Palestinian police stepped up their presence in the streets of Nablus, but it was unclear whether they were taking active part in the search.

Salam Fayyad, the Palestinian Authority prime minister, said during a public appearance in the West Bank: "We clearly and firmly condemn all forms of violence, and I condemn what happened last night in Itamar, just as I condemn the crimes against Palestinians."

The region around Nablus has been a flashpoint of tension between extremist Jewish settlers and Palestinian villagers. 

A week ago Israeli security officers fired rubber bullets at a group of settlers who were resisting the army's demolition of Jewish building in their unauthorized hilltop outpost, Havat Gilad. In turn, the settlers firebombed a Palestinian home in the area.

A group of Israelis in the settlements around Nablus have pursued in recent years a campaign of vigilantism known as ``price tag," targeting Palestinians in revenge for attacks on settlements by militants or in retribution for government activities aimed at curtailing settlement expansion.

Despite the tension, there is a broader calm in the West Bank. Palestinian cities that had descended into lawlessness during an uprising a decade ago have been brought under control by the Israeli military and are now patrolled by Palestinian security services. The Palestinian Authority has been cooperating with Israel to curb activity by Palestinian militants. Israel has removed checkpoints on the roads and at the entrance to Palestinian cities, boosting the Palestinian economy in the West Bank.

David Ha'ivri, a spokesman for settlers in the region, said the military's relaxation of restrictions on Palestinians' movement in the West Bank had contributed to Friday's attack. He called for the resignation of Israeli Defense Minister Ehud Barak.

The last deadly attack on settlers came on Aug. 31, when four Israelis were killed in a shooting near Hebron on the eve of the most recent round of Israeli-Palestinian peace talks. The U.S.-mediated talks collapsed a few weeks later after Israel refused to extend a partial moratorium on construction in settlements on West Bank land claimed by Palestinians as part of a future state.

Israeli officials say Mr. Netanyahu is preparing to unveil an initiative aimed at reviving the talks. They say he may offer the Palestinians a provisional state within temporary borders until negotiations produce a full-scale peace accord on definitive borders, the status of Palestinian refugees and rival claims to Jeruslaem.

Friday's attack was the deadliest against Israelis since March 6, 2008, when a shooting spree by a Palestinian militant killed eight students at a Jerusalem seminary.

Israeli Foreign Minister Avigdor Lieberman instructed Israel's United Nations delegate to submit a complaint about Friday's killings to the U.N. Security Council.