LIMA, Peru—Over the past decade,  Julio César Rivera Dávalos has spent more than $100,000 of his savings, put his consulting business on hold and endured blistering personal attacks to advance a lonely cause: changing Peru's epic downer of a national anthem. 

The 69-year-old auditor has traveled up and down the Andes Mountains giving talks assailing the song and its gloomy first verse, which starts, "For a long time, the oppressed Peruvian dragged the ominous chain." In two self-published books, he argued the anthem engenders "alienation, indifference, apathy, pessimism and disintegration." Mr. Rivera even penned an alternative anthem, hired a classical tenor to interpret it and cut a CD of his song.

Though it has been a struggle, Mr. Rivera can now claim at least partial victory. In August, Peru's education minister, maintaining that an emerging economic star like Peru merits a more upbeat theme song, instructed classrooms throughout the country to substitute the first verse—the one most commonly sung—with a later stanza that exalts freedom and the majesty of the Andes. The military is on board, too. 

In the era when politicians are ever more conscious of the national brand and more sensitive to political correctness, debates over national anthems have simmered from Canada to Nepal. But would-be reformers often find it's an arduous battle making nations change their tunes—no matter how archaic or depressing the songs may be. 

Canada's government, seeking to promote equal rights for women, said last March it was considering a gender-neutral substitute for the "O Canada" lyric that goes, "true patriot love in all thy sons command." Hostility from people who like the existing version of the anthem was so great that the idea was dropped in two days. "We offered to hear from Canadians on this issue and they have already spoken loud and clear," said a government spokesman.

Hear the song's chorus, then the new first verse, followed by a repeat of the chorus:

 Former first verse: 

For a long time the oppressed Peruvian  Dragged the ominous chain;  Condemned to cruel servitude  He moaned for a long time in silence.  But as soon as the sacred cry of  "Freedom!" was heard on the coasts,  He shook off the indolence of slavery,  He raised his humiliated neck.

 New first verse, former sixth verse: 

On its summit may the Andes hold  The two-colored flag or standard,  May it announce to the centuries the struggle  That set us free forever.  Under its shadow may we live peacefully  And, as the sun is born over its peaks,  Let us renew the great oath  We rendered to the God of Jacob.

 The Canadian government considered a gender-neutral substitute for the line "True patriot love in all thy sons command," but public hostility to the change was ferocious. 

O Canada!  Our home and native land!  True patriot love in all thy sons command.

With glowing hearts we see thee rise,  The True North strong and free!

From far and wide,  O Canada, we stand on guard for thee.

God keep our land glorious and free!  O Canada, we stand on guard for thee  O Canada, we stand on guard for thee. 

 Source: National Institutes of Health  

 Russian lawmakers opposed a Communist Party suggestion to amend the line "native land protected by God" by substituting "us" for "God." 

Russia, our holy nation!  Russia, our beloved country!  A mighty will, great glory -  These are yours for all time!

CHORUS: Be glorious, our free Fatherland!  Age-old union of fraternal peoples,  Popular wisdom given by our forebears,  Be glorious, our country! We are proud of you!

From the southern seas to the polar lands  Spread our forests and fields.  You are unique in the world, one of a kind,  Native land protected by God!

Wide spaces for dreams and for living  Are opened for us by the coming years  Our loyalty to our Fatherland gives us strength.  Thus it was, thus it is and always will be.

 Source: Consulate General of the Russian Federation in Montreal  

Russian lawmakers spoke loud and clear—in opposition—when the Communist Party lobbied for a bill last year to write the Supreme Being out of the anthem. The failed Communist proposal would have amended a line referring to Russia as the "native land protected by God" by substituting "us" for "God." 

"Ultimately, the people own the anthem, and you don't always see how much people care until someone tries to change it," says David Kendall, a Winnipeg native who posts recordings and lyrics of 400 past and present anthems at nationalanthems.info. 

He cares so much about national songs that, to get up to speed on the latest permutation in the Pitcairn Islands anthem, he exchanged emails with many of the Pacific archipelago's 50 or so inhabitants.

He tracks brouhahas like the one in Britain a few years ago, when a Labor government official floated the idea of revising an outdated exhortation "to crush" the "rebellious Scots," in an obscure verse of "God Save the Queen." That notion fizzled amid withering scorn from the tabloids.

In some countries—including Afghanistan and Nepal—it has taken regime change to revise an anthem. The "National Anthem of Independent Neutral Turkmenistan" didn't get a rewrite until after the death in 2006 of the Central Asian state's president for life, Saparmurat Niyazov, known as Turkmenbashi. Mr. Niyazov himself had written the original anthem, in which he described the country as the "great creation of Turkmenbashi." The line was changed after his death to the "great creation of the people." 

"The Star-Spangled Banner" has faced criticism from some quarters for glorifying war and being difficult to sing, but periodic efforts to replace it with "America the Beautiful" or other songs have never gained traction.

Song-writing competitions have helped build a consensus for changing anthems in some places, such as the island of Jersey, a British dependency off the coast of France. "Island Home," the winning song in the 2008 contest, was praised for its opening notes, which evoke the lowing of a Jersey cow. The anthem was adopted, though not all residents are enamored of the new song. 

In Spain, one of a handful of nations with a wordless anthem, controversy emerged amid a competition to add lyrics in 2008. The jury's pick among 7,000 entrants featured the refrain "Viva España," or "Long Live Spain," a rallying cry of ex-dictator Gen. Francisco Franco. Critics attacked the choice, and the plan to add lyrics was dropped.

Peru's booming anthem, dating from 1821, is characteristic of a type in Latin America, says Michael Jamieson Bristow, editor of "National Anthems of the World." "They are all like mini operas going on and on at great length, as people at soccer matches know to their dismay," he says.

Mr. Rivera says the first verse was tacked on decades after Peru's anthem was introduced, and the lyrics dwell excessively on Peruvians being "condemned to cruel servitude" by Spain. Mr. Rivera's critics have attacked him as "unpatriotic." 

But Peruvian politicians have begun to echo Mr. Rivera's argument that the anthem contributed to a pall of negativity over Peru—despite recent successes that ought to stoke national pride. Peru's economy grew by around 9% last year, one of the fastest rates in the world. Peruvian author Mario Vargas Llosa just won the Nobel Prize. Even Peru's cuisine is gaining recognition. Yet, paradoxically, polls show Peruvians to be largely dissatisfied with their lives and their country. 

"We are what we are, sad, distrustful," President Alan García said recently. He contrasted his countrymen with Brazilians, "who are of another kind of race, of joy and sun."

Peru's army was first to switch to the new anthem opening, with Mr. García following suit at an appearance before Congress on Independence Day in July. The substitute opening, previously the sixth verse, describes the Peruvian flag waving above the Andes, symbolizing "the struggle that set us free forever." 

Not everyone is happy with the change. Historian Antonio Zapata wrote that the depressing opening was a necessary set-up for the soaring finish. Mr. Rivera, meanwhile, says changing one verse doesn't go far enough and the anthem needs to be scrapped.

César Augusto Neira Magán, head of the association of Peruvian psychologists, says he's waiting to see scientific evidence that anthem lyrics impact the psyche of school kids. "Did you pay attention to the national anthem when you were in sixth grade?" he asks.