A new voting method with the potential to alter election results has sparked a feud among political scientists and statisticians.

More than a dozen cities across the U.S. have adopted the system, called instant runoff, in the last decade, including San Francisco, Minneapolis and Oakland, Calif. Several more, including Memphis and Portland, Maine, are using it for the first time this year.

In instant runoff elections, candidates are ranked by preference, allowing voters to have a say in the electoral outcome even if their top choice doesn't have a shot at winning. (Think Ralph Nader supporters who nevertheless preferred to see Al Gore win over George W. Bush in 2000.) In practice, instant runoffs can be applied only to contests with three or more candidates, but advocates say the system could encourage more third-party contenders to enter competitive races. 

As the system has gained support, a backlash has emerged as well. Last week, voters in the U.K. roundly defeated a proposal to institute ranked voting. Similar approaches have been rejected by Burlington, Vt., Fort Collins, Colo., and Honolulu.

At the same time, some mathematicians and political scientists warn that as instant-runoff systems are adopted, there is a risk that candidates with the broadest support could end up losing.

"It's silly to try out a bad system and then see its failures enacted," says  Steven Brams, professor of politics at New York University who supports a different voting system, called approval voting, in which voters back as many candidates as they want. The candidate with the most overall votes wins.

Prof. Brams and instant runoff's leading advocate— Rob Richie, executive director of the nonprofit advocacy group FairVote—have been debating the merits of alternative voting systems for decades. They and many political scientists say just about any reasonable system would be preferable to the one most commonly used, in which each voter gets one vote and the candidate with the most votes wins, raising the possibility that the two leading choices will split the bulk of the votes and hand the victory to a third candidate. 

But Messrs. Brams and Richie disagree on which system should replace the current one. Mr. Richie, who has advised cities on adopting the instant runoff, says the system is practical. "I'm interested in talking about reform and changing politics, not winning the math debate," he says.

In an instant-runoff race, voters rank as many candidates as they want. The votes are tallied in a series of rounds, which, in practice, occur nearly instantaneously via computer scoring, hence the "instant" in the name. In the first round, all ballots are sorted by their first choice. If one candidate has more than 50% of the vote at that stage, she or he wins the election. But if no candidate secures a majority, the last-place candidate is eliminated, and ballots ranking that candidate first are reassigned to their second preference, if one is indicated. Again, any candidate with 50% of votes wins. If there isn't a winner, the cycle is repeated until someone gets a majority of votes.

Some supporters of instant runoffs like that voters can rank a third-party candidate first without fearing their second choice will be derailed. They also note that the system is less expensive than holding a second, runoff election weeks or months later, when turnout often is lower.

But instant-runoff voting can produce some quirky outcomes. In a scenario cited by the system's detractors, a candidate who would be preferred by most voters if pitted against just one of the other candidates can lose. Consider a four-person race in which the centrist candidate is the first choice of 10% of voters and the second choice of the other 90%, who split their first-place votes evenly among each of the other three candidates. The centrist, despite being preferred by 70% of voters to each of the other three candidates, is eliminated in the first round after receiving the fewest first-place votes.

Mr. Richie says the candidates with more first-place votes would make better leaders. "You want executives who have followers, and who have wind at their back," he says.

  Terry Reilly, a retired engineer and former chair of the campaign finance review and ethics board for San Jose, Calif., once supported instant runoffs but has since come to oppose the system over concerns about possible odd outcomes. Mr. Reilly carried out an independent analysis of last November's Oakland mayoral election, which used the instant runoff. He discovered that Don Perata, who lost despite having far more first-place votes than eventual winner Jean Quan, paradoxically could have won if 2,400 more people had ranked the third-place finisher, Rebecca Kaplan, first, while leaving Mr. Perata off the ballot entirely.

Instant runoff "is being pitched everywhere, and I ain't buying," Mr. Reilly says.

Robert Winters, a Wellesley College mathematician who has studied electoral systems, says the way to know which systems work best is to try them out. "I would love to see a variety of voting methods adopted on a small scale," says Prof. Winters. "They all have flaws, but it's helpful to see how they work with real voters."

 Write to  Carl Bialik at numbersguy@wsj.com 