Stocks faltered slightly, ending a three-day rally as investors showed signs of looking past recent concerns over unrest in the Middle East and Japan's earthquake.

The small decline, which came on lower-than-average volume, saw the Dow Jones Industrial Average move in a narrow band of just 48 points before finishing down 17.90 points, or 0.15%, at 12018.63. 

The Standard & Poor's 500-stock index fell 4.61 points, or 0.36%, to 1293.77 and the Nasdaq Composite fell 8.22 points, or 0.31%, to 2683.87. Leading the declines were industrial and consumer-discretionary stocks.

  Walgreen fell 6.6% to lead the S&P 500's decliners after the drugstore operator's second-quarter earnings disappointed some analysts, with Goldman Sachs saying the quarter would be viewed as "a setback" after two strong quarters. Goldman Sachs said it was disappointed by the chain's gross margin.

Oil prices were also a concern for some investors, as crude-oil futures rise to $104 a barrel.

The broader pause comes after three days that saw the Dow gain 3.5% to trade above 12000 for the first time since the March 11 Japan earthquake, helped by encouraging geopolitical developments and corporate mergers such as  AT&T's
T


-0.97
%




 agreement to buy T-Mobile USA from  Deutsche Telekom.

"We just glided into 2011, and after two months we were up 6%," said  Joe Quinlan, chief market strategist for Bank of America U.S. Trust Private Wealth Management. "We've rattled some complacency out of the markets, and that's good in the sense that it's not a glide. That first 6% felt easy—almost too easy."

Investors were cheered by the strength of the rebound that began last Thursday, and saw Tuesday's light action as a day of "consolidation" for the market.

"The market swing over the last three trading days was really surprising," said  Larry Glazer, managing partner at Mayflower Advisors in Boston. "The market really needs to digest what's been happening and investors need to decide how daring they want to be."

Mr. Glazer said the previous sessions were driven by "bargain hunters" who have been looking to get into the U.S. stock market as the economic fundamentals improve. "We heard  Warren Buffett talking about having an 'itchy finger' recently, and I think investors feel the same way—they're itchy to get into the markets."

Some were concerned about rising oil prices, with crude pushing higher. "If crude oil gets to $110 a barrel, I think that's a yellow light, and at $120 a barrel it's really a red light where it will be bearish for stocks and have a lot of people thinking about this double dip notion we had last year," said  Jerry Harris, president of asset management at Sterne Agee.

Volumes were light, with just 3.7 billion shares changing hands in New York Stock Exchange composite volume, well below the daily average this year of about 4.5 billion shares.

The biggest decliners among Dow components were  General Electric
GE


0.15
%




 and Bank of America, off 1.2% each, while  Verizon Communications
VZ


-0.14
%




 continued to benefit from the prospect of consolidation in the telecommunications industry. Verizon was the strongest performer among the Dow components, gaining 1.3% while AT&T slipped 0.6%.

In corporate news,  Dollar General
DG


-0.15
%




 shares rose 1.5% after the retailer reported fourth-quarter that earnings more than doubled to 64 cents a share from 26 cents a year ago.

  Netflix
NFLX


-2.25
%




 gained 4% after  Credit Suisse raised its rating on the online video-streaming service.

  Dollar Thrifty Automotive Group rose 3.1after the car-rental service lifted its 2011 profit guidance, citing lower costs for its fleet of autos and increased confidence about summer rentals.

In Europe, shares were mostly lower after showing broad-based gains for most of the session. Investors returned to the market in Tokyo after Monday's holiday and pushed the Nikkei Stock Average to close 4.4% higher.

Gold futures edged higher, while the yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury note rose to 3.334%.

The euro was at $1.4202, down from $1.4221 late Monday, and the dollar was at 80.91 yen, from 81.05 yen.

 Write to  Jonathan Cheng at jonathan.cheng@wsj.com 