ABU DHABI—Portuguese Prime Minister José Sócrates says he is counting on a pickup in exports and foreign investors to ease Portugal's debt crisis. 

"We don't need any help," Mr. Sócrates said, referring to whether Portugal might need to ask for a bailout from the European Union or International Monetary Fund. "We reduced our budget deficit by more than 2.2 percentage points [of gross domestic product in 2010] and the economy expanded by nearly twice as much as initially expected to 1.3%," he said in an interview.

"What other country has managed to reduce its budget deficit by so much and, at the same time, expand its economy by so much in a year?" 

To preserve those trends, Mr. Sócrates and other government officials have embarked on a series of roadshows around the world to market Portuguese products—including its debt. Last week Mr. Sócrates was in Qatar and Abu Dhabi, where he signed bilateral trade agreements ranging from renewable energy to tourism. His ministers have also spoken to Gulf sovereign-wealth funds and to China, both have expressed interest in Portugal's debt and its privatization program. 

But doubts persist—including from Portugal's central bank—about the health of the country's economic vital signs. Some economists believe that Portugal will inevitably have to follow Greece and Ireland in seeking a bailout from the EU and the IMF. 

For now, at least, the government's fiscal austerity program and export growth have helped restore some confidence among international bond investors that Lisbon can still avoid a bailout. Yet investors continue to demand a high price for Portuguese government debt. Economists say the 6.8% yield paid on 10-year Portuguese government bonds is unsustainable. 

Mr. Sócrates said in the interview last week that yields of around 7% are "irrational" given the country's better-than-expected economic growth and its budget deficit reduction program. He said he expects that "yields will drop" as the government moves ahead with its budget plan, and boosts exports. 

However, some experts doubt whether higher exports will be enough to support the economy. Exports rose about 15% in the first 11 months of 2010 compared with an 18% drop in the whole of 2009. The government expects exports to rise by 7.3% in 2011. However, the Bank of Portugal expects exports will grow at a slower pace of 5.9% in 2011 and won't be enough to offset a slump in domestic demand and investment. The central bank predicts the economy will shrink 1.3% this year, compared with the government's forecast for 0.2% growth. 

Moody's Investors Service Inc., the credit-ratings agency, is also considering a downgrade of its sovereign-debt rating for Portugal, because it is concerned that the country's high borrowing costs and feeble economic growth prospects could make it hard for the government to rein in its budget deficit. 

Mr. Sócrates said he isn't concerned by doubts regarding economic growth, saying he has "great hope" that exports will grow by more than expected this year. 

Portugal's finance ministry is also on a mission to lower the country's borrowing costs by diversifying its bondholder base. It has traveled as far afield as China, Brazil and the Persian Gulf to attract new capital. 

The government is in the midst of €6 billion privatization program, with proceeds to be used to reduce its debt load. The government is privatizing or selling down its stake in such companies as the TAP Portugal airline and Portugal's largest electricity company, Energias de Portugal SA. Mr. Sócrates previously said Abu Dhabi's sovereign-wealth investment funds are studying Portugal's privatization program, with interest in energy and transport companies. "Our only problem is our public accounts," he said. The government has set itself an ambitious target of reducing its budget deficit to 4.6% of GDP in 2011 and to below 3% in 2012. 

 Write to  Alex MacDonald at alex.macdonald@dowjones.com 