FLORHAM PARK, N.J.—Jets coach Rex Ryan is shocking everyone once again this week, this time by eschewing his favored postseason policy of needling opponents. On Monday, for example, he did not portray the Jets' upcoming AFC Championship Game as a "personal" battle between himself and Mike Tomlin, the Pittsburgh Steelers' head coach. Nor did he critique the study habits of Ben Roethlisberger.

In fact, Mr. Ryan praised Mr. Roethlisberger, the Steelers' bear-sized quarterback, as tough, mobile and capable of dissecting defenses. Any coach, Mr. Ryan said, would "love" to have Mr. Roethlisberger on his team. Then Mr. Ryan paused for a half-beat before adding, "I like our guy."

His guy is Mark Sanchez, the Jets' second-year quarterback, and in victories over the Indianapolis Colts and England Patriots, Mr. Sanchez has been solid, sometimes outstanding. If he once was charged with merely "managing games," which is widely known in the NFL as a euphemism for "handoff specialist," he now is helping the Jets win them.



The Jets (13-5), the sixth seed in the AFC playoffs, hope to take their next step against the second-seeded Steelers (13-4) on Sunday, with a berth in the Super Bowl at stake. For Mr. Sanchez, the contest will present another opportunity for him to change the popular perception of him as a latter-day Trent Dilfer, the poster boy, fair or not, for quarterbacks who have ridden their teammates' coattails to championships.

In two playoff games, Mr. Sanchez has completed 34 of 56 passes for 383 yards with three touchdowns and only one interception. He was at his best in Sunday's 28-21 victory over the Patriots, completing 16 of 25 passes for 194 yards with three touchdowns. He had a knack for making the big play in the big moment, much as he did throughout the regular season. There was a 48-yard pass to Jerricho Cotchery, then a 7-yard scoring strike to Santonio Holmes in the corner of the end zone—each throw helping to shed Mr. Sanchez's reputation as inaccurate and overrated.

"He's only been in the league two years," Mr. Ryan said. "And like I said last year, he's not going to be looked at as the weakness of this team, but as the strength. And I think you're seeing that right now."

The Jets are leaning on Mr. Sanchez—and his sore throwing shoulder—more than they did during last season's three-game playoff run, when Mr. Sanchez only threw the ball on 38.4% of the snaps. This postseason, Mr. Sanchez has thrown the ball 44.8% of the time. Mr. Ryan has sought greater balance between his running and passing games, and now he has enough confidence in Mr. Sanchez to execute the plan.

Not to pick on Mr. Dilfer, but when he quarterbacked the Baltimore Ravens to the Super Bowl at the end of the 2000 season, he attempted passes on just 34.3% of his team's snaps throughout the playoffs. The Ravens were highly dependent on their defense and tried to run the ball as often as possible. As a result, Mr. Dilfer completed just five passes in a divisional-round victory over the Tennessee Titans.

In 2002, quarterback Brad Johnson played a role in the Tampa Bay Buccaneers' run to the Super Bowl, though he threw for five touchdowns over three games and was intercepted three times. The key? Tampa Bay's defense limited its opponents to 12.3 points per game.

The success of the Ravens and Buccaneers undermined the myth about teams needing dynamic quarterbacks to win in the playoffs. Sometimes quarterbacks only have to take care of the ball and avoid making mistakes. 

With the Jets, Mr. Sanchez is doing more than not messing up. In five playoff games, he has completed 75 of 124 passes for 922 yards with seven touchdowns and three interceptions. His quarterback rating: 92.2. He already has won four playoff games, more than any quarterback in team history. 

And what about Joe Namath, the iconic face of the Jets? Mr. Namath played in three playoff games in his career, completing 42.7% of his passes with a quarterback rating of 54.6. In Super Bowl III, he helped the Jets to their first and only title by completing 17 passes for 206 yards. Lost to history is the fact that the Jets ran the ball 43 times for 142 yards. It was old-school "ground-and-pound" at its finest.

Mr. Namath recalled meeting Mr. Sanchez before last year's season opener against the Houston Texans and said he was struck by Mr. Sanchez's polish, his enthusiasm, his sincerity. "You could tell the kid was real," Mr. Namath said.

Mr. Namath said he researched Mr. Sanchez's background. Here, Mr. Namath said, was a quarterback who worked hard and studied lots of film, a young man who carried himself with a sense of purpose. These were the intangibles that Mr. Namath felt would supplement Mr. Sanchez's athleticism and instincts, his strong arm and quick feet.

"He continues to grasp the game and grow with it," Mr. Namath said, "and what he doesn't know, he puts the effort into finding out."

 Write to  Scott Cacciola at scott.cacciola@wsj.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications  Baltimore Ravens quarterback Trent Dilfer and Tampa Bay Buccaneers quarterback Brad Johnson led their teams to Super Bowl victories in 2000 and 2002, respectively. A Sports article Wednesday incorrectly said the teams won the Super Bowl in consecutive seasons. 