If a show opens on Broadway and it's not a Spidery spectacle, will anyone care?

That's what some producers are wondering amid the breathless attention to the trials and tribulations of "Spider-Man: Turn Off the Dark."

The $70 million production has dominated the limelight for months. And last week's replacement of director Julie Taymor with a new artistic team, along with the show's sixth opening-night delay, only intensified public appetite for news about the troubled show. 

The result is a case of arachnophobia for producers all over Broadway.

"Yeah, I think a lot of people are [upset]...that this one show is getting all of the attention," said Ken Davenport, a producer of "Speed-the-Plow" whose current projects include a revival of "Godspell."

Said Daryl Roth, a veteran producer who will open "The Normal Heart" starring Ellen Barkin on April 27: "I personally think the coverage [of "Spider-Man"] should really stop already. It's enough. It's enough."

Many producers react with visceral frustration when asked about how the unwavering spotlight on "Spider-Man" is affecting the rest of the industry.

"I don't want to talk about this anymore," said one producer, referring to "Spider-Man." "It's bad for the show; it's bad for Broadway."

Said another: "Call me back if you want to talk about my show, and we can talk about that."

With "Spider-Man" now set to open June 14, two days after the Tony Awards, producers fear it will continue to leech attention from the rest of the industry despite the slate of major productions scheduled to have their premieres between now and then. 

"Catch Me If You Can," "Priscilla Queen of the Desert the Musical" and "The Book of Mormon," written by "South Park" creators Trey Parker and Matt Stone, are all scheduled to open within the next month.

"There are a lot of stars on Broadway this season, and when [people] start talking about something new, that will be refreshing," said a producer of "Catch Me If You Can," Margo Lion.

But those attempting to switch the subject have often found themselves ensnared by public fascination with "Spider-Man."

During an interview last week on "The Daily Show with Jon Stewart," Messrs. Parker and Stone appeared less than enthused when Mr. Stewart raised the "Spider-Man" specter, asking whether they had considered "throwing people off of rafters on webs" in "The Book of Mormon."

"It's been done," Mr. Parker replied, somewhat curtly.

But Mr. Stewart continued undeterred: "It just seems like concussions are the way to go on Broadway right now," he said, referring to the numerous "Spider-Man" mishaps.

Said Mr. Stone, nodding: "It does sell tickets."

Other producers say that any attention paid to Broadway benefits the industry as a whole. "Generally I think...we feed off each other," said Stewart Lane, who has produced shows including "Thoroughly Modern Millie" and "The 39 Steps." "It certainly draws attention to the Broadway arena."

One camp espousing that theory is "Spider-Man" itself.

"The unprecedented amount of coverage has helped in attracting many first-time theater-goers, many of whom will become lifelong patrons," spokesman Rick Miramontez said in a statement. "There is no question that when one Broadway show gets national attention, the rest of Broadway benefits tremendously."

Ms. Roth, the producer, disagreed. "It's not good for the business," she said, because "it's not that people are interested in it vis-à-vis theater."

As her production, "The Normal Heart," heads toward its opening, "If I'm told that I can't have a story because of 'Spider-Man,'" she said, "I'm not going to be happy."

 Write to  Erica Orden at erica.orden@wsj.com 