Since 2009,  Bill Gross, founder of Pacific Investment Management Co., has been predicting several years of modest economic growth in the U.S. and other developed nations, leading to relatively muted stock returns. But that hasn't stopped Pimco, the giant bond-fund manager, from embarking on an ambitious plan to add actively managed stock funds to its menu.

Read the full  Investing in Funds report .

The  Allianz SE unit already has about $1 billion in its first active stock fund,  Pimco EqS Pathfinder, launched last April with a mandate to seek bargain-priced "value" stocks around the globe. Two emerging-markets funds are set to open in the next few months. 

Heading the stock-fund business: Managing Director  Neel Kashkari, recruited to Pimco in December 2009 after heading the bank bailout fund set up by the U.S. during the financial crisis. 

Mr. Kashkari, 37, recently discussed Pimco's stock-fund plans with The Wall Street Journal. Here are edited excerpts.

 WSJ: Let's start with the big picture: Why stocks? Has Pimco changed its fairly gloomy outlook for stock returns? Or does the company feel it has to do something to broaden its product line because the outlook for bonds is even worse these days? 

MR. KASHKARI: Our move into stocks has nothing to do with the current stock market or bond market. It's a strategic move for the firm. We are very focused on delivering what we call investment solutions to our clients. [If the client is investing for college, say, or retirement,] active equities are going to be part of that. 

No. 2, we absolutely believe that there are certain active equity strategies that can be made even stronger by being part of Pimco. If you look at what Pimco is so good at, it's a remarkable understanding of global economics and global markets. We think there are equity strategies that can harness that expertise, weave it into that bottom-up stock research, that portfolio construction, and be better for it. 

We've come up with a plan to only launch global and international strategies. 

 WSJ: Are you conceding that Pimco can't create a U.S.-stock fund to consistently beat a standard U.S. benchmark like the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index? 

MR. KASHKARI: I'm saying that that's not where our competitive advantage is. We would also argue that markets are in transition away from a domestic focus to a much more global focus. We think going forward investors will—and should—be thinking more globally and with a less constrained approach to investing. 

 WSJ: You see a problem with investors assembling their portfolios from funds that stick to narrow niches, as opposed to flexible funds whose managers have more leeway? 

MR. KASHKARI: It's very hard, especially for individual investors, to piece together strategies into an overall asset allocation or overall investing framework that really makes sense as a whole. A "solutions" approach, where you let a professional firm like Pimco do that asset allocation and that risk analysis, we think is a safer approach.

 WSJ: And yet, when you roll out funds in the emerging-markets category, say, isn't that still a narrow one? 

MR. KASHKARI: It is, although it also depends on how that emerging-markets strategy is managed.

It's a balancing act. We want to be forward-leaning in the industry, taking investors to where we think is a better place for them to earn attractive risk-adjusted returns, but we also need to be mindful of what investor preferences are.

[The planned Pimco EqS Emerging Markets and Pimco Emerging Multi-Asset funds] will be defining emerging markets both in terms of the countries that they are investing in but also companies elsewhere that have major exposure to emerging markets. So it will be a less constrained approach. [And the latter fund is] an asset-allocation product that will combine emerging-markets fixed-income securities as well as equity securities in one solution.

 WSJ: What other types of stock funds do you envision in your lineup?  

MR. KASHKARI: Global growth is a strategy that we are working on right now. Even if the U.S., as we think, is going to be growing more slowly in the next few years, there are going to be markets around the world that are growing. We think we should offer a stock fund that will enable investors to go all around the world to find the growth, wherever that growth is. 

Global income is another strategy that we are working on and excited about. I would envision us at some point coming out with a high-dividend-paying global stock fund. I would also envision us being able to put that together with Pimco's existing expertise in income-generating bond funds—just as we are putting together our emerging-markets equity and fixed-income expertise.

 WSJ: Do you see Pimco offering actively managed stock exchange-traded funds?  

MR. KASHKARI: Not in the near future. We do have an early ETF business that is more focused on what we call smart passive strategies [for fixed-income investing]. Whether we go into the full active ETF space is still an open question. 

 WSJ: How much money do you have invested in Pimco mutual funds? 

MR. KASHKARI: Me personally? I own a house. Aside from my house, the majority of my liquid assets are invested in Pimco funds.

 WSJ: How do you feel about the early performance of the Pathfinder fund, which has trailed its benchmark? [The fund is up 7.3% from inception, while the MSCI World Index is up 12.2%.]  

MR. KASHKARI: We're actually very pleased with Pathfinder. The managers invest in deeply underpriced companies all around the world; sometimes they'll own cash if they think the equity markets are risky. It's a very safe approach to getting global equity exposure. It's generating positive returns, and it's not taking a lot of risk at a time when there still is a lot of global economic risk. 

 WSJ: What's the hardest part of your job? 

MR. KASHKARI: Finding equity portfolio managers that we really believe are great investors. We've interviewed dozens and dozens and dozens. Honestly, the vast majority, even those with great track records, when we really tear apart the way they invest, we just walk away unconvinced that they are really a great investor with a repeatable process that is explainable and logical. 

Ms. Damato is a news editor for The Wall Street Journal in South Brunswick, N.J. Email her at karen.damato@wsj.com.