  Nathan Romano is determined to bust stigmas about mental illness and he says that one of the best ways to do that is by encouraging people to share their own experiences.

"People are still very, very afraid of talking about it for fears of repercussion to the person who is suffering from it," says Mr. Romano. "Even families don't want to admit they have it in their family." 

Mr. Romano, 40 years old, is a managing director in investment banking at Credit Suisse and a board member of the National Alliance on Mental Illness of New York City.

He became involved with the organization in 2004 because he wanted to devote time to a cause that is close to him. Mr. Romano's mother suffered from periodic bouts of mental illness.

"It was probably the biggest impact on my life as a kid because she was alone and raising me and she did an amazing job," says Mr. Romano. 

With an aunt's help, Mr. Romano sweetly says, his mother "raised me successfully."

Over the past six years, Mr. Romano has raised more than $250,000 for the organization and most recently made a personal contribution of $10,000 in honor of today's NAMIWalks event.

Mr. Romano's team of 20 walkers is called the "Credit Suisse Stigma Busters" and they have raised more than $22,000 from individual donors and another $110,000 in corporate sponsorship.

The walk across the Brooklyn Bridge is an event Mr. Romano helped to initiate when he joined the board of the organization. The walk is now in its fifth year and always happens near Mother's Day. 

"You get a couple thousand people who come together and they get to see that they're not alone," says Mr. Romano.

The National Alliance on Mental Illness of New York City is a grass-roots organization that locally provides support and education for individuals and families, and works to improve the mental-health system. The organization serves about 15,000 people annually.

Among its direct services is a helpline, support groups and classes on understanding a mental illness diagnosis and managing an illness.

Mr. Romano feels that while other organizations focus on the science of mental illness, the National Alliance on Mental Illness works to "get rid of unnecessary pain" when it comes to treatment, counseling and providing support for individuals and families that live with mental illness. 

"I try to help educate that people do suffer unnecessarily because of the stigma," he says. "When there's not transparency, people suffer because they don't go out and get help."