Lorenzo Rudolf directed  Art Basel, the international art fair some have called the Olympics of the art world, from 1991 to 2000. Today, he spends most of his time launching new fairs or transforming old ones -- in Asia. 

"The art markets of Europe and the United States are an open and integrated community while Asia remains fragmented," says Mr. Rudolf, who in 2007 helped create ShContemporary, China's first contemporary art fair. "These [markets] have to be opened up and brought together, and it is only possible through top international art fairs." 

Later this month, Mr. Rudolf will launch Art Stage Singapore, which he calls the "Art Basel of Asia." The fair takes place Jan. 12-16 at the Marina Bay Sands Exhibition & Convention Centre.

We asked Mr. Rudolf to name his favorite collections. His choices focus on private collections open to the public, where "viewing art becomes a direct and personal experience."

1. The Menil Collection, Houston, Texas, U.S. 

John and  Dominique de Menil's private cache of artwork includes one of the largest surrealism art collections in the world. The highlight, according to Mr. Rudolf, is "Rothko Chapel," the final work by the artist Mark Rothko, who passed away in 1970. Th work includes 14 paintings. "For me, this is the spiritually richest art space world-wide," says Mr. Rudolf.

2. Ullens Center for Contemporary Art (UCCA), Beijing, China

Founded by Belgian collectors Guy and Myriam  Ullens in November 2007 and located in Beijing's 798 art district, the UCCA is "one of the most active and most engaged Asian institutions," says Mr. Rudolf. The goal of the center is to provide a space in which Chinese contemporary artists can exhibit their work. It even hosts a lectures program about the Chinese cultural scene.

3. Fondation  Beyeler, Basel, Switzerland

The private collection of the late Ernst Beyeler, former art dealer and co-founder of Art Basel, is "one of the best and most sophisticated modern and contemporary art collections world-wide," says Mr. Rudolf. Just as extraordinary is the museum in which the collection is housed, designed by award-winning architect  Renzo Piano (he also designed the Menil collection venue). Care was taken in the design as to the rooms that specific paintings would sit in: The foundation's "Water Lilies" paintings by  Claude Monet, for instance, sit opposite a glass window that looks out onto a pond outside, with real water lilies floating in it. It is "magic, especially during the sunset," says Mr. Rudolf. 

4. Villa Panza di Biumo, Varese, Italy

This beautiful mansion is close to Mr. Rudolf's home in Lugano, Italy, and "hosts some of the most beautiful pieces of minimal art," says Mr. Rudolf. Count Giuseppe Panza di Biumo, who died this year, was one of the world's most important collectors of postwar art, according to Mr. Rudolf, and has "one of the most eclectic collections of contemporary American art." The Dan Flavin installation, he adds, is not to be missed.

5. Private collectors' museums in Miami, Florida, U.S. 

Many of the most active private collectors in the world set up small museums in colorful converted warehouses in the artsy Miami neighborhood of Wynwood to display their collections. Some of the denizens include the Rubell Family Collection, the de la Cruz Collection, the Cisneros Fontanals Art Foundation and the  Margulies Collection. "Don't miss a guided tour by Marty Margulies, one of the biggest and most engaged contemporary art collectors," says Mr. Rudolf.