Any discussion about the better spring training location—Florida or Arizona—typically deteriorates into an argument based on factors that can't be measured.

These include regional biases, team allegiances, rosy childhood memories and other corrupting influences like beaches, golf courses and tiny hole-in-the-wall bars that serve some of the most unbelievable margaritas. 

So for those of you who might consider making the trek this year, we're here to help settle the dispute—empirically. 

The competition pits the tradition of Florida, where 15 teams currently train, against the growing Arizona empire, which has seen its roster of teams grow to 15—an increase of five since 2001. 

The Sunshine State still draws more fans and dollars: Florida's tourism department says the state brings in about $750 million of revenue from spring training alone, compared to $350 million in Arizona, according to that state's tourism office. But these numbers say very little about the quality of the experience. 

Here's how the two sites break down in seven categories: 

According to Rick Seaney, the co-founder of the airfare-tracking website FareCompare, the price differences are small. For people traveling on weekends in March from New York, it costs about $171 to fly to Fort Myers, Fla., versus $224 to fly to Phoenix (assuming the tickets were bought in January or February). Coming from Los Angeles, the average round-trip fare was $121 to Phoenix, and $203, on average, to fly to Fort Myers. In the end, Florida is sightly cheaper for most people to reach, except for some West Coasters. 

As for hotels, there's little difference. According to data provided by Hotels.com, travelers are paying an average of $113 per night for hotel rooms in Phoenix versus $106 in the five clusters where Florida teams train. (Fort Lauderdale is the most expensive at $159, while Orlando is the cheapest at $93). Phoenix has a small advantage in one area: access to the high end. Five of the 124 AAA Five-Diamond lodgings in North America are located in Scottsdale, Ariz. Of the 12 Five-Diamond hotels in Florida, only the Ritz-Carlton in Sarasota is in a city where teams actually play. 

 Advantage: Push  

According to the National Climatic Data Center, the average high temperature in March from 1971 to 2000 in Phoenix was 74.3 degrees, compared to 78.2 in the five primary Florida destinations. It rained an average of 1.1 inches in March in Phoenix, compared to about 3 inches in the Florida cities. 

 Advantage: Cactus 

Eleven of the last 14 league MVPs, including Albert Pujols and Alex Rodriguez, play for teams that train in Florida. Among last year's All-Stars, 47 trained in Florida while only 34 played in Arizona.

In addition, Florida's teams—including big-money franchises like the New York Yankees, Boston Red Sox, New York Mets and Philadelphia Phillies—spent about $100 million on players this year, on average. That's about 25% more than the $80 million spent by Arizona teams.

 Advantage: Grapefruit 

Since 2001, the teams training in Florida have compiled a regular-season winning percentage of .501, compared to .498 in Arizona. But six of the top seven winningest teams since 2001 (the Yankees, Red Sox, St. Louis Cardinals, Atlanta Braves, Minnesota Twins and Phillies) all play in Florida. 

In a recent national popularity poll by Harris Interactive, the top four teams—the Yankees, Red Sox, Phillies and Braves—train in Florida. (That said, Florida is also home to the four least popular teams: Washington, Houston, Florida and Toronto). 

 Advantage: Grapefruit 

If cozy old ballparks are what you're looking for, Florida has you covered. The average year of construction for Florida parks is somewhere around 1986. It's home to the oldest spring training park of all: McKechnie Field in Bradenton, where the Pittsburgh Pirates train. It opened in 1923. 

Florida's average park holds about 7,600 fans, compared to almost 11,000 in the Cactus League. Only one Florida stadium—the Yankees' Steinbrenner Field in Tampa—has a capacity greater than 10,000.

Arizona's parks are bigger, but they're also newer and often have better sightlines and scenery. The oldest is Oakland's home, Phoenix Municipal Stadium, which opened in 1964 and was renovated in 2003. Scottsdale's Salt River Fields at Talking Stick (home to the Arizona Diamondbacks and Colorado Rockies) opened this year. 

 Advantage: Cactus  

According to data by SeatGeek, the average ticket for a Grapefruit League game this season is going for $43.86 compared to $39.68 in the Cactus League. While the March 18 Dodgers-Giants game in Scottsdale is the most expensive ticket overall at $85.54, eight of the remaining nine most expensive games are in Florida. 

In terms of convenience, there's no contest. Since the Diamondbacks and Rockies left Tucson, all 15 Arizona teams play within a 40-minute drive of downtown Phoenix. 

 Advantage: Cactus 

With 82.6 million visitors in 2010, Florida wins the tourism title (Arizona's tourism office says the state hosted 35.3 million visitors). 

Florida has the edge in theme parks and beaches. Phoenix is a four-hour drive to the Grand Canyon. Arizona has seven of the top 100 public golf courses, according to Golf.com, while Florida has six. 

Arizona has four restaurants that have won James Beard Foundation Awards and three others that have been nominated. The five Florida clusters with teams have a total of one winner and one other nominee. 

 Advantage: Grapefruit  

The competition was pretty close, but looking at all the evidence, we think it's finally time to dispense with tradition and throw your support behind the Cactus League. 

While Florida shines in marquee teams, cozier ballparks and tourist attractions, Arizona wins in the categories that count the most: Convenience, access to cheap tickets and the gorgeous, dry weather. All of which are perfect for what should be the primary goal for any spring training pilgrim—watching some dadgum baseball. 