This week, London's Design Museum announced the winner of the 2011 Brit Insurance Design Awards: a sculptural, energy-saving light bulb called Plumen 001. Deyan Sudjic, director of the museum, called it "both beautiful and smart." 

The bulb beat out 90 other short-listed designs from around the world—including the iPad, the "Angry Birds" game, the U.K. pavilion at the 2010 Shanghai Expo and an eco-friendly jewelry collection from Brazil. The nominees were divided into seven categories, and each category had its own winner, including the digital magazine app Flipboard (in interactive) and Barclays Cycle Hire, a self-service bicycle rental program in London (in transportation). Here is a look at the other winners. An exhibit of all the designs will be on view at the museum until Aug. 7.



 DESIGN OF THE YEAR: The Plumen 001, which also won in the product category, bills itself as "the world's first designer energy-saving light bulb." The compact fluorescent bulb uses 80% less energy and lasts eight times longer than an incandescent bulb, the company says, but the thin, curvy glass tubes are made to be exposed—no lampshade required. It's only available in Europe for now, but a 110-volt version for the U.S. is due out in May, for $30.





 GRAPHICS: "Homemade Is Best," a Swedish coffee-table cookbook from Ikea, takes an unusual approach to photography. The ingredients for each recipe are measured out and artfully arranged in patterns inspired by Japanese minimalism. (The makings of an almond pastry are shown above.) Ikea began giving copies away to customers last fall—but only in Sweden.





 FASHION: Uniqlo, the Japanese "fast fashion" clothing chain (with a store in New York), won for the fall/winter 2010 collection of its +J brand, a collaboration with designer Jil Sander. Shirts start at $50 and bottoms at $60—"quite a democratic approach to fashion," said an awards jury member. The spring collection includes pinstripe pants, ultrathin sweaters and jackets in "techno-taffeta." 



 FURNITURE:  Branca, a simple, elegant wooden chair designed by the London firm Industrial Facility for Mattiazzi, combines robotic manufacturing with traditional hand finishing. Its shape was inspired by the twigs and branches of a tree. Chairs are available from Mattiazzi in Italy from about $970, and will be sold by Herman Miller USA starting in the fall.



 ARCHITECTURE:  In an abandoned section of Magdeburg, Germany, the Open-Air Library is not a typical spot for checking out books. The space incorporates pieces of an old modernist warehouse facade, patches of grass and trees, a stage for performances and shelves to hold the 20,000 books that were donated for the government-funded project. It's all out in the open, and anyone can freely borrow and return books 24 hours a day. The library, which is managed by residents, "presumes citizens are intelligent, interested and responsible," commented jury chairman Stephen Bayley, a design critic. "This may be unrealistic, but it's nonetheless inspiring."