Federal immigration agents questioned workers at about two dozen outlets of  Chipotle Mexican Grill Inc.
CMG


1.04
%




 in several states Tuesday as part of an expanding probe of the company's employment practices.

Robert Luskin, an outside counsel for Chipotle, confirmed that U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement officials visited "20 to 25 restaurants" as part of a criminal investigation of the company. Mr. Luskin, a partner at Patton Boggs LLP in Washington, D.C., said the government had notified the company that its agents would seek to interview workers. 

"The company remains fully committed to cooperating with the government's investigation," said Mr. Luskin. 

The agents, who arrived in plain clothes, interviewed managers and supervisors, according to people familiar with the investigation. The restaurants visited by agents were located in Atlanta, Washington, D.C., and Los Angeles, among other cities, these people said.

"As a matter of policy, ICE does not comment on ongoing investigations," said Cori W. Bassett, an agency spokeswoman. 

ICE has been investigating Chipotle for several months. The burrito chain has seen galloping growth in recent years. 

Chipotle let go of more than 400 workers in Minnesota last December, following an ICE audit of company records, namely I-9 forms that attest to a worker's eligibility to be employed in the U.S. The audit indicated workers had used suspect documents to secure jobs. 

"If agents are interviewing workers at stores, clearly they are looking for information that goes beyond the I-9 audits," said Victor Cerba, a former general counsel at ICE who is now a partner at Jackson Lewis LLP. "An audit can be a purely paper process when there is nothing unusual with the company."

In March, Chipotle fired at least 40 workers in Washington, D.C., after ICE collected documents for an audit in Virginia and Washington, according to an immigrant advocacy group and dismissed workers. A Chipotle spokesman said they had presented new documents to verify their status "that proved to be fraudulent."

Last month, Chipotle disclosed that the criminal division of the U.S. attorney's office in Washington had joined the case. "That elevated the case to the highest level of scrutiny under immigration law," said Mr. Cerba, who advises firms facing audits. 

The Obama administration in 2009 shifted the focus of workplace enforcement from arresting illegal workers to pressuring employers not to hire illegal workers. The approach includes expanded use of civil penalties and criminal prosecutions. Businesses face criminal charges if authorities can prove the employers knowingly employed unauthorized workers.

In the fiscal year that ended Sept. 30, 2010, ICE filed criminal charges against a record 180 owners, managers and other senior officials of companies. It initiated a record 2,746 work-site enforcement cases in fiscal 2010.

More than 1,000 audits are under way, according to ICE. But the investigation of Chipotle, a high-profile chain whose slogan is "Food with Integrity," has garnered the most attention. 

Chipotle boasts 1,100 company -owned and-operated restaurants across the U.S. Its share price has more than tripled in the past two years. Recently, the company announced that it plans to open an Asian-themed restaurant chain in the summer that would echo Chipotle's concept and business model. 

But the immigration probe has cast a pall over the Wall Street favorite, with some analysts downgrading its share value. The company's labor costs are likely to rise as it hires new workers who require training to replace undocumented workers. 

Job site Careerbuilder.com Tuesday had more than 100 postings for Chipotle hourly "team workers," for restaurants from Florida and Connecticut to Nebraska and Arizona. Many of them had been posted in the past few days.

 Write to  Miriam Jordan at miriam.jordan@wsj.com. 