Culturally shortsighted consensus cites the 1981 launch of MTV as the moment when popular music was successfully wedded to cinematic accompaniment. But even the most cursory examination of cinema history reveals a romance carried on between short-form song and short-form film stretching back to the dawn of sound and picture recording technology. 

"I did kind of want to re-iterate the fact that there was a time when there was no MTV," the East Village based filmmaker and photographer M. Henry Jones said recently in his Avenue A storefront workshop SnakeMonkey Studio. On Thursday, Anthology Film Archives and the nonprofit UnionDocs organization will present "M. Henry Jones: The Downtown Scene," a comprehensive screening of the artists's film work. 

The program, curated by Steve Holmgren, encompasses three decades of film and video, from a 1974 Kodak Teenage Movie Award-winning short to current works in progress. Three Jones films created in New York during the late 70's, however, offer an especially acute acknowledgment that music and video were not brought together just to promote records on cable television.

The Fleshtones' "Soul City," (begun in 1977 and completed in 1979), Nervous Rex's "Go Go Girl" (1978-81) and the Zantees' "Brand New Cadillac" (photographed in 1979 but completed last year) each utilize Mr. Jones's painstaking work methods to, in his words, "visually counterpoint the structure of the music that is being featured." 

According to Fleshtones lead singer Peter Zaremba, the "Soul City" video owes its genesis to a fateful late-70s diner conversation, when both he and Mr. Jones were studying animation at Manhattan's School of Visual Arts. "Henry said he wanted to make a Fleshtones movie, but only of one song," Mr. Zaremba said. 

While Mr. Jones maintained that it was Mr. Zaremba's brandishing of a 45 RPM record that provided the kernel of inspiration, both men agree that the filmmaker's ulterior motives were more perceptual than promotional. Mr. Jones, a protégé of the avant garde collage filmmaker and anthropologist Harry Smith, was eager to create a visual experience equal to the Fleshtones sets he witnessed at Max's Kansas City. Mr. Jones sought, he said, to overload viewers with "photo cut-outs and stroboscopic color combined to induce retinal after-images and create unique color sequences." 

"What's it called, retinal retention—where your eyes maintain certain colors for an instant?" Mr. Zaremba asked. "Most of Henry's pitch about making this movie had to do with that. I wasn't really sure what he wanted to do." 

Joe Bonomo, author of the meticulously compiled Fleshtones biography "Sweat" and a professor of English at Northern Illinois University, described the ulterior aesthetic motive behind "Soul City" thusly: "What Henry was trying to do was create this experience that would totally engage and cultivate the viewer's eye." To that end, Mr. Jones filmed the group on a plywood set performing a Lou Reed song originally recorded by girl group the Foxes in 1965.

But, Mr. Zaremba said, "that was just the beginning." Mr. Jones's vision required a small army to cut, tint and rephotograph the photos, frame by frame, over a nearly two-year production process for a barely two-minute film. 

The performance footage was photographed on 35 millimeter film so that each individual frame could be printed out as a still on photo paper. "From 1,700 frames they cut out images with X-Acto knives," Mr. Bonomo said. "They had to hand paint each one of those cut-outs with whatever color Henry was seeing in his head based on a certain note or a certain chord change. This was before digital everything. Every frame was hand-done." 

Said Mr. Zaremba, "Myself, I hand painted and colored hundreds and hundreds of images."

Once finished, "Soul City" (which can also be seen in a truncated form on YouTube) made the rounds at rock clubs and art museums. "Most of its influence was word of mouth," Mr. Bonomo said. "I know for a fact that people who saw it were blown away by it."

Mr. Jones has since produced and directed dozens of films and commercial spots. He also pioneered a unique 3-D still process known as "Fly's Eye" from within his East Village workshop. Though the neighborhood around him seems to change daily, his creativity remains unflagging. "A lot of people come by and say, 'Well what are you doing here?'" Mr. Jones said. "I tell them, 'Well I do animation, I do 3-D photography.' We've been kind of a super force, but quiet." 