This is an unusual spring training for the Yankees—and not only because they enter in the unfamiliar position of multimillion-dollar underdogs, or for the dribbles of drama leaking through the cracks in a professional façade that has held for more than a decade.

There are potential pitching woes; an aging core; a newly embattled captain. 

But those aren't the most important changes. The real change around this team is more attitudinal—more atmospheric. This is the first full season since the loss of George Steinbrenner. 



It's hardly a stretch to say that even when he was removed from daily operations, The Boss still loomed over every action. But now that he's gone, the Yankees are free to fill out the contours of a new mold. Now, for the first time, there are detectable signs of difference. 

There's still a Steinbrenner blustering at spring training. The team's failure to make—let alone win—the World Series last year remains widely denounced in Yankee circles. The Bombers may always view anything less than perfection as profound disappointment. They're the Tiger Mother of baseball teams.

But when the news came in December that the 2010 Yankees had been tagged with their lowest luxury tax penalty in almost a decade, it wasn't hard to imagine how The Boss would have reacted. The team spent less and didn't go as far. To Steinbrenner, that would have been a perfect correlation. Anyone who dared to trumpet the cost savings would have had their head lopped off with a Mongolian ceremonial sword. 

Objectively, of course, this is crazy. The Yankees had the highest payroll in baseball by many millions. The team spent more in 2008 ($222.2 million) when the Yankees didn't even make the playoffs than in 2010 ($215.1 million) when they at least reached the American League Championship Series.

 But this is more about character and attitude than actual calculations. The luxury tax penalties were a badge of proof that the Yankees were using every advantage to field the best team they possibly could. Under George, the Yankees were as brazen at the bank as they were in the batter's box. 

So it was somewhat jarring to Steinbrenner acolytes that upon hearing of the lower assessment in December, Yankees general manager Brian Cashman seemed positively gleeful. "Atta baby," he exulted to the Associated Press. 

"And right now we're in the $170s," he continued jubilantly, referring to the 2011 payroll, which has since risen to $189 million.

What he neglected to add was that the payroll number was low because the Yankees had just been totally rejected by Cliff Lee. In another age, that low 2011 payroll would have been a like a scarlet letter branding, a constant reminder of their shame. (In fact, a recent Wall Street Journal analysis ranked the Yankees 26 out of 30 teams in terms of off-season moves—well behind the Mets at No. 12).

When did budget constraint become a Yankees virtue to be celebrated? 

But maybe we shouldn't be surprised. Just as the Yankees have represented an enduring desire among New Yorkers to be the best, the franchise has also consistently reflected the shifting spirit of its city.

There was the flamboyant Babe in the glamorous '20s when New York established itself as a national center; the steady exceptionalism that Lou Gehrig brought to a city reeling from the Great Depression, yet still defiantly erecting icons like the Empire State Building; the sunny optimism of Mickey Mantle in the '50s (hiding a darker underside); the turbulent '70s when New York descended into chaos but remained resilient—embodied by tumultuous Billy Martin and Reggie Jackson teams; the city's resurgence in the late '90s and 2000s, rooted in an ethic based on competence over charisma, an attitude embodied by the classy, unshowy Yankee champions of the Jeter/Core Four age.

"I think that it's true that in every age the Yankees have, with enough hindsight, come to seen to be the team that most represents New York," said documentary filmmaker Ric Burns, who directed the 17.5-hour "New York: A Documentary Film." "It's some kind of helpless synergy."

In many ways the recent Yankee teams have been the embodiment of the Bloomberg era, he continued: "They are extremely well off," Burns said. "They are well paid and well remunerated. They are fiscally prudent to some disagree. They are unabashed in their ambition and they are at some level professional and responsible."

Mayor Bloomberg does not have the flash and charm of an Ed Koch, any more than the current Yankees have the showmanship or bravado of Reggie Jackson. 

"They're not like the '86 Mets; they're not a scrappy gang of boy geniuses and retreads and wacky near-losers and ex-cocaine addicts. It doesn't have that kind of glamour. It's steadier," Burns said of this Yankee incarnation. "There's nobody there to light the charismatic fire, but at the same time I like this team as well as any Yankees team I've seen."

And now we come to the New York of 2011; the third-term Bloomberg city. For a place that has staked its credibility on capable execution there have been some striking stumbles (be it a ferocious snowstorm or a rare free-agent snubbing). 

The verbal gaffes that once seemed relics of the past, gaining in charm as they faded in memory, have returned. (For Mayor Bloomberg, ask the Irish; For the Yankees, see Hank Steinbrenner.)

There is a little less joy in New York these days. We are parsing budgets, seeking cuts and crowing about savings rather than visionary investments. We're even shortening parades.

Let's just hope we can still manage some ticker tape.