The U.S. and other countries that seek to hand frozen assets of Col. Moammar Gadhafi's regime to rebels that seek to overthrow him face political and legal obstacles that could slow the delivery of funds.

Secretary of State Hillary Clinton on Thursday said the Obama administration was working with Congress to pass legislation allowing the Treasury Department to release Libyan assets that it froze in response to the Libyan leader's crackdown on protesters. The U.S. has frozen more than $34 billion of assets related to the Gadhafi regime; billions of dollars more have been frozen elsewhere.

The amount of Gadhafi assets frozen by some countries.

 WSJ reporting 

To get frozen assets to the Libyan opposition is fraught with complexities. "It is a lot more complicated than saying we are going to unfreeze these assets and hand them over," says  Harriet Territt, a London-based lawyer at Jones Day. 

The U.K., for instance, is keen to help address humanitarian needs, but needs to clear a number of complex obstacles, said a person familiar with the situation. "We're considering a number of options to do this and we will see what is legally possible," a spokesman for the U.K.'s Foreign Office said.

With political will on the rebels' side in the U.S. and Europe, the unfreezing of the assets on their behalf would be a relatively straightforward amendment of current regulations—though the U.K. and other European countries would require the European Union to act first.

Track the latest events in Libya.

Track events day by day in the region.

See the level of unrest, plus the economic and politic status of some countries across North Africa and the Middle East.

Popular demonstrations in Tunisia toppled a president and spread to countries across the region. See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

The main legal complication comes in turning those assets over to somebody else. One obstacle to clear is the legal mechanism of transferring ownership to someone new.

That is potentially easier to do in the U.S., where an act of Congress or executive order could dictate the transfer of ownership. "While the freezing of assets in sanctions programs is common, the much more aggressive act of seizing them is very rare," said Stuart Levey, a former senior Treasury official. But, he added, it is "certainly possible to do under U.S. law." 

In some European countries, including the U.K., it could be more complicated. Ms. Territt said she wasn't aware of an easy legal mechanism under English law that would allow such a transfer. "I think it could technically be done but it would be very difficult," she said. More than £12 billion ($19.6 billion) in Gadhafi assets has been frozen in the U.K. 

Some countries, such as Germany and Switzerland, this week questioned the legality of seizing the Gadhafi regime's frozen money and handing it over to the rebels. "You can't just take somebody's money and start spending it," says Jean-Bernard Schmid, a Swiss magistrate. "It's even more absurd to finance his enemies, whether you like them or not."

Lawyers say any effort to transfers assets will likely be met by legal challenges by the original owner. That could include Col. Gadhafi's family or companies in whose name the assets are held, such as oil or other companies whose assets have been frozen. 

Libya's deputy foreign minister, Khaled Kaim, criticized the effort Thursday, saying that for countries such as the U.S. and U.K. "there's no legal framework" for such a move. He also pointed to another problem, saying the rebels "are not a country."

This points to a political obstacle: what some lawyers say is the likely requirement that assets be transferred to a legally recognized government, or at least to a government that has clear control of the country. Most nations, including the U.S. and the U.K., haven't formally recognized the rebels' Transitional National Council as the new government of Libya.

Still, there is a precedent. In March 2003, shortly after U.S. invasion of Iraq, President George W. Bush, signed an executive order declaring that frozen funds belonging to the Iraqi central bank as well as the country's oil company should be used to help the Iraqi people. That freed the Treasury Department to seize the money for the reconstruction of Iraq.

—Richard Boudreaux contributed to this article.

 Write to  Cassell Bryan-Low at cassell.bryan-low@wsj.com and Deborah Ball at deborah.ball@wsj.com 