LONDON—The number of people claiming unemployment benefits in the U.K. fell unexpectedly in February to its lowest level in two years, official data showed Wednesday. 

The Office of National Statistics said the claimant-count measure of unemployment fell by 10,200 in February, the biggest fall since June 2010, to stand at 1.45 million, the lowest total since February 2009. The claimant-count rate was steady at 4.5%. Economists polled last week predicted a 1,500-rise in jobless benefit claimants. 

The news will be a boost for the government a week ahead of its budget announcement March 23. Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne has said the budget will promote growth in the economy, even as he pushes ahead with an ambitious program of cuts to bring down the U.K.'s deficit.

Sterling climbed slightly against the dollar on the data. 

A fall in the number of men claiming job seekers' benefits was offset somewhat by a rise in female claimants. That reflects a change in the benefits system, the ONS said. 

January's figures were revised to show a smaller increase in the claimant count of 1,500, from 2,400 previously reported. 

Signs that the jobs market improved in February could tip some members of the Bank of England's Monetary Policy Committee closer towards voting for a rise in interest rates. Investors predict a series of rate increases this year owing to BOE policy makers' recent warnings on inflation threats. But some MPC members have said they want clear signs that the economy has recovered before they begin to raise borrowing costs.

A broader, less timely measure of unemployment rose. The ONS also said average wage growth slipped in the three months to January, which may assuage BOE concerns that higher wages could fuel inflation. Average wages excluding bonuses rose 2.2%, slowing from the 2.3% increase in the three months to December. The measure that includes bonuses can cause steep fluctuations in the monthly changes to payments. 

The ONS said the international measure of unemployment, formerly known as the International Labor Organization measure, rose by 27,000 in the three months to the end of January, to 2.5 million. That pushed the unemployment rate up to 8.0%, the ONS said. 

Separately on Wednesday, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development cut its U.K. growth forecast for 2011 to 1.5% from 1.7%, citing the government's spending cuts.

The OECD urged the Bank of England to maintain its loose monetary policy, saying it was needed to support the U.K.'s fragile economic recovery and to counter the "significant headwinds" arising from the government's five-year £111 billion ($178.5 billion) fiscal-tightening program.

The OECD's forecasts are lower than those of the government's official forecaster, the Office for Budget Responsibility, which is predicting growth of 2.1% in 2011 and 2.6% in 2012. 

—Ainsley Thomson contributed to this article.





