Asian shares ended mixed Thursday amid caution ahead of the European Central Bank's interest-rate meeting later in the day, with many commodity plays around the region declining, while Indian stocks headed for their ninth straight session of losses.

The region was also weighed by dropping commodity prices and weak U.S. economic data, which weighed on Wall Street on Wednesday.

"Commodities have been the story over the past couple sessions...there's certainly no one just quite ready to stand in front of this," said Michael Turner, a Sydney-based strategist with RBC Capital Markets. 

Hong Kong's Hang Seng index fell 0.2% to 23,261.61, China's Shanghai Composite rose 0.2% to 2872.40, Australia's S&P/ASX 200 gained 0.3% to 4,753.70 and Taiwan's Taiex advanced 0.8% to 9018.61. India's Sensex slid 1.4% to 18,210.58.

Markets in Japan, South Korea and Thailand were shut for public holidays.

Dow Jones Industrial Average futures were 23 points lower in screen trade. 

Falling commodity prices kept investors on edge, with a continued selloff in silver prices reflecting the heightened risk aversion.

Prices of spot silver were bid at $38.55 a troy ounce, 84 cents lower than the settlement in New York. The metal has lost about a fifth of its value this week. Spot gold, meanwhile, fell $4.50 to $1,510.90 an ounce. June crude-oil futures also continued to sell off, trading at $108.88 a barrel in electronic trading.

Several resource-sector stocks in the region buckled under the impact of those moves.

In Hong Kong, Cnooc skidded 2% and Jiangxi Copper Co. gave up 1.8%, while PetroChina fell 2.6% in Hong Kong and 0.5% in Shanghai. Cairn India Ltd. gave up 1.4% and Sterlite Industries India Ltd. lost 3.3%.

Hong Kong stocks fell for the seventh session in a row, weighed by commodity plays and as many property developers dropped.

"The Hong Kong market remains in a consolidation mode, but it's not alone, as we can see the China markets and the U.S. markets are having similar trading patterns," said Prudential Brokerage's associate director Alvin Cheung.

Property developers fell on data showing the number of transactions fell 23% in April from the previous month, and 27% from the year-earlier period. The decline follows a sharp increase in prices over the past several quarters, and amid rising mortgage rates in the city. Cheung Kong Holdings fell 0.6% and Hang Lung Properties dropped 1.6%.

Esprit Holdings Ltd. shed 2.5% after J.P. Morgan cut the fashion wholesaler and retailer's earnings estimates and price target.

In Sydney, however, many resource stocks recovered after recent losses, with the market rising after data released earlier Thursday showed the country's March retail sales fell 0.5% from February, compared with an expected 0.5% rise. First-quarter retail sales were flat on-quarter, compared with an expected 0.7% gain.

The data dampened interest-rate-increase expectations, and weighed the Australian dollar. 

In the retail sector, Harvey Norman Holdings Ltd. fell 1.1% after the retail data, but Myer Holdings Ltd. bounced off the day's low to finish up 0.3%.

In the commodities space, Rio Tinto Ltd. rose 0.3% and BHP Billiton Ltd. added 0.6%, helping to support the market.

National Australia Bank rose 2.4% after the lender's fiscal first-half profit topped expectations.

"We have a pretty meaningful pullback and there is some technical support near 4,700," said IG Markets strategist Ben Potter. "But it's all about commodities weakness...so obviously the Australian market is facing some major headwinds relative to the U.S. market."

In India, Bharti Airtel dropped 3.3% after India's largest mobile operator said its fiscal fourth-quarter net profit tumbled 32% from the year-ago period.

Concern over inflation and its impact on corporate earnings and economic growth also weighed down several interest-rate-sensitive stocks, with ICICI Bank Ltd. losing 2.8%, Tata Motors Ltd. shedding 2.1% and real-estate major DLF Ltd. dropping 1.9%.

In Manila, San Miguel Corp. plunged more than 28% as trading resumed after a three-week suspension to make way for its $900 million sale of shares and convertible bonds. 

Among other markets, New Zealand's NZX-50 rose 0.1%, Philippine stocks finished 1.2% lower, Singapore's Straits Times Index fell 0.1% and Indonesian shares were little changed.

In foreign-exchange markets, the dollar was trading below Y80 in London hours for the first time since March 18, when the Group of Seven leading industrial nations intervened and sold the Japanese currency to stop it strengthening too much, too quickly in the wake of the Japan's earthquake and tsunami.

The sharp move lower followed a move through the ¥80.20 support line, which triggered a succession of stop-loss trades and took the currency pair to as low as ¥79.81. 

"Risk appetite seems to be waning and investors are taking profit ahead of Friday's [U.S.] non-farm payroll numbers," said Elsa Lignos, a currency strategist at RBC in London.

The single currency was fetching $1.4832 from $1.4829 late in New York on Wednesday, and ¥118.54 from ¥119.47. The dollar was at ¥79.93 from ¥80.61.

 Write to  Shri Navaratnam at shri.navaratnam@dowjones.com 