NEW DELHI -- Business-process outsourcing is getting redefined and will expand rapidly over the next five to seven years outpacing growth in technology services, says Deepak Patel, chief executive of Aditya Birla Minacs, a business solutions company under the Aditya Birla Group. Companies, these days, are looking to outsource a wide range of services including human resources and accounting. To meet this demand, outsourcing companies are rushing to build up their expertise. Several companies have taken the acquisition route while others are opting to develop these services internally. Mr. Patel spoke to Deals India about his company's plans, edited excerpts:

 Deals India: World economies haven't recovered from the economic meltdown. Isn't that still a cause of concern to your company and the outsourcing industry?

 Mr. Patel: It depends on the customer's economic cycles. In the last 18 months, volumes have been low in case of some customers who are affected by the economy and these volumes will increase now as our customers come out of the downturn in the economic cycle. However, on the other hand, looking at the business in totality shows that the business has not shrunk. In fact Minacs' business grew last year by 30%, and we look to grow at a much faster pace in the next 12 months because the length and breadth of what people are outsourcing is increasing. 

 Deals India: What services are customers looking to outsource now?

 Mr. Patel: Customers want to focus on their very core …and look to specialized service providers. For example, if one is looking to open an insurance company the focus will be only on strategy, which markets you want to focus on, what is the product mix but for services -- including marketing, information technology, infrastructure, account opening, account closing and customer care -- the company would outsource to specialized service provider so that it can focus on its very core and it can leverage the variable cost structure by partnering with companies that can provide world-class services in that area.

 Deals India: Which industries are looking to outsource services?

 Mr. Patel: Banking, financial services and insurance sectors have always been the leading adopters of new things and they continue to outsource quite a bit. The other groups that Minacs is focused on is technology, telecom and manufacturing. Besides that, we focus on American and Canadian public-sector and healthcare companies. 

 Deals India: How are you going to build your resources to provide those services?

 Mr. Patel: We are making significant investments. We are working with our existing customers because it is much easier to expand to adjacent areas rather than on something completely new. Second, in the Aditya Birla Group we are 65 different businesses in various industries, some of those companies face challenges very similar to that faced by our existing customers. This provides us with a fertile ground to do our outsourcing work and build capabilities by working with our sister companies. Then, we also will continue to do outsourcing agreements where we will look to take over active operations of existing customers and bring them into the Minacs fold and use that as a base to go after new customers. Also, we will look at targeted mergers and acquisitions to build new capabilities also.

 Deals India: Any M&A activities in the pipeline?

 Mr. Patel: We continue to look at opportunities as they come up. It definitely is part of our strategy and as opportunities come up with a win-win opportunity for all parties then a deal will materialize.