U.S. airlines are beefing up their online offerings as they focus more on dealing directly with fliers—and selling more than just seats.

The fast-growing list of direct online offerings by carriers ranges from luggage pick-up at home and special security lanes at the airport to designer snacks on the plane and paragliding lessons after landing.

The moves come as the industry is at a crossroads with third-party distributors such as travel agencies that sell more than 60% of U.S. airline tickets. Most distributors haven't been offering the customized "extras" to consumers until now, focusing instead on basic fares and schedules.

"It's as if everyone in the pizza industry only offered pepperoni and cheese," said  Jay Sorensen, head of IdeaWorks, a consulting firm specializing in ancillary revenue.

Many U.S. carriers want more control of the sales process as they increasingly bank on revenue from such perks as early boarding and extra legroom to turn profits. They also see it as a way to win brand loyalty and compete on more than just price after collecting about $8 billion in ancillary fees last year, or 6% of revenue. 

  AMR Corp.'s American Airlines is relying more heavily on sales from its website after its fares recently stopped being displayed on  Expedia Inc.
EXPE


0.23
%




 and  Orbitz Worldwide Inc.,
OWW


-0.04
%




 the two largest online travel agencies, amid commercial disputes. It also reached a deal this month with ITA Software to develop more customized offerings as technology makes it easier and cheaper to hawk products directly.

American, the third-largest U.S. airline by traffic, said it still hopes to hammer out new terms with distributors. But the carrier also wants "to have as close a personal relationship with the customer as we can," said  Monte Ford, American's senior vice president of technology.

Travel agencies say they're eager to incorporate carriers' new offerings into their distribution networks. Expedia disclosed Friday a new distribution deal with  US Airways Group Inc. enabling the fifth-largest U.S. carrier to charge different fees for window and aisle seats. Virgin America, a smaller airline, said Monday it plans to extend its sales reach through travel agencies.

Third-party distributors also point out they allow consumers to comparison shop for the best fares among hundreds of airlines for each leg of a trip, unlike an airline's site, which pitches its own products.

"The airlines will never be able to match us until they start selling other airlines' tickets," said  Tim MacDonald, Expedia.com's general manager.

But  Delta Air Lines Inc.,
DAL


-1.56
%




 the second-largest U.S. carrier, has pulled its fares from about a dozen smaller online travel agencies in recent months. The moves coincide with a major overhaul of its own website beginning late last year that added purchasing options and more flight-specific information such as Wi-Fi availability.

Visitors booking a Delta flight from Atlanta to Los Angeles on the airline's website last week also were pitched a $50 day pass for the airport club lounge, $87.99 bus service from Los Angeles to Las Vegas and a $119.99 paragliding lesson on the beach in Malibu, among other "upsell" efforts. 

At an investor conference last month,  Glen Hauenstein, Delta's head of revenue management, said the airline wants "as direct a relationship" with consumers as possible. "We look at it very much like an Apple store versus Best Buy," said Mr. Hauenstein, comparing Delta's website push to Apple Inc.'s retail efforts.

  United Continental Holdings Inc.,
UAL


-2.12
%




 the largest U.S. airline group, also is pushing a la carte options, such as extra legroom and priority security-line access, that aren't available through its third-party distributors. Travelers booking on United's website are steered toward a "Premier Travel" option starting at $47 that bundles extra legroom, priority security-line access, early boarding, bonus frequent-flier miles and baggage fee waivers.Visitors to United's site also are offered a door-to-door service starting at $79 in which their golf clubs or skis are picked up at their homes and sent to their destination. Travelers also can pre-order on-board snacks such as a yogurt parfait for $5.49 or cheese and wine for $11.98 when booking their flights. 

American recently rolled out a "Your Choice" option that is only available on its website and offers add-on options such as early boarding, free standby and discounted flight-change fees at various prices. Consumers booking flights from Dallas to Chicago, for example, also can double their frequent-flier miles for $24 or triple them for $48. 

"If all we're going to do is sell a seat on a plane, that's not competitive," said Mr. Ford, the American executive. 

  Southwest Airlines Co.
LUV


-1.15
%




, the fourth-largest airline, has long sold most of its fares directly but is adding more bells and whistles to its website after long focusing on simplicity. Since last year, consumers can more easily add extras such as a $10 "early bird" boarding fee to their online shopping carts before purchasing fares. Last month it began more aggressively pitching air, hotel and rental car packages to Las Vegas. 

"We're in the process of becoming more of a full-service travel solution for customers," said  Michael Van Houweling, Southwest's senior director of marketing. Southwest said more than 80% of ticket sales are from its own websites.

Not everyone is impressed.  Gary Leff, a moderator at FlyerTalk, an online chat site for frequent fliers, said most of the airlines' websites "are pretty darn bad" and that the booking experience is faster and better at third-party sites such as Expedia or Orbitz.

"You get to know your friends at outsourced web support very well" when trying to book on airlines' websites because of frequent glitches, said Mr. Leff, who lives in Washington D.C. 

But others say they prefer booking their flights on the airlines' websites, even if they first do some comparison shopping on third-party websites. "When I go to the airline website I know I'm getting it right from the source," said  Brian Cohen, a frequent Delta flier in Atlanta.

 Write to  Mike Esterl at mike.esterl@wsj.com 