The guilty verdict in the trial of hedge fund manager Raj Rajaratnam makes me think of a joke that a very cynical friend used to make.

"As far as I'm concerned," he said, "it should be illegal to purchase a share unless you can prove you are in possession of inside information!"

He was only half-kidding. His point wasn't that the stock market was so efficient that you couldn't beat it without inside information. It was that the stock market was such a den of thieves that unless you were in on the scam you were probably one of those being scammed. (As they say in Vegas: Look around the poker table. If you can't spot the sucker, it's you.) Many ordinary investors, on hearing the Rajaratnam verdict, will probably reach a similar conclusion. 

It's another black eye for Wall Street, they'll say, and another reason to shun the market.

But it's not my take.

On the contrary, this verdict carries some valuable positive lessons for anyone hoping to invest profitably.

The first is that you can save the hedge fund envy. Worried that big hedge funds won't let you in? Don't be. As I noted recently in a column for Dow Jones sister site MarketWatch, most of them have underperformed a simple balanced portfolio of index funds over the past five or ten years.

And turns out even some of those who did produce good returns relied on illegal activities to do so. The Securities and Exchange Commission is cracking down on so-called "expert networks" that some funds may have tapped for that purpose. The share of hedge funds that beat the market legally is even lower.

The second lesson: This case reminds us, once again, that for investors, fund fees really matter. Hedge fund managers like Raj have an incredibly high hurdle to beat. Most typically charge 2% of assets under management every year, and 20% of any profits. The higher the fees, the harder it is to generate great returns. No wonder some cut corners.



For an ordinary investor, it doesn't mean index funds have all the answers. But it does mean they are very tough to beat.

The third lesson is to be deeply skeptical of anyone promising fabulous returns. Almost no one produces them. Hardly anyone produces them consistently. There really aren't any shortcuts to wealth. You can get rich slowly. But trying to get rich quickly in the stock market is a project doomed to fail. You might think everyone knows that. But I am constantly surprised at how many people are still suckers for the dream of the quick buck.

If Warren Buffett is the gold standard, even he's only managed average returns in the low 20-percents. Before inflation.

And there's a fourth lesson in this trial that may get missed. It's a great reminder that anyone investing in a stock should first ask themselves the following set of questions: "What do I know that the market doesn't? What's my edge? Why is the current market price wrong?"

Raj was making money because he knew things the rest of the market didn't. He came by that information illegally. But not all such information is illegal. You may have an edge on a stock because you know the industry better, or you've done your homework better, or for any number of legitimate reasons. You could have made money on Chipotle stock just by eating one of their terrific burritos long before most other investors. I am not an efficient market cultist: I don't think the market is always right, all the time. But it's usually more right than wrong. So what's your edge?