Nothing in sports cries out for a warning label like the first few weeks of a baseball season. Given the length of this unholy death march, performance in April and early May isn't a guarantee of future results.

Now that we have that disclaimer out of the way, let us ponder and wonder: How on earth are the Cleveland Indians in first place?

After two brutal years and 206 roster moves, the Tribe has clawed back to the top. The Journal's Darren Everson details the key moves that worked (and a few that didn't) along the way.

In October 2007, the team was riding high with a 3-1 lead on the Boston Red Sox in the American League Championship Series. The Indians blew that series, slipped to mediocrity the following year (81-81) and then to irrelevance, failing to win 70 games in the next two seasons. This year they were as much as a 125-to-1 longshot to win the World Series. But a funny thing happened on the way to the boneyard: Cleveland's 22-11 record through Monday was tops in the AL, making them just the sixth team since 1900 to win 21 of its first 30 games after losing 90 the year before. 

As a forensic exercise, The Wall Street Journal retraced all 206 of the Indians' noteworthy transactions since that Game 7 loss to the Red Sox. Forty-four of those were deals with other clubs, the third-most of any team over that span. These deals show, quite clearly, how well the Indians fared in dealing veterans like Mark DeRosa and CC Sabathia for prospects. It also showed what an elaborate dart-throwing exercise running a baseball team can be: other moves, like spending $6 million for Masahide Kobayashi, landed well off the mark. 

The Indians' philosophy on retooling the roster comes from a 2002 study the front office did on rebuilding efforts across the majors. The team found that it generally took teams at least eight years to get back to a 90-win level (in other words, an eternity). "We didn't want to go through an 8-to-11-year process," general manager Chris Antonetti said. So Cleveland focused on acquiring youngsters who are at or near the major-league level, as opposed to hyped prospects who needed time. The most prominent is pitcher Justin Masterson, who came from Boston in the 2009 trade of catcher Victor Martinez. With the Red Sox, Masterson was a reliever and spot starter. With the Indians he lost 20 of his first 27 decisions. But this season he's 5-0, while making just shy of $500,000.

Although Cleveland has had a few successes with homegrown players, especially former 19th-rounder Josh Tomlin (4-1, 2.43 ERA through Monday), it's the Indians' repeated stars-for-youngsters deals of the past three years that have paid off most. Chris Perez, the Indians' hard-throwing closer, came over from the St. Louis Cardinals in 2009 for DeRosa, a solid but aging infielder who hit just .228 for the Cardinals and is on the Giants' disabled list. First baseman Matt LaPorta, the key prospect in the 2008 Sabathia trade with Milwaukee, is improving (.464 slugging percentage) after struggling his first two years.

Outfielder Michael Brantley, a former player-to-be-named-later, was a fortuitous choice. In the Sabathia deal, Cleveland got to choose the player-to-be-named from a group of prospects, the best of whom were Brantley and third baseman Taylor Green. Although Green had more power, the Indians preferred the speedy Brantley, who was hitting .287 with a .366 on-base percentage through Monday. As for Green, he's hitting .235 for the Triple-A Nashville Sounds.

Not everything has come up bullseyes. Kerry Wood was a $10 million closer on two 90-loss teams. The 2009 Cliff Lee deal with Philadelphia (for Carlos Carrasco, Jason Donald, Lou Marson and Jason Knapp) hasn't yielded a superstar to match. Kobayashi, a Japanese reliever, was so ineffective the Indians released him in 2009 with two months left on his contract. 

The draft has also been a soft spot. Jeremy Sowers, a former No. 6-overall pick, has a 5.18 career ERA and is out with an injury. Cleveland had five picks in the first three rounds of the 2005 draft and six more in 2006, but none of those players is on the major-league roster. 

Antonetti stressed that it's early. "We need to be mindful of that," he said. "But I believe in the talent that's here."

 Write to  Darren Everson at darren.everson@wsj.com 