Sluggish service-sector activity and modest job growth in April offer the latest signs the economic recovery is merely sputtering along, reports on Wednesday showed.

An index of service-sector activity fell to 52.8 in April from 57.3 in March, the Institute for Supply Management said Wednesday. Readings above 50 indicate the sector is still expanding. The slower growth was caused by weakening consumer demand and price pressures for fuel and other raw materials.

Slowing improvement in the economy is likely to yield job gains that aren't sufficiently robust to restore the labor market's health anytime soon. A separate report Wednesday showed private firms added jobs in April but the pace of growth slowed.

While there is little worry the economy will slip back into recession, signs of additional slowing are unwelcome when the recovery is progressing at a modest pace. The economy expanded at a 1.8% annual rate in the first quarter, down from 3.1% at the end of 2010.

"We're getting a moderate recovery off of a deep recession," said John Ryding, an RDQ Economics analyst. "I think there's inevitably uncertainties about what we're settling into."

Service-sector companies saw a decline in new orders last month, with an index measuring orders dropping 11.4 points to 52.7. Production growth also slowed, the ISM report showed.

Prices in the service sector grew more slowly last month, but the index remained at a high level as companies faced increasing costs for commodities such as cotton, fuel and plastics. Rising raw materials prices have been a concern for both services and manufacturing firms that are struggling with whether to pass along price increases to already-uncertain consumers. So far, they have largely resisted.

The labor market is a particular concern. The ISM's employment index declined last month and a separate report gauging private-sector employment showed firms added 179,000 jobs in April. That is down from the 207,000 new private-sector hires in March, according to payroll firm  Automatic Data Processing Inc.
ADP


0.69
%




 and consultancy Macroeconomic Advisers. That may mean that the government's employment tally on Friday will reveal moderate April job growthfor April.

In an encouraging sign, the rise in nonfarm private-sector jobs covered a wide range ofmany industries. Manufacturers added 25,000 workers, marking the industry's seventh consecutive month of gains. Service-providing firms increased payrolls by 138,000. Even construction companies, battered by the housing bust, added 9,000 jobs.

"There's some evidence the troubled sectors have turned around," said Joel Prakken, chairman of Macroeconomic Advisers, but "I'm becoming a little disappointed at not seeing stronger numbers."

Job gains last month were largely split between small and medium firms, both of which added 84,000 positions. Large companies, with 500 or more employees, added 11,000 new workers. 

 Write to  Sara Murray at sara.murray@wsj.com 