MUMBAI – Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd. India's largest utility vehicle maker by sales, and U.S.-based networking major Cisco Systems Inc. Tuesday said they have signed a global partnership agreement to offer technology-based services such as virtual dealerships and cloud computing. 

The companies intend to also offer services in areas such as smart cities, and sports and entertainment under the agreement, a joint statement said. 

"We are looking to cater to a global market size of $5 billion... we expect $500 million-$750 million revenue in the next five years" Naresh Balwant Wadhwa, president and country manager Cisco Systems (India) Pvt. Ltd., said at a news conference. 

Mr. Wadhwa expects about 15% of the revenue to come in from India. 

Both companies have already invested 100 million rupees ($2.2 milllion) in the venture, he said, but didn't elaborate on their future investment plans. 

San Jose, California-based Cisco dominates the global market for information-technology networking gear and has expanded into other areas of the data-center sector. 

Mahindra & Mahindra is part of the diversified $7.1 billion Mahindra group which has interests in automobiles, aviation, information technology, hospitality, financial services, logistics, real estate and retail. 

Apart from the flagship Mahindra & Mahindra, other major companies in the group include Tech Mahindra Ltd. and Satyam Computer Services Ltd. which provide software services. 

"Mahindra and Cisco will also explore working together to build the private cloud roadmap for the Mahindra group across different businesses--Mahindra & Mahindra, Tech Mahindra and Mahindra Satyam," the statement said. 

Shares of Tech Mahindra and Satyam Computer--which operates under the brand Mahindra Satyam--rose on the news due to hopes that they would indirectly benefit from the agreement through sub contracts. Tech Mahindra jumped 9.3% to close at 739.35 rupees, while Satyam shares ended 3.8% higher at 64.9 rupees on the Bombay Stock Exchange. The benchmark Sensex closed up 1.2%. 

Anil Menon, president, globalization and smart connected communities at Cisco Development (India) Pvt., said the company will provide technology solutions in existing and new properties build by Mahindra's realty unit, Mahindra Lifespace Developers Ltd. 

The first project for the partnership is to develop a technology park--Mahindra Innovation Park, the two companies said. 

Mahindra Lifespace will build the physical infrastructure of the park, while Cisco will provide the technology solution platforms, Mr. Menon said. 

"We will retro-fit solutions in terms of automation and security systems in some existing properties and later in new properties," Mr. Menon said. 

 Write to  Anirban Chowdhury at anirban.chowdhury@dowjones.com and Romit Guha at romit.guha@dowjones.com 