 More moves by major central banks to weaken the yen could come as soon as Monday, but the goal will be to ensure stability, rather than pushing the currency sharply lower, traders say. On Friday, the yen gained back most of the ground lost earlier in the day against the U.S. dollar after a rare concerted intervention by the BOJ, ECB, Fed and monetary authorities in Canada and the U.K.  

 Japanese authorities are likely to cast a much wider net for possible food contamination after elevated levels of radioactivity were found in more milk and spinach near the Daiichi nuclear plant.  

 The computer-system breakdown at Mizuho Bank has affected so many people that Japanese regulators are expected to consider disciplining the lender.  

 Nissan will resume its parts-production and vehicle-assembly operations in Japan this week, becoming the first car maker to restart its entire auto-manufacturing process after the earthquake brought the country's auto industry to a standstill.  

 China's central bank will raise Friday the share of deposits banks must hold in reserve by half a percentage point, the third increase this year, as inflationary pressures remain in the spotlight.  

 Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing's chairman said demand for mobile chips is still strong despite earthquake-related supply-chain disruptions.  

 Etisalat scrapped a near $12 billion plan to buy 46% of Kuwait's Zain, a deal that would have given the U.A.E.-based firm access to new markets in the region such as Iraq and Kuwait.  

 Just when markets seemed headed back to normal, the "risk on/risk off" trade has come back. Stocks are consistently moving in opposite directions from the dollar and Treasury securities.  

 The fallout from Japan's earthquake continues to hurt IPOs. Nine deals around the world were yanked last week, the most since the first week of December. Many debuts declined, such as Hutchison Port Holdings Trust.  

 The Fed's move to allow some U.S. banks to raise their dividends presents a clear division between the industry's strongest and weakest players.  

 Weak demand for steel in Japan is further depressing spot prices for iron ore and some steel products throughout the world.  

 Rio Tinto faces a crucial week in its quest to take over Africa-focused coal producer Riversdale after a slow take-up of shareholder acceptances.  

 U.S. regulators accused IBM of bribing South Korean and Chinese government officials for more than decade. IBM agreed to pay $10 million to settle the civil charges.  

 Egyptians approved constitutional changes in a landmark referendum, with 77% of votes in favor of the moves, the elections commission chief said. The changes eliminate restrictions on political rights and open the way for parliamentary and presidential elections within months.  

 China "expressed regret" over the use of military force in Libya even as it decided last week not to block authorization of strikes at the U.N. Security Council, a rare acquiescence that moved it further away from its foreign policy based on nonintervention.  

Yemen's president fired his cabinet amid protests demanding his ouster, and after his own tribe called on him to resign. 

Thousands of Syrians rallied for a third consecutive day in a tense southern city where security forces killed at least five protesters, signaling that unrest in yet another Arab country is taking root, a witness and activists said.

A methane-gas explosion in a coal mine in southwestern Pakistan killed at least six miners and trapped 46 others.

Tibetans across the world began voting for a new leader, as the Tibetan parliament-in-exile debated how to handle the Dalai Lama's resignation from politics.

Thailand's prime minister survived a no-confidence vote in parliament, following a heated debate that provided a taste of the tone that can be expected during elections planned for later this year.