You know how I hate to sound gloomy, but I do find myself wondering how many of the Christmas presents we opened so recently and with such delight will, before summer is over, be lying forlornly in the window display of a London High Street pawnbroker. The snuffboxes, the silver crumpet rings; this Ferrari; that solitaire diamond ring…one quite chokes up.

In 1835, Charles Dickens wrote: "Of all the numerous receptacles for misery and distress with which the streets of London unhappily abound, there are, perhaps, none which present such striking scenes of vice and poverty as the pawnbrokers' shops."

As if to honor February's bicentenary of Dickens's birth, Victorian-style poverty solutions are coming back in vogue. The pawnshop—an institution which only in the vulgar age of online lenders and jewelry buyers like wonga.com and cash4gold could be credited with a variety of antique charm—has a new lease of life. Barry Stevenson, chief executive of the U.K.'s largest pawnbroker chain, Albemarle & Bond, told the Times newspaper last month that he believes 2012 will mark the beginning of "the age of the pawnbroker." Here is an epoch of unhappiness too grimly managerial to have commanded the attention of Nostradamus. While businesses in nearly every other sector are shedding jobs and shuttering outlets, Albemarle & Bond says it is planning to open 25 new shops this year and take on 300 new staff.

In default of banks being prepared to lend money at risk, even the extremely wealthy are resorting to pawnbrokers for bridging loans. Cherished personal items such as private planes are, heartbreakingly, being used as collateral at usurious rates of interest. 

As Dickens put it: "There are some pawnbrokers' shops of a very superior description. There are grades in pawning as in everything else, and distinctions must be observed even in poverty." 

How right he was. Paul Aitken, the boss of one such high-toned firm, borro, was proudly pictured in the Times brandishing nearly a dozen hocked watches, while a pair of high-performance cars and a single-prop plane stand in the background. We're told his vaults contain several Ivor Novello songwriting awards—Elton! Say it ain't so!—and a Henry Moore. Mr. Aitken says his business has "gone gangbusters this year"—which is no doubt true but still sounds a little more like gloating than the former owners of those objects will probably feel is sensitive.

One wishes such entrepreneurial types every success, but a certain melancholy does attend the thought that the three golden balls of destitution may replace the cheerful face of Colonel Sanders as the icon of the High Street. 

Optimism is not, mind you, the default position of the well-informed adult: We, in general, prefer to pull the lead-lined hoods of our survival suits over our noses and brace for impact. Our children are another matter. Christmas has done them no good at all. "More present! More present!" Such has been the cry of my 2-year-old daughter ever since lunchtime on Dec. 25. Just old enough to grasp the concept of Christmas, and the fact that it has started, she is not yet old enough to grasp the concept of Christmas coming to an end. That is her tragedy, and ours. 

It seems to me we have quite enough present as things stand. "More future!" would sound more progressive as a rallying cry. "Less future," that said, has a certain Eeyorish appeal. 

With literary prizes proliferating nearly as fast as literary festivals, I'm pleased to have been asked to help judge one that goes against the prevailing mood of soupy authorial self-congratulation. Critics, rather than authors, are to be honored for once—in the inaugural "Hatchet Job of the Year" award. Our shortlist will be announced this month. The online review aggregators the Omnivore are offering a year's supply of potted shrimp (bottom-feeders, of course) to the winner.

—Next week, Francis X. Rocca in Rome