SYDNEY—Australian Prime Minister pledged to keep the nation's troops in Afghanistan following the killing of Osama bin Laden, warning that his death won't end the terrorist organization he masterminded.

"The death of Osama bin Laden is not the end of al Qaeda," she said at a press conference Monday. "That is why, here in Australia, we will continue to do what we need to do to keep the nation as safe as we can from threats of terrorism."

She added, "We will continue the mission in Afghanistan."

Australia has nearly 2,400 troops in Afghanistan, with another 87 in the Middle East and North Africa, according to the government. The nation has been one of the most steadfast allies for the U.S. in the region.

But the center-left Labor government made good on a 2007 election promise to withdraw combat troops, leaving only a handful of personnel to protect the nation's embassy there. Meanwhile, the Afghanistan commitment has come under scrutiny from political allies of Ms. Gillard's Labor party, which governs under a fragile coalition. Some lawmakers who could provide the keys to power, including independent Robert Oakeshott and Greens lawmaker Adam Bandt, have questioned Australia's ongoing commitment to Afghanistan.

Ms. Gillard said the death of bin Laden only reinforces the Pacific country's need to be present in the region with al Qaeda still posing a danger, especially as Afghanistan moves into a time of year she referred to as the "fighting season."

Ten Australian citizens died in the Sept. 11, 2001. Australia quickly joined a U.S.-led effort in the Middle East and Afghanistan, with 23 of the country's solders dying in Afghanistan since operations began in late 2001. Adding to Australia's desire to join the move against al Qaeda were a series of attacks that included the death of 88 Australians in Bali on Oct. 12, 2002. A further eight Australians were killed in London, Bali, Mumbai and Jakarta between July 2005 and July 2009.

Ms. Gillard said she has advised all embassies and consulates of the need for security awareness. "We are advising Australians in areas likely to be affected by gatherings outside hotels, gatherings and demonstrations, to exercise enhanced vigilance," said Ms. Gillard. Her remarks echo similar concerns from other leaders around the world, particularly those involved in the joint U.S. and allied forces operations in Afghanistan. Late Sunday the U.S. put its embassies on alert and warned Americans of possible reprisal attacks. 

Australia has thwarted numerous home-grown terrorist incidents in recent years, including plans by a Melbourne-based cell to carry out an attack on the Holsworthy Army Barracks in western Sydney in 2009. The government plans to triple its secret-service numbers to 1,860 by July this year, and is building a new high-security office on the shores of Lake Burley Griffin in Canberra, the country's capital. 

Ms. Gillard's relief was shared by her counterpart across the Tasman in New Zealand, Prime Minister John Key who told reporters he had "no doubt that the world is a safer place without Osama bin Laden." 

New Zealand currently has about 70 troops in Afghanistan but plans to half that number over the next 12 months. 

 --Rebecca Howard in Wellington contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Geoffrey Rogow at geoffrey.rogow@dowjones.com 