What is it with the giant flowers sculptures around town? First there were those huge, creepy roses that refuse to wilt on Park Avenue in the 60s. And now a developer has installed a humongous pot of daisies on top of a condo he's building in Chelsea. I headed down there a few days ago—I can't say in the hopes of persuading him to throw them in the trash before I'd even seen them, but certainly to find what's behind this disturbing trend. There's also a 28-foot rose sprouting from the façade of the New Museum in the Bowery.

My general belief when it comes to public sculpture—even though an unbelievably large percentage of it seems bad, as if the artists commissioned to create it lose all taste and self-control when faced with lots of space and the prospect that anybody other than their friends is going to be forced to admire the results—is that more is more. Even if the effort doesn't pan out in the end, I think it would be hard to argue, just from looking around, that society spends too much time seeking the sublime.

The building that boasts the daisies is an otherwise stark, seven-story, 53-unit condo at 305 W. 16th St. that has yet to open. I met on its windswept roof with  Harlan Berger, its developer, and  Rob Buchholz, the artist. The sculpture—37 feet high, if you include the three-foot base it rests on, and 6,000 pounds—includes a giant vase decorated with mirrors and white porcelain glass, and several stainless-steel daisies that sprout from it. It's called "Perhaps."

I know you're not supposed to ask artists why they call their works what they do, like "Nude Descending a Staircase" or "Untitled 7," because it just proves that you're too unsophisticated, lacking the education and aesthetic software, to appreciate the miraculous. But I did anyway. 

"The year I built it I was still fresh out of college," explained Mr. Buchholz, a 31-year-old Nevadan. "Perhaps I was going to do this thing, perhaps that."

I wasn't certain creating public sculpture in the heart of Manhattan was the way to determine what you wanted to do with your life—especially when I think of all the false starts, the dead ends, my friends and I pursued before we stumbled into our careers. But at least the messes we created along the way have been buried in the sands of time. Mr. Buchholz's exercise in self-discovery is here to stay.

Not that I didn't like it. Indeed, no pun intended, it was starting to grow on me. It seemed a perfectly pleasant counterpoint to the view of the skyline punctuated, most prominently, by the Empire State Building. The gray daisies seemed forged of the same industrial forces as the skyscrapers that served as their backdrop, yet simultaneously made fun of the pretensions that underscore the city's ambitions. 

Good or bad, I assumed the piece bore the influence of  Jeff Koons—the superstar artist who has taken kitsch to new heights, quite literally. Some of his masterpieces, and I use that term advisedly, are extremely large, such as the 43-foot chia pet puppy that graced Rockefeller Center in 2000. 

But no. "I don't even know who that is," Mr. Buchholz, who was discovered by Mr. Berger at the annual Burning Man self-expression festival in the Black Rock Desert in 2007, said of Mr. Koons. Mr. Buchholz added that his idea of fun is to go snowmobiling. My suspicion is that the average downtown artist or Chelsea gallerist has never thought of contemplating nature from behind the wheel of an  Arctic Cat.
ACAT


-0.70
%




 "You have to be a different kind of artist to do large-scale stuff like this," he explained. In fact, "Perhaps" rates among his more diminutive pieces. "I have a big project next month in Southern California, a 12-ton set of three daisies," he said. "Not daisies—dandelions."

"Which are incredible," Mr. Berger noted.

"They pulse and change colors to sounds," Mr. Buchholz went on. "I don't always do flowers. I do large eggs and nests."

While Mr. Buchholz has never heard of Jeff Koons, Mr. Berger, an art collector, certainly has. He described his work as "interesting and powerful," though he wanted to make it clear that he isn't jumping on some sort of giant-flower-bouquet bandwagon.

"This project has been in the works for a year-and-a-half," he explained, contrasting it to the Park Avenue center-island flowers made by  Will Ryman of marine-painted stainless steel and brass, and that didn't blossom until this January. "When I decided to put this on the roof, it had nothing to do contextually with anything else going on. A lot of time and thought went into deciding whether to do this or not."

Mr. Berger didn't share precisely what those intellectual processes were that caused him to render an affirmative verdict, but he said he hoped it encouraged conversation (and undoubtedly condo sales). "It definitely gives brand identity to the building," he said. "Out of the box, it will probably be a little controversial. But I believe it's going to grow nicely with the neighborhood."

He was speaking metaphorically, of course. The sculpture has reached full height. My hunch is that if the piece excites any controversy, it will come mostly from the disco glass on the vase that will shine into surrounding apartments and offices on sunny days. And then there are the fully programmable lights. 

I wondered whether "Perhaps" might try to mimic the Empire State, which baths its summit in questionable hues of blue, green, purple and red on special occasions. "At Christmastime!" the artist said.

But Mr. Berger, the businessman, nipped that thought in the bud. "I think what we're going for is subtle," he cautioned. "We're going to wash it with light." And tasteful white light at that.

— ralph.gardner@wsj.com 