 What to do: Stuttgart sits in the heart of Baden-Württemberg in the southwest corner of Germany and is nestled between the Black Forest to the south and the Schurwald mountains to the east, along the Neckar River. In the surrounding hills, you'll find a flurry of vineyards, apple trees and cabbage fields. To enjoy Stuttgart and its environs is to enjoy local Swabian cuisine, wine and history.

Upon arriving in the area, head for Stuttgart's center and take a long stroll along Königstrasse, a shopping and business avenue that locals claim is the longest pedestrian street in Germany. The street is only blocks from the Hauptbahnhof, or central train station, and extends past the sprawling Schlossplatz, the city's major square. It's at Schlossplatz that you'll find the Königsbau, or King's building. The arcade structure is the former home of Stuttgart's stock exchange and today houses the Königsbau-Passagen, a large shopping center that was completed in 2006 (Königstrasse 26; www.koenigsbau-passagen.de). Facing the Königsbau, on the other side of Schlossplatz, you'll find the baroque style New Castle, or Neues Schloss. The castle was once intended to rival the Palace of Versailles and now houses the regional government offices. Just south is the medieval Old Castle (Altes Schloss), the former residence of the Dukes of Württemberg, which dates back to the 10th century. Today, the castle houses the Landesmuseum Württemberg. Visit the museum to explore the region's art and cultural history, including clocks from the renaissance and the Württemberg crown jewels (Schillerplatz 6; www.landesmuseum-stuttgart.de; open 10 a.m.-5 p.m., Tuesday to Sunday; €5 for adults, €3 for youths over 12 years old).

To explore more of the city, take a trip up to the Fernsehturm, Stuttgart's television tower. Completed in 1956, the tower is the first of its kind and would later inspire Berlin's more famous structure. The observation deck includes a café where you can enjoy cake and a drink while looking out onto the panorama (Jahnstrasse 120; www.fernsehturmstuttgart.com/en; open 9 a.m.-11 p.m. daily, last ride to the top is at 10:30 p.m; €5 for adults, €3 for children 3-15 years old).

A must-see while staying in Stuttgart is the Mercedes-Benz Museum, located in Stuttgart's Bad Cannstatt district. Mercedes-Benz is a major employer—and a point of pride—in the region. The museum sits next door to the car maker's headquarters and explores the company's automotive history dating back to 1886 and famed innovators, Gottlieb Daimler and Karl Benz. Of note are the "silver arrows," Mercedes racing cars that led to the company's reputation for high performance. If you peek outside the museum's windows, you'll see the Mercedes-Benz Arena, home to Stuttgart's soccer team, VfB Stuttgart. (www.mercedes-benz-classic.com; open 9 a.m.-6 p.m., Tuesday to Sunday; €8 for adults, €4 for youths).

If you want to venture outside the city limits, take a trip to Esslingen am Neckar and enjoy more of the medieval history of the region. Esslingen neighbors Stuttgart to the southeast and, as its name suggests, is situated in the Neckar Valley. Take in the rows of fachwerk, or timber-framed, homes within the city's medieval center and enjoy wine from the local vineyards dotting the area. If you can, venture into the fortress walls overlooking the old city center, dating back to the 1300s (www.esslingen.de). 

 Where to eat and drink: Only a stone's throw away from the Old Castle is Stuttgart's Markthalle, or market hall. Step inside to indulge in the daily assortment of fresh meats, vegetables and fruit sold by locals, or try one of the restaurants housed inside. Even if you're not intending to eat, this art nouveau building is worth a visit (Dorotheenstrasse 4; www.markthalle-stuttgart.de).

For a traditional Swabian meal, visit Calwer-Eck-Bräu, which claims to be the first and smallest microbrewery in Stuttgart. The establishment sits on picturesque and pedestrian Calwerstrasse, just two blocks west of Königstrasse. The restaurant is tough to find so look for the overhanging sign and a stairwell leading upstairs. Among the offerings here are the tasty maultaschen, a Swabian ravioli, and käsespätzle, a local cheese noodle dish. Considering it's a microbrewery, grab a stein of the home brews (Calwerstrasse 31; www.calwereck.de).

For light fare, head over to Scholz, a café situated across from the Rathaus, or Stuttgart's city hall. The first thing you'll notice about Scholz is the five rows of chairs outside its doors. That every seat faces outward into Marktplatz makes Scholz a desirable place to grab yourself a drink (I suggest a Hugo or an Aperol Sprizz) and relax as life in Stuttgart moves along (Marktplatz 12; www.scholzstuttgart.com).

 Where to stay: Stay at the hip and luxurious Steigenberger Graf Zeppelin hotel, considered one of the best hotels in Stuttgart and centrally located across the street from the main train station. Rates vary from €177 to €339 per night (Arnulf-Klett-Platz 7; www.steigenberger.com/en/Stuttgart).

Another option is the Kronen-Hotel, only a short walk from the central train station. A four-star hotel, it is located on quiet Kronenstrasse and known for its friendly staff and hearty breakfast buffet. Rates vary from €108 to €185 per night (Kronenstrasse 48; www.kronenhotel-stuttgart.de). 

For those looking for a budget option, there's Arche Hotel, which is located in the heart of the city behind the Markthalle. The hotel has a set of simple rooms with shared showers and restrooms and features a restaurant and outdoor seating area on the ground floor along quiet Bärenstrasse. Rates can run from €35 to €60 a night (Bärenstrasse 2;www.arche-stuttgart.de).