The cost of a seven-day, unlimited-ride MetroCard just hit $29, and the online squawkers are predictably upset that the threatened fare hike has become a reality, calling it "abusive" and "ridiculous." One math whiz notes that if you use the weekly pass for nothing more than a five-day commute, you'll spend an "obscene" $2.90 per ride.

Talk about a limited perspective. If you're man enough to ride the A train 24/7, the $29 pass—or, heck, a $2.25 fare—starts looking like a great deal. Either way, by my calculation you'd be traveling 2,500 miles a week—the distance from New York to L.A. And think of the accompanying thrills. I've witnessed fellow passengers feasting on raw chicken, playing in mariachi bands, even clipping their toenails. Can any other $29 travel option even come close? There was one way to find out. 

My first test was a standard NYC cab, hailed on Sixth Avenue. I asked the driver, a friendly guy from Vietnam, to take me as far as possible for $29. He was all over it: "This never happen in 21 years!" 

It was his big chance to play tour guide. Our first destination: Central Park South, which he dismissed with a wave of his hand: "They got nothing here except trees." He perked up when, driving through the Upper West Side, he spotted a white poodle with a fancy clip job. "Funny! Like no clothes on!" Further uptown, he pointed out "a very famous school" (Columbia), a Mexican neighborhood ("lots of amigos") and the grand hospitals of Washington Heights. The 40 minutes of fun came to screeching halt when the meter hit $29 and he dropped me in front of Ulloa's Digital Photo Lab at 181st and Broadway. Total distance: an entertaining 7.7 miles. 

A pedicab ride proved even more thrilling, though it took some doing to arrange. The cluster of operators outside the Plaza Hotel weren't exactly vying for my $29. One offered a trip to Rockefeller Center. Another, Times Square. The best offer: Bloomingdale's. 

Alex bundled me in a blanket and raced along 59th Street. I thought I'd feel like a tourist, but there was no time to feel anything. The cyclist sped between lanes and dodged buses, shouting all the way. It was electrifying. Pedicabs, it turns out, are popular with business folks in a hurry. They slice through traffic twice as fast as a cab, and they're probably the best option if you're late for a meeting.

Still, $29 for a four-block jaunt?  Gregg Zukowski, president of the NYC Pedicab Owners' Association, said he'd have taken me at least as far as the Empire State Building. Pedicab drivers charge whatever they want, he says, and the guys operating near Central Park usually demand the highest rates: they're holding out for $100 park tours. In general, a cross-Midtown ride should cost about 20 bucks. 

If it's mileage you're after, discount services such as BoltBus and Megabus offer $29 round-trip fares to cities like Baltimore on motorcoaches equipped with free Wi-Fi and bathrooms the width of a drainpipe. Then there's the leisure options: $29 more than covers a two-hour bike rental, or a Circle Line speedboat ride that includes, somewhat disconcertingly, a hug from a stranger dressed in a shark costume. 

But for a New Yorker, there's nothing more exotic than driving a car, which is why I went for the $29, three-hour Zipcar rental. Determined to garner maximum mileage, I imagined making a dozen expressway loops around Brooklyn, chewing up the highway like a bat out of hell. Wrong. My navigator buddy, who took notes throughout the trip, jotted the following: "BQE—20 MPH. Reporter disgruntled." 

The Belt Parkway was even slower, so my navigator suggested a clever alternative: a spin through Floyd Bennett Field, the semi-abandoned airfield in southeast Brooklyn. The area is blissfully deserted; you can actually speed onto what's marked as an active runway. But a day marked by a biplane landing on your hood is a bad day indeed, so after a short joyride we crawled up the Van Wyck and headed home. Total distance covered in three hours: a pathetic 49 miles. 

Of course, it's hardly fair to compare private-sector transportation with the MTA. Our train and bus fares are cheap because they're heavily subsidized. Fares cover less than half the $7 billion cost of running the system's 24 train routes and 200-plus bus lines. The rest of the money is minted on an underground press operated by industrious mole people. 

Perhaps a better comparison would be a N.J Transit ride. I stepped up to the window at Penn Station and asked about the $29 options. The look on the ticket agent's face suggested she'd had it with fools like me about 50 years ago: "You mean you don't know where you're going?" Finally, she suggested the round-trip to Hamilton. 

Hamilton, it turns out, is the second-to-last stop on the Trenton line, a 60-mile jaunt through an industrial corridor that gives way to a pastoral spread of woodland and trailer parks before dumping passengers off at a giant parking garage facing a plumbing-supply factory. I looked around at the world's largest expanse of concrete and imagined the ticket agent having a good laugh. 

Still, the area isn't without its charms. Ambling along the highway, I spotted a 30-foot sculpture of what appeared to be a giant molar, and happened upon a lone Korean deli selling delicious Philly cheesesteaks. It wasn't the day trip of my dreams, but I'll take it over my F train commute. 

Comparing just how far New York City travelers can go on $29.

—Ms. Kadet, who writes the "Tough Customer" column for SmartMoney magazine, can be reached at anne.kadet@dowjones.com 