 Dutch car maker Spyker Cars, which owns troubled Swedish car maker Saab Automobile, is in funding talks with Chinese companies Great Wall Motor, China Youngman Automobile Group and Jiangsu Yueda Group about possible investments, according to people familiar with the situation.  

 Booming demand for luxury cars, particularly in China, and a recovery in major truck markets helped Daimler almost double first-quarter net profit to €1.18 billion ($1.75 billion), up from €612 million a year earlier, and remain on track to deliver a "significant rise" in earnings this year. 

 Investigators combing the wreckage of an Air France jetliner that crashed almost two years ago enroute to Paris from Rio de Janeiro said they had located and retrieved the plane's data recorder from the depths of the Atlantic Ocean. 

 The European Commission recommended European Union countries defer controversial changes to rules on airport screening of duty-free liquids, bowing to opposition from EU governments that said the move would weaken aviation security.  

Poland's BRE Bank, the country's third-largest bank by assets, said net profit almost doubled in the first quarter to 229.7 million zlotys ($86.5 million), compared with 115.4 million zlotys a year earlier, due to strong interest income, boosted by fatter margins. 

 Warren Buffett called the recent actions of his former top aide "inexplicable and inexcusable," even as the billionaire investor took some responsibility for the stock-purchase controversy surrounding Berkshire. 

 French oil major Total said it would spend $1.37 billion to buy a controlling stake in SunPower, which weds a solar company industry observers say has an attractive technology to make high-quality, high-efficiency panels with a fossil-fuel company. 

 DuPont raised its offer to acquire Danish food ingredients maker Danisco by about 5% to about $6.6 billion after failing to gain enough investor support for the deal.  

 European antitrust authorities have opened two investigations into the financial institutions and clearinghouse that operate the region's market for credit-default swaps, the derivatives that act as insurance against a debt default.  

 The U.S. Treasury Department proposed excluding certain foreign-exchange instruments from new rules governing derivatives, a decision hailed by business organizations but criticized by some advocacy groups as creating a regulatory loophole. 

 Gulf Arab companies seeking to raise capital are looking increasingly to London rather than to regional markets to list their shares, sending a strong signal to Gulf regulators that they need to accelerate moves to make local markets more friendly to investors. 

Singapore Mercantile Exchange said Chief Executive Thomas McMahon has resigned and will leave his post at the end of June. The exchange, which commenced operation in August last year, said McMahon—who was previously president of the Hong Kong Mercantile Exchange and director of Asia for the New York Mercantile Exchange—will remain as a member of SMX's advisory board.

Actelion, Europe's largest biotechnology firm, said it lost a legal case in the U.S. that may cost it more than $500 million, further undermining trust in the company's management and board that will have to defend itself and its strategy at a shareholder meeting, where an investor group has called for a boardroom overhaul. 

Merck & Co. said its first-quarter profit tripled to $1 billion, compared with $299 million a year earlier, on lower acquisition-related costs, while generic competition for previously big-selling drugs limited sales growth to 1%. 

 Samsung Electronics announced a 30% drop in first-quarter profit to 2.78 trillion won ($2.6 billion) as its TV-component business dropped into the red and semiconductors brought smaller profits.  

 Sony said it couldn't rule out the possibility that credit-card information from 10 million customers may have been compromised by the security breach at its online videogame service, although the company said there is no evidence at this time to indicate that the data had been stolen. 

 Infosys Technologies named a banking veteran as its chairman and one of its founders the new chief executive as India's bellwether technology company unveiled a much-talked-about management restructuring. 

 Investors dumped shares of Research In Motion, amid growing worry that the BlackBerry maker's current development pipeline—including several new BlackBerry devices powered by its latest operating system—won't be enough to stem declining sales in the U.S.  

Nokia Siemens Networks said it completed the acquisition of most of Motorola Solutions's network-equipment assets in a $975 million cash deal, making it the second-largest network gear vendor globally and strengthening its position in the U.S. 

 Amazon.com issued an account of its recent Web services outage in which it apologized for the shutdown, offered a service credit to customers and promised improved communication in the future.  

Hon Hai Precision Industry, the world's largest contract electronics maker by revenue, said first-quarter profit fell 20% to 14.4 billion Taiwan dollars (US$502 million) from a year earlier on higher operating expenses. 

Heavy-equipment maker Caterpillar reported record first-quarter earnings and raised its outlook for the year on surging global demand for its mining equipment and a budding U.S. recovery in sales of its construction machinery. Caterpillar's first-quarter earnings totaled $1.23 billion, up from $233 million a year earlier.