A routine mammogram checking for breast cancer may predict the future development of heart disease, according to a study in Obstetrics & Gynecology. Fine, granular deposits along the circumference of breast arteries, called breast arterial calcifications, are visible on 3% to 29% of breast scans and are frequently seen in women with heart disease. The study looked at 1,454 U.S. women who received mammograms in 2004. After five years, 20.8% of the subjects who tested positive for calcifications had developed heart disease compared with 5.4% who tested negative. The risk of heart disease in women with breast calcification was 6.3% compared with 2.3% in those without calcification. Of the women with calcification, 58.3% developed stroke compared with 13.5% who were calcification-free. Adjusting for age and other risk factors didn't affect the findings. Researchers recommended calcifications be routinely reported on breast scans. Using mammography to screen for heart disease could lead to earlier detection and intervention, they said.

 Caveat: As the subjects were primarily white and non-Hispanic, the findings may not apply to women of other races or ethnicities. The severity of calcification wasn't measured in the study. 

  Title: The Association of Breast Arterial Calcification and Coronary Heart Disease 

Having a job is better for a person's psychological health than being unemployed. But being in a poor-quality job may be worse for people's health than not having a job at all, according to a study in Occupational and Environmental Medicine. Paid employment is associated with better health, including mental health, but few studies have compared the health effects of unemployment and poor-quality jobs, defined as jobs with high demands, low pay, limited decision-making and no security. A study of 7,155 Australians found the health benefits of paid work depended on the job. Workers in good jobs had significantly better mental health than those who were unemployed. But the mental health of workers in bad jobs was significantly worse than among the unemployed. The study used data gathered over seven years from an annual survey started in 2001. A five-item inventory assessed mental health. The study found that 20% of workers had spent time in bad jobs and more than 25% of all respondents were identified with a mental-health problem at some point during the study. Mental health declined significantly in unemployed workers who took a poor quality job. The findings show that adverse working conditions may incur a health cost, researchers said.

 Caveat: Certain aspects of job quality, such as workplace supports, couldn't be measured. The findings might not be applicable to countries with less generous social safety nets than Australia, researchers said. 

• Ibuprofen benefits: People who take ibuprofen for arthritis or other painful conditions may be less likely to develop Parkinson's disease than if they use aspirin, other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory (NSAID) drugs or acetaminophen, according to a two-part study in Neurology. In the first part of the study, researchers examined the effects of ibuprofen and other pain medications in 136,197 participants from two U.S. health studies. During six years of follow-up, 291 cases of Parkinson's were reported. Ibuprofen users had a 38% reduced risk of developing the disease compared with people not taking the painkiller. No significant associations were observed for acetaminophen, aspirin or other NSAIDs. More tablets of ibuprofen, but not aspirin or acetaminophen, were associated with lower risk for Parkinson's. In the second part of the study, results of the first study and six previous studies of NSAIDs and Parkinson's were pooled in a meta-analysis that found ibuprofen users had a 27% reduced risk for Parkinson's. Ibuprofen may have anti-inflammatory properties not shared by other NSAIDs and deserves more study, researchers said.

 Caveat: Use of ibuprofen and other NSAID drugs was self-reported on questionnaires so errors were possible. Ibuprofen may have been used to treat conditions that are associated with lower Parkinson's-disease risk, researchers said.

  Title: Use of ibuprofen and risk of Parkinson disease 

• Exercise and polyps: Men and women can reduce their chances of developing pre-cancerous colon polyps by staying active and exercising, according to a meta-analysis of 20 studies published in the British Journal of Cancer. Physical activity has been shown to play a role in preventing colon cancer, but its effect on polyps or adenomas, the precursors to colon cancer, isn't clear. U.S. researchers analyzed data from 20 studies involving more than 250,000 patients who underwent colonoscopy and concluded that exercise has an important role in preventing colon polyps and colon cancer. The most active individuals had a 16% lower risk of developing polyps compared with the least active, and a 35% reduced risk for large or advanced polyps. Activity levels ranged from 30 minutes a week to several hours. The findings confirmed a smaller 2007 study that found exercise reduced colon-polyp risk by 15%. Researchers suggested exercise may lower the risk of polyps by reducing inflammation and insulin resistance, and boosting immune function.

 Caveat: Most of the underlying studies looked at large or advanced adenomas or polyps and didn't consider the effect of exercise on low-grade growths. The analysis didn't identify a minimum level of exercise that might be protective. 

  Title: Physical activity and risk of colon adenoma: a meta-analysis 

• Detecting Down syndrome: Scientists have developed a new test for Down syndrome that is less risky than current diagnostic techniques and can be used earlier in a woman's pregnancy, according to a study in Nature Medicine. Down syndrome is caused by an extra copy of trisomy 21 chromosome and results in a range of physical and learning disabilities. The defect, which occurs in one in 700 births, is usually diagnosed during the second trimester with amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling, which require extraction and testing of fetal genetic material from the placenta. Both procedures for diagnosing Down syndrome carry a small risk of miscarriage. The new method involves a maternal blood test between 11 and 14 weeks. Using routine lab equipment, scientists are able to identify and quantify specific DNA sequences in the blood by comparing chemical changes called DNA methylation from the mother and the fetus. The new test, developed by scientists from Greece, Cyprus and the U.K., successfully identified 14 blood samples with Down syndrome and 26 with no abnormalities in a laboratory study. Researchers believe the simple, low-cost test is safer and more reliable than existing technologies.

 Caveat: The study was carried out on a small number of blood samples taken from women who had undergone traditional prenatal testing. A large-scale study is needed to introduce the test into the clinical practice of prenatal diagnostic laboratories, researchers said.

  Title: Fetal-specific DNA methylation ratio permits noninvasive prenatal diagnosis of trisomy 21 

• Ultrasound and bones: Regular treatments with low-intensity ultrasound promote healing and new bone growth in lower leg fractures which are slow to close, according to a study in BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders. Every year, an estimated 500,000 Americans fracture their tibia, the larger of the two bones between the ankle and the knee. In approximately 4.4% of cases, especially in smokers, healing is delayed and surgery or bone grafting are required to knit the bones. From 2002 to 2005, six hospitals in Germany tested the use of low-intensity ultrasound on 51 patients with tibial fractures that hadn't closed after four months. A sham device resembling ultrasound was used on a control group of 50 patients with similar slow-healing fractures. Both groups of subjects, who ranged in age from 14 to 70, received 20-minute treatments daily for 16 weeks. Ultrasound increased bone density in open tibial fractures by 34% compared with the sham treatment and significantly reduced the gap between the bones. Researchers concluded that ultrasound is a safe, non-invasive treatment that accelerates the healing process in delayed unions of the tibia.

 Caveat: For ethical reasons, the institutional review boards at the participating centers limited the study to 16 weeks. As it was unlikely that most delayed tibia unions would heal within this time frame, researchers used surrogate measures of healing that had been validated in other studies. The study sample was small.

  Title: Improved healing response in delayed unions of the tibia with low-intensity pulsed ultrasound: results of a randomized sham-controlled trial 

• Lung cancer: When heavy smokers are able to suddenly quit without effort, they may be exhibiting early signs of lung cancer, according to a study in the Journal of Thoracic Oncology. An estimated 1.4 million people die of lung cancer every year, mostly because of smoking. The study looked at 115 lung-cancer patients at a veterans' medical center in Philadelphia. Researchers found that 48% of the subjects quit smoking before their diagnosis, 31% without difficulty. Among current smokers with lung cancer, 38% had reduced their tobacco use by about 50% the previous year. In a comparison group of 101 patients with either prostate cancer or heart attack, smoking was spontaneously reduced in 17% and 4% respectively before their diagnosis. Researchers suggest lung tumors may secrete a substance that blocks the effects of nicotine. The findings challenge the notion that lung-cancer symptoms prompt smokers to quit and may lead to earlier detection of a cancer that is only curable in the early stages, they said.

 Caveat: The study was small and involved a single interview. Some patients may have quit because they suspected they had lung cancer, even without symptoms, researchers said.

  Title: Spontaneous Smoking Cessation Before Lung Cancer Diagnosis 

• Hospital readmission red flag: A routine blood test may help hospitals identify the most seriously ill heart-failure patients who are at risk for readmission or might not survive, according to a study in the American Journal of Cardiology. Levels of N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) are measured within 24 hours of admission to hospital and again at discharge to help doctors diagnose and manage patients with heart failure, which is often confused with other conditions. A study of 217 patients admitted to a Baltimore hospital from 2006 to 2007 found that NT-proBNP may also predict adverse outcomes. Patients whose peptide levels fell by less than 50% during their stay had a 40% increased risk for readmission or death in the following year, compared with patients whose peptide levels declined by 50% or more, the study found. When adjusted for age, gender, race and other diseases, the increase in risk was 57%. Of the 217 patients, 28 (13%) were readmitted in less than a month, and of these, 17 (61%) had NT-proBNP levels that had dropped by less than 50%. Patients with greater risk for readmission might benefit from more intensive medical treatment and follow-up, researchers said. 

 Caveat: The study was small and involved patients from one hospital. There was limited adjustment for socio-economic factors.

  Title: Acute Changes in N-Terminal Pro-B-Type Natriuretic Peptide During Hospitalization and Risk of Readmission and Mortality in Patients With Heart Failure 