As venture capitalists scramble to get a piece of Silicon Valley's new Web boom, entrepreneurs like  Aaron Levie are finding they have the upper hand.



Mr. Levie, 26 years old, founded online storage provider Box.net in 2005. While his 140-person Palo Alto, Calif., company has money in the bank, Mr. Levie saw the Web investing environment heat up recently, driven by interest in fast-growing start-ups such as Facebook Inc. and Zynga Inc.

So Mr. Levie decided to tap that interest and raise new capital. In less than three weeks last month, he closed a hefty $48 million round of financing from venture-capital firms including Meritech Capital Partners and Andreessen Horowitz. In the process, Mr. Levie said he turned down several other venture firms that wanted a piece of the deal.

"There was no capital limit and we could've raised more," said Mr. Levie, whose start-up counts about five million users at 60,000 companies. 

Mr. Levie's experience underlines one of the dynamics of the latest Web boom: the growing clout of many entrepreneurs. As venture-capital firms pile into deals in order to find the next Facebook or Twitter Inc., some entrepreneurs are calling more of the shots, picking and choosing whose money they will take and at what price.

That's driving up the valuations of many venture deals as firms bid up what they're willing to pay to get into a company. 

An analysis of Silicon Valley venture financings by law firm Fenwick & West shows funding rounds where valuations rose exceeded those where valuations declined by 67% to 21% in the fourth quarter of 2010. That's a jump from up rounds exceeding down rounds 52% to 30% in the third quarter. 

The shifting power balance has pushed some investors to be more entrepreneur-friendly. Some investors are no longer insisting on a board seat in a start-up. Many venture firms are simplifying deal terms by reducing provisions that dilute the stake of an entrepreneur. Other investors are more willing to work with convertible debt instead of equity, which gives them less say in the start-up's business. 

Start-ups with potential for technological breakthroughs in health care, mobile communications and business software topped The Wall Street Journal's second annual Next Big Thing list.



Indeed, "it's an excellent time to be an entrepreneur," said  Cheryl Cheng, a partner at venture-capital firm BlueRun Ventures in Menlo Park, Calif., which has stripped out some dilutive provisions in its deal terms. By doing so, she said, "it's a way to stay competitive and to stay relevant to entrepreneurs."

Many venture capitalists are desperate to find hit companies amid a shakeout in the industry. Venture-capital firms have been dealing with weak fund raising prospects and a dearth of  Google Inc.-like returns following the recession and a general lack of initial public offerings and acquisitions in the last decade.

Overall, U.S. venture firms raised just 119 new funds totaling $11.6 billion last year, down from 215 funds with more than $40 billion in 2007, according to research firm VentureSource.

And while U.S. IPOs and acquisitions of venture-backed companies—which are the main source of venture-capital profits—picked up last year, the venture industry generated just $39.3 billion through such deals last year, down 43% from the $69.1 billion that was produced in 2007, according to VentureSource.

Some of the most frenzied competition among start-up investors—and where entrepreneurs find they have the most sway—is happening at the earliest stages among tiny Web companies seeking funding. 

That's where numerous "angel" investors, who provide small amounts of capital, have proliferated and are competing with one another.

In a sign of the early-stage flurry,  Yuri Milner, who heads Digital Sky Technologies Inc. and start-up investment firm SV Angel, in January offered $150,000 each to 45 early-stage companies associated with Y Combinator, a Silicon Valley firm that provides early funding to start-ups and helps them refine their ideas. 

Rather than taking sizable stakes in the companies, Mr. Milner and SV Angel only asked to get the same financing terms as later-stage investors in the companies. 

"It was the most founder-friendly investment document that's ever been created," said Harj Taggar, a partner at Y Combinator, which takes a 7% stake in the companies it helps. He said almost all of the Y Combinator start-ups took the cash.

  David Lee, a partner at SV Angel, said the Y Combinator start-ups "are going to be some of the defining companies in technology."

Meanwhile,  Philip Inghelbrecht, 38 years old, who launched a mobile application called DriveMeCrazy Inc. in December, spent the past few weeks raising about $300,000 in "seed money," a process he said was easier than in the past. 

In 2000, he said it took him months to raise the same amount for a mobile application called Shazam, which recognizes songs played within earshot of a mobile device and today has more than 100 million users.

  David King, who recently launched mobile-application company Camino Real Inc., said he could also have taken advantage of the heated market but chose "to do the opposite." 

Mr. King, who in 2009 sold another start-up, said this year he raised a total of several hundred thousand dollars from about 30 people who could act as advisors to his new business. 

"The market is crazy right now and we have access to it but we wanted to get really great partners," he said. Mr. King added that some of the investors were "downright surprised I wasn't using the market to push them for the best deal." 

 Write to  Pui-Wing Tam at pui-wing.tam@wsj.com and Amir Efrati at amir.efrati@wsj.com 