WASHINGTON – A small incendiary device addressed to Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano went off Friday in a District of Columbia postal sorting facility that handles mail addressed to government agencies, sending the federal and local law enforcement authorities in the region scrambling for the second day in a row.

A federal law enforcement official said the fiery letter found at the mail processing center at 3300 V Street NE was similar to the incendiary packages discovered in Maryland a day earlier.

An ATF official said a postal employee tossed the parcel in a mail bin and threw other mail on top of it when the device went off. "They smelled it before they saw it and they had to move the mail around to find it," the ATF official said. Early indications were that there were no explosives in the parcel.

Washington Police Chief Cathy Lanier said police initially learned about the package when a postal employee flagged a police cruiser down outside the facility. "Right now we don't have any other packages, but we're not taking anything for granted," Ms. Lanier said. "All of the protective measures that went into effect yesterday will continue."

The incident, which prompted an immediate response from a variety of law enforcement authorities, was the third involving incendiary devices going off in two days. On Thursday two devices, including one addressed to Maryland Gov. Martin O'Malley, went off in the mail rooms of two Maryland state government office buildings, forcing employee evacuations and touching off an investigation by state and federal authorities. 

Those incidents, at the Jeffrey Building in Annapolis, Md., and the Maryland Department of Motor Vehicle headquarters in Hanover, caused evacuations of about 300 people. There were no serious injuries.

Maryland State Police Superintendent Terrence Sheridan said no suspect has been identified in the investigation. "We have not narrowed this investigation down to any one person or persons," he said.

Mr. Sheridan said the parcels, which he described as being 7 1/2 inches long, four inches wide and 1 inch deep, were sent to the Federal Bureau of Investigation crime lab in Quantico, Va., for further examination. 

The two Maryland packages included angry notes, apparently in reference to the state's traffic alert signs.

Mr. Sheridan said that all state agencies had been alerted about how they might handle suspicious packages in the future. So far "we have not received any calls about any packages similar to what were delivered yesterday," he said during a Friday afternoon press conference.

All three packages flashed and produced smoke and the odor of sulfur, law enforcement officials said.

State Police spokesman Greg Shipley said Friday evening that authorities were aware of the latest report in D.C. and they had been in constant communication with the FBI since the devices went off. 

"All possibilities are being considered," Mr. Shipley said.

Investigators from the FBI, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives all responded to Friday's incident, as well as postal service investigators and Department of Homeland Security personnel.

Authorities across the country investigated similar incidents in 2004 when business-sized envelopes rigged with matches were sent to governors in at least 20 states. No charges were ever filed in those incidents, an FBI spokesman said.

Another FBI official familiar with the latest incidents said disgruntled citizens routinely use the mail system to voice their displeasure with the government and its officials.

 Write to  Gary Fields at gary.fields@wsj.com and Devlin Barrett at devlin.barrett@wsj.com 