Canoe racing sounds more like a summer camp activity than an athletic endeavor. But outrigger canoe racing requires serious technical skills, strength and stamina. 

"You use every muscle in your body at some point during each stroke," says Charlene Reed. "Core strength is especially important, as is leg strength."

Ms. Reed, the 59-year-old founder of an executive recruiting firm, has been racing with the Kupa'a Mau Outrigger Canoe Club in California for three years. Ms. Reed was first introduced to the sport, which is popular in Hawaii, in 1997 while visiting her boyfriend, who was living in Maui. While she was out in the ocean surfing, he was paddling an outrigger canoe, a modern-day version of a small boat that Polynesians developed for sea travel thousands of years ago.

Ms. Reed was already in great shape when she first tried outrigger canoeing. "It wasn't about getting in shape. I had the fitness level," she says. "I wanted something that could be social and physical." 

Ms. Reed has paddled for both women's and co-ed canoe teams. Outrigger canoes have one, two, four or six seats. Races fall into three categories: an Ironman race is a short course between four to six miles; a regatta race is six to 12 miles; and long distance, or a nine-man race, is any course over 12 miles. 

In the six-seat canoe, Ms. Reed usually paddles in seats three or four, which are considered power seats. Seat one sets the tempo and pace. Seat two calls out side changes, which is when paddlers switch the side they are paddling on. It's usually 16 strokes a side. Seat six steers the boat. "Six paddles have to act as one and totally be in synch," she says. "Individual athletes tend to have a hard time with this sport."

Last year, Ms. Reed competed in 10 outrigger canoe races. Her club starts practicing for the race season in March. Races begin in May, starting with six-man outrigger races at Ironman and regatta distances. Later in the season, nine-man distance races begin. The season culminates in September with the annual 41-mile Molokai to Oahu race, which cuts across the shark-infested Kaiwi Channel of Hawaii. Ms. Reed has competed in that race only once, in 2009. "It was beyond tough," she says.

Ms. Reed practices with the club Monday through Thursday from 5:30 p.m. until dark, usually about two hours, paddling intervals in the canoe. Interval training might include paddling five sets of one-minute sprints; paddling for five, 10 or 15 minute increments at 90% effort; or paddling on one side for a set period of time. 

"You never go easy," she says. "Maybe on the very last interval when you have a longer rest time between intervals." Rest time means jumping out of the canoe, swimming under it and getting back in. Saturdays Ms. Reed practices from 8 a.m. to 11 a.m. at the club.

Ms. Reed has a cross-training routine she can do at home or on the road. At least once a week she lifts weights, at home, at the gym or at a hotel gym. She focuses on her lats, the back muscles that are key to paddling, often doing lat pull downs and seated rows. 

Strong legs are needed to drive the canoe and Ms. Reed works her legs on the stationary bike and elliptical machine. She says rollerblading is the best exercise to build leg strength and she tries to blade along the beach near her home in Dana Point, Calif., for 45 minutes at least once a week. Since she works from home, Ms. Reed can sometimes take breaks during the day to surf for an hour.

"I am probably not the healthiest eater," Ms. Reed admits. "When I'm training I eat anything I want." For breakfast, she has oatmeal or dry cereal with kefir, a fermented yogurt-like milk drink, and coffee. 

Lunch most days is a salad and some kind of protein, such as a hard-boiled egg. For snacks she eats a piece of cheese, banana or a handful of nuts. For dinner she will eat some type of protein like fish, pork chops or a steak with a side of vegetables.

"When I know we're going to have a hard workout, I eat a high-carb dinner," she says. She starts hydrating at least 48 hours before a big race, drinking lots of water and two to three bottles of Gatorade a day. 

A new one-man outrigger canoe costs about $4,000 and a paddle costs about $200. Ms. Reed's annual club dues are $150 and she generally spends between $25 to $50 per race on fees. Her gym membership is $16 a month. Ms. Reed spends around $45 on neoprene shorts and $40 on her racing jersey. She spent $75 on two pairs of thick neoprene booties so her feet stay warm and don't slide in the canoe. She goes through three pairs of running sneakers a year.

"Do something every day that makes you sweat or get out of breath," Ms. Reed says. "It only takes an hour a day and it doesn't have to be all at once. I often break it up." 

If Ms. Reed has a busy day, she can always walk her Jack Russell terrier, Olive, around the hilly terrain near her home for exercise. 

"We do about three to four miles, about 45 minutes, power walking and sometimes running," she says.

"My boyfriend will be so embarrassed that I admit this, but on my playlist I have 'Y.M.C.A.' by the Village People. The Weather Girls' 'It's Raining Men' is for when I really need a lift. I love disco."

 Write to  Jen Murphy at workout@wsj.com 