The turmoil in the Middle East and Africa hasn't derailed the stock market's rally—yet—but investors might want to consider how to position their portfolios in case it does.

From Feb. 22 through Feb. 24, the Dow Jones Industrial Average dropped 2.6%, as oil spiked 8.4%. But then oil stalled out under $100 per barrel, and the stock market stabilized. The Dow rallied 1.3% during the past two days and is up 5.6% so far this year, its best start since 1998.

Still, the market is not out of the woods. Investors appear to have come to terms with the risks poised by Libya, which exports 1.5 million barrels of oil a day. But if the turmoil spreads to larger oil producers such as Saudi Arabia—the world's No. 1 oil exporter, at 7.3 million barrels of oil per day—watch out.

So what should investors do?  Aaron Gurwitz, chief investment officer at Barclays Wealth, recommends keeping portfolios positioned for continuing global growth but believes investors should have exposure to either higher energy prices or equity volatility, just in case the dominos in the Middle East and Africa continue to tumble. He does, however, say that investors should wait for the market to calm down before entering new energy-related positions.

"We believe that markets have overreacted," Mr. Gurwitz wrote in a note to investors on Monday. "But if unrest spreads ... our inclination would be to shift towards immediate action, even with oil prices and volatility indexes at higher levels."

Another option: Rebalance your portfolio. During past geopolitical disturbances, having more than just equities made a big difference. Consider what happened in September 2001: A portfolio of all stocks would have dropped 8.2% that month, while a portfolio that had 60% of assets in equities and 40% in bonds dropped just 4.4%, according to Research Affiliates LLC. 

Interestingly, having even more asset classes didn't protect against losses, according to Research Affiliates'  Ryan Larson. A portfolio equal-weighted between 16 different asset classes, including stocks, commodities, real estate investment trusts, bonds and bank loans, fell 4.7%.

Where diversification did make a difference was over the longer term. During the five years after the end of September 2001, the 60/40 portfolios gained 36% versus 72% for equal-weighted portfolios. The Dow Jones Industrials gained 32% over the same period.

Says Mr. Larson: "We're confident in a strong, diversified portfolio."

 Write to  Ben Levisohn at ben.levisohn@wsj.com 

