The teachers union is accusing the Department of Education of playing partisan politics with its employees, as the battle over seniority-based teacher layoffs rages on. 

On Tuesday, an education department employee sent an e-mail message to dozens of Queens parent coordinators—DOE employees who work at schools as liaisons between school administrators and the community—asking the coordinators to circulate a petition among parents and others that would be delivered to elected officials. The petition is to urge elected leaders to help end the state's last-in, first-out layoff rule and instead allow "teachers to be retained based on their performance, rather than just seniority."

A spokeswoman for the education department said the email message was "not appropriate" and that neither the chancellor nor the mayor authorized it. The e-mail came from the DOE's Office for Family Information and Action.

In Albany, Senate Republicans introduced a budget bill this week that would allow Mayor  Michael Bloomberg to start layoffs with teachers who have received unsatisfactory ratings. The mayor has been predicting that he needs to lay off more than 4,400 teachers and that current law would force him to lose some of his brightest educators. 

The United Federation of Teachers called the DOE's petition e-mail potentially illegal and said its lawyers "are reviewing the DOE's conduct."

In 2008, the DOE and the UFT quarreled over teachers' ability to wear buttons favoring political candidates. The schools chancellor at the time,  Joel Klein, reminded principals about DOE policy that teachers be neutral to all political candidates. The UFT sued, but a court backed the DOE. 

In a statement, the UFT's president,  Michael Mulgrew, said the DOE, "which on the pretext of sheltering students has forbidden teachers even from wearing buttons indicating support for candidates, has now embraced using students and parents in a clearly partisan legislative initiative."

The UFT said the request from the DOE appears to violate state law that says that no civil service employee "shall use his official authority or influences to coerce the political action of any person or body."

There are about 1,000 parent coordinators in New York City schools. A spokeswoman for the DOE,  Natalie Ravitz, said "while we strongly encourage parents to speak out on issues concerning their children's education, it was not appropriate for Department of Education staff to prescribe a specific solution for parent coordinators, or parents, to advocate….we will ensure that DOE staff understand their responsibilities and the appropriate standards to which we must adhere."

 Write to  Barbara Martinez at Barbara.Martinez@wsj.com 