(Please see Corrections & Amplifications item below.) 

Members of online forums where Jared Loughner shared his thoughts and violent notions are asking the same question as many of those who knew him in person in the wake of Saturday's shootings in Arizona: Could they have helped?

On Thursday on Above Top Secret, a conspiracy-theory website where Mr. Loughner, the alleged assailant, appears to have posted more than 100 messages in July 2010, one member worried whether a series of posts could have pushed Mr. Loughner over the edge.

"All the information, discussions, and conspiracy theories…might have served as fuel for his fire which was obviously not on the right track," this member wrote.

Mr. Loughner stands accused of killing six people, gravely wounding Arizona congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords and injuring 12 others.

The Federal Bureau of Investigation declined to comment on its investigation. On Wednesday the agency requested Mr. Loughner's postings from the online forum associated with the game Earth Empires, according to game's administrator, David McVittie.

Bill Irvine, chief executive of Above Networks,which owns Above Top Secret, said he was convinced that Mr. Loughner posted on Above Top Secret under the user name Erad3 because of similarities in other confirmed online identities and posts of Mr. Loughner.

Mr. Irvine said in an interview Thursday that his community was doing some soul-searching after the shooting spree, but he didn't think it could be held responsible for Mr. Loughner's behavior.

The Wall Street Journal this week reviewed 131 posts from April through June that Mr. Loughner, 22 years old, made in a private forum associated with the game Earth Empires. In that forum, Mr. Loughner asked provocative questions and shared details of his life. He expressed deep distrust of the government and violent, often misogynistic ideas.

In both settings, other online users' postings indicate that they were baffled and sometimes concerned about Mr. Loughner's comments that stood out even in a realm where extreme ideas are common.

Yet, as in Mr. Loughner's interactions in real life with friends, teachers and others, no action was taken to alert authorities.

In the online world determining if someone is troubled can be complicated by the practice of people assuming personas and acting more provocatively than they would in real life, said Mr. Irvine and others familiar with Internet discussion communities.

"As incidents like this accumulate we're all going to learn the skill of interpreting text the way we do face-to-face interactions," said Edward Castronova, a professor of telecommunications at Indiana University who studies games, technology and society. "We'll gradually realize if you run across someone online who seems really disturbed, maybe something ought to be done."

 Read the Pima Community College Department of Public Safety reports mentioning Jared Lee Loughner. Warning: Some of the language in these reports may be graphic and disturbing. 

Mr. Loughner asked in an Above Top Secret site posting: "Is it possible that politicians are taking advantage of the money system? It's possible to overthrow a government and change the currency."

At first users took the question seriously. One user responded, "Governments, corporations, lots of individuals take advantage of the money system.…What we need to do is get rid of money, barter and exchange altogether."

Yet after some back-and-forth, another user questioned Mr. Loughner's mental health.

"I think you're frankly schizophrenic, and no that's not an amateur opinion and not intended as an uninformed or insulting remark," this user wrote. "I really do care. Seek help before you hurt yourself or others or start taking your medications again, please."

When Mr. Loughner joined the Earth Empires community, members initially made light of his rants.

As time wore on, members in his online community began to detect trouble.

In one of Mr. Loughner's last messages in Earth Empires, on June 4, he posted a spreadsheet that appeared to compare in bold letters "Suicide" to "Prison" and "Career/Job."

Mr. McVittie, who administers the Earth Empires game and has studied online community interactions as a computer-research graduate student at the University of Guelph in Ontario, Canada, said members may take as a joke statements that are actually serious. "They tend to be ignored when they could be part of a larger mental problem," Mr. McVittie said.

When he first heard about the shooting, one Earth Empires community-forum member who had known Mr. Loughner through online games for nine years said in an interview, "I felt really bad because I didn't really pay attention."

 Corrections & Amplifications 

Mr. Loughner stands accused of killing six people, gravely wounding Arizona congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords and injuring 12 others. A previous version of this article incorrectly stated that 20 people were shot.

