In 1945, designer Florence Schust dipped into a trust fund and covered furniture manufacturer Hans Knoll's $50,000 debt to Bloomingdale's. The rescue essentially made her a co-owner of Knoll, and Ms. Schust helped the company quickly advance to the top rank of post-World War II design firms. 

Mr. Knoll, a German émigré, founded his eponymous company in 1937. He had business savvy, but he wasn't a designer, and there was a huge demand for product when the war was over. 

He recruited Ms. Schust, an architect trained at the famous Cranbrook Academy of Art in Michigan and close to groundbreaking modernists like architect Eero Saarinen and his family. At Knoll, Ms. Schust played the role of aesthetic visionary, first as a free-lance designer and then as the founding director of the textile division from 1947 until her retirement in 1965. (Hans and Florence married in 1946.)

At a time when the market was full of what she called "brocade and chintz with cabbage roses," Florence introduced a style of her own influenced by the modernism of the Bauhaus school, and the hand-woven fabrics and prints she commissioned were clean and sophisticated, with few frills. 

"Knoll Textiles 1945-2010," which will open Wednesday at New York's Bard Graduate Center, explores the evolution and continuing influence of KnollTextiles. While Knoll's furniture designers—Frank Gehry, Italy's Ettore Sottsass and Ludwig Mies van der Rohe—are in the history books, a good number of its textile designers (many of whom were women) are not. "We're trying to counter that,' said Earl Martin, associate curator at the Bard Graduate Center.

"Knoll Textiles" fills four floors of a West 86th Street townhouse of Bard College's graduate arm. It features more than 250 objects, including textile samples, furniture with its original upholstery, photos and mock-ups of interiors including fabric swatches and bits of wood. The show highlights Florence's unfussy style, which outlasted her tenure; KnollTextiles is still a source for classic modernism. 

The curators spent four years scouring attics, the KnollTextiles archive and art institutions for information—for example, tracing "Prestini," one of Knoll's most popular textile designs, to Antoinette Lackner Prestini, the wife of woodworker James Prestini. One of many rare pieces in the show is a length of an Anni Albers-designed open weave casement fabric, which was preserved in the attic of a former Knoll employee for about 50 years, said Mr. Martin.

—Laura Raskin