A presence hung over the Irish elections. It wasn't the shade of a hero from Ireland's long history of failed rebellions, or the mewling of a banker looking for another handout. It was, instead, the awesome power of a 56-year-old German woman by the name of Angela Merkel.

Many extraordinary things happened during the election. For a start, one of the most successful vote-winning machines in Europe's recent history failed to win many votes. A group of elite families that had exercised a stranglehold over the high offices of state for many decades found themselves shoved aside in a manner that is becoming increasingly familiar to North Africa's aging tyrants. And nobody blamed Britain for anything. 

But the oddest thing about the campaign and the days following the vote was how often Mrs. Merkel's name was mentioned, not just by politicians, but by ordinary voters. Rightly or wrongly, many Irish people believe the fate of their nation is in the hands of the pastor's daughter who grew up in a country that no longer exists.

There was much discussion about which of the candidates for leadership had the necessary qualities to negotiate with Ms. Merkel. And in the end, Irish voters chose as their prime minister a man who comes from the same Christian Democratic tradition, and who had secured the public-relations coup of a meeting with the putative maker and breaker of nations midway through the campaign.

  Enda Kenny will meet Mrs. Merkel again on Friday. Their respective parties sit in the European Parliament as part of the European People's Party, and leaders from that grouping meet in Helsinki to plot a course through a crucial month of negotiations that will set Europe's economic course for many years to come.

What Mr. Kenny wants from Ms. Merkel and other European leaders is a reduction in the interest rate charged on the loans his government will receive from the European Financial Stability Facility. Right now, that rate is close to 6%, well above the cost at which the EFSF borrows in the international bond markets.

Mr. Kenny's Fine Gael and his likely coalition partner both campaigned to reduce the interest rate and believe they have a mandate to secure a concession on that issue. 

A number of European officials over recent weeks have said the deal was struck by an elected government and can't be altered. They claim Europe doesn't revisit agreements to change their terms.

Ireland's new government will argue that's not true. Irish voters rejected both the Treaty of Nice and the Treaty of Lisbon when they were first presented to them in referenda. Europe's response was to tweak those treaties and try again, succeeding with both.

But a lower interest rate on the EFSF loans won't repair Ireland's tattered public finances, and it won't even help a great deal. Mr. Kenny will also want to talk about restructuring bonds issued by Ireland's state-owned banks, something other euro-zone governments fear because that could lead investors to blackball many other banks from the currency area.

If Mr. Kenny doesn't come up with something soon, his administration will have the shortest honeymoon period in modern political history.

Of course, Ms. Merkel has her own voters to think about. And German attitudes to Ireland have changed pretty radically in recent years. Once, Ireland was a nice, green backwater apparently unsullied by ambition, and German taxpayers were happy to build its roads. 

But then Ireland became rich—a development on paper that far exceeded the reality—brashly and imprudently capitalist, and extremely Americophile. And it made an almighty mess of its banking system and its economy. As the Irish say, they lost the run of themselves.

However, the timing may be favorable for Mr. Kenny. Ms. Merkel's government, with French support, is proposing a series of economic reforms designed to make other euro-zone economies behave a little more like Germany.

That's linked to an agreement on a new, permanent mechanism to deal with euro-zone members that have problems borrowing in the international bond markets. Known as the "grand bargain," euro-zone leaders want to seal an agreement at their summit on March 24-25.

To do that, lots of smaller agreements will have to be reached—that's the European way. 

The grand bargain will precede a new, more stringent set of stress tests on banks designed to settle once and for all the question of whether the financial system is viable without huge amounts of additional taxpayer money.

And Europe wants to move on. Which is why other euro-zone leaders may want Portugal to ask for a bailout sooner rather than later. Wrapping all of these initiatives together, while conceding much of what Ireland wants, may allow the euro zone to turn the page in its relations with bond investors.

And there is also a political risk for Europe in not being nice to Ireland's new governors. 

In Friday's elections, Irish voters chose to take revenge on the outgoing government but elect parties that intend to follow through on most of the austerity measures outlined by that government.

It was a "revolution lite," swapping one center-right party for another. But there will be other elections, and there are signs that many Irish voters are starting to contemplate more radical responses to the country's economic problems.

The left-of-center Sinn Fein made a lot of headway, as did many smaller groupings and independent candidates with a similar view of how Ireland's economic problems can be addressed.

For the first time in many, many years there are a number of multi-seat electoral districts in Dublin that are either without a center-right member of parliament, or elected just one out of four or five.

If Ireland's economy is laid waste by the demands of meeting the terms of the bailout, repaying bank debts and honoring the government's obligations, the next prime minister is probably not going to be a Christian Democrat. It is likely to be someone who looks and acts a lot more like  Gerry Adams.

 Write to  Paul Hannon at paul.hannon@dowjones.com 