With his approval rating at new lows because of the city's sluggish response to last week's blizzard, Mayor  Michael Bloomberg sought to reassure New Yorkers that his administration is ready and able to deal with snow. He'll have his first small test of that vow Friday, when up to 6 inches are expected. 

The storm forecasters say will hit the region Friday is far smaller than the one that dropped 20 inches the day after Christmas and brought the region to a halt. Snowfall will end by Friday evening, according to the National Weather Service.

"While I realize that there were problems with the snow-cleaning efforts last week, we want to assure all New Yorkers that we are doing everything in our power to make sure that we don't experience those kinds of problems again," Mr. Bloomberg said at a Thursday afternoon news conference. "We plan to do a great job."

An NY1-Marist poll released Thursday evening showed Mr. Bloomberg with a 37% approval rating, his lowest since taking office in January 2002. According to the poll, 11% said he's doing an excellent job; 26%, good; 34%, fair; 26%, poor. According to the poll, 71% of adults in New York City disapproved of the mayor's handling of last week's snowstorm. Residents in Brooklyn, Queens and Staten Island were the most dissatisfied.

Asked to comment on the poll,  Stu Loeser, a spokesman for the mayor, said, "Mayor Bloomberg keeps saying the city's snow response was unacceptable and that he's accountable, and it's no surprise that a majority of New Yorkers agree."

The poll also revealed, for the first time since Mr. Bloomberg took office, a majority of registered voters, 53%, said they believed the city is moving in the wrong direction. According to the poll, 38% believe the city is moving along the right path and 9% are unsure.

The Metropolitan Transportation Authority said Thursday it would put its operations on their highest snow alert level ahead of the impending storm. The agency didn't take that step until the December storm was already under way. That means extra crews will be called in, subways laid up underground and chains put on some buses. Two situation rooms—one for buses, one for subways—will also be opened. With trains taking up space underground, some express subway service would likely be delayed or disrupted until rush hour Friday morning, New York City Transit President  Tom Prendergast said.

Snowfall was expected to be slightly higher north and east of the city. On top of the snow already on the ground, that could cause problems for the Long Island Rail Road, a spokesman said. The railroad planned to offer extra eastbound trains from Penn Station Friday afternoon.

The Sanitation Department planned to have eliminated much of the backlog in trash pickup by the time snow started falling again, spokesman Vito Turso said. But it could delay the week's second scheduled pickup as workers and trucks normally used for trash get put on snow duty. 

Two Sanitation Department managers responsible for southern Brooklyn—where reports of uncleared streets were among the worst—will be reassigned to other jobs, the department said Thursday. The department also announced plans to reorganize sanitation zones in southern Brooklyn. The moves come on the heels of Wednesday's demotion of the head of the city's Emergency Management Services. 

 Write to  Andrew Grossman at andrew.grossman@wsj.com and Michael Howard Saul at michael.saul@wsj.com 