At some point in Wednesday's ICC Cricket World Cup game between England and Ireland, a brief huddle in the middle of the field will signal the introduction of a batting powerplay.

The umpire will move his arm in a circle, the fielding team will empty the outfield, and everyone will sit back and wait for a couple of burly men to launch the ball into the upper deck of the M Chinnaswamy Stadium. Except lately, it's not the ball that's ending up in the stands—it's the batsmen. 

"For all the big hits, we're seeing plenty of batsmen heading back to the pavilion," said Shoaib Akhtar, the Pakistan bowler who has taken 242 wickets in one-day internationals. "People are losing games in powerplays rather than winning them."

The batting powerplay—a five-over period during which the fielding side can have just three men in the outfield rather than the normal five—is the latest attempt by cricket's administrators to encourage the lusty hitting of Twenty20 to be replicated in one-day internationals, the medium form of the game.

But in a delightful turn of events for cricket's purists, this ploy to promote a barrage of boundaries is having an unforeseen side effect: Through the opening days of the 10th World Cup, the powerplay is becoming a source of angst for the batting side as wickets tumble and runs dry up.

Just ask England.

Last Sunday night, in its Group B game against tournament favorite India, the England team was in one of those epic one-day situations: Seven overs to go, eight wickets in hand, and 59 runs needed for victory. 

"We got ourselves in a position where we just needed to have a good powerplay and we were there," said Andrew Strauss, the England captain.

Instead of propelling England to a memorable win, the powerplay sparked a loss of four wickets for the addition of just 25 runs as England collapsed from 280 for two to 305 for six, turning the game on its head and leaving the team needing 34 runs from the last 18 balls. "In the end, we were lucky to scramble a tie out of it," said Mr. Strauss.

The English aren't the only ones struggling here. Some of this tournament's powerplay batting has been laughably ineffective: In its opening match against Zimbabwe, Australia took its batting powerplay in the 41st over and scored just 35 runs off the five overs, losing one wicket. The Australians then scored 55 off the last five normal overs.

In New Zealand's Group A game against Australia in Nagpur last Friday, Daniel Vettori, the New Zealand captain, delayed using the powerplay until the 44th over, when his team was eight wickets down. Although Mr. Vettori struck boundaries off Mitchell Johnson and Brett Lee, he was dismissed with three powerplay overs remaining. One ball later, the Kiwis were all out.

"Some days you do well, some days you do poorly," Mr. Vettori said of the batting powerplay. "It's really hard to get a consistent feel on it."

To be sure, the struggles batting teams have encountered during the powerplay overs are partly due to smart bowling and better field placements at this tournament. When the powerplay was introduced to cricket in 2005, tactics were often rigid and teams rarely employed spin bowling while the fielding restrictions were in place. 

Slow bowling, which usually restricts scoring shots, has since emerged as one of the keys to preventing an onslaught, while fielding sides have also learned to combat the powerplay's destructive potential by holding back their most effective bowlers until the batting team has opted to use it, meaning the best players are usually bowling their overs at the exact time the batsmen are looking to let rip.

The introduction in 2008 of a ball change after 35 overs has also tilted the balance of power back towards the fielding side, since the new ball is more conducive to swing bowling—the black magic art that gets the ball boomeranging through the air. "The change of ball does seem to help because there's not much conventional swing at the start," said South Africa bowler Dale Steyn. "We work hard on the second ball to get it to reverse [swing], which is very important."

But perhaps the biggest reason that batsmen have struggled here is a small but significant change to how the powerplay is implemented. When powerplays were introduced, the onus of when to use it belonged solely with the fielding team, which made things fairly straightforward: Finish them off as early in the innings as possible, so the fielding captain has the option of plenty of men on the boundary towards the end of the innings when the batsmen attempt to accelerate. 

But after the 2007 World Cup in West Indies, the rule books were tweaked to allow the batting team to invoke one of the powerplays, a development that has changed the peculiar dynamic of one-day cricket.

In most limited-overs games, the pressure is on the fielding team to keep the run-rate down. Batsmen are more concerned about scoring runs than protecting their wicket, and so there is less margin for error for the men in the field. By making batsmen invoke the powerplay, a mindset change can set in, with the result that the batsmen feel compelled to launch every ball into orbit. Teams attempt to force the pace unnaturally and wickets can tumble as batsmen go for strokes they wouldn't normally play.

In England's game against India, for instance, Ian Bell had found the boundary with a series of orthodox strokes for his 62 runs, but once the powerplay was called, he succumbed to an ungainly shot (although he later said he was suffering from cramp). Then Paul Collingwood slogged and missed; Matt Prior slogged and mis-hit; and soon England needed 30 runs off two overs for victory and the opportunity was lost.

"You have to go into the batting powerplay with the mindset that you can change the game, but it weighs heavily on the minds of both the batsmen and bowlers," said Mr. Steyn. "Whoever does best in those five overs, it has a massive impact on the game."

 Write to  Jonathan Clegg at jonathan.clegg@wsj.com 