  Oprah Winfrey is known for turning everything she endorses on her hit TV show into a blockbuster, from books to beauty products. But the daytime-TV queen says there's one venture she'll be careful about pumping too aggressively from her armchair: her own cable channel.

That network, dubbed OWN: Oprah Winfrey Network, launched over the weekend. It will enjoy several months of overlap before the end of the syndicated "Oprah Winfrey Show," which averages nearly seven million viewers each weekday. 

But Ms. Winfrey says "there's a fine line I have to walk" when it comes to self-promotion on her own show: "What I can do is talk about a show that's going to be on OWN, if that guest or that person is of interest to 'The Oprah Winfrey Show,' " Ms. Winfrey said in a recent interview. "What I can't do is sit up on my show and say, 'You ought to be watching OWN.' That wouldn't be fair to the people I now serve."

Last week, Ms. Winfrey dedicated two episodes of her show to talking about OWN programs, including "Miracle Detectives" and "Your OWN Show," often with giant OWN logos in the background.

 "It's great television," she said in closing Thursday's episode, adding, "I'd love your support, so please watch us."

—Sam Schechner

Washington Post Co. continues to get friendlier to Facebook.

The company has created a new subsidiary called SocialCode that sells services that help businesses build a fan base on the social-networking website and deliver targeted advertising. 

The technology allows clients to simultaneously test different ads on different types of viewers and refine the messaging accordingly. It will focus exclusively on Facebook for now. 

The Washington Post was among the first major news organizations to aggressively promote its articles on Facebook. Post Co. Chairman  Donald Graham is on the board of the social-networking site and is bullish about the social network's advertising potential. 

Post Co. joins a growing list of traditional media companies going outside their expertise to cash in on businesses' demand for new technology. 

Earlier this year,  New York Times Co.
NYT


0.07
%




,  Gannett Co.
GCI


-3.58
%




 and Post Co. together invested $12 million in a California start-up, Ongo Inc. that is launching a digital consumer service for reading and sharing news from multiple publishers. 

The service will be part of the Post Co.'s Slate Group and be run by general manager  Laura Graham O'Shaughnessy. Launched in beta mode mid-last year, SocialCode has grown from two to 10 employees and has worked on several seven-figure campaigns, Slate editor  Jacob Weisberg said.

—Russell Adams

The world's largest electronics show is branching out to Madison Avenue.

For the first time in its 44-year history, the Consumer Electronics Show will include a keynote address featuring top advertisers and ad agency executives, including  Martin Sorrell, who heads WPP Group, and  Michael Roth, CEO of Interpublic Group. For the annual geek-fest, it's a noteworthy break from a lineup usually dominated by hardware executives. 

Technology and advertising companies need each other more than ever, says the CEO of media consulting business Media Link,  Michael Kassan, who is moderating the Friday panel. Breakthroughs in mobile phones, Web-connected TVs and myriad other areas are upending advertisers' old ways of doing businesses. Tech companies, meanwhile, need advertisers to support new business models for their products, he says. 

The dynamic continues to lure more advertisers to CES to see what all the fuss over fancy gadgets is about. 

Coca-Cola, whose chief marketing officer,  Joe Tripodi, is also on Friday's panel, is stressing the importance of CES to its planning. The company's annual marketing leadership meeting is being relocated from Atlanta to the conference this year, said  Wendy Clark, a senior vice president in marketing communications at the beverage company. 

—Jessica E. Vascellaro 