Across the Muslim world, the killing of Osama bin Laden has unleashed a swirl of conspiracy theories, with many Pakistanis, Afghans and Arabs refusing to believe U.S. assurances that al Qaeda's founder is actually dead.

The U.S., which deployed a Navy Seal team to kill bin Laden in the Pakistani city of Abbottabad on Sunday, hasn't yet released any photographs of the Saudi fugitive's corpse. The body itself, U.S. officials say, has been buried at sea after bin Laden's identity was confirmed through a DNA test.

Afghanistan's Taliban movement, which hosted bin Laden and al Qaeda until the U.S. invasion of 2001, Tuesday night challenged President Barack Obama's account. "The Americans have not shown any credible evidence of Sheikh Osama's death, and his death has not been confirmed or denied by the sources close to Osama bin Laden," the Taliban said in their first official reaction to the killing.

In Abbottabad, many locals argue that the raid early Monday local time was a fake designed to embarrass Pakistan and bolster Mr. Obama's re-election chances.

"They're just making it up. Nobody has seen the body," scoffed Owais Khan, a local lawyer. He argued bin Laden would never have chosen Abbottabad, a wealthy, army-dominated town just 40 miles from Pakistan's capital, as a hideout.

Haji Liaquat, who runs a print shop about two miles from bin Laden's Abbottabad compound, agreed. "It's not the reality that Osama was present over there," he insisted. "This is just a drama to show how Pakistan is protecting Osama."

The U.S. Special Representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan, Marc Grossman, had to confront skeptical questions about the veracity of bin Laden's death during his news conference Tuesday in Islamabad. "I can't answer every conspiracy theory. You can have as many conspiracy theories as you wish," he said in reply, noting that the Pakistani government also confirmed bin Laden's killing. "He's dead. It's good."

Pakistan, Afghanistan and the Middle East, of course, are fertile grounds for conspiracy theories, especially ones that feature the U.S. or Israel as villains. It is still common to hear in Cairo, Kandahar or Karachi that the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks were carried out by the Bush administration to attain world domination; an alternative version blames the Israeli Mossad.

The reluctance of many in the region to believe Mr. Obama's account of bin Laden's death must be seen in this context of pervasive anti-American sentiment, explained  Shadi Hamid, director of research at the Brookings Center in Doha, Qatar. "It's not so much about bin Laden as it is about the U.S.," he said. "The U.S. has provided its narrative to the world—and the natural reaction of many people is to cast doubt on whatever the U.S. says."

In Afghanistan, many compared bin Laden's death with the 2007 killing of the Taliban's chief military commander, Mullah Dadullah Akhund, by a coalition Special Operations Forces team. To dispel any doubts, the militant's bullet-ridden corpse was quickly put on display for journalists. 

"When the Americans killed Mullah Dadullah they publicly showed the footage in the media and to everybody," said a Taliban commander in Afghanistan's Khost province, reached on the phone Tuesday. "If they have really killed Osama, why they don't show us the proof?"

The U.S. also has released the photo of the cadaver of Abu Musab al Zarqawi, the chief of Al Qaeda in Iraq, after killing him in an air strike in that country in 2006.

 The White House said Tuesday that the photos of Osama bin Laden's body are gruesome. At issue is the value of offering visual proof of his death to the world versus concerns that the photos may be inflammatory to some. Later, in the day, Central Intelligence Agency Director Leon Panetta told NBC News in an interview the U.S. would eventually release a photo. 

Perhaps nowhere in the Muslim world are the conspiracy theories about bin Laden's death becoming more fanciful than in Egypt, a country where credulous rumors spread like wildfire. Mohammed Ali, a 38-year-old bank manager and fluent English speaker, said he believed that bin Laden really died five years ago, and that the U.S. had been hiding the news "to continue taking money from Gulf countries and to keep everyone afraid."

"There are a lot of doubts," echoed Magdy Suleiman as he was fixing falafel sandwiches for a lunch-hour crowd in Cairo's middle-class Agouza neighborhood Tuesday. "Why did they catch him now?"

In cafes in downtown Riyadh, bin Laden's birthplace, men Tuesday repeated another long-standing belief among some Arabs: that the terrorist mastermind never existed. "To be honest, I've never been convinced that there was such a person as Osama bin Laden," said Osama al-Obeid, a Saudi banker.

Even if the U.S. were to release photographs and other proof of bin Laden's death, this latest batch of conspiracy theories wouldn't necessarily disappear. "A lot of people live in their own world based on imagination rather than facts," said Hasan-Askari Rizvi, a Pakistani political analyst. "They don't want to accept the reality."

— Margaret Coker  and Summer Said in Riyadh,  Habib Khan Totakhil in Kabul  and Paul Beckett in New Delhi contributed to this article.

 Write to  Yaroslav Trofimov at yaroslav.trofimov@wsj.com and Tom Wright at tom.wright@wsj.com 