In an arena that has witnessed its share of the bizarre, it was a small but staggering sight.

With a little more than three minutes to play at Madison Square Garden in Tuesday's game over San Antonio, and the Knicks leading 121-111, Spurs coach Gregg Popovich yanked his veteran stars Tim Duncan, Manu Ginobili and Tony Parker, and emptied his black-and-silver sock drawer of substitutes onto the floor.

The Spurs were surrendering to the Knicks. Yes, those Spurs. The ones who have a league-best record of 29-5. The team with four world championships, including one over New York. The methodical, mildly tedious machine that has made the playoffs 12 straight years.

"The New York Knicks kicked our [bleep] tonight," Mr. Popovich said when it was over, and the Knicks had prevailed, 128-115.

When was the last time you heard an NBA made man like Mr. Popovich say the Knicks had kicked his [bleep]? For years, it's been the Knicks getting the kicks.

Strange, pleasant things are happening at the Garden. The 2010-11 Knicks are hanging around, lingering in VIP rooms where they used to have no business. They are 20-14—not a record to send your mother a postcard about, but playoff good, enough for second place in their division. They are 10-7 at home, 10-7 on the road, and they beat San Antonio without starting forward Danilo Gallinari, who's out with an injured knee.

 On Tuesday they got a massive 31-point contribution from Wilson Chandler, and Larry Brown refugee Raymond Felton scored 28, including a fourth-quarter 3-pointer flurry that made Mr. Popovich wave a white towel. An inconsistent franchise is showing signs of consistency, that it can take a hit and keep jabbing.

It's almost...Spurs-like.

"We feel like we can match up with the best of them," Knicks star Amar'e Stoudemire said after the most satisfying Knick win of the season.

Best not to interpret too much from a single game; after all, the Knicks are 4-5 since the Celtics and Heat rumbled in for an early-winter exam before Christmas. But there's a new confidence at the Garden, and it doesn't feel like a tacky bandwagon. The courtside celebrities at Tuesday's game included Joe Frazier, Chloë Sevigny, Pauly D from "Jersey Shore," Penny Marshall, Spike Lee and Mayor Bloomberg.

 That's not a fashionable front row. That's a "Cannonball Run" sequel.

The Knicks seem in it for the duration. The potshots at management have abated—on the contrary, there are raves for grabbing Mr. Felton, and the draft find Landry Fields. The old cinderblock arena is rocking, and loyalty is building. 

Even the salivating over Carmelo Anthony has died down. It's like New York is saying: we have our guys. If Carmelo comes, he comes.

They're not a title contender. Not this year, at least. The East is treacherous and hard-nosed. Boston is banged up but remains cranky and determined. Orlando reloaded with Gilbert Arenas to revive a complacent team. The Bulls have been rolling. 

And the Heat? Sorry to disappoint the haters, LeBron James and Dwyane Wade are flying, and Earth's Anger Sponge is playing like the best team in the NBA. They've won 19 of 20 and might not lose much more this season.

But the Knicks are writing a similarly compelling story. Basketball is simply better when New York is a noisy part of the fray. The thick of winter is here and the no-longer-dormant Knicks are finally chasing something better than a ping-pong ball. 