DAVOS, Switzerland—Some of the world's leading bankers are pushing for the euro zone to embark on a newly aggressive effort to defuse Europe's simmering debt crisis.

A group of about 40 chief executives of top U.S., European and Asian banks gathered Thursday in this ski resort for a wide-ranging, more-than-five-hour discussion and debate about the euro zone and other global issues.

The consensus among at least some of the CEOs was that European governments should adopt a "shock-and-awe" approach to the sovereign-debt crisis, according to executives who attended the meeting on the sidelines of the forum. "The question was: how can you stop the euro-zone problem from becoming a chronic problem?" one CEO said, adding that the group believed the crisis has moved beyond its acute phase.

Among the recommendations: a massive new program that could purchase outstanding government bonds issued by financially shaky countries on Europe's periphery. One CEO said such a pool could be as large as €200 billion ($275 billion).

Separately, Greek Finance Minister George Papaconstantinou said discussions are under way to let the Greek government buy back debt with help from the European bailout fund, allowing Greece to re-enter the bond market. "It is one of the ideas that are on the table," Mr. Papaconstantinou said.

 Attendees at the bankers' meeting included  Barclays
BCS


0.38
%




 PLC's  Bob Diamond, HSBC Holdings PLC's  Stuart Gulliver, Industrial & Commercial Bank of China Ltd.'s  Jiang Jianqing, UBS AG's  Oswald Gruebel, Banco Santander's  Ana Botin, Deutsche Bank AG's  Josef Ackermann, and  J.P. Morgan Chase & Co.
JPM


0.13
%




's  Jamie Dimon.

Several proposals are under discussion among euro-zone governments aimed at expanding the lending power and the flexibility of the euro-zone's bailout fund, which can lend up to €250 billion to troubled countries. Those talks will be wrapped up in March—but look unlikely to settle on a program large enough to buy as much as €200 billion in bonds.

Banks would be big beneficiaries of a big bond-buying program because they own a lot of the bonds. But the bond-buying idea wasn't universally welcomed by the bank chiefs at the meeting. Some German executives said it was politically impossible for Germany to inject more money at this stage, as it would essentially be adding yet another subsidy for Europe's weaker countries. A top European bank CEO said he dismissed the idea as "rubbish." Even the idea's proponents acknowledge it might not be feasible to get ahead of the problem decisively, and that another bout of jitters might be necessary to prompt action.

Some CEOs nonetheless plan to raise the idea in a closed-door meeting Saturday with finance ministers and central bankers.

In a speech in Davos Friday, German Chancellor Angela Merkel said the euro zone needs a more coordinated economic policy. Ms. Merkel demanded that weaker members of the euro zone reduce their budget deficits and work harder to restore lost competitiveness. 

"The biggest risk to prosperity in our continent is indebtedness," Ms. Merkel said. 

The European Central Bank began buying bonds issued by shaky governments in May, and now has some €76.5 billion of bonds from weak governments on its books. One proposal under discussion by governments is that Europe's emergency financing mechanism, known as the European Financial Stability Facility, could provide finance for governments to buy back bonds from the ECB or from secondary markets, where they are trading at deep discounts.

Bankers and government officials were heartened by the stronger-than-expected bond sale the EFSF fund executed this month.

That bond-buying is gaining traction among bank CEOs in Davos this week highlights the continuing worries that Europe's financial crisis might flare up again—even as European government officials voice optimism that the worst is over.

The idea behind a giant bond-buyback fund, which could be bankrolled by an enlarged EFSF, is that a show of force would demonstrate Europe's commitment to weathering the financial storm. It also could ease concerns about potential losses at some European banks holding debt issued by financially troubled countries such as Greece, Ireland and Spain.

—Geoffrey T. Smith and Stephen Fidler contributed to this article.

 Write to  David Enrich at david.enrich@wsj.com 