TRIPOLI, Libya—Libya's conflict spilled over its western frontier Friday as government forces and rebels contesting a remote border post clashed inside a nearby Tunisian community, prompting Tunisia's army to intervene.

Track the latest events in Libya.

Track events day by day in the region.

See the level of unrest, plus the economic and politic status of some countries across North Africa and the Middle East.

Popular demonstrations in Tunisia toppled a president and spread to countries across the region. See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

At least three Libyan soldiers were reported killed in or near Dhuheiba before Tunisian forces gained control of the small town in the Nafusa mountains straddling the border. The nearby region in western Libya has emerged as a pocket of resistance to Col. Moammar Gadhafi's regime, which is fighting an insurgency based in the eastern part of the country.

The cross-border violence also poses a test for Tunisia's interim government, already struggling to cope with an inflow of thousands of Libyans fleeing the 10-week-old conflict. 

Tunisians toppled their own veteran leader, Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali, in a January uprising that triggered turmoil throughout the Middle East, and many sympathize with the Libyan rebels fighting to end Col. Gadhafi's four decades of rule next door.

At the same time, Tunisian authorities continue to recognize Col. Gadhafi as Libya's legitimate ruler and have permitted some cross-border commerce with his regime to continue.

Tunisia's Foreign Ministry summoned the Libyan ambassador Friday to deliver a protest against the incursion and to demand a halt to violations of its territory. 

Details of the fighting in Dhuheiba were sketchy. Libyan government spokesman Moussa Ibrahim and several reports from the town said the rebels had surrounded government troops inside Libya, prompting them to flee into Tunisia in 15 vehicles armed with anti-aircraft guns and rocket launchers. 

The Tunisian state news agency said soldiers and border guards had intervened even-handedly, moving to disarm both the rebels and the government soldiers. The Tunisian Defense Ministry said Col. Gadhafi's forces had been "sent back into Libyan territory"

Mr. Ibrahim played down the Tunisian protest, saying the two governments were working together to restore calm.

Tunisian authorities said a number of people were killed in the fighting but gave no precise figure. At least 12 people, including a young girl, were hospitalized, they said. Western news agency photographers reported seeing three dead Libyan soldiers. 

Tunisian authorities said its army had sealed off the town and fired weapons in the air to control angry residents who were besieging the Libyan troops, but had not engaged in combat.

The border crossing, which links Dhuheiba with the Libyan town of Wazen, has changed hands several times in fighting this month. On Thursday, Libyan government forces seized the crossing and briefly chased the rebels into Tunisia.

Friday's fighting was the first of the Libyan conflict to spill into a Tunisian town. Tunisian authorities said artillery shells landed in Dhuheiba on Friday morning, damaging some buildings, before the Libyan troops arrived. 

By that time, the rebels were back in control of the Libyan side of the border, restoring a vital supply line to their besieged strongholds in the mountains of western Libya. But later Friday, Mr. Ibrahim, the Libyan spokesman, said Col. Gadhafi's had recaptured the outpost.

The region, 180 miles southeast of Tripoli, is home to Libya's ethnic Berber minority, which has long complained of discrimination by the Libyan government. Along with the coastal city of Misrata, the area is one of the few centers of opposition in western Libya, which is mostly controlled by the regime.

Officials of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization said Friday that its warships had intercepted several Libyan government vessels laying anti-shipping mines in Misrata's harbor less than two miles [three kilometers] from the shore. The port is the only lifeline for the city of 300,000 people, which government forces have kept under siege for two months.

The mines were fished out and destroyed, a NATO statement said, and two dockings of ships bringing humanitarian aid to Misrata were postponed. It appeared to be the first time sea mines had been used in the Libyan conflict. 

Mr. Ibrahim said he had no information about the mines. But he added that Libya would not permit vessels to land in Misrata without government permission. He said Libya would accept humanitarian aid for the city only if delivered overland through government-controlled territory.

Brig. Gen. Rob Weighill, NATO's operations director for Libya, said Gadhafi's forces were shelling Misrata with longer-range artillery, mortar and rockets. Doctors in the city said shelling killed at least eight people there Friday.

—David Gauthier-Villars  and John W. Miller contributed to this article.

 Write to  Richard Boudreaux at richard.boudreaux@wsj.com 