CULLMAN, Ala. -- Three days after they were pummeled by the worst storm system in decades, the residents of this and many other tornado-ravaged towns across the South started settling into a slow rhythm of recovery, installing generators, mastering open-fire cooking, and dispatching volunteers.

Pastors, politicians, and city employees huddled to figure out how to deliver food that has flooded into Cullman, the county seat, out to more rural areas. Volunteer fire departments -- often the only form of officialdom in Deep South hamlets -- would be called upon to help, they decided.

The local commission on aging, which oversees the distribution of meals to shut-ins, is trying to deliver 5,000 meals to elderly residents by Tuesday, hoping to supply each with enough non-perishable food to sustain them through the week, said Neal Morrison, a regional state official who is overseeing the effort in Cullman and neighboring Lawrence County.

"There's a lot of food," Mr. Morrison said. "But a lot of these seniors can't even get out of their homes without an ambulance or serious help. "

Similar scenes played out across the region, as aid continued to arrive and locals mustered their own forces to begin the long, exhausting business of putting lives and communities back together.

In Jasper, Ala., where electricity started returning and a cluster of gas stations at the intersection of two highways brimmed with customers.

"How much does it cost to remove a tree?" an elderly man standing outside a Raceway gas station asked a young man sitting inside a red pick-up truck with a "New Bark Tree Experts" logo emboldened on the door.

"It depends," the young man said. "Is it leaning over the house?"

It wasn't. The old man, dressed in a yellow shirt, denim overalls and gray velcro shoes, filled out paperwork for a work request that might be finished tonight.

In Birmingham's Forestdale neighborhood, workers at a Piggly Wiggly grocery store pulled meat, vegetables and other perishables from refrigerated areas. Since the electricity had been out, the food would have to be tossed.

The death toll for the tornadoes and storms that swept across seven states on Wednesday and Thursday now stands at least 342 people, authorities said, topping a powerful storm system in 1974, when 310 people were killed.

The heaviest toll was in Alabama, where the count has now reached 250 dead, the Associated Press reported Sunday.

The number still missing: "Unfortunately," said state Sen. Paul Bussman, "right now we don't know that."

The Red Cross, Salvation Army and other relief groups have opened shelters and distributed food and other supplies to the displaced across Alabama, Mississippi and other states.

In Pratt City, a working-class section of Birmingham where entire blocks now look like landfills, the newly homeless are unlikely to have the financial wherewithal to rebuild, said Birmingham's fire marshal, C.W. Mardis.

"It'll take some time," Mr. Mardis said. "It's going to need government assistance."

President Barack Obama, who toured the wreckage in hard-hit Tuscaloosa Friday, promised maximum aid. "We are going to help these communities rebuild," he said.

Mike Hale, the sheriff of Jefferson County, Ala., said his deputies have the technical aspects of the recovery effort under control. "We know how to search, we know how to rescue, we know how to protect." What worries Mr. Hale, he said, is the emotional trauma so many citizens are suffering in Jefferson County, where 20 people were killed.

An aerial shot of Tuscaloosa, Ala., taken April 28, shows the tornado's path across the city. 

There were a few scattered reports of looting in Tuscaloosa and elsewhere: tires stolen from an auto-parts store, suitcases carried away from damaged apartments, a brand-new pair of size 13 basketball sneakers pilfered from the wreckage of a college student's home. But the Alabama National Guard had received no reports of looting as of Friday, a spokeswoman said.

Electricity began slowly returning to parts of Cullman late Friday, routed to restaurants and motels on the highway into town, where out-of-town power crews are camped, a nursing home, dialysis center and other crucial locations. Officials warned constituents, however, that damage to primary transmission lines is so extensive that it would be some time before power is fully restored.

"We've got to be patient," Mayor Max Townson said.

More than 430 homes were significantly damaged in Cullman, along with 63 businesses and eight churches, Mr. Townson said. While several storms struck the north Alabama county, which shares a name with its largest city, most of the damage was done Wednesday afternoon by a single funnel cloud that carried sustained winds of 170 mph as it cut 38 miles through the county, said Phyllis Little, the county's emergency management director.

"We are very, very fortunate that we did not have more loss of life and serious injuries," she said.

Authorities have not yet determined the force of the tornadoes that blasted Northern Alabama. "There are a lot of unanswered questions," said Greg Carbin, a meteorologist at the federal Storm Prediction Center in Norman, Okla.

Officials did announce Friday that one of the funnel clouds to claw northeast Mississippi was a category EF-5, the highest rating for tornado damage and the first twister of this magnitude to hit the state since 1966.

Authorities also said at least six category EF-4 tornadoes—which pack winds of 166 to 200 miles per hour—touched down in Alabama, Mississippi, Georgia and Tennessee.

The EF-5 tornado, which raked a three-mile path of destruction through the small town of Smithville, packed 205 miles-per-hour winds, according to the National Weather Service. It killed 14 people and displaced many more; some 450 evacuees took their meals Thursday at the First Baptist Church in nearby Amory, which served as a Red Cross shelter.

"We lost everything. We have nothing now," said James Beeks, 63, a recovering stroke patient who was staying in the shelter and trying to secure help getting a motor scooter so he could move about.

"The need right now is massive," said Michael Sullivan, regional coordinator for a nonprofit group that assists individuals with disabilities. "This tornado caused a lot of head and neck injuries. The number of disabled people in northern Mississippi just went up."

Authorities were aware of the potential for big storms and tornadoes five days before they hit, said Mr. Carbin, of NOAA's Storm Prediction Center. About two days before they struck, officials roughly knew the storms could hit between Texas and Georgia. About four hours before, they had narrowed it down to primarily Mississippi and Alabama. But it's difficult to predict exactly where a tornado will land, Mr. Carbin said.

Major thunderstorms and tornadoes are produced by a volatile mix of three ingredients - wind shear, instability and lift – and commonly occur in the spring as warm and cold air fronts clash. May typically is the busiest month.

Mr. Carbin said Alabama just appeared to have been less lucky than neighboring states this time around. ``There's no real reason. You could have had similar conditions to the west or somewhere else. It's all about the ingredients,'' he said.

It's difficult to predict whether there will be a continued spike in tornadoes this year. A spate of tornadoes in one month historically hasn't resulted in more tornadoes the following month, according to Mr. Carbin.

—Mike Esterl, Ana Campoy and Miguel Bustillo contributed to this article.

 Write to  Timothy W. Martin at timothy.martin@wsj.com and Douglas Belkin at doug.belkin@wsj.com 