Borrowing a move from New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie's playbook, New York Gov.  Andrew Cuomo on Monday proposed a bill that would cap the salaries of superintendents at no more than $175,000 a year. 

The financial impact would be small: The governor's office said the limit would trim $15 million out of the budgets of school districts, a tiny percentage of overall school spending. 

But the measure could also have symbolic weight. Mr. Cuomo has been pressing school districts to make do with less money without firing teachers and has urged superintendents to shrink administrative costs and hammer out more affordable contracts with teachers' unions.

Some school districts have started to re-open agreements with unions. But school managers have also pushed the Cuomo administration and lawmakers to repeal labor-friendly regulations that have tied their hands at the bargaining table. And school boards and their superintendents say restrictions on compensation could make it harder for districts to recruit and keep top talent to run the system. 

The governor wants to spend just under $20 billion on public schools, the largest single piece of the state's operating budget. Albany would spend slightly less than it did this year from its own coffers. But schools would also have to make do without stimulus dollars, translating into a steeper overall cut of more than 7%, or $1.7 billion. It is unclear what support the bill would have in the Legislature.

The cap, which would apply to future contracts and exempt New York City's schools chancellor, would range from $125,000 to $175,000, based on district size. Voters could override the salary cap, except in Rochester, Buffalo, Syracuse and Yonkers, where mayors could do so.

Mr. Christie recently imposed a similar cap—now the subject of court battles—but didn't allow voters to spend more. 

In New York, the average superintendent earns $166,000 a year, not including benefits, with about a third of school districts paying their chiefs more than $175,000. In wealthier suburban districts, it's not uncommon for superintendents to make more than $300,000 a year.

The cap also sets limits on fringe benefits awarded to superintendents, many of whom have contracts loaded with perks that add tens of thousands of dollars in costs. Hewlett-Woodmere Superintendent Joyce Bisso, for example, is making $265,000 this year in a contact that also guarantees her a $60,000 raise over five years. She gets 15 sick days a year and can cash out any unused days, plus as many as 48 unused vacation days, upon retirement. And in addition to a $25,000-a-year contribution to a retirement plan and life-insurance payments, the district has promised to pay health-insurance premiums for her and her spouse—for life. 

 Write to  Jacob Gershman at jacob.gershman@wsj.com 