Gas prices are on the rise again. This time around Detroit's auto makers—caught flat-footed in 2008—say they are ready.

Two-and-a-half years ago, when U.S. pump prices soared above $4 a gallon,  General Motors Co.
GM


0.28
%




,  Ford Motor Co.
F


1.16
%




 and Chrysler Group LLC were caught with dealers' lots full of gas-guzzling sport-utility vehicles and pickup trucks. As consumers turned to small, fuel-efficient compact cars and hybrids, the Detroit makers lost out, helping send GM and Chrysler into U.S.-funded bankruptcy reorganizations and delaying Ford's return to profitability. 

Today, the Detroit companies have bolstered their fuel-efficient offerings. GM launched the Cruze compact, began selling its electrically powered Chevrolet Volt in December and plans a new subcompact, the Sonic, for later this year. Chrysler is introducing the Fiat 500 subcompact to the U.S. this month and remodeled its Sebring compact, now called the Chrysler 200. Ford last summer launched its fuel-efficient Fiesta subcompact in the U.S. and is about to debut a restyled version of its Focus compact. Ford also offers a Fusion hybrid midsize sedan. 

All three companies have cut operating costs and improved their balance sheets, and say producing and selling small cars isn't a loss-maker anymore. 

"We're in a pretty good position to weather anything gas prices might throw at us,"  Don Johnson, GM's head of U.S. sales, said Tuesday on a conference call with reporters and analysts. 

Ford echoed those remarks. "We are in a much better position to compete and win,"  Ken Czubay, Ford's U.S. sales chief, said on a separate conference call. "We have made a big bet on fuel economy and it's paying off."

But Detroit's big test is whether consumers seeking better gas mileage will turn to their showrooms instead of those of foreign rivals such as  Toyota Motor Corp.,  Honda Motor Co.
HMC


1.10
%




 and Hyundai Motor Co. The Asian companies have a much longer track record of selling competitive small cars.

If Mark Slepin is a gauge, it is going to be a tough sell. Mr. Slepin, a 53-year-old health care consultant in southern Florida, started shopping for a new car in December. His criteria: a price below $30,000 with gas mileage above 30 miles per gallon. 

Among the seven sedans he checked out there was only one made by a Detroit company, the Fusion hybrid. In the end he traded in his 1998 Toyota Sienna minivan for a Toyota Prius hybrid.

"The Prius got better mileage and had a longer track record. I know that's not good for Detroit but it is what it is. They'll catch up eventually," said Mr. Slepin, who counts an older-model Chevy Impala among the four cars in his garage.

At the North Palm Beach Toyota dealership where Mr. Slepin made his trade-in, Prius sales jumped last month as gas prices started climbing, said owner  Earl Stewart. He sold 69 Priuses in December, his best month for the model in over two years, compared to average sales of 31 Priuses a month last year.

In 2007, before gas prices started heading north, auto sales were at their peak and truck and SUV sales accounted for 53% of the U.S. market. In 2009, those sales accounted for only 47% of the overall market. But their share moved up to 50% last year.

"We don't anticipate the consumer reaction to be quite as dramatic as 2008, because if you look at the industry as a whole, vehicles are becoming more fuel-efficient," said  Bob Carter, the head of Toyota-brand sales in the U.S. Toyota is estimating gas prices could rise to as high as $4 this year.

Still, Toyota said consumers expressed much more concern about fuel prices in December than in previous months last year. Prius sales rose 33% in December from a year earlier to the highest level since August 2009. 

Despite their small-car push, GM, Ford and Chrysler remain tied to big vehicles. 

Rebounding truck sales helped GM and Ford return to profitability last year. Chrysler credited its recent sales rebound in large part on its redesigned Jeep Grand Cherokee. All three sold more light trucks than cars in 2010, while GM's car sales actually fell in 2010. And while Ford sold more cars than the year before, the increase was smaller than the rise in Ford truck sales. 

In contrast, Toyota and Honda sold more cars than SUVs and trucks in 2010, and Hyundai, whose sales have been soaring, doesn't make any light trucks. 

If higher gas prices boost sales of small cars that could spell smaller profits for the Detroit Three. 

"Profitability on larger trucks tends to be quite a lot higher than small cars," said Itay Michaeli, an automotive analyst at Citigroup. Still, he said, U.S. car makers "are far better positioned to make money on small cars" than they were a few years ago. 

As part of the bankruptcies of GM and Chrysler, the companies shed debt, lowered labor costs and shuttered excess plants, helping pave the way for their return to profitability, even on small cars. Ford avoided bankruptcy but still cut its debt and negotiated concessions with unions. 

—Matthew Dolan, Mike Ramsey and Sharon Terlep contributed to this article.

 Write to  Kate Linebaugh at kate.linebaugh@wsj.com 