MUMBAI –The Indian rupee fell Wednesday to a near two-week low on heavy dollar buying by oil and gold importers before recovering partly on the back of sharp gains in local stocks. 

The U.S. dollar was at 44.51 rupees in late trade, compared with 44.39 rupees late Monday. 

"The market is witnessing capital inflows and we expect the trend to support the local unit in the near to medium term," said A.D.M Chavali, general manager for treasury and resource management at state-run Bank of Baroda. 

The rupee has been falling steadily after touching a near six-month high of 43.98 on April 8, due to dollar buying by importers at lower levels. 

"The pair has shown swings either way in the last two weeks and we can't rule out a central bank intervention given the way rupee has been losing since Friday," a senior dealer with a state-run bank said.

ICICI Bank said in a note the interest rate differential between India and the U.S. and Japan has helped the rupee to gain in the previous week. 

"With the U.S. and Japan, the two key global liquidity providers, holding their rates at low levels [while developing economies such as India are close to the peak of their rate hike cycle], carry trades have resurfaced and have helped buoy" regional currencies, it said. 

Dealers said that the rupee recovered in the afternoon trade because of firm local stocks and dollar selling by some software companies. They added that the weakness may not continue in the near term, as huge corporate borrowing related inflows are in the pipeline. 

The Bombay Stock Exchange's Sensitive Index rose 434.32 points, or 2.3%, to close at 19696.86. 

Meanwhile, Indian government bond prices ended lower in lackluster trade as traders offloaded positions ahead of the central bank's 120-billion rupee bond auction and March inflation print, both due Friday. 

The March wholesale price index likely rose 8.30% from a year earlier, little changed from February's 8.31% increase, according to the median estimate in a Dow Jones Newswires poll of 15 economists. 

The most-traded 8.13% 2022 bond ended at 99.51 rupees, down from 99.62 rupees on Monday. The benchmark 7.80% 2021 bond fell to 99.10 rupees from 99.36 rupees. 

"Inflation will provide the next major cue to the market. If the print is above expectations, bonds may tumble further on fears of a tighter monetary policy action," said Bank of Baroda's Chavali. 

He said traders will avoid building positions in the truncated week.

The local market was closed on Tuesday for a religious holiday and will also remain shut on Thursday. 

Dealers said there will be cautious bidding at Friday's bond auction as aggressive yield cutoffs, like in the previous auction, may trigger another sell-off wave. 