TOKYO—Prime Minister Naoto Kan said Japan should start over in forming a long-term energy policy, dropping plans to get half its energy needs from nuclear power and instead turning to renewable sources.

"The existing energy-policy outline needs to be scrapped, and discussions should be started from scratch," he said Tuesday at an evening briefing. 

Mr. Kan said nuclear and fossil fuel were the pillars of Japan's energy policy but now will add two others: renewable energy such as solar, wind and biomass, and conservation. Japan has lagged behind other countries in curbing greenhouse gases, relying on nuclear power to achieve emission targets.

The government had set a goal to get 50% of Japan's energy from nuclear sources by 2030, and planned to build at least 14 reactors. Currently, it gets about 29% of its electricity supply from nuclear power.

The policy change comes amid public concern about the safety of nuclear-power plants, in light of the crisis that began when the March 11 earthquake and tsunami damaged the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear facility. Radiation contamination spread to surrounding areas and forced the evacuation of local residents.

Last week, the government demand a halt to operations at a nuclear facility run by Chubu Electric Power Co. Other nuclear plants across the nation also are facing public opposition.

"I believe the government bears a major responsibility for having promoted nuclear energy as national policy," Mr. Kan said. 

The prime minister also said Tuesday that he would decline part of his pay because of the nuclear crisis. "As one responsible, "I will return my salary as prime minister until the accident is under control," Mr. Kan said at an earlier news conference.

 The president of Tokyo Electric Power Co., Masataka Shimizu, also said the eight members of the company's board, including himself, would receive no compensation, starting now, while managing directors would see a 60% pay cut and regular employees would have a 20% reduction. 

The Tepco chief made the announcement as he formally requested government aid, saying the embattled utility's financial problems could endanger its program to pay compensation to those affected by the nuclear-power crisis at its Fukushima Daiichi plant.

The Japanese government had asked Tepco to undertake broad restructuring to win government support, including cuts in corporate compensation.

Mr. Kan, on top of base pay as a member of parliament totaling ¥1.3 million (about $16,100) monthly, receives a monthly payment of ¥1.64 million. He also is eligible for two bonuses, in winter and summer, which vary in size.

The move isn't unprecedented. In September 2006, incoming Prime Minister Shinzo Abe slashed his salary by 30% to show the need to reduce government spending.

Tepco's Mr. Shimizu told reporters that the company accepts its liability for the crisis. "We acknowledge that we have caused the enormous problem and damage to people around the plant and the country as a whole, and would like to pay compensation quickly to those who have suffered losses," Mr. Shimizu said, as he handed a letter of request for assistance to Economy, Trade and Industry Minister Banri Kaieda at the prime minister's office.

The minister said the government hoped to have a compensation plan in place by Friday. The government has said it will ensure there is funding for payouts. But he added that "taxpayers should bear a minimal cost for rescuing Tepco." 

Compensation payments could cost Tepco tens of billions of dollars, according to Merrill Lynch estimates.

Mr. Shimizu said Tepco is facing problems in obtaining the funding it needs, and runs the risk of a cash-flow problem. He said the company faces ¥750 billion in debt repayments in the fiscal year that began April 1, while it stands little chance of raising new cash in the markets.

Additional costs for the utility include buying ¥1 trillion in fossil fuels this year due to the outages of its nuclear units.

Mr. Shimizu said the company also will look at further asset sales, including real-estate and securities holdings, and that staff reductions were under consideration. He added that a detailed restructuring plan would be announced with the company's earnings figures, but that a date hadn't been decided. He didn't provide specifics of the plan.

Despite Mr. Shimizu's warnings of a cash shortage, the stock market responded positively to the news. Tepco shares rose 3.2% Tuesday to ¥484. The shares have gained 17% over the past five sessions. 

Hiroaki Osakabe, a fund manager at Chibagin Asset Management, said shares have been rising on expectations that a compensation plan will include some cap on liabilities. 

In terms of compensation payments, Tepco has announced an initial plan that provides about 50,000 households within a 30-kilometer (19-mile) radius of the plant with payments of up to ¥1 million each, for a total cost of about ¥50 billion.

But the final costs are expected to be far higher as former residents, farmers with irradiated fields and fishing boat operators ordered to stay at port seek compensation.

Merrill Lynch has said claims would likely total ¥2.4 trillion to ¥3 trillion if it can resolve the crisis in six to nine months, its current target time frame.

Local media have said the government is considering a number of approaches to aiding compensation payouts, including a government stake in the company or creation of an organization, funded in part by the industry, to handle all claims. 

This latter approach isn't popular with other utilities, as many face extra costs as the public becomes wary of bringing idled nuclear units back online, requiring them to switch back to more expensive oil, gas and coal-powered generators.

Senior government officials have rejected the idea that Tepco is largely exempt from paying compensation under the Act on Compensation for Nuclear Damage. They said that the company should have known a major quake and tsunami were likely to hit and should have taken better precautions. 

"The scale of the earthquake was within the scope of what human beings had experienced in the past," Chief Cabinet Secretary Yukio Edano said May 2, adding there would be no cap on liability under the law. 

Meanwhile, Chubu Electric began to shut down its complex in Shizuoka prefecture in central Japan until better safety measures are put in place. 

The Hamaoka complex has three active reactors, including one now closed for maintenance. Two others already are being decommissioned because of age. Chubu is expected to close the two operating reactors one at a time, a process expected to take about 1½ days each. The temporary shutdown is expected to last for at least two years.

 Write to  Mari Iwata at mari.iwata@dowjones.com 