Risky bonds have been on a tear since 2009. But as the events in Japan and elsewhere fuel demand for safer assets, investors would be wise to exercise caution. 

High-yield or "junk" bonds have been one of the best-performing assets of the past few years as investors, reassured by declining default rates and signs of a strengthening economy, flocked to the bonds' higher interest payments. So far this year, investors have poured about $11 billion into high-yield mutual funds, on pace to eclipse last year's flows of $31.5 billion, according to EPFR Global, a Boston research firm that tracks fund flows. 

Year to date, high-yield bonds are up about 3%, following returns of 15.2% in 2010 and 57.5% in 2009, according to the Merrill Lynch High Yield Master II Index.

But there are signs that the market is getting riskier. Since March 11, the Merrill Lynch High Yield Master II Index has fallen by 0.41%, sending yields, which move in the opposite direction of price, 0.10% higher to about 7%. Meanwhile, several high-yield issues were postponed, including CDW Escrow Corp.'s proposed $1.07 billion deal, because of weaker market conditions. 

Before this week, the dollar value of new deals this year was running about 33% ahead of last year's pace. But as concerns mounted over Japan's nuclear crisis, "issuance slowed down, investors demanded some better terms and the deals didn't trade as high as they have in previous weeks," says  Matthew Fuller, director at Standard & Poor's Leveraged Commentary & Data.

The difference in yields between high-yield bonds and Treasurys has widened to about 5.15 percentage points, higher than the 4.7 level of a week ago and the long-term historical average of around five points. 

The changes may signal the beginnings of a turning point for high-yield bonds—making now a good time for investors to dial back. 

Income-oriented investors often opt for a dollop of high-yield corporate bonds in their portfolios. The bonds are issued by highly leveraged companies, but offer higher rates than government bonds or investment-grade corporate bonds to compensate investors for the greater risk of default. In some cases, high-yield bonds also can offer portfolio diversification, since the sector tends to be less sensitive to interest-rate changes than, say, Treasurys.

The trouble is that companies in recent months have been issuing bonds with weaker investor protections. That is partly because, while 2011 has brought roughly $69 billion in high-yield issuance, about $40 billion of that has been for refinancing purpose—leaving only $29 billion in net new supply, according to  Citigroup Inc.
C


1.55
%






"If conditions are strong enough, companies will take advantage of it and issue bonds that are more issuer friendly than bond-investor friendly," says  Michael Anderson, global high-yield strategist at Citigroup Inc. 

This month, for example, CKE Restaurants Inc. and Bumble Bee Holdings Inc. sold risky securities called "PIK toggle," or payment-in-kind, bonds. Such deals, popular in the run-up to the credit crisis that began in 2007, essentially allow companies to make debt payments by issuing more debt. "It means if your cash flow is getting tight, you can issue bonds instead—which means you will have a larger interest obligation come the next pay period," S&P LCD's Mr. Fuller says. 

At the same time, the percentage of lower-grade, triple-C-rated bonds has jumped to about 24% of new issues this year, from 17.4% in 2010 and just 11.4% in 2009, according to S&P LCD. In 2007, just as the credit boom began to fizzle, triple-C-rated bonds made up 37% of bond volume. 

Given the high-yield run-up in recent years, investors aren't likely to get much more price appreciation, experts say. The Citi High Yield Market Index, for example, is trading at 103, near its all-time high of 105 hit in January 2004 and up from the low of 55 in December 2008.

To be sure, some strategists point to strong fundamentals—low defaults and improving economic conditions—as evidence that the sector will remain strong. But if the economy worsens and defaults rise, prices may fall and investors could lose money.

That is why many high-yield bond-fund managers are trying to temper expectations about the outlook, says  Miriam Sjoblom, an analyst at investment researcher  Morningstar Inc.
MORN


-0.15
%




 "We had an amazing recovery, and now we're at the turning point where the other side of the cycle is beginning." 

Some managers have cut their positions in high-yield bonds entirely or are moving up the credit spectrum to higher-quality bonds.  Bonnie Baha, portfolio manager of global developed credit at DoubleLine Capital LP, recently reduced high-yield bonds in the  Core Fixed Income Fund to about 1.5% from a high of 10% last summer in favor of emerging-markets bonds. "After this benign credit environment for the better part of last year, suddenly there are so many things to be concerned about," she says.

Meanwhile,  Western Asset High Yield Fund dropped its allocation to bonds rated below B to about 27% from 38% in December 2009, while  T. Rowe Price High-Yield Fund's allocation to similarly rated bonds fell to 15.9% at the end of February from 20.9% in December 2009. 

A better play for income-oriented investors may be emerging-market bond funds, which can offer higher yields without the debt problems that many developed countries are facing. 

  Jeff Feldman, a financial adviser in Rochester, N.Y., uses the  MainStay High Yield Corporate Bond. He says he likes the fund's conservative management, consistent performance and lower volatility than other funds in the sector. He also recommends that investors diversify their fixed-income holdings with hybrid or balanced funds, such as  FPA Crescent, that can invest in convertible bonds and high-dividend-paying stocks, which could benefit if economic growth improves. 

"Anytime there's uncertainty, that's bad for risky assets," says Citi's Mr. Anderson. "And high yield is certainly a risky asset." 

 Write to  Jane J. Kim at jane.kim@wsj.com 