Managers of some red-hot small-company stock funds are cautioning investors that returns could start to cool off.

Read the complete Investing in Funds report. 

For the past three years, small-cap funds have been the top performers among diversified funds, according to Morningstar Inc.

The biggest winners: small-company funds focusing on growth stocks. So far in 2011, small-growth funds are up an average of 13%, Morningstar says. That follows an average 27% return in 2010 and 35% in 2009. Many funds have completely recovered losses from the bear market of 2007-09, when the average small-growth fund lost nearly 42%.

In contrast, large-cap stocks, as measured by the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index, are up 8.4% (about 9% including dividends) so far this year, and plenty of large-cap stock funds are still in the red from the bear market.

This has some fund managers turning a bit cautious. "We're still positively biased…but we feel we have had the bulk of the returns" we expected for 2011, says  Mark Burns, a portfolio manager on  Loomis Sayles Small Cap Growth, up 17% so far this year and 37% over the past year.

  Tom Wetherald, manager of  MFS New Discovery, says, "We're more cautiously positioned than we've been in quite some time." The fund is up about 36% over the past year.

Several factors have fueled the outsize gains. The first was a simple snap-back from the bear market when small caps were hit harder than large-company stocks. Second, small-company stocks got a big boost from the Federal Reserve's aggressive efforts to stimulate the economy.

That's in part because they're the most leveraged to changes in the U.S. economy. In addition, "small caps have been lumped in with other risky assets like high-yield bonds and commodities," says Mr. Wetherald.

Prime beneficiaries of these trends have been small-cap tech stocks. The Loomis fund had been biased toward that sector. Now, says Mr. Burns, "we've pulled in our horns a bit."

The main headwinds, managers say: Valuations aren't bargains across the board the way they were in 2009, and the Fed this summer is expected to wind up its most recent moves to pour money into the financial markets.

At MFS, Mr. Wetherald has been tilting his fund toward stocks left behind during the small-cap rally. That's leading him to residential-construction stocks and regional banks.

It's a similar story at  Cambiar Small Cap, a value-tilted portfolio up 28% over the past year. There are pockets of industrial and tech stocks "where we've seen valuations get extended," says  Andrew Baumbusch, a manager on the fund. "We're moving toward areas of consumer stocks and health care where that valuation extension hasn't taken place."

In general, Loomis's Mr. Burns says, small-cap investors are going to find themselves in an environment "where the tide has stopped lifting all boats."

—Send questions and comments to Mr. Lauricella at tom.lauricella@wsj.com.