Only days before Christmas, investors in Jo-Ann Stores Inc. got an early gift in the shape of a 32% bump up in the stock's value after a private-equity firm agreed to pay $61 a share to acquire the craft and fabric specialty retailer. That was all it took for  SouthernSun Small Cap, a $105 million mutual fund run by  Michael W. Cook of SouthernSun Asset Management, to romp across the finish line and become the top-performing fund in our Winners' Circle contest for 2010.

Read the complete  Quarterly Investing in Funds report .

Surprise acquisitions—whether by buyout funds or businesses hoping to expand or diversify their revenue—helped the Memphis-based fund post a 48.35% return for 2010. It was a year in which funds that invested in small-cap stocks ruled the roost, accounting for six of the 10 top-performing diversified U.S. stock funds that can boast at least $50 million in assets and a three-year track record, according to preliminary data compiled by researcher Morningstar Inc. (Leveraged and indexed funds are excluded.) 

A small-cap rally started in August and gained momentum from improving economic news in the final months of 2010. But Mr. Cook says he wasn't at all surprised by the magnitude of the gains recorded by the small companies he winnows through in search of future stars.

"We try to understand what businesses can do over a long period of time, and that can generate real discretionary cash flow," he says. To some extent, he adds, the fund is still benefiting from the "enormous vacuum" created by the deleveraging across the entire economy in the wake of the financial crisis of 2008. "Many of our companies saw their revenues hold up because of the nature of their businesses, or found ways to manage costs, or were otherwise flexible enough to ride out the storm," he says.

Indeed, Mr. Cook is so confident of the inherent strength of the fund's holdings that he's not planning on making any changes that aren't forced on him. He'll have to seek out new investments to take the place of Jo-Ann Stores and two other portfolio companies taken private during 2010. But he's sticking with businesses like  Nordson Corp.
NDSN


0.64
%




, a maker of specialty spray valves and applicators. "It's used on a production line in China to apply adhesive on Pampers," he says. Nordson's stock price soared 48.5% during 2010, while that of  Polaris Industries Inc.,
PII


2.06
%




 another top holding, posted a gain of 78.8%. "It was able to redeploy its free cash flow in research and development and has a great military business, which most people know nothing about," Mr. Cook says. Indeed, he says, many of the two dozen or so small stocks his fund owns "make stuff that nobody sees," like  Middelby Corp.
MIDD


0.21
%




, which makes pizza ovens and frying equipment used in fast-food restaurants. The company's stock jumped 72.2% in 2010.

  Managers Cadence Emerging Companies, led by a team including  William Bannick, chief investment officer of Cadence Capital Management, ranked fourth in our survey, with a 40.01% gain for 2010. Both this fund and the No. 3 fund,  Hotchkis & Wiley Small Cap Value, which jumped 43.3% in 2010, benefitted tremendously from the tailwind of an improving economy, an environment that traditionally favors smaller stocks. (The managers of the Hotchkis & Wiley fund didn't return calls seeking comment.)

"Small caps are bull-market investments; they are going to respond better than the average stock in a market and economic rebound," Mr. Bannick says. "When the economy expands, we start looking for companies in industries where revenues are expected to grow more than average." That has taken the fund (which requires a $2.5 million minimum investment) into the tech arena, investing in stocks like  Amtech Systems Inc.,
ASYS


-0.70
%




 a semiconductor-equipment company with clients in the solar-energy industry. The stock jumped 72.2% in 2010. Overall, Mr. Bannick calculates that about half of the fund's outperformance in 2010 can be attributed to information-technology companies.

He doesn't plan to tweak his fund much in 2011, unless he has to. "We grappled with a larger-than-normal number of companies being acquired in the last year, and have to find new places to put money to work," he says. New additions last year included specialty retailer  Zumiez Inc.,
ZUMZ


0.22
%




 which opened three dozen stores and saw a big jump in sales as the economy revived.

Not all of the 2010 winners were small-cap funds.  Integrity Williston Basin/Mid-North America Stock posted a 47.43% gain, for second place, by betting on mid and small caps, and by hopping aboard another winning trend: commodity investing. A large portion of the fund's return came from energy exploration, production and service companies active in the Williston Basin, which includes parts of eastern Montana, North and South Dakota and southern Saskatchewan.

"So much of the value here has only just begun to be recognized," says fund manager  Robert Walstad, who describes the basin as one of the largest and underexplored in North America. "It's got oil and gas and potash and who knows what else there," he says, explaining that new drilling techniques make those resources more accessible. He runs the fund from the Minot, N.D., headquarters of Viking Fund Management LLC. 

Big performers last year included  Kodiak Oil & Gas Corp., which soared 197.3%. "We have no plans to trade any of this away anytime soon," says Mr. Walstad. "Why change what is working well?"

 Ms. McGee is a writer in New York. She can be reached at reports@wsj.com. 