SYDNEY—In a bid to dominate Australia's airwaves,  Southern Cross Media Ltd. said it has made a friendly 741.3 million Australian dollar (US$736.1 million) takeover offer for rival radio broadcaster  Austereo Group Ltd. and intends to issue new shares to help fund the deal. 

The offer, announced Monday, is heartening news for the wider stock market as it continues a recent pickup in merger and acquisition activity, indicating that companies are more confident taking large bets as share prices improve and global markets show tentative signs of recovery. Coal miner  Riversdale Mining Ltd., life insurer  Tower Australia Ltd. and airline  Virgin Blue Holdings Ltd. have all been the subject of corporate activity in recent months. 

A former satellite fund of investment bank  Macquarie Group Ltd., Southern Cross says it boasts "the largest commercial radio network in Australia", with 68 radio stations in 38 license areas nationwide. 

Most of its assets are in regional centers with only one or two local broadcasters, so Southern Cross will hope its offer for Austereo won't attract too much scrutiny from Australia's competition regulator. An Australian Competition and Consumer Commission spokeswoman said it would review the offer and release a timeline for the decision soon.

Austereo owns the dominant Today and Triple M networks, with stations in all mainland Australian states. But because it is a metropolitan rather than a regional player, it doesn't compete directly with Southern Cross for advertising dollars. 

"We've made an application to the ACCC and we're pretty comfortable with the submission we've made and the initial discussions we've had," Southern Cross Chief Executive  Rhys Holleran told reporters, adding that the company doesn't expect to encounter any significant regulatory problems. 

Southern Cross is offering A$2 cash per Austereo share plus a five-cent dividend Austereo announced Monday. It will also pay an extra 10 cents a share if its offer reaches the 90% compulsory acquisition threshold, bringing its offer to A$2.15 a share. 

Austereo shares were at A$1.89 just before the offer was announced, up from around A$1.80 when major shareholder  Village Roadshow Ltd. said a few weeks ago that it was considering selling its stake. 

Southern Cross is also offering a share-based alternative of 0.95 Southern Cross share for every Austereo share plus the five-cent dividend and potential 10-cent payment. 

Austereo's directors "have announced that they will unanimously recommend that Austereo shareholders accept the offer in the absence of a superior proposal," Southern Cross said. 

Austereo shares jumped 11% to end at A$2.09—not far from the A$2.15 bid. Southern Cross shares slumped 12% to A$1.90 after it said it intends to repay an up to A$540 million equity bridge facility by way of a share issue, most likely an entitlement offer. 

It didn't provide more details, only saying it intends to fund the transaction through a combination of new senior debt facilities of up to A$755 million and the equity bridge facility. 

Southern Cross would use the fresh debt to refinance A$210 million of Austereo's debt and A$290 million of its own, leaving the up to A$255 million left over to combine with the equity bridge facility to fund the takeover. 

Any equity raising won't exceed A$540 million, Mr. Holleran said.

 Write to  Ross Kelly at ross.kelly@dowjones.com 