The word on inflation according to the Federal Reserve before the Middle East blew up and Japan was shaken up: Relax. 

With so many people out of work and so many factories, offices and malls empty, few workers can get big wage increases and few firms can make price increases stick.

Yes, food prices are up, but nothing we do will make the sun shine or the rains come at the right time to grow more crops. Yes, commodity prices are rising but that's because demand from emerging markets is strong. Yes, we are still pumping billions into credit markets, but we'll drain that money before it fuels inflation. And, please, don't blame us for inflation in China or India—or the U.K. Fighting inflation there is a job for their fiscal, monetary and exchange-rate policies, not us. 

So, as long as all of you believe that we at the Fed won't let inflation climb much and act accordingly, it won't. 

Then came Tunisia, Egypt and Libya. The Brent benchmark price of oil went from $90 a barrel in December to $115. 

And then Japan's earthquake hit. That is severing supply chains—25% of the world capacity to make silicon chips is down—and depressing demand from Japan's consumers and businesses. 

So what's the word on inflation now? Does all this bring it closer—or not? 

The answer isn't obvious: Economic winds are blowing in two directions at once. Demand has taken a hit. Although Japan has been surpassed in economic heft by China, it's still as big as Britain and France combined. It will consume less for a while; so will some consumers and businesses elsewhere, many a bit more cautious than they were before. 

Higher oil prices pinch, too. Every extra nickel Americans spend to fill the tank is a nickel they don't have to spend on something else. Each $10 increase in the price of a barrel of oil, economists estimate, reduces economic growth by 0.2 percentage points. 

The weaker demand, the less likely inflation is to take off. Usually.

But supply matters, too. Nothing good has happened there. Oil prices have gone up, not because of strong global demand but because of anxiety about the flow of oil from the Middle East. Closed plants, shortages of made-in-Japan auto parts and computer chips and ripple effects on factories from Korea to Louisiana constrain supply. 

The less supply, the more upward pressure on prices. Usually. 

The Fed has learned over time that it's unwise to rush to raise interest rates when oil-price increases reflect a supply shock. That makes the pain worse and doesn't cut oil prices quickly. As long as consumers and businesses see any oil-price hike as temporary, as they did when oil prices soared in 2008, inflation won't infect the economy. 

"The most likely outcome is that the recent rise in commodity prices will lead to, at most, a temporary and relatively modest increase in U.S. consumer price inflation," Mr. Bernanke told Congress in early March. Nothing he nor like-minded Fed officials has said since suggests he sees any worrisome increase in the inflation risk at home. 

What might go wrong?

One, so far, the Fed hasn't had to choose between fighting inflation and fighting unemployment, its twin mandates, and it has kept the credit spigot open. It hopes growth will pick up and unemployment will come down before inflation gets going. But cross currents of the past few weeks could produce a less-pleasant scenario: Less growth and more inflation, accompanied by still very high unemployment. 

Two, during the financial crisis, Mr. Bernanke deemed inflation so low that the U.S. risked deflation. 

He set out to raise inflation and succeeded. Because monetary policy works with a lag, he must tighten credit before it hits his 2% target. 

"We have to skate ahead of the puck," Richard Fisher of the Dallas Federal Reserve Bank said this week. 

But if inflation surprises, the Fed isn't well-positioned to move quickly: It plans to keep pumping money into the economy by buying U.S. Treasury bonds until June and has promised to keep rates low for an "extended period." 

Three, the Bernanke strategy rests on public confidence that he won't permit inflation to take off or, as he puts it, on keeping inflation expectations "anchored." That's tough when average gasoline prices cross $3.50 a gallon,  Southwest Airlines
LUV


0.95
%




 has raised fares six times in 90 days,  General Mills
GIS


-0.58
%




 is boosting the price of Cheerios and  Starbucks
SBUX


-0.09
%




 is lifting coffee prices. 

It's too soon to be sure, but the latest University of Michigan survey of consumers and a J.P. Morgan survey of finance professionals hint that inflation expectations are now rising. 

Mr. Bernanke's job isn't getting any easier. 

 Write to  David Wessel at capital@wsj.com 