LONDON—Bank of England Governor  Mervyn King on Tuesday stepped into a simmering debate among policy makers about the role of the sterling exchange rate in monetary policy, a subject that has been almost taboo since a 1992 attempt to track the Deutsche mark went disastrously wrong. 

The pound has become something of a flashpoint among the members of the bank's rate-setting Monetary Policy Committee, who disagree about how large a role the pound's depreciation has had in pushing the U.K.'s inflation rate to double its 2% target, and rising. 

Answering questions from British lawmakers Tuesday, Mr. King said the decline in sterling's exchange rate since the start of the financial crisis hasn't contributed greatly to inflation. 

The pound declined between 20% and 25% against other major currencies between 2007 and 2009, according to Bank for International Settlements figures, and Mr. King said the fall had helped to rebalance U.K. economy by aiding exporters. 

"I think that it is best understood as a one-off re-evaluation of the likely level of sterling necessary to ensure we can achieve a rebalancing of our economy," Mr. King said. It isn't a sign sterling will keep falling, he added. "That would be a source of greater concern, but we are not seeing a continuously declining exchange rate," he said. 

Mr. King's remarks suggest he is relatively sanguine about the exchange rate.

  Grant Lewis, head of economic research at Daiwa Capital Markets, said the governor is merely stating facts and Mr. King hasn't suggested it would be possible or desirable to use monetary policy to influence the pound's exchange rate. 

That is in sharp contrast to the Bank of England's foremost policy hawk, Andrew Sentance. 

Mr. Sentance, who has voted for a rise in the bank's benchmark interest rate since June 2010, has argued that while sterling's decline had helped rebalance the economy, it has gone too far. 

"If we are to avoid 'selling England by the pound' in the sphere of monetary policy, we need to ensure that a weak or declining currency is not aggravating imported price pressures and destabilizing the path of inflation over the medium term," Mr. Sentance said. 

He said a rise in interest rates would boost sterling, making the currency act as a "windbreak" against higher commodity prices, which are contributing to U.K. inflation. 

It is unusual for U.K. policy makers to discuss exchange rates, still less to suggest it might be desirable to influence them. The U.K. crashed out of the European Exchange-Rate Mechanism in 1992, after efforts to prop up the pound failed. 

Following that episode, British policy makers decided they would never again try to set an exchange rate for the pound, and they have largely stuck to that position in the intervening years. 

In comments that could be seen as a riposte to Mr. Sentance,  David Miles, another rate-setter at the BOE, said in a speech on Feb. 23 that it might be possible to bring inflation back to the 2% target within months if sterling appreciated significantly and unemployment rose. 

"One could use monetary policy to try to engineer that," he said. But he added that he didn't think that was desirable, because raising interest rates now would probably require the bank to loosen policy again next year. 

 Write to  Jason Douglas at jason.douglas@dowjones.com and Paul Hannon at paul.hannon@dowjones.com 