Two adjoining duplex apartments at a legendary Park Avenue address are about to be put on the market for $60 million, an offering that is sure to attract global interest even at a time when demand for top luxury Manhattan homes is already booming.

The grand apartments on the 12th and 13th floors of 740 Park Ave. are owned by philanthropist  Courtney Sale Ross, the widow of former  Time Warner
TWX


0.63
%




 CEO  Steve Ross. The duplexes have access to each other but are not fully combined, say brokers familiar with them. Together, they have more than 30 rooms. 

Ms. Ross is offering them together or separately, asking $35 million for one and $25 million for the other, according to a person familiar with the matter.

A sale would represent a rare turnover at 740 Park, perhaps the most prestigious residential building in New York and one with a notoriously difficult co-op board. The 19-story limestone-clad co-op was designed by renowned architect Rosario Candela and completed around 1930. 

Residents have included  John D. Rockefeller, Jr., private equity kingpin  Stephen Schwarzman, Ronald Lauder and  Vera Wang. Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis's grandfather developed the property and the future first lady lived there as a child. Also notable are some people who didn't get in, including  Joan Crawford and businessman  Nelson Peltz. 

It may also be the only Manhattan co-op to have a 576-page book devoted to it. "They are not only partners in a significant investment," Michael Gross wrote of 740 Park residents in his book, "they are fellow members of a secret society."

In the 36-unit building, there is currently one other active listing, a 15-room duplex with an asking price of $23 million, marked down from $35 million in 2008 went it first came on the market, according to Streeteasy.com. The most recent sale was more than three years ago, Streeteasy.com records show. 

The Ross apartments were offered for sale in 2008, though they were never formally listed, brokers say, and it is unclear how many people ever actually viewed the property. They are being listed now by  Serena Boardman of Sotheby's International Realty.

The listing comes as the city's upper-luxury market has been setting new price records. Last month,  Sloan Lindemann Barnett, an author and the daughter of a cellphone magnate, and her husband  Roger Barnett, an entrepreneur, found a buyer paying more than $47million for an East Side townhouse. Earlier this year, a Russian couple bought a $48 million apartment at the Plaza, one of the priciest condos ever sold. 

 Write to  Craig Karmin at craig.karmin@wsj.com 