 Chicago 

Back in the 1980s, the director Peter Sellars shocked operagoers with his wholesale reimagining of the Mozart-Da Ponte operas, most notably his "Don Giovanni" set in a slum with Donna Anna as a heroin addict. For his production of Handel's "Hercules" (1745), which had its premiere at Lyric Opera of Chicago on March 4, Mr. Sellars had the mythical Hercules returning home from a modern war, presumably Iraq or Afghanistan. This time, the reimagining had a more benign intent: to call attention to the struggles of returning veterans, an effort amplified by a community engagement program run in collaboration with veterans' groups and the University of Chicago. However, as was the case with "Don Giovanni," the director's concept, outlined in an extremely detailed synopsis in the program book, seemed to float above Handel's opera rather than inhabit it. In addition, Mr. Sellars's stylized approach to acting often kept the audience at arm's length, challenging viewers to interpret rather than immediately understand. Those who didn't read the synopsis in advance may have missed the point entirely.

In Handel's version, Hercules returns home from war to his wife, Dejanira, and son, Hyllus. He brings a prisoner, the princess Iole: He has killed her father and conquered her country, and he may be in love with her. The jealous Dejanira decides to win her husband back with what she thinks is a love charm: a garment soaked in the blood of the centaur Nessus, whom Hercules killed with a poison arrow. Unfortunately, it is actually Nessus's murderous weapon of revenge, and Hercules dies in agony. Dejanira goes mad with grief and remorse; Hyllus and Iole get married.

In the music, Hercules is a pretty straightforward returning hero; in Mr. Sellars's synopsis, he has been given a panoply of "coming home" insecurities—he worries about making the transition from war to peace, he can't connect with his wife, he feels guilty about his wartime actions. Dejanira, despairing of her husband's return, has become addicted to pills. Mr. Sellars worked to demonstrate the distance between husband and wife with glances and body language; he also had characters silently witnessing and participating in other characters' solo scenes to further his motivational interpolations. But "Hercules," despite its title, is really about the evolution of Dejanira's jealousy, and the attempt to make it explicitly about the human costs of war rather than a tragedy about love ultimately felt like a stretch. 

However, the terrific cast and conductor sold the show. The standout was Lucy Crowe, making her Lyric Opera debut as Iole. She entered in an orange jumpsuit, her hands bound and a black mesh hood over her head (the reference was Abu Ghraib), and sang her first aria beautifully, hood and all. Every subsequent aria upped the level, as her soprano shifted effortlessly from agile brightness to gracefully spun lyricism, communicating plangent despair or affecting tenderness, with pinpoint attention to period style. After "Ah! Think what ills the jealous prove," Iole's warning to Dejanira, the audience went wild. 

The excellent mezzo Alice Coote just missed making Dejanira the powerhouse that she needs to be to dominate the opera. She was better at lamenting than fury, and despite her wide vocal range, her lower register did not carry consistently. Still, she was wonderfully savage in her mockery of Hercules ("Resign thy club and lion's spoils") and persuasive in her mad scene. Eric Owens was a solid Hercules, chilling in his death scene, which he sang lying on a rock with his head hanging backward. Tenor Richard Croft brought a gentle beauty to Hyllus, and the countertenor David Daniels was sensitive and affecting as the herald Lichas, who comforts Dejanira. The Lyric Opera chorus was impressive in the important choral commentaries, and conductor Harry Bicket led a vivid, superbly paced performance, supporting the singers and shaping Baroque gestures and articulations with this modern-instrument orchestra. 

George Tsypin's set was noncommittal as to era and location—a ring of broken columns surrounding what looked like a pit of rocks that occasionally glowed red, and a backdrop scrim studded with metal shards that shone like stars or fires. James F. Ingalls's lighting reflected the inner turmoil of the characters as much as any external reality. Dunya Ramicova's costumes ranged from modern military camouflage fatigues to generic long robes in various colors for the chorus women and ugly shirts for Hyllus and Lichas. Mr. Sellars's directing incorporated naturalistic moments (a coming-home party for Hercules with bottled beers and a portable grill; Hercules' funeral, with its flag-draped coffin) and more stylized ones, like the chorus's mysterious choreographed hand gestures. It was entertaining to try and figure out what the director wanted you to think was going on, but, finally, it was the musical performance that told the tale. 

In contrast, Lyric Opera's "Lohengrin" production boasted no directorial concept at all. The production, an ancient import from Covent Garden, with sets and costumes by John Napier and direction by Elijah Moshinsky, was played on a mostly empty stage, decorated with three structures that looked like enormous sword hilts combining Christian and pagan symbols. The costumes were standard medieval German robes with lots of crosses and armor; direction was basically traffic management. 

Of principal interest were Andrew Davis's conducting, which was energetic and unusually transparent for Wagner, and Amber Wagner, a recent graduate of Lyric Opera's young-artist program, who sang Elsa with warmth and steel in her full-bodied, gleaming soprano. Also engaging was Michaela Schuster, who brought a fine, sexy malevolence to Ortrud—she was like one of those sorceresses whom you expect to turn into a serpent. Tenor Johan Botha stood and delivered as Lohengrin, but his handsome tenor was strong and free without any forcing or overkill. He even managed to communicate the regret of his final arias. Bass-baritone Greer Grimsley brought a welcome subtlety to Telramund, making his snarling villainy a product of his weakness, exploited by the conniving Ortrud. Georg Zeppenfeld and Lester Lynch were secure as King Heinrich and the Herald, and the chorus and the four onstage trumpeters made a joyful noise. 

 Ms. Waleson writes about opera for the Journal. 