JAKARTA—BlackBerry maker  Research In Motion Ltd. said Thursday it has started Internet filtering on its smartphones in Indonesia just ahead of a pending deadline, the first such move in any country.

The Indonesian government since last year has been telling Internet service providers in the country to block customers from viewing websites with pornographic material. The move put pressure on RIM, as the company is known, to install filters by a Friday deadline.

"RIM is now in the process of implementing an Internet content-filtering solution that addresses our carrier partners' regulatory obligations in Indonesia. ...We are pleased to have implemented the solution in advance of the date requested by the ministry," the Waterloo, Ontario, company said. 

In response, Indonesian Communication Minister Tifatul Sembiring—who has been at the forefront of the government's efforts to clamp down on pornography—said on his Twitter account; "Thank God RIM has complied with Indonesian regulations. Pornography has been blocked. Please go ahead with business as usual in compliance with the law." 

The move could resolve one of a number of conflicts RIM has found itself in with other governments. In most cases, the source of contention is BlackBerry message encryption. 

In India, for instance, the government has said it fears that encryption makes RIM's smartphones convenient for terrorists to use undetected. 

The Indian government has been holding talks with the Canadian company on ways to allow monitoring of RIM's corporate-email services. Last week, RIM provided tools for Indian security agencies to access messenger services, another feature that under government scrutiny.

RIM said in a statement Thursday that talks with the Indian government are "ongoing and positive," following local media reports of problems with the negotiations. 

"We continue to work with the government of India toward mutually agreed objectives within the framework of RIM's publicly stated principles," the company said, adding, "we remain focused on our commitment to India and our strong growing customer base."

Countries where RIM has faced troubles in the past year:

—Source: Dow Jones Newswires

Both India and Indonesia are crucial markets for RIM. Analysts estimate BlackBerry users in Indonesia top two million, while the number in India easily exceeds one million. 

RIM currently has more than 55 million subscribers globally but is betting on emerging markets to further growth. 

RIM also has been under pressure in the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia to provide access to data on its secure networks. The company averted a ban on key BlackBerry services in both after the countries said regulatory requirements had been satisfied. The encryption is central to the company's appeal to corporate customers, which say that secure communications are necessary. 

—R. Jai Krishna in New Delhi contributed to this article. 