BRUSSELS—The European Union's highest court said an EU proposal that would create a new system to litigate patents isn't compatible with EU law, a setback in a decadeslong effort by EU nations to come up with a single patent regime.

The proposal would have created a new court to handle patent litigation. But the Luxembourg-based European Court of Justice said in an opinion that that court would impinge on its own prerogative to rule on EU law, and on the obligation of national judges in the 27 member states to administer it.

The agreement "would alter the essential character of the powers conferred on the institutions of the European Union and on the member states which are indispensable to the preservation of the very nature of European Union law," the Court of Justice said.

Disagreements have hindered efforts to create a single patent regime for years. Talks lately have stalled because of strong opposition from Spain and Italy over language issues—the languages of the European Patent Office are English, French and German—but EU ministers are expected Thursday to go ahead with plans for a patent that would cover the other 25 countries.

The Court of Justice's opinion, however, means that they will need to find a new solution for litigation.

Currently, the Munich-based European Patent Office acts as a sort of clearinghouse for the 27 EU countries and nine other European nations.

Patent applications are filed centrally to the EPO, but applications still must be translated into national languages and validated by national offices. That drives up costs and red tape. 

A European patent validated in 13 countries costs as much as €20,000 ($28,000), of which nearly €14,000 arises from translations alone, according to the European Commission.

Moreover, national courts now resolve legal issues, making it possible for different courts to adopt different, if not contradicting, rulings on similar cases.

That has instigated a push for a single EU patent that would be valid across the bloc and litigated in one central place.

In 2009, ministers of the EU member states asked the Court of Justice to give its opinion on the legality of a new patent court.

The new court would be a creation of an international treaty among the 38 countries that use the current European patent system, and would thus exist outside the main body of EU law. Even the EU countries were split. 

In filings with the Court of Justice, eight EU states said the proposal doesn't comply with EU law; 12 said it does. The Court of Justice said no.

The court is concerned that the agreement would give important powers to an entity whose status as a non-EU institution wouldn't be totally clear, and without having clear guarantees about how it would be bound by EU law and what kind of checks and balances would apply to it, said  Geert Glas, a Brussels-based intellectual-property partner at law firm Allen & Overy.

The court feels that "there aren't enough guarantees that this patent court would respect EU law, and would be bound by EU law," Mr. Glas said.

The European Commission, the EU's executive arm, insisted Tuesday that the court's opinion won't hurt the progress toward the single patent.

"The agreement on the European Patent Court and the creation of the unitary patent protection through enhanced cooperation are two distinct projects," the commission said. "Now that the opinion is available, the Commission will analyze it very carefully with a view to identifying appropriate solutions."

A commission official explained that in theory the EU could decide to go ahead with a single patent and then set up a single patent litigation system for related disputes at a later stage, although it wouldn't be ideal.

"I would hope they would do both in parallel," Mr. Glas said, adding that the outcome of having a full framework in place would be worth some further delay.

The negotiations leading to a single EU patent have been going on for more than 30 years.

At the outset, even the definition of a patent and what rights it would give the holder had to be harmonized.

Now the expectation is that the first single EU patent could be issued in 2014, the commission official explained.

 Write to  Alessandro Torello at alessandro.torello@dowjones.com 