The Illinois House of Representatives adjourned on Friday without voting on a proposed 75% income-tax increase designed to dig the state out of a $13 billion budget deficit.

House members are expected to reconvene Sunday afternoon to continue discussing the proposal.

The proposed agreement, which is still in flux, was reached Thursday night between Democratic Gov. Pat Quinn and Democratic leaders in the House and Senate. 

Among other things, the deal would raise Illinois' income-tax rate to at least 5.25%, from the current 3%. That would be the state's first increase in the income-tax rate in roughly two decades.

Municipal bond market participants reacted with skepticism to the tentative deal. The yield on Illinois 10-year bonds were trading around 2.3 percentage points above a market triple-A benchmark, about 0.05 to 0.10 percentage points more than Thursday, said Thomson Reuters senior analyst Randy Smolik. Yields move in the opposite direction from price.

Illinois "still has gaps to close despite [any] tax increases and [they still] want to issue a lot of bonds," Mr. Smolik said.

"The Governor continues to have productive discussions with the Senate President and the Speaker of the House to build a framework that will allow the state to pay its bills, stabilize the budget and strengthen the Illinois economy," said Kelly Kraft, a spokeswoman for the governor's budget office.

Democrats are attempting to get an income-tax increase passed before the new legislative session convenes on Jan. 12, when Republicans will hold more seats after making gains in the November election. Republicans have strongly opposed an income-tax increase and instead have been advocating for spending cuts.

"They fall woefully short on cutting and committing to not spending new money," said House Republican Leader Tom Cross. "This is the exact reason we got into this mess.…If they start spending and not cutting, it will be the same mess next year and the year after."

—Kelly Nolan contributed to this article.

 Write to  Lauren Etter at lauren.etter@wsj.com 