DETROIT—Michigan's newly elected Gov. Rick Snyder Wednesday came out in favor of a new bridge connecting Detroit and the Canadian city of Windsor, the continent's busiest international border crossing.

In his first state of the state address, Mr. Snyder said he had secured $550 million in funding from Canada for construction of the U.S. portion of the road system for the bridge and a matching grant from the Federal Highway Administration. Private-sector investment would be used to build the bridge, he said. Mr. Snyder stressed that Michigan won't take on any debt related to the project, making good on a campaign promise that state tax dollars wouldn't be used.

"The new bridge will create jobs, strengthen our economy and help establish Michigan as a hub for global commerce," Mr. Snyder said at the state legislature in Lansing, Mich.

In a 43-minute address in which the former venture capitalist spoke from a rough outline rather than a prepared speech, he stressed the need to extricate Michigan from its economic doldrums by creating jobs, reforming government and consolidating services across jurisdictions.

"We have a government sector with an unsustainable financial model that has mortgaged our children's future with more than $54 billion in pension and benefit liabilities," he said. "The number one item is the need for more or better jobs."

Michigan's unemployment fell to 11.7% in December from 14.5% a year ago and compared with a 9.4% national jobless rate.

To create jobs, Mr. Snyder said he would focus on businesses already operating in the state as opposed to "hunting" for new enterprises to bring jobs to the state.

Mr. Snyder however didn't provide details on how he would balance the state's projected $1.8 billion deficit and said that would come out as part of the budget deliberations in the next months. He pledged to present a two-year budget by mid-February with the goal of completing the budget by May 31.

The future of the Detroit River border crossing, an important link in the auto industry's supply chain, has been a contentious subject among business and political leaders in the region for nearly a decade. Some $1.2 billion worth of goods cross the U.S.-Canada border each day at all of Michigan's border points, with a quarter of that going across the Ambassador Bridge, a privately owned bridge currently operating at the Detroit-Windsor crossing.

The proposed new bridge that Mr. Snyder backed has been a polarizing issue for the past few years. Legislation on the new bridge stalled in the legislature late last year.

"Now I ask you to forget everything you heard in last year's debate," he said. "We will present a totally revamped and highly attractive economic development proposal."

Mr. Snyder said the Canadian investment would be repaid with toll revenue.

The owner of the Ambassador bridge, trucking magnate Manuel "Matty" Maroun, has criticized the public bridge project as wasteful and an attack on his business. Maroun pledged to build the second Ambassador Bridge span with his own funds. He has already spent more than $500 million to upgrade ramps and toll plazas on both the U.S. and Canadian sides. Ambassador Bridge officials didn't respond to questions.

 Write to  Kate Linebaugh at kate.linebaugh@wsj.com 