You see plenty of wacky things in New York City. A rat scurrying up a sleepy passenger's face on the subway. A giant airplane belly-flopping safely in the Hudson. A straight-faced bartender selling you a vodka tonic for $16.

Now Regis Philbin is retiring. That's like the Statue of Liberty putting on shorts and moving to Boca Raton.

But with all due reverence to Regis, there may be no stranger sight than New York rallying around its kooky football Jets.

It's a bizarre switch. The Jets aren't new in town—they won a Super Bowl back in the 17th century—but they have never been a citywide treasure. They're not the entitled Yankees. They're not the fancy Giants. They're not even the Knicks, who've been dormant forever, but were showing flickers of a revival. (Guys, losing to Sacramento and Phoenix...really?)

A Jets fan does not grow up believing he or she is the center of the city's sports universe. It's a fight for every headline, for each tiny scrap of respect. When the Jets come up short—and in their history, they have almost always come up short—the jokes are withering.

Being a Jets fan—a true Jets fan, not someone who hopped on after "Hard Knocks"—is not a stylish move. Historically, it's been more of an affliction than a passion. Reasonable people try to fight it.

Last year at the NFL draft, we met a guy named Tim whose young son had recently become a Jets fan, just like his dad, who inherited it from his father amid that magical Super Bowl III year. Tim's wife was deeply upset; she acted like Tim had taught the boy how to juggle knives. Why, she asked her husband, must their son be exposed to such potential agony?

Now it's different. The agony is dwarfed by the ecstasy. The Jets are a rowdy pleasure. It's still messy, ugly and controversial, but if you're a longtime sufferer, take a mental picture. These are the glory days.

It's as if Joe Namath is back in fur. These Jets were in the AFC championship last year, but that felt flukish—those playoff wins were a brilliant gift, and that AFC Championship loss to Indianapolis wasn't a soul crusher.

This season is different. The Jets snuck up on nobody. Their head coach, Rex Ryan, said it was Super Bowl or bust. They talked loudly, behaved badly, created dozens of mini-dramas, nearly got bounced by Indy, but then they stunned the New England Patriots. The brash green team the rest of America despises is a win away from the Super Bowl.

Being a beloved underdog is fun, but there's something to be said for doing it when nobody wants you to do it.

Now the Shiraz and smoked Gouda crowd is hopping on the bandwagon, in their Moncler jackets and Sorel boots. The Jets are hotter than the Verizon iPhone, Black Swan, and "The Battle Hymn of the Tiger Mother."

We live in a Brooklyn neighborhood where there is one authentic KLECKO-jersey, stand-outside-and-smoke-Camel-Lights, non-ironic mustache Jets bar. It's surrounded by a zillion hipster restaurants that get tons of drooling press.

Guess what's suddenly the new weekend hot spot in the 'hood? On Sunday, that Jets joint should charge anyone with a carefully-considered haircut a $150 cover.

Up is down and down is up. The Jets are inhaling New York. And if they get past Pittsburgh, it's only going to get loopier.

 Write to  Jason Gay at jason.gay@wsj.com 