BRUSSELS—NATO military planners should have completed an assessment of a no-fly zone in Libya in time for the issue to be considered by alliance defense ministers at a meeting in Brussels on Thursday, according to the U.S. ambassador to NATO, Ivo Daalder.

He told reporters that NATO had decided Monday to start round-the-clock surveillance of Libya using AWACS aircraft. Until now, the aircraft have been operating 10 hours a day tracking air and ground traffic in and around Libya.

A meeting of ambassadors to NATO in Brussels received an assessment Monday from military planners on what the 28-nation alliance might do to help humanitarian operations. The ambassadors will meet again Tuesday and Wednesday to discuss the issue.

In coming days, military assessments should be completed into a no-fly zone and how to enforce an arms embargo, Mr. Daalder said.

He said a no-fly zone would be more useful to deal with fighter aircraft than against helicopters. "It's not going to be the solution to every problem," he said.

"The kind of capabilities that are being used to attack the rebel forces and the population would largely be unaffected by a no-fly zone," he said.

He said there had been a decrease in the regime's air activity over Libya since the beginning of the weekend. "Perhaps talk of a no-fly zone helps to that extent."

He said NATO defense ministers should be in a position to make a decision on a no-fly zone at a previously scheduled meeting on Thursday "if there is a consensus." But he added that governments are watching developments on the ground and that some haven't made up their minds.

Asked about a United Nations Security Council resolution to mandate a no-fly zone, he said: "All of us want a Security Council resolution for that eventuality. That's a pretty clear requirement. ...We would certainly seek one."

He said that at Monday's meeting he encouraged the use of NATO assets to help out in the humanitarian crisis, asking whether NATO's command and control capabilities could help coordinate the exercise, whether ships currently on a NATO exercise in the Mediterranean could be repurposed and whether there is spare airlift capacity to get refugees home. 