Most of us choose our favorite movie stars before we turn 18. They take possession of our imaginations while we're still trying on role models. By the time we're out of high school, we're essentially who we'll be for the rest of our lives, and although new movie stars are created every year, they will never have the same resonance of someone we fixed on earlier.

For many people under the age of 50, Elizabeth Taylor was something of a punch line, known more for her multiple marriages, her perfume line and her friendship with Michael Jackson. But for me and others of my generation, the death of Ms. Taylor took away one of the last movie stars who really affected us in our youth. I have no doubt that Meryl Streep is a better actress, but Ms. Streep is younger, and I've met her, and besides, she's just another human being, you know? She can take consolation in the fact that millions of younger moviegoers grew up on her movies, and for them she will forever be a goddess.

Movies enter our minds more directly when we're young. They're realistic in a different way. There's a difference between empathizing with a character and identifying with a star. When we start going to the movies, stars are leading surrogate lives for us. At the risk of tasking you with my infantile fantasies, I was, for a period of hours, John Wayne or Robert Mitchum or James Stewart. I believed Doris Day was just about the nicest and sunniest person on earth. I was not only in lust with Elizabeth Taylor, Jane Russell and Marilyn Monroe, but in some way I absorbed their appeal and shared with them the knowledge that they were desired. They let me imagine how it felt to be longed for, and that was a knowledge sadly lacking in my real life. 

I met Ms. Taylor only twice. In 1969 I was interviewing Richard Burton in London, and he asked me into his enormous dressing room on the set of "Anne of the Thousand Days." Ms. Taylor was there with the couple's daughter, Maria, Mr. Burton's sister Katherine, her son, and her father-in-law, who as it happened was the undertaker in their village in Wales. Drinking was happening. I sat in a corner and sensed it was not the right time for interview questions. I had been forgotten. What I saw was Ms. Taylor completely relaxed in this family gathering, joking, showing off an enormous new sapphire Mr. Burton had given her, leaning over so he could tease her about flashing her bum, laughing, happy. 

That image of Ms. Taylor fits with what I've heard about her over the years. That she was human, present and had a sense of humor. That she was ready to poke fun at herself, and slow to care about the limitless gossip that appeared about her. That she was a good mother and a loyal friend. When she married Larry Fortensky in 1991 after meeting him at the Betty Ford Clinic, I thought, yes, she's the kind of woman who doesn't give a damn what people think. 

But that's speculation, because I could never get a good angle on her. I could talk for hours with actresses like Sissy Spacek, Isabelle Huppert and Whoopi Goldberg because they were women in my age range. But something chemical had happened in my brain when I saw Elizabeth Taylor while I was in grade school. She was…Elizabeth Taylor, just as everyone I knew in those years said "Marilynmonroe" as if it were one word. 

In the 1980s, Ms. Taylor presided at many of the amfAR benefit auctions held at Cannes to raise money for AIDS research. The events were held at the Moulin de Mougins, a hillside restaurant north of town, and the presence of Ms. Taylor elevated the event, especially for wealthy older men of my generation, who bid absurd sums for baubles, perhaps to impress her. The BBC estimated that she raised more money for AIDS research, an untouchable cause when she began, than she had earned over the course of her lifetime.

In 2000, amfAR held a fashion show with models from Victoria's Secret (don't ask me why). I was seated in the front row, facing the runway, and right next to me was Ms. Taylor. I have no way to explain that. 

"There must be a mistake," I said to someone, looking at my ticket, but there wasn't. As I went to sit down, Ms. Taylor politely asked, "Is that your seat?" and scooted aside a little. She could have said, "Who is this person sitting next to me at my own event?" but she didn't. 

What did we talk about? I was so intensely conscious of who she was that I could think of nothing other than small talk. To my credit, I didn't say, "We met before, in London, in 1969!" 

—Mr. Ebert has been the film critic of the Chicago Sun-Times since 1967. His public-television program, "Ebert Presents At the Movies," airs weekends.