Rep. Jason Chaffetz is no fan of the American military operation in Afghanistan. In fact, he was one of only nine Republicans in the House who voted last year to curtail funding for the Afghan war effort. 

So, as you would expect, the conservative Utah lawmaker is arguing that the killing of Osama bin Laden a week should hasten the departure of American troops from Afghanistan, now that the terror leader who prompted the incursion in the first place is gone. In fact, he co-signed a letter to the White House Monday urging an end to the "formal" Afghan war. 

Yet Mr. Chaffetz isn't so sure the president is prone to this kind of pressure; in fact, he has almost the opposite view. "I think the president has more leeway than he did before," he says. "He's probably gained a little bit of confidence with some people, and he's produced some results with bin Laden."

Amid all the speculation about how the bin Laden demise might affect the future of the U.S. military operation in Afghanistan, that point has been almost lost. Yes, the bin Laden operation is prompting foes of the military operation in Afghanistan, on both the left and the right, to step up their argument that there's little reason for troops to stay. Not only is al Qaeda's leader gone, they argue, but the fact he operated deep inside Pakistan for the past five years shows that the epicenter of terrorism no longer is in Afghanistan anyway.

Yet the underlying political reality is this: Congress, never eager to force a president's hand on a matter of national security, is even more reluctant to do so when that president is seen as succeeding. And for now, at least, the bin Laden operation has given that air of success to President Barack Obama.

Indeed, Mr. Chaffetz says he suspects the number of House Republicans who would vote to cut off funding for the Afghan war has risen only to about two dozen now. That's up from those nine last year, but still leaves Mr. Obama with plenty of Republican votes to help continue funding the military operation in Afghanistan. Mr. Chaffetz actually thinks there may be more support for curtailing American participation in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization military operation against Moammar Gadhafi in Libya.

Thus, in the short run, Mr. Obama actually may have more latitude, not less, in deciding his path forward in Afghanistan. The big question isn't what Congress will force the president to do, but what Mr. Obama himself decides to do. 

Upon ordering a surge in troop strength in Afghanistan last year, Mr. Obama said he wanted to begin a drawdown of those forces this July. Since then, NATO said the goal of the American-led coalition is to turn over security to Afghan forces by 2014. That leaves Mr. Obama a lot of latitude indeed in deciding on the pace and level of American withdrawals from the current 100,000 troops.

As he ponders that decision, the underlying mystery—as it has been for a decade now—is whether the trend line in the struggle to build an Afghan security structure against Islamic extremism is heading up or down. 

During the weekend, for example, Taliban insurgents mounted a big push to regain a foothold in their traditional base in the Afghan city of Kandahar. That can be seen either as a discouraging sign that the Taliban has enough strength and firepower to cause havoc in a city that U.S. and Afghan forces have been working mightily to fortify—or as an encouraging episode because Afghan forces "resisted successfully," as Sen. Richard Lugar, a leading GOP voice on foreign policy, said on CNN Sunday.

As Afghan decision time approaches for Mr. Obama, the vibes suggest that the U.S. military will try to persuade him to order only a token drawdown of troops this summer, to signal that the U.S. isn't bailing out on the Afghan government. Meanwhile, and intriguingly, Mr. Obama said in an interview a few days ago that the drawdown he orders "will be significant."

Yes, there will be political pressure for more than a token withdrawal, from both the left and right, which happen to come together on this subject. Last week, Democratic liberals in the Congressional Progressive Caucus sent the president a letter saying the bin Laden death should produce a "swift" drawdown of American forces so funds being spent in Afghanistan can be redirected to the home front. At about the same time, conservative Republican Rep. Ron Paul of Texas drew loud applause at a Republican presidential candidate debate in South Carolina by calling for a withdrawal from Afghanistan.

Lawmakers doubtless will seek a more firm timetable for an exit. Ultimately, though, the decision is Mr. Obama's—and the bullets that felled bin Laden only made it more his own.

 Write to  Gerald F. Seib at jerry.seib@wsj.com 