Richard Wilbur turns 90 on Tuesday, but it's unlikely that many Americans will stop to pay tribute to our finest living poet. Despite having earned almost every literary award this country has to offer, including a pair of Pulitzers and Bollingens, as well as the title of U.S. Poet Laureate in 1987-88, he has never enjoyed a rapt general following. Neither his highly wrought verse nor his reserved public manner are apt to elicit birthday visits from TV news crews or party invitations to the White House. 

Why Mr. Wilbur is not more nationally beloved or imitated is perplexing. Clive James favors the suppression theory: Mr. Wilbur's virtuosity in meter and rhyme so daunted his contemporaries returning from World War II that he had to be belittled or ignored. "Anyone capable of appreciating his artistry was helpless not to emulate it, and emulation guaranteed mediocrity," according to Mr. James. 

Others have argued the opposite: Mr. Wilbur has not risked enough of himself. He has let his mastery with the brief lyric figure shield him from daring, turbulent subjects. In Randall Jarrell's curt judgment: "Wilbur never goes too far, but he never goes far enough."

It's undeniable that Mr. Wilbur's tight-lipped formality and his traditional menu of topics—nature and art uppermost—were out of touch with the naked emotionalism and the shaggy enjambments of the post-Beat generation. Almost all of his poems are metered, more than half are strictly rhymed, and most are less than a page. The well-rounded concision of his musings sets him apart from the epic strivings of modernists such as Ezra Pound and T.S. Eliot, as well as from the free-associative collages of the New York School. 

Anthologies for the past 50 years have featured a dozen or so of his poems. But for whatever reason, early masterworks such as "The Beautiful Changes," "Love Calls Us to the Things of This World," "A Baroque Wall Fountain in the Villa Sciarra" and "Advice to a Prophet" have not entered the language. Even non-English majors can cite titles, images or stanzas by W.B. Yeats, Robert Frost, Wallace Stevens, William Carlos Williams, Marianne Moore, W.H. Auden and Philip Larkin—and can conjure up a picture of them—while Mr. Wilbur's achievements and the man himself remain blurry. He has never developed an "act," like the different ones that Dylan Thomas and Allen Ginsberg fashioned to entertain the public.

Mr. Wilbur matured in the late 1940s, during the reign of New Criticism, an academic movement that favored poems capable of yielding multiple ambiguities after a rigorous analysis, and he has always written in its approved neoclassical style. The density of his riddling wordplay can seem as if he has an expectation of being studied in a seminar rather than happily consumed. 

But if the young have stayed away from fear of being unable to parse all of his meanings, that is their loss. Their obsessions are also sometimes his. "The Undead" is a chillingly seductive vampire poem—"Even as children they were late sleepers / Preferring their dreams, even when quick with monsters / To the world with all its breakable toys / Its compacts with the dying"—and should be known by every reader of the "Twilight" series. 

They might also learn to appreciate Mr. Wilbur's exceptional wit. The springy elegance of his mind, which serves to clarify the problems of life, not to muddle them with vatic obscurities, has brought him triple glory—as a poet, a translator (no one has captured Molière in English better than he) and a lyricist. Stephen Sondheim, not a critic easy to please, has declared Mr. Wilbur's words for "Candide," done in tandem with Leonard Bernstein's score, "the most scintillating set of songs yet written for the musical theater." 

The verbal portrait of the deluded optimist Dr. Pangloss in the song "The Best of All Possible Worlds" is typical, blending the patter of W.S. Gilbert with the steel of Jonathan Swift: "I think this peace is charming. / It gives the scholar leisure for / His hist'ry of the latest war. / It gives us time for farming / And gradual rearming."

Satire seems a natural mode for Mr. Wilbur, but one he has only sparingly employed. Except in a couple of poems obliquely opposed to the Vietnam War, his verse did not take a stand on the divisive issues of the '60s and '70s; and a rather priggish six-line jibe against casual obscenity in speech ("To a Comedian") suggests he has been wise not to speak out in this forum. 

Mr. Wilbur's equanimity has frustrated some readers who want their poets to suffer for them on the page. Instead of madness, scandal, loneliness or addiction, his long life from all outward appearances has been characterized by a normality that is freakish by the standards of his peers. 

Educated at Amherst and later at Harvard, he served in the U.S. Army during World War II, first as a cryptographer and then in combat, shocking experiences that became the source for the early villanelle "First Snow in Alsace" and the recent "Terza Rima." ("I wrote poems to calm my own nerves," he has said.) He married his college sweetheart, Charlotte Ward, and stayed married for 64 years until her death in 2007. They had four children and lived in New England, where for two decades he was a professor at Wesleyan. Since retirement he has lived in western Massachusetts and Key West, Fla.

His productivity, never high to begin with, has slowed with age. He finishes poems at the rate that Antonio Stradivari constructed a violin. "I often don't write more than a couple of lines in a day of, let's say, six hours of staring at the sheet of paper," he told the Paris Review in 1977. "Composition for me is, externally at least, scarcely distinguishable from catatonia."

He believes over time, though, that the joints in his verse have loosened up even as those in his body have stiffened. Whereas his family once seemed off-limits as a subject, last year's "Anterooms: New Poems and Translations" opened with a tribute to his wife ("The House") that was heartbreaking in its reticence.

"One of the jobs of poetry is to make the unbearable bearable, not by falsehood but by clear, precise confrontation," he has said. Mr. Wilbur has met that challenge by holding himself to the strict, outmoded view that what can't be described well maybe isn't worth writing down.

Few things in American life are built to last. Mr. Wilbur's poems and translations are an implausible anomaly. Wherever English is read, tomorrow and a century of birthdays from now, their example will still be inspiring veneration and dispensing comfort.

 Mr. Woodward is an arts critic in New York. 