Women-led companies are making hefty financial strides, new research shows.

Revenue at such concerns rose significantly in 2010, with much of the growth coming from the burgeoning business-technology field, according to an annual ranking by trade group Women Presidents' Organization. 

On average, private U.S. companies on the list—all of which were either founded by women or have female CEOs—posted annual revenue of $82.7 million, up from $45 million in 2009. Despite the growth, the findings indicate that women-led business may still be having trouble accessing start-up capital. None are venture-funded and less than one-fifth used bank loans or lines of credit to finance operations.

While a number of tech companies pepper the list, this year's No. 1 is BrightStar Franchising LLC of Gurnee, Ill., which supplies home health-care staffing at more than 200 locations in 36 states and Canada. It's grown to nearly $100 million in annual revenue since its 2002 launch. 

Next in line are two providers of workplace-technology systems, Sierra Nevada Corp. of Sparks, Nev., and Rose International Inc., of Chesterfield, Mo., coming in at No. 2 and No. 3, respectively. (Please see photo gallery at bottom of the Top 10, which includes the executives' best tips.)

Women Presidents' Organization, a peer-advisory group for multimillion-dollar women-owned businesses, determined the Top 50 Fastest-Growing Women-Led Companies using a formula that combines percentage revenue growth and absolute growth. To be eligible for the list, companies must be privately owned, women-owned or led, and have generated at least $500,000 in annual revenue in 2006 and $2 million by year-end 2010, among other criteria. About 375 companies applied for inclusion on the list.

This year's revenue growth is "a definite reflection of an improving economy," said WPO's founder and president Marsha Firestone, who originated the ranking four years ago to combat the notion that women-led companies are "itty-bitty" businesses in retail or services industries. The majority of firms on the list are business-to-business companies in traditionally male-dominated fields, such as information technology consulting, general contracting and transportation management.

Six companies in this year's ranking surpassed $200 million in annual revenue, four more than last year's list. No. 2 Sierra Nevada cleared $1.2 billion in yearly sales, far surpassing its nearest contender. The top 50 employ an average of 480 workers, up from about 140 a year ago.

Although women-owned firms have improved in terms of performance, they still trail male-owned firms, according to national statistics. Only 3% of all women-owned firms have revenues of $1 million or more, compared with 6% of men-owned firms, according to the Center for Women's Business Research, a McLean, Va., nonprofit. 

WPO and other women's business groups say female-led companies continue to face barriers when it comes to raising money, particularly in the area of venture capital. Securing "venture capital and equity investors is a networking process, and it's harder for women to get into that network," Ms. Firestone said. Instead, women often find "alternative means" to grow their businesses, such as through bootstrapping or redirecting profits back into the business, she said. 

Shelly Sun, CEO of No. 1 BrightStar, said she hasn't had trouble securing capital, but added that her situation may be unusual because she's a former certified public accountant. "I can speak 'banker' and I'm comfortable with debt," said Ms. Sun, who's taken out a number of loans, including a $1.2 million one for a large technology project, and plans to go public in 2014. "That's a type of communication that doesn't lend itself naturally to women."

 Write to  Colleen DeBaise at colleen.debaise@wsj.com 