The U.S. is recommending that Americans leave Egypt as soon as possible and is offering emergency flights out of the strife-torn country, while other nations urged their nationals to avoid traveling to big cities and set up contingency plans. 

The U.K. government advised against all but essential travel to Cairo, Alexandria, Luxor and Suez and recommended that British citizens leave those cities if it is safe to do so. Germany's foreign ministry has warned against all non-essential travel to urban centers. 

The Greek Foreign Ministry said Sunday that it has formulated contingency plans to evacuate its citizens from Egypt. "We have two military C-130 airplanes on standby to fly to Alexandria and Cairo and evacuate any Greeks that want to leave, but we are waiting for a momentary green light from Egyptian authorities so we are sure it is safe to land," said Sofia Batalogianni, a Foreign Ministry information officer. 

Travel companies are continuing to fly vacationers to the country to popular tourist resorts still unaffected by the protests. Europe's largest travel operators,  TUI Travel PLC and  Thomas Cook Group
TCG


-0.23
%




 PLC, said while they cancelled excursions to the affected

cities from holiday resorts on the Mediterranean and Red Sea, customers in resorts including Sharm el Sheikh and Hurghada can continue their holidays as planned. 

"Our experienced teams on the ground assure us that no tourist areas at the Red Sea have been affected in any way by the recent demonstrations," Thomas Cook said on its website. "They are fully operational and holiday makers are continuing to enjoy these popular resorts." 

TUI Travel also tried to reassure travelers, saying: "Sharm el Sheikh operates like a country in itself. It is run separately from the rest of Egypt, benefits from having just one secure road into the resort, and enjoys an exceptionally low crime rate." 



Swiss, Turkish and Dutch governments issued advisories encouraging nationals already in the country to leave and telling those who planned trips to Egypt to reconsider. A growing number of governments--including China, France, Germany, Belgium, Sweden, Finland, Russia and Poland--warned against travel to most parts, if not all of Egypt.

The U.S. State Department said it plans flights beginning Monday from evacuation points to safehavens in Europe, where travelers will then have to make their own arrangements to get home. 



The only American carrier with direct service to Cairo,  Delta Airlines,
DAL


-1.63
%




 has suspended that service. 



Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain, Kuwait, Qatar and Jordan sent in over 15 flights in total to transport their national out of the country, an official at Cairo International Airport said. Royal Jordanian and Bahrain's Gulf Air switched to larger flights to accommodate more people. Gulf Air's Chief Executive  Samer Majali said the carrier is in touch with officials in both Egypt and Bahrain and is prepared to put additional measures in place if necessary.

