Anti-Americanism among the British has a lineage that crosses party lines and social rank. The French are usually regarded as our most contemptuous ally, a distortion prevalent since 2003, when they sat out the Iraq invasion and U.S. congressmen deemed it patriotic to rename a McDonald's staple "Freedom Fries." French disdain is comparatively recent, however, and evenly directed at all other countries. The British have felt superior to us over a longer span of time and, as one's closest friends can be one's harshest critics, have not been shy about naming our faults.

In 1832, only a year after Tocqueville published the first volume of "Democracy in America," Mrs. Frances Trollope was acclaimed in England for her less optimistic views of the experiment in self-government. "Domestic Manners of the Americans," a record of her travels around the U.S. in 1827-28 (future novelist Anthony in tow), abounds in insulting, and no doubt accurate, observations about local customs. A typical zinger: "I hardly know any annoyance so deeply repugnant to English feelings, as the incessant, remorseless spitting of Americans."

Charles Dickens shared her disappointment and ridicule after he toured the U.S. in 1842. Not only were the natives uncouth—tobacco chewing revolted him, too—but their defiance of copyright law also meant that he earned no royalties on the hundreds of Dickens novels bootlegged at his sold-out readings. Both writers detested slavery and found it grossly hypocritical that a rebellious colony dedicated to liberty had not yet abolished the practice. 

Fictional Americans have not fared much better. The Tory wing of English novelists (Evelyn Waugh, Kingsley Amis) has tended to portray characters born on this side of the Atlantic as bumptious and grasping, as Dickens did in "Martin Chuzzlewit"; the political left (Graham Greene, John le Carré) has often made Americans either dangerously idealistic or dangerously cynical. Greene's "The Quiet American" is handily quoted by British pundits whenever U.S. troops intervene in a foreign land. 

Worries about America's growing industrial and military strength over the course of the 20th century united Britons of all castes. Almost as painful to them as the gradual loss of empire after World War II was the awareness that the U.S. was becoming the main (and perhaps sole) alternative to their former authority. The zeal for communism among well-born British intellectuals, from the Cambridge spies in the 1930s to young Trotskyites such as Christopher Hitchens in the 1960s, was driven in no small part by a wish to thwart America's sway over the Britons' own land as well as the globe. 

Patrick Wright's "Passport to Peking" (Oxford University Press, 591 pages, $34.95), an acerbic and fair-minded study, examines an obscure historical episode from 1954, when left-wing sympathizers from the Labour Party set off to visit Mao's China, a trip that would likely never have taken place if not for what Mr. Wright calls the "affronted patriotism" of the British in the face of American power. The motley array of travelers included Clement Attlee, the former prime minister; Aneurin Bevan, his health minister; artists Stanley Spencer and Paul Hogarth; classicist Rex Warner; philosopher A.J. Ayer; and planeloads of trade unionists and members of Parliament.

All were motivated by a belief that friendship with leaders of the new communist state might help to secure a place for Britain between the Soviet Union and the U.S., the Cold War's two superpowers. In a chapter titled "The Charms of Anti-Americanism," Mr. Wright writes that, "despite being abjectly dependent on American loans and aid through the Marshall Plan," the members of the British left believed strongly that their country "should under no circumstances be reduced to behaving like a bloc-minded stooge of its American paymasters." Disapproval of the trip by Churchill's Conservative government had only stiffened the group's resolve to go.

The result, in Mr. Wright's artful telling, is social comedy with a rueful edge. Most of the British pilgrims were blissfully ignorant of China—of its geography and traditions—and so interpreted the unfamiliar through their own history. The word "Victorian" pops up repeatedly in the travelers' journal entries when they refer to China's quaint decor and customs. Class rifts soon opened up among the pilgrims, notably between Spencer, a religious painter who spoke like a plumber, and the cultivated Ayer, an Etonian celebrated for his philosophy of logical positivism. Habits from home were hard to break. Spencer disliked the Chinese delicacies that were served and asked for fish and chips. Wherever the group landed, the first question from the alcoholic Warner as he disembarked was: "Where's the bar?" 

The Chinese had learned from the Soviets how to walk visitors down the sunny side of a street, making a point of showing off their country's supposed achievements. Even so, the British were not simply "useful idiots," in Mr. Wright's view. Many went home disheartened. The rhetoric of the "new China" seemed as divisive and rigid as Stalin's had been. One delegation of the British refused to toast Mao unless their host, Premier Chou En-lai, toasted the British queen.

Attlee's hopes of finding a middle path between the Soviets and the U.S. were less than successful. Pravda, with typically perplexing logic, attacked this traveler to China as somehow trying "to curry American favor," while George Meaney, the president of the American Federation of Labor, denounced such junkets as "wining and dining with Communist murderers." 

The leftists' flirting with China in the 1950s reflected a more widespread longing among the British to assert a certain independence from their America allies. The challenge of how to keep one's friends at arm's length has been a nagging dilemma for Britain since World War II. Harold Macmillan, serving as a liaison between Churchill and Roosevelt in North Africa, argued in a well-known 1943 dispatch for an approach as cunning as it was pragmatic. "You will find the Americans much as the Greeks found the Romans," wrote the future prime minister. "Great big vulgar, bustling people, more vigorous than we are and also more idle, with more unspoiled virtues but also more corrupt." Britain, he believed, would have to be resigned to a secondary role in the partnership. At the same time the British would need to "guide" the U.S., "both for their own advantage and ours for the future of the world."

It may be said that Macmillan's realism has not entirely suited either "vulgar" Americans, who bridle at being condescended to, or English critics of the "special relationship," some of whom have pointed out that Athens was eventually colonized by Rome.

The timing of Mr. Wright's book cannot be accidental. Parallels with today are hard to overlook. As some on the British left in the 1950s resented the Truman-Acheson- Eisenhower-Dulles-led crusade against communism, so has a sector of the British public in the past decade hoped to opt out of the Bush-Cheney-Rumsfeld-led global "war on terror." 

Anti-Americanism has not lessened with the Obama presidency or the Cameron prime-ministership. The decision to continue standing by the U.S. in Afghanistan and Iraq has soured a vocal British minority against both of their political parties and deepened the impression that the White House, not Downing Street, calls the shots. Paranoid conspiracies about the CIA are again popular with British writers, as seen in recent films such as "In the Loop" and "The Ghost Writer." Wealthy Americans and Russians now own all or parts of the English soccer clubs Manchester United, Liverpool, Arsenal and Chelsea, a development that has alarmed some loyalists who feel caught in a replay of the Cold War.

British resentment at American dominance and distrust of our motives isn't likely to go away, especially on the left. Only if, as some have predicted, the 21st century turns out to belong to China—alas, too late for Attlee & Co.—will the special relationship regain its luster, as Americans hunker down with the British and join in feeling dominated together.

—Mr. Woodward writes frequently about the arts for the Journal and other publications. 