Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney on Thursday will address his most glaring political liability—his work as governor to establish universal health-care coverage in Massachusetts—in a speech aides say will attempt to shift attention to how he would replace President Barack Obama's health-care law.

The speech in Ann Arbor, Mich., marks the emergence of one of the GOP's leading candidates after months of avoiding the spotlight while he raised money and built his campaign. Mr. Romney will soon visit the early-primary state of South Carolina for the first time this year, will make his first trip since 2010 to Iowa on May 27, and in June will join other Republican White House hopefuls in his first debate of the 2012 election cycle in New Hampshire.

"It's a new phase," said Jim Talent, a former Missouri senator and close Romney friend.

But first, aides say, Mr. Romney believes he must get ahead of attacks from GOP rivals who will link his Massachusetts health-care law to the federal version, which Mr. Obama has said was modeled on Mr. Romney's. 

Mr. Romney's dilemma is acute. Supporters said Wednesday that he can't honestly disavow legislation he helped design and personally shepherded to passage. At the same time, he must explain why he didn't embrace at the outset the approach that he will lay out Thursday.

Read about the potential Republican presidential contenders.

In trying to finesse the issue, Mr. Romney plans to take up his party's pledge to "repeal and replace" the federal health-care law and flesh out what a replacement would look like—something GOP leaders in Congress have shied from.

Aides and advisers say Mr. Romney will outline a five-point plan with the following components. He would offer state governments block grants for the federal share of Medicaid and children's' health programs, allowing states to tailor their own programs. He would offer individuals a choice between the current tax credits that help pay for employer-provided health insurance or a new tax credit to help purchase their own plan.

Mr. Romney would narrow—but not abandon—provisions of the national law that ban insurers from denying coverage for pre-existing conditions. People would be allowed to purchase insurance across state lines, and small businesses would be allowed to form insurance-purchasing pools.

And he would call for caps on medical-malpractice awards and for expanding tax-advantaged health-savings accounts.

"What he's saying is, 'I've clearly had some experience wrestling with this problem, and here's what I learned: Government's role is to organize an efficient market, not run the system,' " said Romney adviser Mike Leavitt, a former Utah governor who was Health and Human Services secretary under President George W. Bush.

Mr. Romney won't apologize for the Massachusetts plan, which conservatives have criticized for mandating individuals to purchase health care, just as Mr. Obama's law does, aides and adviser say. That element has drawn the harshest fire from the law's opponents and is the primary target of its numerous legal challenges. Mr. Romney contends the Massachusetts plan was right for its residents, but that other states need flexibilty to design their own approaches.

"We shouldn't lament our 98% coverage rate," said Romney ally Bradley Jones, the Massachusetts House GOP leader, who helped pass Mr. Romney's plan.

Mr. Romney's proposal of a new approach to health care without repudiating his old one may not quiet critics on the right, or stifle liberals who praise his former position. Iowa state Sen. Kent Sorenson, an influential conservative in the first caucus state, faulted Mr. Romney for not repudiating the Massachusetts plan. 

"Socialized health care is socialized health care, whether it's done at the state level or the federal level," said Mr. Sorenson, who wants Rep. Michele Bachmann (R., Minn.) to join the presidential contest.

Hollis "Chip" Felkel, a South Carolina political consultant, said Mr. Romney is in a jam. "You can't really apologize for it, and if you try to explain it, the comparisons to ObamaCare keep coming," said Mr. Felkel, who isn't backing any candidate after aligning with Mississippi Gov. Haley Barbour, who chose not to run. "It may be his albatross."

But Mr. Romney hopes to muscle past the issue by addressing it early, then relying on the strength of his political organization. 

His financial backers say that for now, no other potential rival can compete with the war chest Mr. Romney is amassing.

At a recent stop at the Harvard Club in New York City, for example, hedge-fund titan John Paulson introduced him to a crowd of about 125 that included former Goldman Sachs Group Chairman John Whitehead and a number of prominent hedge-fund and private-equity managers.

Romney backers raised more than $1 million in Manhattan Tuesday. Thursday's speech is in Ann Arbor because he has a fund-raising event in the Detroit area, an aide said.

On Monday, about 1,000 Romney supporters are scheduled to gather to dial for dollars at the Las Vegas Convention Center.

 Write to  Jonathan Weisman at jonathan.weisman@wsj.com 