Frustrated by soaring prices in their home markets, an influx of young foreign investors is heading to Eastern Europe in search of real estate bargains. But it is not homes they are hunting, but ski chalets. As prices in Western Europe's Alpine regions reach exorbitant levels, savvy investors have woken up to the opportunities in the fast developing ski resorts of the East. 

Read the full Real Estate report.

The British in particular have gravitated towards countries that recently joined the European Union such as Slovakia, the Czech Republic and Bulgaria. For years, mountain facilities in the East could not match the mainstream Alpine resorts in France, Austria, Switzerland and Italy, but local governments have worked hard during the downturn to pull in tourists. The primary resorts in Eastern Europe have poured money into creating ski pistes and lift systems and the last five years has brought about a transformation.

Until now, possibly the most overlooked ski region in Europe has been Slovakia. Although the country's move to the euro means it's not quite the bargain basement of ski resorts it once was, it's not that far off, and its inclusion in the eurozone has opened the door to foreign investment in its primary tourist areas.

Slovakia's ski area is divided between the HighTatras Mountains that form the border with Poland, and the Low Tatras, a 40-minute drive to the south-west. It is in the lower regions, amid the densely forested national park, that the country's biggest resort, Jasna-Chopok, can be found. Paul Wilson was one of the first foreigners to spot the area's potential as an international destination. He set up Propaganda Snowboards in the resort six years ago when he was just 22 years old. Mr. Wilson teamed up with a local travel agent who was keen to tap the U.K. market, who in turn helped him track down and buy a suitable property. It has been a wise investment. Mr. Wilson paid £95,000 for his nine bedroom chalet five years ago. It is now valued at £300,000.

Skiing in the East is different to the more traditional Alpine European ski resorts. For one thing, the weather has a distinctly Siberian edge to it. But while this may bring on an impromptu shiver it also brings more snow. The season is also different: Bitterly cold in December and January followed by more powder snow and sunshine in February and March. "We found when we first started the business we weren't selling a chalet holiday we were selling the entire resort," Mr. Wilson says. "There was nothing on the internet –and we needed to persuade people to come to a new destination." He was able to expand his business by appealing directly to the U.K. snowboarder market. A group often neglected by package tour operators. He targeted magazines and websites with big snowboarder followings and designed tour packages that offered in-house snowboard guides and took guests on personalized tours of the mountain at no extra expense. 

"Part of the attraction of the area [for snowboarders] are the free-ride zones available alongside the piste which would normally take one or two hours to hike to in most European resorts," Mr. Wilson says. Such areas are growing in popularity and have proven a big draw for sponsors of major snow sports events. "The recession did hit our business to some extent, but we found there were still plenty of people looking for a ski holiday. They wanted something that was better value for money. And this year it's been incredible – we're fully booked for the whole season."

Mr. Wilson says that one key to his investment's success has been minimal property development in the ski area due to its location inside a national park. "The building restrictions have stopped the resort becoming a concrete jungle – it's still like Narnia up there most days," he says. 

Unfortunately such protection is not widespread across the other ski resorts of Eastern Europe. Take the medieval town of Bansko in Bulgaria. The nation's biggest ski resort, many believe it has been developed too fast and without any form of considered urban planning. The result has been extreme volatility in house prices. A glut of new apartment blocks built across the resort in recent years has led to some flats losing as much as 60% of their value over the last five years, according to local developers. 

Securing a property purchase in any part of Eastern Europe is not without its pitfalls. Although there are few limits on foreigners purchasing land in Bulgaria, it seems to be a much more challenging prospect for foreign buyers than Slovakia and the Czech Republic. 

Laura Miller and Jay Etherington own two chalets in Bankso. Mr. Etherington, who paid £150,000 for his first chalet, says: "The buying process was not easy, and at times very stressful, but it was possible with the help of interpreters - they're crucial to ensure all the documents you're reading have been accurately translated from Bulgarian to English and vice versa." 

Further west, it's a different story. Hills and mountains still cover about 95% of Slovakia's neighbor, the Czech Republic, and its ski areas are enclosed in national parks. Its carefully protected forests and beautiful lakes drew Robert and Sonia Lees from Bolton, North West England, to the area. The Lees, both in their early thirties, recently bought a three bedroom apartment for £50,000 euros with a view to making it a family holiday home. 

Mr. Lees expects to see a growing number of tourists from the U.K. and Ireland travelling beyond Prague to find out what else the Czech Republic has to offer. 

"For Brits it really is a much cheaper holiday here in terms of food, transport, hire of sports equipment and lift passes during the ski season, compared to the rest of Europe," he says. He adds there is a great deal that will appeal to families with young children. 

"There are crèche facilities and it's a really good place to learn to ski as there's a wide variety of beginner slopes as well as intermediate runs."

Another attraction for Mr. Lees was the range of activities available in the summer months. "The Germans and Dutch have already cottoned-on to the Czech Republic as a great year-round mountain location," he says. "We originally decided to consider buying during the summer months, as there's just so much to do. You've got walking, climbing, mountain biking and everything is well-linked. There's a good public transport system."

Despite the excellent facilities, good value and pristine pistes, any investor in the ski resorts of Eastern Europe needs to consider ease of access. Not all airlines operate regular services from Western Europe to the former Eastern Bloc and even when they do, it can take many hours driving before the ski areas can be reached. 

In this regard resorts in the Czech Republic have the edge on Slovakia. Prague is only an hour and half's drive away from the mountains with good links not just to London airports but also to a number of regional hubs such as Manchester. Meanwhile in Slovakia, the carrier operating the route from London to Poprad - just 40 kilometers from the main resort in Jasna - recently closed the route, so now the nearest airport transfer is Bratislava which is at least two hours away.



 Angela Henshall is editor of special reports at Financial News in London. She can be reached at angela.henshall@dowjones.com. 