In the winter of 1962, folk-music great Pete Seeger took Bob Dylan and Phil Ochs to see the editors of Broadside, a mimeographed newspaper that became the paper of record for the Greenwich Village folk scene. As he listened to the two men play their songs, Mr. Seeger thought that they were the future superstars of folk music. He was half right. 

Mr. Dylan, of course, became one of the great musicians in American history. Mr. Ochs, however, led a checkered life. A cornerstone of the Village folk scene, he wrote songs like "Here's to the State of Mississippi," "The Power and the Glory" and "I Ain't Marching Anymore," which rank among the most enduring protest songs of the 1960s. But his career—and life—were cut short just 14 years after that visit to Broadside when he committed suicide at age 35.

Mr. Ochs is the subject of a new documentary, "Phil Ochs: There But for Fortune," which opens Wednesday at the IFC Center. Effective and compelling, the film chronicles the highs and lows of the musician's life. 

"He was like Tom Paine with a guitar," said the film's director, Kenneth Bowser, in his West Village office. "Phil had a real love for the idea of America, that anyone could come from anywhere and achieve something that they aimed for."

Mr. Ochs was born in El Paso, Texas, but his family moved frequently; their stop in Far Rockaway, Queens, lasted several years. He went to military school in Virginia and played clarinet while idolizing the music of Elvis Presley and the films of John Wayne. His interest in left-wing politics and folk music began when he was a student at Ohio State University. Graced with a fragile but warm tenor, a knack for wordplay, biting wit and a charismatic stage presence, Mr. Ochs soon dropped out to move to Manhattan and join its burgeoning folk scene. 

He made an immediate impact in the city with topical songs about the civil-rights movement and the Vietnam War. "He really wore his heart on his sleeve," said Mr. Bowser. "But he had an acid wit, and everyone was his target."

Mr. Ochs saved some of his most venomous attacks for his presumed allies on the left. His enduring "Love Me, I'm a Liberal" assaulted the pieties and comforts of many of that persuasion. In 1994, Mojo Nixon and ex-Dead Kennedys frontman Jello Biafra recorded a cover version of the song, with lyrics updated to address the Clinton era, and Mr. Biafra appears in "There But for Fortune" to comment on the prescience of Mr. Ochs's words.

Mr. Ochs also ran afoul of folk-scene group-think by publicly supporting the troops in Vietnam, separating his attacks on the policy makers from his sympathy for the mostly working-class soldiers. Although Mr. Ochs championed Mr. Dylan when he electrified his sound, he did not get on the folk-rock bandwagon himself. Instead, Mr. Ochs opted for a more ambitious and grandiose sound. "The Pleasures of the Harbor" (A&M), his 1967 release featuring lush string arrangements and longer songs with more oblique lyrics, was his best-selling recording, but he never shook the folk-singer-with-protest-songs image.

After the war ended and tastes in music changed, Mr. Ochs, who had suffered vocal-cord damage while traveling in Africa in 1973, was plagued by severe bouts of depression and alcoholism. On April 9, 1976, he hanged himself.

Mr. Bowser, age 59, who has directed documentaries on the lives and work of the great filmmakers Preston Sturges, Frank Capra and John Ford, took to Mr. Ochs's music as a child on the Lower East Side and in Washington Heights in the 1960s. "I admired his complexity," Mr. Bowser said. 

The project started seven years ago as a labor of love. Mr. Bowser worked with Michael Ochs, Phil's brother, who is a leading archivist of music photography. The two men put up their own money, and Michael Cohl, the former chairman of the concert presenter Live Nation, provided the rest. Phil Ochs had played at Mr. Cohl's first club, and Mr. Cohl has remained a fan.

For Michael Ochs, the location of the film's New York premiere marks a homecoming of sorts. "Phil lived at 178 Bleecker St. and 156 Prince St., and he loved movies," he said by phone from Los Angeles last week. "He was at the IFC when it was the Waverly Theater all the time."

—Mr. Johnson writes about music for the Journal.