 Cargill said it plans to give up its majority stake in fertilizer company Mosaic in a transaction worth about $24.3 billion, which could make Mosaic, a leading seller of potash, more attractive for a takeover. 

 One of the three Renault managers accused of selling company secrets sued the auto maker for defamation, raising the stakes in a mysterious case involving electric vehicles. 

 Boeing said it will deliver its first 787 Dreamliner in the third quarter after an electrical fire and power failure in November forced a month-long suspension of flight testing. The first delivery, to All Nippon Airways, had been expected in February.  

 Airbus raised the average price of its aircraft to offset rising costs of its industrial investments and the weak dollar, according to a senior executive at the European commercial-aircraft builder.  

 Europe's Galileo satellite-navigation system project, which aims to compete with the U.S. Global Positioning System, will need another €1.9 billion ($2.5 billion) between 2014 and 2020 to be fully operational, the European Union's industry chief said.  

Separately, a German company involved in the building of the Galileo says it removed its chief executive after he was quoted in a cable obtained by WikiLeaks as describing the project to a U.S. official as "a stupid idea."

Aircraft lessor Avolon said it raised $650 million, taking its total to $2 billion in under 12 months, but there is concern the recent wave of start-ups in the aircraft-leasing market could create a bubble. 

Delta Air Lines reported its first fourth-quarter profit in a decade on improved revenue from ticket sales and other products and services, such as its frequent-flier program. Delta said it made $19 million, compared with a prior-year loss of $25 million. 

Air passenger traffic in India grew 19% to 52 million passengers in 2010 as higher incomes and the introduction of new flights encouraged more people to take to the skies. 

U.S. bank J.P. Morgan Chase wrongly foreclosed on 14 active-service military families and overcharged thousands more on their mortgages, an ongoing internal bank review has found.

Barclays was hit with a £7.7 million ($12.2 million) fine and will have to pay as much as £60 million to customers who were missold two stock-and-bond funds. 

Santander U.K. plans to make commitments to the British government on how much money it will lend to small businesses this year, Chief Executive Officer Ana Botin told U.K. lawmakers, amid a broader industry and government effort to boost lending.

The U.K.'s other major banks—Barclays, HSBC Holdings, Royal Bank of Scotland Group and Lloyds Banking Group—are also in talks with the government about lending commitments. These commitments, including Santander UK's, are seen totaling as much as £200 billion ($317.7 billion). 

 Citigroup swung to a fourth-quarter profit of $1.31 billion from a year-earlier loss of $7.58 billion as revenue more than doubled and it set aside sharply less to cover potential losses.  

Comerica plans to acquire Texas's Sterling Bancshares for $1.03 billion in stock while also reporting a swing to a bigger-than-expected fourth-quarter profit and setting aside less to cover loan losses. 

Comerica posted a profit of $96 million compared with a prior-year loss of $29 million. Revenue edged up 1.6% to $620 million. 

Hutchison Whampoa aims to raise up to $6 billion by listing its southern China ports assets in Singapore, a person familiar with the situation said, in what could be Asia's biggest public offering this year. 

Aerospace, defense and energy company Meggitt announced it had agreed to buy Pacific Scientific Aerospace, a leading supplier of components to the global civil aerospace and military markets, from U.S.company Danaher for $685 million. 

SABMiller posted a 3% rise in third-quarter lager volumes, boosted by its emerging-markets operations in Africa and Asia. 

 The International Energy Agency, which represents major energy consuming countries, said oil demand is growing faster than expected and the world will need more crude from the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, or risk high prices that damage the economic recovery.  

Qatar has begun talks on supplying natural gas to China Petroleum & Chemical Corp., in the latest move by the resource-rich Arab emirate to build exposure to fast-growing Asian demand for cleaner fuels. 

Royal Dutch Shell shut four of its platforms in the North Sea on Saturday after a fender fell off the Brent Bravo platform.

Petrofac said it has been awarded a $1.2 billion lump-sum engineering, procurement and construction contract by In Salah Gas—a dry gas project in Algeria between Sonatrach, BP and Statoil—to develop southern fields in the development.

Burberry reported third-quarter sales rose 27% from a year earlier to £470 million ($746.6 million), led by growing retail sales in China and at new stores.

GMAC Mortgage, a unit of Ally Financial, told a Maryland court on Friday that it would dismiss around 250 pending foreclosures in the state to avoid a potentially lengthy class-action lawsuit.

AIG. and the U.S. Treasury picked four Wall Street banks to jointly lead their first large offering of AIG shares in the coming months, according to people familiar with the matter. 

Royal Bank of Scotland Group said it is selling care homes operator Priory Group to private equity firm Advent International for an enterprise value of up to £925 million ($1.47 billion). The bank said that, after the settlement of outstanding debt, it expects to get up to £133 million in cash from the sale. 

Singapore Exchange reported a 14% rise in fiscal second-quarter net profit to 81.7 million Singaporean dollars (US$63.5 million).

German publisher Axel Springer raised its bid for French property website SeLoger.com by 12%, valuing the company at €634 million ($842 million), after its initial offer was rejected as too low. 

 Johnson & Johnson won't give eligible employees their full bonuses for 2010, citing hits to the company's reputation and the "mixed performance" for the year. 

 Apple's profit for the quarter ended Dec. 25 surged 78% to $6 billion as the company posted record iPhone and Macintosh computer sales, as well as strong sales of its iPad tablet.  

 IBM reported a increase in profit of 9.4% to $5.26 billion, indicating that companies are again spending on technology.  

 Facebook says it disabled a feature to let users share their address and phone number with external websites and applications after criticism from security experts. 

 Two men were arrested by U.S. authorities for an alleged security breach of AT&T's servers that may have exposed personal information and email addresses of about 120,000 users of Apple's iPad.  