"The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn" is a favorite target for book-banners, Publisher's Weekly notes: "For decades, it has been disappearing from grade school curricula across the country, relegated to optional reading lists, or banned outright, appearing again and again on lists of the nation's most challenged books, and all for its repeated use of a single, singularly offensive word: 'nigger.' "

"In the new classroom, it's really not acceptable," explains Alan Gribben, a Twain scholar and professor of English at Alabama's Auburn University at Montgomery. Taking on censorship through appeasement, he has produced a new, bowdlerized version of "Huck Finn" that "does away with the 'n' word (as well as the 'in' word, 'Injun') by replacing it with the word 'slave.' "

The obvious objection to Gribben's plan is what PW calls "academic tradition, in which allegiance to the author's intent is sacrosanct." But Gribben was persuaded to "turn his back" on this principle because of "his involvement with the National Endowment for the Arts' Big Read Alabama."

So government funding of the arts has produced the literary equivalent of those Hollywood movies sanitized for television or in-flight viewing, such as the version of "Snakes on a Plane" (not an in-flight favorite, to be sure) in which Samuel L. Jackson exclaims: "Enough is enough! I have had it with these monkey-fighting snakes on this Monday-to-Friday plane!"

But there are less obvious objections as well. For one, even before emancipation, not every black person was a slave--and not every black person in "Huckleberry Finn" was either. Consider this passage, from Chapter 6, in which Huck is quoting his father's drunken rant:

Applied to this passage, Gribben's political correction would yield "a free slave," a contradiction in terms. There's no indication that the gentleman being described was a freed slave--that is, a former slave--either. We suppose in this context it would make literal sense to have Pap rant about "a free African-American there from Ohio," but this doesn't really capture the spirit of the passage, does it? 

Another problem, as Abe Greenwald notes, is that the word "slave" isn't politically correct either. Greenwald once worked in educational publishing, and he recalls an assignment in which he helped edit a third-grade history textbook for a Southern school district: "A directive came from on high: the chapters on slavery, the Civil War, and the Reconstruction had to be reworked. There was, we were told, excessive use of a forbidden word. Dare to guess? Slave. The term, you see, was dehumanizing and had to be replaced with 'enslaved person.' "

The reason the word "slave" is dehumanizing, of course, is that slavery was dehumanizing. That is the didactic message of "Huck Finn" as well. To soften this message is to promote ignorance, not knowledge.

To illustrate the point, consider this howler from a New York Times editorial yesterday denouncing Republicans for reading the Constitution on the House floor: "Certainly the Republican leadership is not trying to suggest that African-Americans still be counted as three-fifths of a person."

African-Americans were never counted as three-fifths of a person. Slaves were. The fellow from Ohio whose right to vote Pap disparaged would also have been counted fully in the decennial census. The three-fifths provision has been a nullity since 1865, when the 13th Amendment was ratified. But the Times either is using "African-Americans" as a euphemism for "slaves" or is simply ignorant about what the Constitution says.

More likely the latter, for the Times editors seem to believe that counting slaves as fractional persons was meant as an insult. In fact, delegates from slave states sought to maximize their representation in Congress by counting slaves as full persons. Delegates from free states didn't want slaves to count at all. "The three-fifths compromise meant that the ill-gotten gains of slavery were no longer solely financial but that slaveholders were to receive political gains as well," observes Seth Lipsky in "The Citizens Constitution."

The original Constitution, it should be noted, does not use the word "slave." Nor does it use any racial designation. Here is the actual language of the three-fifths clause, which appears in Article I, Section 2:

Not slaves--"other Persons." In drafting this passage, the Founding Fathers were acting as the Alan Gribbens of their day, using euphemism to make a morally objectionable institution seem more palatable. If Gribben really wants to make Twain "acceptable," maybe he should go all the way: " 'There was a free other Person there from Ohio . . .' "

 Two Veterans in One! 

  Who's Your Daddy?   Rep. Steny Hoyer of Maryland has put his foot in his mouth again. Investor's Business Daily quotes the new minority whip:

Hoyer's office put out a statement of clarification:

Obviously! So why did Hoyer's office need to put out a statement of clarification? It does sound to us as though Hoyer didn't mean for this to be as insulting as it came out. He wanted to call Tea Party types stubborn and ended up suggesting that they were failures in their intimate lives. 

It's an odd comment, though, and not only because likening the government to a family is creepy. If you take Hoyer's clarification at face value, the implication is either that Tea Party types should be forgiving of compromising Republicans or that non-Tea Party types should be forgiving of uncompromising ones because their constituents are so bullheaded.

  One Newspaper the Zionists Don't Control   Have you heard of the Falls Church News-Press? Neither have we, but it is the new home of American journalism's crazy old aunt in the attic, who, the FCNP reports, "has come out of a seven-month retirement to resume her weekly political affairs column":

Benton spent eight hours alone with Helen Thomas? That's almost enough to make us feel sorry for the guy, although our sympathy is tempered by his failure to spot the dangling modifier in the preceding passage.

Here's how the FCNP describes the circumstances of Thomas's departure from her last job:

The description of the ship's mission as "humanitarian" and people on board as "civilians" is highly tendentious, but the assertion that Thomas made the comments in question on June 5, "in the wake of" the incident is simply inaccurate. As we noted at the time, Thomas made her ugly statements on May 27, before the incident with the Gaza-bound ship.

The story continues:

The FCNP doesn't tell its readers what Thomas said, which is that Israelis should "go home" to "Poland, Germany . . . and America, and everywhere else." Nor does it make any mention of her more recent statement, made to an Arab-American organization just last month: "Congress, the White House, and Hollywood, Wall Street, are owned by the Zionists."

We'd love to hear Nick Benton's translation of that one.

  Global Warmist Crab Antics   "Thousands of dead crabs have washed up along the Kent coast, with environmental experts believing the cold weather in Britain is to blame," London's Daily Mail reports. That can only mean one thing: global warming! Seriously, that is what these guys are claiming:

So this isn't the same ridiculous claim we've been hearing lately, that global warming causes cold weather. Rather, the problem here seems to be that the crabs made the mistake of believing in global warming.

  Homer Nods   Five congressmen received a single vote each in the election of the speaker of the House, not six as we wrote in an item yesterday (since corrected).

Also, yesterday we received an email from Mitch Stewart of Organizing for America, informing us that "the Affordable Care Act"--ObamaCare--"did not pass because of a partisan or ideological agenda." We regret the error.

 Out on a Limb 

  We Blame Global Warming   "For Apartments, a Hot Winter"--headline, The Wall Street Journal, Jan. 6

  With DNC in Mind, City Bans Carrying Urine, Feces   "Gibbs Plans a White House Toilet Paper Roll if Auburn Wins"--headline, USA Today website, Jan. 6

  It May Be Wider Than You Thought   "Palin's Retweet of Gay Radio Host's DADT Comment Sparks Speculation Over Stance"--headline, Washington Post, Jan. 5

  'You Remember--It Was the Big Building and Everyone Was Shouting'   "Premier Must Recall Parliament"--headline, BigPond.com (Australia), Jan. 5

  The Lonely Lives of Scientists   "Help Scientists Probe Yorkshire Quake by Telling Them if the Earth Moved for You"--headline, East Riding (England) Mail, Jan. 5

  The Lonely Life of Ann Woolner   "Hedge Funds' Insider Tips Are Like Paying for Sex: Ann Woolner"--headline, Bloomberg, Jan. 4

  Generalissimo Francisco Franco Is Still Dead   " 'Pinkerton's Law of Political Regression' Remains in Force"--headline, National Review Online, Jan. 5

  Himmler Had Something Similar   "No-Ball Umpire Riles the Aussies"--headline, London Evening Standard, Jan. 4

 Hey, Kids! What Time Is It? 

 Questions Nobody Is Asking 

 Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  Dogs Found in Bug Food--Now That Would Be News   "Beaverton Pet Owners Warn of Bugs Found in Dog Food"--headline, Northwest Cable News website (Seattle), Jan. 5

  Chicago Man to Be Barack Obama's New Chief of Staff--Now That Would Be News   "Chicago Woman to Be Michelle Obama's New Chief of Staff"--headline, Chicago Sun-Times, Jan. 5

 Look Out Below! 

  Too Much Information   "Obama White House Sheds Some of Its Hard Men and Nancy Pelosi Makes an Ungracious Exit"--headline, Daily Telegraph website (London), Jan. 5

  News of the Oxymoronic   "Random Pellet Shots Target Lake County Cars, Buses"--headline, WTHR-TV website (Indianapolis), Jan. 6

  Breaking News From 1859, 1881, 1889, 1895, 1917, 1947, 1953, 1995   "Republicans Take Control of US House of Representatives"--headline, BBC website, Jan. 5

  Breaking News From 1978   "Israeli, Egyptian Leaders to Discuss Peacemaking"--headline, Associated Press, Jan. 6

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  Bobos in the Press Room   Who will replace Robert Gibbs, leaving his post as White House press secretary? Politico rounds up the usual suspects--and an unusual one:

That would be awfully entertaining. But you know who would be even more entertaining as press secretary? Thomas Friedman. Imagine the scene:

Another possible candidate is former Enron adviser Paul Krugman. He would have the advantage of making Obama look less angry, if only by comparison.

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Tom Elia, Paul Gross, Edward Tannen, John Bobek, Daniel Mullen, Hillel Markowitz, Marc Young, Michele Schiesser, Ed Lasky, Glenn Merritt, Mark Kellner, Zack Russ, Stan Baran, Roy Cullinan, Phil Klein, Charlie Gaylord, Dave Ceely, John Sanders, James Benenson, Evan Slatis, Ethel Fenig, Bruce Goldman, Steve Prestegard, Joel McLemore, Brian Azman, John Nernoff, David Wesolowicz and Ray Burnham. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)