We know that relationships work, for the most part, because couples pay attention to the big issues: the ability to compromise, similar philosophies about finances and child-rearing, respect for each other's interests. But relationships flourish and deepen when attention is paid to small things as well—simple acts and shared memories.

Read the complete  Next: Planning & Living the New Retirement report .

I have seen how these small things can connect two people in even the most challenging times. One particular example comes to mind.

My father-in-law was a general in the Marine Corps and the recipient of a Purple Heart and Silver Star. His leg was nearly severed when he was hit by a piece of shrapnel during the Battle of Saipan in World War II. A prisoner-of-war ship that was passing by with medical personnel on board picked him up and eventually landed him in a hospital in San Diego. He spent two years there on his back in a body cast. My mother-in-law visited him twice a day with their two young daughters in tow, tending to every detail the Navy would turn over to her.

She saw him through his convalescence as well as a severe heart attack 25 years later. When, in her early 80s, she began to suffer from dementia, my father-in-law moved them to an apartment in a retirement community, kept her by his side and managed her care. When he died of heart failure at age 88, the words etched into his grave were simply: "We stayed the course and kept the faith."

A newspaper article 40 years after the end of World War II quoted one of the men under his command as saying, "He looked like Rock Hudson and fought like John Wayne." I was born years after he returned home from Saipan, but I have a picture in my mind that is just as vivid. Every morning in the retirement community, he would lay out his wife's clothes along with a pair of her favorite earrings—an attention she most likely was never aware of and therefore never acknowledged.

I thought about them recently in the context of a medical-journal study on longevity. According to the authors, children born after the year 2000 in developed countries can expect to live to 100. "We are not close to a limit," the article says. "A further rise in life expectancy seems likely." I wonder just how far gerontologists see us going—can we imagine 150 years old? 200? Do we want to? And what condition will we be in when we get there? (As a famous nursery rhyme presciently points out: After a particularly nasty fall, "all the king's horses and all the king's men couldn't put Humpty together again.")

As individuals, we don't always have control over how medical technology will affect our lives. But we can still control and tend to the small, intangible moments of our relationships.

A good friend of mine, godfather to my older son and a rabid baseball fan, died eight years after being diagnosed with a rare pituitary tumor. A metro reporter for a Boston newspaper, he used to say he had as much hope of covering the Red Sox as he did of being recruited for the Boston Celtics basketball team (he was 5 foot 1). But in the last year of his life, when it became clear he was fighting a losing battle, the newspaper sent him down to Florida to report on Red Sox spring training. He came back six feet tall. During his last few months, his wife always made sure he had a baseball hat on his head or by his side. When he couldn't put it on himself, she did it for him—a nod to who he was and what his dreams had once been.

It was a small gesture, a light brush stroke on a much larger canvas, but one that suggests what is likely to sustain us as we enter unfamiliar territory. When my husband was in law school and I was teaching part time at a university, we could rarely afford to eat out. Instead, we established "Café Un Rose" in the living room of our two-room rented house and occasionally set up takeout dinners under the light of a single candle. I don't remember the food, but I do remember the feeling of having created a private memory, one that returns with every candlelight meal.

By now, we have accumulated the experience of many such small things. I note my husband's long-suffering patience when I sing the Philadelphia Eagles fight song before kickoff on TV and when, year after year, I bet my office colleague that the Philadelphia Flyers will get to the Stanley Cup finals (I'm 1 for 12). I know my husband smiles when I chair-dance to the theme song of a favorite TV show.

For my part, I am respectful when he seeks advice from an old, beaten-up copy of the I Ching, which guided him several decades ago on an 18-month trip around the world. And I know that his day starts out on the bleak side if breakfast doesn't include a cup of blueberries and The Wall Street Journal (honest). When we travel, the hunt is on for both, and I, the earlier riser, have spent beautiful mornings walking quiet streets in strange cities looking for fruit stands and newspaper kiosks. 

The logistics of aging—the wills and medical networks and living arrangements—will always have their place. But if that's all there is, the years ahead will become little more than tests of endurance. I don't know what really old age—a phrase whose definition keeps shifting—holds for me and my husband: Will I be the caregiver, the one who needs care, or neither?

But I am very certain that however long I live, I want those around me to remember the telling details of who I am and have been. I wish the same for my husband. It will be the small gestures, the intimate routines, another rendezvous at Café Un Rose, a walk to the ends of the earth for blueberries, that will keep us going and grace the years to come.

 Ms. Shell is an editor at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia. She can be reached at next@wsj.com. 