OTTAWA—The Canadian labor market rebounded strongly in April, with 58,300 jobs created in the month after a slight loss in March, and full-time employment returning to levels last recorded at the start of the recession, Statistics Canada said Friday. 

The jobless rate in April fell to 7.6% from 7.7% in March. 

The April labor data might "dampen some budding concerns that the North American economy was losing serious steam," said  Douglas Porter, deputy chief economist at BMO Capital Markets. "The details of the release were a little less ebullient—still respectable, but hardly rip roaring." 

Overall, the data surpassed market expectations, which were for a 20,000 advance in jobs and the unemployment rate to remain unchanged. 

The Canadian dollar was initially firmer after the data were published, with the U.S. dollar briefly touching a low of C$0.9594. However, the Canadian dollar later lost ground. Still, economists said the labor report could spur the Bank of Canada to begin raising its benchmark policy rate, from 1%, starting in July, as the data continue to suggest the recovery is chugging along. 

April job gains were concentrated in the province of Ontario, Canada's largest, as it added 54,800 jobs. 

The bulk of the new jobs were in part-time work, as that climbed 41,100, and mostly in the services sector, specifically in finance and business-support services. That gain compares to March, when employers shed 92,100 part-time positions. 

Meanwhile, full-time jobs advanced 17,200 after a robust 90,600 gain in March. And as a result, the data-gathering agency said, full-time employment in Canada reached levels last hit in October 2008, which was the onset of the Canadian recession that lasted three quarters. However, the total number of hours worked remained 0.6% below the October 2008 benchmark. 

"The full-time job growth that we have seen in Canada is more than impressive," said  Mark Chandler, head of Canada fixed-income and currency strategy at RBC Capital Markets, adding the jobless rate is just 0.5 percentage points away from reaching its decade-long average, of 7.1%. "A few more months of reports such as these and we will have a hard time talking about slack in the labor market." 

Most of the new jobs were in the private sector, with 35,600 positions created, compared to a 20,600 gain for the public sector. The number of self-employed workers grew by a meagre 2,100. 

Average hourly wages rose 2.5% in April, matching a gain in February but below the 2.7% advance recorded last month. This is a sign that inflationary pressure may be waning, analysts say. "Real wage gains remain very flat in Canada which is hardly bullish for consumption," said  Derek Holt of Scotia Capital. 

The labor force grew in April by 47,400, and the participation rate, which is the share of the population in the labor force, increased to 67% from 66.9%. 