For many U.S. professionals the new year often brings a new job. The greatest percentage of in-house promotions take place in January, according to data analyzed by LinkedIn Corp.

The study, released Wednesday by the professional networking site, found that 16% of promotions since 2000 occurred in January, more than any other month. June and July were the next most popular months.

LinkedIn analyzed its users' profiles, which detail employment history, to learn when people were promoted within the same company. The January and mid-year peaks may be partly explained by companies' fiscal years, which tend to begin at those times, said  Krista Canfield, a LinkedIn spokeswoman.

There were variations by industry. Management consulting companies most commonly promoted employees in September, but people working in higher education most commonly got promoted during the summer.

Although January took the top spot, its hold is weakening. 

During the 1990s, 22% of promotions happened in January versus 16% in the past decade. 

Part of the shift has come from younger workers. According to the LinkedIn study, just 14% of promotions that occurred in January came from those born in the 1980s, compared to 22% coming from people born in the 1950s.

Employees born in the 1980s tend to be more aggressive in asking for raises and promotions than their older counterparts, said Clark University professor  Jeffrey Jensen Arnett, author of "Emerging Adulthood."

"They speak up about what they want and don't want to wait for a boss to notice they're doing a good job," he said.

Most large companies have set time windows, either every quarter or at the beginning of the fiscal year, when managers are able to promote employees, said  Tom McMullen, a human resources consultant at Hay Group.

That means that employees who want to move up within that window should talk to their managers about a promotion a couple months beforehand, he said. So an employee whose next window is in July, for example, would meet with his or her manager in April or May, he said.

If an employee waits until the annual performance review in January, when many promotions take place, he or she might have to wait until the next window, he said. "Waiting until the annual performance review means you've lost an opportunity," he said.

Ideally, employees should be setting the stage for a promotion throughout the year, by keeping their bosses up-to-date on successes and their desire to move up, said New York-based career coach  Laura Hill of Careers in Motion LLC.

"When the performance review comes around, you'll have a catalogue of your successes to show them and make that conversation easier," she said.

 Write to  Joe Light at joe.light@wsj.com 