BRUSSELS—The European Union will expand sanctions against Libyan leader Col. Moammar Gadhafi to include organizations controlled by his entourage, its foreign policy chief will say in a speech to parliamentarians Wednesday.

Catherine Ashton, in remarks prepared for the speech, also said the EU supports calls for a United-Nations led investigation into events in Libya, although the statement was retracted in a later version of her speech. 

"In addition to the UN sanctions, the EU adopted on 28 February further restrictive measures such as an embargo on equipment which might be used for internal repression and autonomous designations under the travel restrictions and assets freeze," Catherine Ashton according to the text of a speech delivered at the EU Parliament.

"We are now in the process of adding several entities controlled by Gadhafi and his closest associates to that list."

The broadened sanctions are almost certain to include a freeze of assets held in Europe by the country's sovereign-wealth fund and its central bank, senior European officials have said. 

EU foreign ministers will meet here Thursday to discuss the Libyan situation, while on Friday there will be a crisis summit of the bloc's 27 leaders to develop a joint response to the turmoil in Libya and a new common policy for relations with Arab states. 

Under an accord reached Tuesday, the sanctions will be broadened to apply beyond the top Libyan officials already affected by EU sanctions to assets those people "can access or somehow make use of," one official said. Unless there are unexpected last-minute objections, the sovereign-wealth fund, four other entities and one more person will be added to the sanction list that now covers 26 people, the official said. 

A second official said Libya's central bank also will likely be on the list. He said the agreement was a "done deal." The officials asked not to be identified because the agreement hasn't been formally approved.

The Libyan Investment Authority has upward of $60 billion in assets, including a combined 7.5% stake in Italian bank UniCredit SpA, a 3% stake in U.K.-based educational publisher Pearson PLC, and a holding in Italian football club Juventus. 

The EU last week froze the assets of 26 Libyans, including Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi, his family and his close associates, and banned them from traveling to the bloc. It also prohibited weapons sales to Libya.

Ms. Ashton said on Wednesday in an earlier version of the speech that the EU supports calls from some EU members and a Libyan foreign ministry official that the United Nations carry out an independent assessment of the situation in Libya. She said this doesn't contradict the EU's demand that Col. Gadhafi quit as the country's leader. 

"Supporting the need for an international independent evaluation chaired by the U.N. does not need to change the political decision we have already taken that Gadhafi has to leave and the war has to stop immediately," Ms.  Ashton said. 

Her office later redacted these comments in a later version of the speech. 

Libyan Foreign Minister Moussa Koussa repeated Monday evening his government's assertions that its military has acted within the law and hasn't been indiscriminately shooting at civilians. Mr. Koussa said that his government would welcome international fact-finding missions to investigate these allegations and that Libya was ready to extend full cooperation to any such team.

—John W. Miller in Brussels and Margaret Coker in Tripoli contributed to this article.