Portugal's political leaders set the stage for new elections following the resignation of Socialist Prime Minister José Sócrates, who insisted Friday that the country could avoid an international bailout and continue to finance itself from financial markets.

Portugal's political crisis, which comes as the country's borrowing costs rose further toward unaffordable levels, thrust the country's financial problems to the forefront of a summit of European Union leaders in Brussels on Thursday and Friday.

Mr. Sócrates, who quit after losing a key vote in Parliament over a package of fresh budget cuts that European policy makers had urged on his government, insisted after the summit that Portugal is still able to finance itself from the markets. He said the country will meet budget cutting goals regardless of who forms the next government.

President Anibal Cavaco Silva held meetings with leaders of major political parties on Friday, and is expected to announce next week the date for new elections.

The EU leaders agreed late Thursday to establish a new permanent €500 billion ($707 billion) bailout fund for the 17 members of the euro zone and on measures designed to encourage closer economic integration and greater competitiveness. 

But the leaders didn't invest the fund, which comes into existence in 2013, with as much financial firepower from the outset as they had earlier advertised—and put off a decision to expand of the lending capacity of the existing bailout vehicle.

Still, the bailout funds already have more than enough money, when incorporated with funds from the International Monetary Fund, to cope with a bailout of Portugal, which could run to as much at €80 billion, analysts say.

Despite Mr. Sócrates's claims, Portugal came under increasing financial-market pressure, as its funding costs rose Friday to the highest levels, compared with Germany's benchmark borrowing costs, since the advent of the euro in 1999. 

That makes it unclear whether the country will be able to survive alone until April, when it must repay €4.23 billion in debt. Currently, it has cash reserves estimated at about €4 billion.

The ratings firms Standard & Poor's and Fitch Ratings both cut Portugal's debt two notches on Thursday. 

A bailout would make the country the third euro-zone nation, following Greece and Ireland, to seek help from other members of the EU and the IMF. 

Yet, in a sign that the euro-zone's government debt crisis wouldn't necessarily spread more broadly, borrowing costs for Spain, long considered by investors as the next possible euro-zone domino, eased slightly, compared with Germany's. 

Portugal's constitution requires the president to meet with the leaders of the parties represented in Parliament to see if they can form a new government. The leaders of all five parties said afterward that they had urged elections as soon as possible. The earliest elections could be held is at the end of May. 

Once President Cavaco Silva formally accepts Mr. Sócrates's resignation, Mr. Sócrates would become a caretaker prime minister, with limited powers, until a new government can be sworn in.

 Write to  Alex MacDonald at alex.macdonald@dowjones.com and Patricia Kowsmann at patricia.kowsmann@dowjones.com 