TRIPOLI, Libya–Warplanes of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization bombed a government complex in Tripoli early Saturday as Col. Moammar Gadhafi was appearing on television to offer a cease-fire. The airstrikes damaged a pre-school for children with Down Syndrome and two government buildings, toppling a communications tower atop one of them.

Libyan officials accused NATO of trying to assassinate the Libyan leader and said he was unhurt. They said he was speaking live at the time of the predawn attack but would not disclose where from. The seaside complex includes the headquarters and transmitting tower of the state Broadcast Authority, which were not damaged.

Track the latest events in Libya.

Track events day by day in the region.

See the level of unrest, plus the economic and politic status of some countries across North Africa and the Middle East.

Popular demonstrations in Tunisia toppled a president and spread to countries across the region. See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

A policeman at the scene said three people were hurt in three airstrikes. Reporters taken there were shown a partly demolished two-story building that appeared to be the main target. It housed the Libyan Down Syndrome Assn., which serves 400 children, and 15 social welfare agencies. Part of the pre-school and its library had been reduced to rubble.

In the ruins of the Italian colonial-era building lay a tall metal tower. Officials said they believed it was a cell phone repeater. "This building was purely for civil administration, nothing connected with any other activity," Social Welfare Minister Mohammed Sherif told reporters.

A nearby one-story building housing parliamentary staff offices had a crumpled roof, a large hole in a back wall and fallen ceiling tiles and light fixtures on the floor. A large portrait of the Libyan leader hung intact in the lobby.

Television screens in Tripoli flickered three times during the Libyan leader's 80-minute address, which began after midnight. Moussa Ibrahim, a government spokesman, said Col. Gadhafi was notified of the airstrikes and continued his speech.

"We believe the target was the leader," Mr. Ibrahim said, repeating a claim that Libyan officials first made on Monday. "They thought he was speaking from a building adjacent to the Libyan Broadcast Authority."

"This is a crime," he added.

In his speech, Col. Gadhafi repeated his earlier calls for a cease-fire and said Libyans were free to choose their political system but not under the threat of bombings. He appeared tired and subdued after weeks of NATO assaults and an armed popular uprising against his 41-year-old rule.

"I'm not leaving my country," he declared. "No one can force me to leave my country and no one can tell me not to fight for my country."

The rebels' Transitional National Council rejected the cease-fire offer, saying it would not negotiate as long as Col. Gadhafi remains in power. "The time for compromise has passed," it said in a statement.

The Associated Press reported Saturday that NATO wants Col. Gadhafi's forces to end their attacks on civilians before it considers the Libyan leader's cease-fire offer. According to the AP, a NATO official said that the alliance wants "to see not words but actions."



NATO officials said this week they were intensifying attacks on headquarters and communications centers that Col. Gadhafi uses to maintain his grip on the country. His sprawling residential compound, which includes military facilities, has been hit on two occasions by NATO bombs, most recently on Monday.

Col. Gadhafi denied in his speech that his regime was killing civilians and said NATO was exceeding its mandate under a United Nations Security Council resolution to protect innocent lives. He urged Russia, China and friendly African and Latin American countries to press the Security Council to reconsider the resolution. 

Airstrikes and international sanctions, he said, were hurting civilians and destroying Libya's infrastructure.

"We did not attack them or cross the sea …. Why are they attacking us?" he asked, referring to European countries involved in the military campaign. "Let us negotiate with you, the countries that attack us. Let us negotiate."

Addressing Libyans, he struck a more conciliatory note than in recent speeches, in which he had called the rebels "rats" who would be tracked down and killed. This time he called on rebels, who control much of eastern Libya, to lay down their weapons. "We cannot fight each other," he said. "We are one family."

He spoke hours after the government had offered an amnesty to rebels in the besieged port city of Misrata, one their few strongholds in western Libya. Rebels there were given until Tuesday to surrender their weapons.

At the same time, the government warned that it would attack ships entering Misrata's harbor without its permission, even those carrying humanitarian aid to the city's 300,000 residents.

On Friday, officials of NATO said its warships had intercepted several Libyan government vessels laying anti-shipping mines in Misrata's harbor less than two miles (three kilometers) from the shore. The port is the city's only lifeline.

The mines were fished out and destroyed, a NATO statement said, and two dockings of ships bringing humanitarian aid to Misrata were postponed. It appeared to be the first time sea mines had been used in the Libyan conflict. 

Mr. Ibrahim, the government spokesman, said he had no information about the mines. But he warned that Libya would allow humanitarian aid for the city only if delivered overland through government-controlled territory.

—John W. Miller contributed reporting from Brussels.