Optimism is typically a good thing, but it can morph into blindness to the facts. A study suggests that some cancer patients in clinical trials have crossed that line.

Researchers asked 72 participants in early-stage clinical tests to rate the likelihood of certain outcomes—specifically, whether the outcomes were more or less likely for them than for the typical patient. The study used a scale of -3 to 3, with 0 meaning "like the average patient."

Depending on the question, which might be about side effects as well as benefits, anything above 1 or below -1 ("slightly above" or "slightly below" average) was deemed unrealistic.

Sixty percent of patients were unrealistically hopeful about having their cancer "controlled" by the drugs under study, 63% too hopeful about experiencing a health benefit, and 39% too hopeful about avoiding side effects.

Given these cognitive errors, it's unclear whether such patients have given truly informed consent for experimental treatments, the study's authors said. 

 "Unrealistic Optimism in Early-Phase Oncology Trials," Lynn A. Jansen, Paul S. Appelbaum, William M.P. Klein, Neil D. Weinstein, William Cook, Jessica S. Fogel, and Daniel P. Sulmasy, IRB Ethics & Human Research (Jan.-Feb.)  

By the time they are 10 months old, infants have already picked up a harsh rule of their tiny thumbs, a study finds: When there's physical conflict, the little guy gives way to the big guy.

Researchers had 144 infants, ranging from eight to 16 months, watch a series of videos in which two cartoonish figures (squares with eyes and a mouth) interacted in primitive ways. In the key variation, a blue square makes its way across the screen, on what looks like a sidewalk, as a smaller green one moves toward it. The two meet in the middle and bump several times; then there's a pause, and one gently falls on its face and moves to the side, giving way.

Infants pay more attention to scenes they find surprising. At eight months, they paid equal attention, whatever block prostrated itself. But at 10 months and older (and tentatively at nine months), the infants expected the little block to make way.

The experiment was designed to rule out the objection that the infants were reacting to violations of the laws of physics (whose rudiments they grasp). The pause, gentle forward fall, and sideways slide were arranged so as to avoid looking like a large block simply hitting a small block. The researchers suggest that being attuned to size-based dominance may be innate in humans, since infants of this age haven't had much exposure to it in real life.

 "Big and Mighty: Preverbal Infants Mentally Represent Social Dominance," Lotte Thomsen, Willem E. Frankenhuis, McCaila Ingold-Smith and Susan Carey, Science (Jan. 27) 

President Barack Obama's State of the Union speech was full of calls to restore American greatness, and a new study helps explain why: Citizens' subjective well-being is closely connected to impressions of their nation.

The researchers drew on a survey of 132,516 people in 128 countries. The correlation between satisfaction with country and personal contentment was strong everywhere, although it was strongest in poor countries (and among poorer people generally).

In the richest 20% of nations, personal satisfaction was higher than national satisfaction: 7.2 versus 6.5, on a 10-point scale. In the poorest 20%, personal satisfaction was lower: 4.8 versus 4.9.

But in the poorer countries, for every one-point increase in national satisfaction there was an associated 0.5-point increase in personal well-being. In the richest 20% of nations, a one-point increase in national satisfaction was linked to only a 0.3-point rise in personal well-being. Wealthier people look more toward their own health, standard of living and job for happiness, it seems, though national pride still plays a role in how they feel about themselves.

 "Subjective Well-Being and National Satisfaction: Findings From a Worldwide Survey," Mike Morrison, Louis Tay, and Ed Diener, Psychological Science (forthcoming)  

The "I've spent too much to quit!" fallacy is alive and well at your local all-you-can-eat buffet, a study finds.

Classical economic theory says that once consumers have chosen the all-you-can-eat format, they'll eat until they're content, and stop. With the cost per additional bite being zero, they can focus on satisfaction alone. But at a Pizza Garden in Illinois, consumers strove to "get their money's worth," eating more when they had paid more, even if they didn't like the food. Sixty-six patrons either paid $5.98 or got a 50%-off coupon when they walked in. Those who got the coupon ate 2.95 slices, on average, while those who paid full price ate 4.09 (a daunting 1,464 calories).

Those who paid full price gave the pizza slightly lower taste ratings. Indeed, across the two groups the researchers found an inverse relationship between taste and consumption. This "seems perverse," the authors concede. They conclude that diners think that if the pizza is bad, each piece is worth less, so they need to eat more to come out ahead.

 "The Flat-Rate Pricing Paradox: Conflicting Effects of 'All-You-Can-Eat' Buffet Pricing," David R. Just and Brian Wansink, The Review of Economics and Statistics (February 2011) 