TOKYO—Prime Minister Naoto Kan, his voice rising with emotion, told the nation Sunday that the earthquake and tsunami that have devastated the country represent the biggest crisis to face the country since it emerged from World War II. 

"This is the biggest crisis we have faced in our 65-year post-war history. I am confident that we can work together to overcome these difficulties," he said.

As for many Japanese, the worst earthquake to hit the country in modern times has transformed Mr. Kan's world. Just two days earlier, he was slouching in a meeting room in the ornate parliament hall, as opposition politicians continued the now familiar hectoring that has recently dominated the political scene. The gridlock stymied the government's legislative program and threatened the passage of bills needed to authorize the necessary borrowing for the fiscal year starting April 1. 

The political situation had taken its toll, pushing Mr. Kan's approval rating to below 20%. The latest crisis: a scandal over whether Mr. Kan was at fault for accepting 1.04 million yen ($12,700) over three years from an ethnic Korean resident who isn't a Japanese citizen. Donations by foreigners to politicians are illegal under Japanese law.

But at 2:46 p.m. on Friday, the massive chandeliers in the parliament building began to sway, the politicians began to look around, and aides ran out of the room to deal with the new crisis.

Mr. Kan took the lead in the government's reaction to the disaster, seeking to avoid the mistakes made by Tomiichi Murayama, prime minister during the Kobe earthquake of 1995, who wasn't visible during the initial disaster-relief effort. Prime Minister Kan named an emergency team of senior officials, appointing himself as head. By Saturday morning, he was on a helicopter flying over the devastation. Since the quake, he and other officials have appeared everywhere in the blue uniforms of the disaster-relief team. 

For now, the head of the main opposition Liberal Democratic Party, Sadakazu Tanigaki, said he would cooperate fully with the government in putting together an extra budget to pay for the reconstruction effort, showing a willingness to drop the party's near-blanket ban on working with the administration.

But political analysts were far from certain the good feeling would last.

"This gets the Kan cabinet over the hump of the new fiscal year, but it does not shore up his position too far into the future," the Eurasia group said in a report on Saturday.



 Write to  William Sposato at william.sposato@dowjones.com 