HONG KONG—Macau casino mogul  Stanley Ho and members of his family said they settled a two-month-long dispute over a controlling stake in his multibillion-dollar empire in the world's top gambling destination.

A lack of details in a written statement issued by Mr. Ho left unknown who would control his casino company,  SJM Holdings Ltd.
SJMHF


-1.69
%




 And previous twists in the family dispute left open the possibility that further divisions could erupt. 

Mr. Ho's office issued a statement late Thursday in Hong Kong saying an agreement had been reached Tuesday. The settlement of the dispute was confirmed by his lawyer,  Gordon Oldham, and representatives of Ho family members with whom the patriarch had been fighting. "All members of the Ho family have reached full and final agreement based on the principle of 'mutual understanding and mutual accommodation,' " Mr. Ho's statement said.

See a timeline of Mr. Ho's casinos business.

A settlement would bring to a close a bitter public dispute that clouded the future of the biggest casino operator in Macau, the only Chinese territory where casino gambling is legal.

Mr. Ho held the casino monopoly for four decades in the former Portuguese colony, which returned to Chinese rule in 1999. Three years later, authorities allowed in other companies, and there are now six licensed operators, including Americans  Sheldon Adelson and  Steve Wynn, transforming the sleepy town into a neon tourist Mecca.

Since then, Macau has eclipsed the Las Vegas Strip in volume, with gambling revenue last year rising nearly 60% to $24 billion as rich Chinese gamblers poured into the enclave. Some analysts expect Macau's gambling revenue to increase another 30% this year. SJM holds about 30% of the market, propelled in part by its lotus-shaped Grand Lisboa Hotel, which dominates Macau's skyline.

Mr. Ho, an avid amateur ballroom dancer who fathered at least 17 known children from four women he calls his wives, ruled over his gambling empire until brain surgery two years ago forced him to the sidelines. That has raised questions about who would succeed him.

Two of Mr. Ho's children from his second wife have their own casino interests in Macau. Those children,  Pansy Ho and  Lawrence Ho, are barred by law from controlling more than one casino. Pansy Ho also runs  Shun Tak Holdings Ltd.
SHTGY


-8.50
%




, the transportation and real-estate company her father founded.  Angela Leong, Stanley Ho's fourth wife, is an executive director of SJM Holdings and as of late last year was its second-biggest shareholder.

A dispute burst into the open earlier this year, when Mr. Ho accused the children of his second wife of colluding with his third wife,  Ina Chan, of stealing the holding company that held the bulk of his assets. They denied his accusations.

Over the following weeks, competing camps produced apparently contradictory statements signed by the ailing 89-year-old, who appeared before cameras to read prepared statements, stirring a frenzy among Hong Kong's tabloids. Dozens of reporters shadowed Mr. Ho as he shuttled between his four households on a daily basis. One newspaper even published his weekly schedule showing how he divided his time among the four homes.

Representatives of Ms. Chan and Mr. Ho's children from his second wife confirmed the settlement that was announced Thursday. Ms. Leong couldn't be reached, but she has kept a low profile in the last two months of disputes. 

SJM is scheduled on Wednesday to announce its annual financial results. The company's shares, which are listed on the Hong Kong stock market, have fallen almost 20% since the dispute became public Jan. 21.

J.P. Morgan analyst  Kenneth Fong said Thursday's announcement "should alleviate the near term uncertainty over the family issue." 

But, he cautioned, "given the complexity of the matters, and all the back-and-forth lawsuits, even after his previous announcements, I think it may take some time for investors to gradually regain confidence over the stock."

 Write to  Shai Oster at shai.oster@wsj.com and Kate O'Keeffe at kathryn.okeeffe@dowjones.com 