I have been looking at a lot of floor plans recently, from the rather straightforward "back-of-the-brochure" type provided by real-estate firms to the more serious layouts of architects. One never expects much of the former although it's fun to mentally rearrange these peculiar layouts and imagine the life that could be lived between those thick black lines. 

One thing I've noticed that's missing from many plans today is corridors. Rooms tend to just lead from one to the other, and the house or apartment becomes almost entirely open-plan. As a result, some rooms end up functioning as thoroughfares. 

I strongly believe that there is merit in corridors, lobbies, halls and passages that lead to rooms: They give you somewhere to go and they offer some definition to what could otherwise become an amorphous space that I suppose is also known as fashionable loft-style living.

We've been sweeping these slivers of real estate away in order to make homes feel as large as possible, but in-between spaces have real purpose. They are architectural breathers. With their elimination we lose some of the intrigue that comes with not seeing a whole apartment in the blink of an eye. 

Perhaps counterintuitively, corridors make a place feel larger because they lead you to imagine what might be beyond the room you're standing in. They are also great fun to decorate. Because they are usually small areas, and ones that you simply pass through rather than spend serious time in, you can be a little more extravagant and aesthetically courageous. 

A vestibule or small entrance hall is made so much livelier by an exuberant choice in wallpaper. I recently put a banana-leaf pattern (famously used in the Beverly Hills Hotel and the New York restaurant Indochine) on the walls of a client's tiny corridor, and what had once been a badly lit length of white wall positively sprang to life. 

Fun paint is another good option. A friend of mine in London painted the walls in a small passageway a shiny turquoise that looks smart with the space's black-and-white checkerboard linoleum floor. Another friend lined the walls around a spiral staircase with bookshelves painted a glossy dark purple. There is great opportunity in these currently dreary spots.

If you're renovating, you're in the enviable position of being able to either create these spaces or enhance them in a more architectural way. Closets with paneled doors are a lovely thing to put in little lobbies, on landings or even in short passages. 

Not only will they gain you some storage—a shallow closet can hold bed linens or china and glass—but pretty panelled doors will give you that substantial feeling you want in a home. I also think corridors and landings in the more private areas of a house are excellent places for hanging family photographs, from floor to ceiling. 

It doesn't matter how they are framed, just get them up off the floor and onto the wall in whatever haphazard way you can. Having those memories on the wall will add such life, and it's also a great way to deal with the picture frames that can clutter the surfaces in your primary rooms. 

If you have a deep door jamb, usually created by closets on either side, think about installing bookshelves, or paneling the space and putting mirrors within the panels. I saw an excellent example of this idea on a recent visit to a house decorated by Tom Sheerer, a New York-based interior designer who has a great talent for working out the layout of a house. Between the living room and dining room of this particular project was a short corridor created by an elevator shaft. 

The entire space was paneled in pecky cyprus wood. Across from the elevator door, Tom had built in a bar with shelves lined with glasses and a counter and drawers to store bottles. It was a genius idea, not only as a wonderful break between the two rooms, but it gave a sense of so much more space than if one room simply opened straight onto the other. 

When you are designing your home, take a second look at these small areas that on the face of it are just the mundane spaces between rooms but in fact, rather like delicious trout cheeks, are the tiny, often overlooked prizes that can get lost in the bigger picture.

—Ms. Konig is a decorator and journalist in New York.