KABUL—Tribal leaders from one of Afghanistan's most volatile districts made a pact with the Afghan government and coalition forces, promising to halt insurgent attacks, turn in homemade explosives and expel foreign militants in exchange for international aid. 

Leaders of the Alikozai tribe, one of the country's largest, agreed to the pact in Sangin district in southern Helmand province, said Daoud Ahmadi, the provincial spokesman.

If the agreement sticks, it could convince more communities to work with the coalition in exchange for government benefits. The Taliban, however, are likely to continue their campaign of intimidation against tribal elders who are seen to be supportive of the Afghan government.

Taliban spokesman Qari Yousuf Ahmadi denied any agreement took place in Sangin, labeling the news propaganda by international forces.

Although violence isn't expected to stop overnight in Sangin, U.S. military officials say the nascent agreement is working so far. 

"The insurgents have already begun to strike back savagely at those who desire peace, but so far the elders remain steadfast," said U.S. Marine Maj. Gen. Richard Mills, the commander of coalition forces in the southwest of Afghanistan. 

"We are cautiously optimistic of this agreement and will monitor" insurgent activity, he added.

Sangin is a hotbed of Taliban activity and a hub for opium-processing, a key source of funding for the insurgency. International forces have struggled to control the district and about 100 British soldiers were killed during a four-year mission in Sangin before they handed the district over to U.S. forces in September.

The security agreement has been under negotiation for 25 days and was agreed to on Saturday, said Daoud Ahmadi, the spokesman for Helmand. He added that the people of Sangin promised to thwart any attacks on development projects in order to encourage more international aid money to flow to the district. 

"People have lost hope in the government because they lack services," Mr. Ahmadi said.

Sangin's elders promised to give coalition soldiers "freedom of movement" while they complete construction on route 611, which connects Sangin with districts throughout Helmand.

Afghans in Sangin "want schools, medical clinics and the freedom to move about," Maj. Gen. Mills said.

The U.S.-led coalition has tried to win over the Afghan people in the nine-year war by supplying more government services. But in the Taliban's southern homeland, government services are scarce and insurgent attacks against state workers have dissuaded many Afghans from taking positions in local government offices. 

Under the Sangin agreement, tribal elders promised to turn in any homemade explosive devices they find. The devices are the biggest killer of both Afghan civilians and coalition troops. 

More than half the 711 coalition fatalities last year were caused by homemade explosives, according to icasualties.org, an independent monitoring website. 

—Arif Afzalzada contributed to this article.