The Cleveland Orchestra helped get one critic fired. Now it's hired another one. In February Enrique Fernández reported for duty as "critic-in-residence" in Miami, where the orchestra has been playing an annual residency since 2007. Mr. Fernández is not, however, your run-of-the-mill music critic. For one thing, he doesn't write reviews; for another, his pieces don't appear in a newspaper or magazine. Instead he writes a blog on the Cleveland Orchestra's Miami-based website. His job is to get Floridians talking about the orchestra—and posting their own opinions of its concerts.

The ironies surrounding Mr. Fernández's appointment are manifold. In 2008 Don Rosenberg, the Cleveland Plain Dealer's classical-music critic, was reassigned to another beat for having written predominantly negative reviews of Franz Welser-Möst, the Cleveland Orchestra's music director—reviews about which the orchestra's management had previously complained to the paper's editors. Mr. Rosenberg responded by suing the paper for defamation and age discrimination. He lost, but the resulting stink has yet to dissipate.

Is the Cleveland Orchestra having second thoughts? I doubt it. Despite his resounding title, Mr. Fernández is not a critic in the ordinary sense of the word. His blog, which you can visit by going to clevelandorchestramiami.com and clicking on "blog," is an online magazine that runs feature pieces about the orchestra and its activities in Miami. In addition, Mr. Fernández invites concertgoers to post their own thoughts on the orchestra's performances: "Online everybody's a critic.... Comment on the concert you are about to experience. Review if you wish, if you must. Hey, it's your ticket, rave on, pan on."

Mr. Fernández and the Cleveland Orchestra are clearly trying to come up with an institutional equivalent of the "online communities" that spring up around homemade blogs. This kind of blogging is still relatively new in the world of art, and to date the only institutions that seem to have embraced it wholeheartedly are museums (an especially good example is the Los Angeles County Museum of Art's "Unframed," which is at lacma.wordpress.com). Classical-music organizations, by contrast, seem ill at ease with the openness and interactivity of blogging, and even the best of their efforts, such as the St. Louis Symphony's STL Symphony Blog (stlsymphony.org/blog), tend to be one-way operations that aren't open to comments or email from readers.

So why bother? Because regional American newspapers have been cutting back sharply on fine-arts coverage in recent years. Here's another irony: I first read about Mr. Fernández's blog not in a newspaper but on a news-and-reviews website called South Florida Classical Review (southfloridaclassicalreview.com) that was launched by Lawrence A. Johnson, the former classical-music critic of the Miami Herald, after he got downsized out of his job in 2008. Now that high-culture organizations are finding it harder to get the word out about their activities through the mainstream media, the smartest ones are following Mr. Johnson's lead and setting up alternative outlets of their own.

But Mr. Fernández's title points to the great flaw of institutional blogging, which is that it is institutional. Whatever else he does with "his" blog, you can bet he won't be saying anything on it that's even mildly critical of the Cleveland Orchestra. Here, for instance, is the last sentence of a recent posting about a performance by Giancarlo Guerrero, the principal conductor of the orchestra's Miami residency: "As my 18-year-old jock hip-hopper college freshman would say, 'What a beast!'" (Grow up, dude.) And though he has made it clear that negative comments on the orchestra's concerts are welcome and will not be deleted, the truth is that he isn't getting very many comments of any kind—three in the past month, to be exact.

Are classical concertgoers in Miami too old to reflexively look to the Web for information about music? Have they simply not heard about the Cleveland Orchestra's blog? Or do they find its institutionally sanctioned contents too safe to bother with? The answer, I'm sure, is "all of the above," but it's the last point that matters most. The reason artblogs caught on in the first place is that they frequently offered a sharper, better-informed alternative to the bland arts coverage published in regional newspapers—and that they were, to use a word coined by no less a journalistic authority than Joseph Pulitzer, "indegoddamnpendent." They still are, and that's why people continue to read them. It remains to be seen whether any institutional blog will ever pack that kind of punch, the kind that makes readers sit up and take notice. Perhaps Mr. Fernández will be the exception that tests the rule, but his performance to date suggests that the phrase "critic-in-residence" is a contradiction-in-terms.

—Mr. Teachout, the Journal's drama critic, writes "Sightings" every other Friday. He is the author of "Pops: A Life of Louis Armstrong." Write to him at tteachout@wsj.com.