OTTAWA—Canada's Conservative party won a long-elusive majority in federal parliamentary elections Monday, securing another term for Prime Minister Stephen Harper and elevating the left-leaning New Democratic Party ahead of the more-established Liberal party for the first time to second place, according to preliminary results.

Mr. Harper framed the campaign as a referendum on his economic track record—insisting it was a chance for voters to further solidify the country's nascent economic recovery with a stable, majority Conservative government after five years of minority Tory rule. 

In early results, Mr. Harper's Conservatives were ahead in races for 166 seats, surpassing the 155 needed for a majority, according to projections by the Canadian Broadcasting Corp. Several of those races were too close to call, but all three of Canada's broadcasters projected a majority government for Mr. Harper. 

 With most polls reporting Tuesday morning, Mr. Harper's Conservatives had won 167 seats, surpassing the 155 needed for a majority. The NDP won 102 races, up from 36 seats in the previous government. The Liberals won just 34 races, down from 77 seats in the last parliament. The Bloc Quebecois, a separatist party focused on French-speaking Quebec, won in just four constituencies, or ridings, down from 47 seats in the previous legislature. 

Mr. Harper has earned praise for his government's navigation of the global economic and financial crisis. Canada has been the first Group of Seven economy to move from recovery to self-sustaining expansion following the downturn. Mr. Harper pushed through a number of pricey stimulus measures to help the country navigate the crisis, but has more recently mostly ended those, winning praise from the International Monetary Fund for Canada's deficit-reduction plan. Higher oil and commodities prices have also buoyed markets, underpinning a recently rising Canadian dollar.

The victory gives Mr. Harper the majority government that he's failed to win on two previous occasion since he first took power at the top of a minority Tory government in 2006. 

The majority government could ease some worry among the business and financial community, which had worried that a late NDP surge could eat into Tory votes and deprive Mr. Harper of a clear mandate. 

NDP's leader, Jack Layton, had promised to balance the budget, but has also pledged to boost spending—worrying some observers that government outlays could grow if he sustains support through the polls. The NDP has called for 70 billion Canadian dollars (US$73.6 billion) in spending over the next four years on improved health-care services, carbon-reduction strategies and enriched benefits for seniors. 

The party says it will finance this spending with higher corporate taxes and a cap-and-trade emissions credit system, both of which have been criticized by opponents and some economists. The NDP has defended its economic platform as sound and responsible.

Still, the NDP's sudden rise has come at the expense of the centrist Liberal party, which has held power in 32 of the last 50 years and is now led by former Harvard professor Michael Ignatieff. In late results, Mr. Ignatieff was struggling to keep his own seat. 

The Liberals' third-place finish is its worst showing in its long, storied history. The separatist Bloc Quebecois, meanwhile, is also poised to post its worst showing since its first election in 1993.