Police in the U.K. and Russia are investigating allegations of corruption against Russia's top appointee to the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and three others in the highest-level probe of suspected criminality at the bank to date, officials said Tuesday.

The Russian government said the top official involved was  Elena Kotova, who stepped down as Russia's director at the EBRD in December. The EBRD said Tuesday it had waived diplomatic immunity for four Russian officials appointed to the bank by Moscow in order to allow British and Russian police to investigate them. Tuesday's move was the first time the EBRD had lifted immunity for such a senior official and the first public disclosure of the police probes.

"The City of London police is working closely with the EBRD as part of an investigation into allegations of corruption," a police spokesman said.

The EBRD declined to provide details of the investigation. Russia's Interior Ministry confirmed that it is conducting a probe but provided no other information. 

Ms. Kotova, who worked at the World Bank and Russian state bank Vneshtorgbank before taking the EBRD post in 2005, couldn't be reached for comment. 

The other three people involved weren't identified. The EBRD said they all either work or have worked at the bank as representatives of the Russian government, which is one of the EBRD's shareholders, as well as a country in which it invests. 

Such officials don't work for the development bank, but represent the interests of its 61 government shareholders and oversee management of the bank. Ms. Kotova also represented the governments of Tajikstan and Belarus. 

The EBRD said it had conducted an internal investigation into the activities of the four officials last year, and had shared its findings with the Russian authorities. It said it will share those findings with the U.K. police. 

Early last year, the EBRD said British police questioned a bank employee in connection with suspected criminal activity involving its investments. The employee was never identified. A person familiar with the case said that probe is related to the Kotova case.

The Russian Economy Ministry said it had decided to relieve Ms. Kotova of her duties at the EBRD following the bank's investigation, which found that she and three other officials had violated its code of conduct. 

The ministry said it had asked the EBRD to waive diplomatic immunity for the four. A similar request was separately made by U.K. police through the Foreign and Commonwealth Office. 

The EBRD was established in 1991 to help countries in Eastern European and the former Soviet Union make the transition from centrally planned to market economies. 

Russia is the largest of the 29 economies in which the EBRD invests, and has long taken the largest share of those investments. In 2010, the EBRD's new investments in Russia fell to €2.3 billion ($3.06 billion) from €2.4 billion in 2009. The total of new investments made by the EBRD was €9 billion, up from €7.9 billion in 2009.

 Write to  Paul Hannon at paul.hannon@dowjones.com and Alexander Kolyandr at Alexander.Kolyandr@dowjones.com 