HONG KONG—The defense for accused murderer Nancy Kissel sought on Wednesday to poke holes in prosecutors' evidence, suggesting during cross-examination of a key witness that there was much Robert Kissel's friends and family didn't know about the U.S. investment banker.

Also Wednesday, David Noh, Mr. Kissel's friend and former colleague at Merrill Lynch, testified that just before Mr. Kissel's death in 2003, he told Mr. Noh he was excited about an imminent promotion that would relocate him to Tokyo.

That information didn't come out in the initial trial for Ms. Kissel, who was convicted in 2005 of murdering her husband. That conviction was overturned by Hong Kong's highest court because of procedural flaws during the trial.

People close to the defense said Mr. Noh's testimony about the Tokyo job came as a surprise to them, as well as to Ms. Kissel.

In cross-examination of Mr. Noh, defense council Edward Fitzgerald sought to show that although the two men were close—traveling together often for work overseas—Mr. Kissel was also quite secretive and potentially concealing some inner conflict.

Mr. Fitzgerald cited the results of the defense team's analysis of Mr. Kissel's personal computer that found he had been searching the Internet for "anal sex in Taiwan," "gay anal sex," and "Taiwan escorts," as well as visiting various homosexual pornographic websites. Mr. Noh said he wasn't aware of any such behavior by Mr. Kissel while they traveled together.

That evidence was already revealed in the 2005 trial, and members of the defense team said it would come up again this time around as evidence of a hidden personal conflict that could complicate evidence attesting to Mr. Kissel's character and behavior. Ms. Kissel also wasn't aware of the Internet searches, defense representatives said.

Over the past two weeks of the trial, the jury has heard evidence from the Kissels' friends and acquaintances, many of whom testified that there was no evidence of violence between the husband and wife. In the previous trial, Ms. Kissel testified that she kept hidden years of physical and sexual abuse by her husband, saying he would demand sex from her against her will.

Prosecutors accuse Ms. Kissel of serving her husband a drug-laced milkshake before bludgeoning him to death with a lead statuette while he was sedated. Mr. Kissel's body was found in a storage room near the family's home in November 2003.

Ms. Kissel, 46 years old, pleaded not guilty to murder but guilty to manslaughter at the start of her retrial earlier this month. She had testified in the first trial that she killed her husband in self-defense.

The prosecution estimated it would wrap up its arguments before the Chinese New Year holiday beginning Feb. 3, and the defense would begin to present its case after the court returned from the break. 