Before the start of this Test match Andrew Hilditch, Australia's chairman of selectors, was asked to pass comment on the performance of Australia's seamers throughout this series. Was he satisfied? A little disappointed, perhaps? Apparently not. Despite conceding 600 once and 500 twice, the man in charge of evaluating Australia's elite bowlers was more than happy with their efforts. Has he been watching? 

Mr. Hilditch is usually sighted on the morning of a Test match, power walking around the ground, and rarely thereafter. Maybe he has only glimpsed his bowlers before the start of play, and no doubt, like Australia's batsmen, they are going well in the nets. Out in the middle, things have not gone so swimmingly, although no doubt Mr. Hilditch was more than happy as his choicest threesome allowed Andrew Strauss and Alastair Cook to breeze past fifty for the first wicket with some really poor new-ball bowling. 

Thankfully for Mr. Hilditch, and Michael Clarke, Australia's new captain, who kept his head during the early onslaught, things improved enormously thereafter, principally through the mercurial figure of Mitchell Johnson. Bowling quickly and straight in his final spell of the day, Mr. Johnson eventually found that this pitch still has plenty to offer when asked the right questions. 

  Richard Hobson: Cook Is More Talented Than Pietersen, Says Anderson 

  Gideon Haigh: Aussie Bowlers Take Place in Hall of Shame 



Having given England a start, Andrew Strauss and Jonathan Trott were removed within six balls of each other and, late in the day, Kevin Pietersen hooked Mr. Johnson high to fine-leg where Michael Beer took his first catch in Tests. The second day ended with the match beautifully poised and promising much, Mr. Pietersen's dismissal having given the home team a huge lift. 

Mr. Beer might have improved Australia's position even further earlier had his front foot not crept over the front line moments before Cook launched him in the air to mid-on. Cook was 46, the score was 140-2 and Mr. Beer, having had his first ball pinged to the fence by Mr. Pietersen, was in his third over when he believed a first Test wicket was his, only for umpire Billy Bowden to call for a no-ball check. 

Sympathy was with the rookie spinner, but the front foot is there for a reason and, having passed 600 runs for the series, Cook is not a man to whom to give such a silly reprieve. Mr. Beer, though, bowled respectfully enough for nine overs, turning the occasional ball and finding some bounce. If he has runs to play with towards the end of the match he could be a threat. 

Australia's new-ball bowling in the 22 overs either side of tea was about as bad as it could possibly be, as they veered in length from short to shorter against two batsmen who have a penchant for back foot play. Mind you, poor deliveries have to be put away and Mr. Strauss, in particular, played with complete freedom, looking about as relaxed as a man who had just secured the destination of the Ashes should be. 

Seven boundaries came in his joint quickest half-century in Tests, all but two of them cut or pulled square of the wicket to the fence. He tucked in gratefully to some short bowling from Mr. Johnson, who was given the new ball for the first time this series by his captain Mr. Clarke. The injured Ricky Ponting may be a controlling presence in the dressing room still, but out in the middle only one man can make the decisions. The reasoning was logical enough, given that Mr. Johnson had just scored a morale-boosting half-century, which helped lift his team to a competitive 280, but it was not until his second spell when the lacquer was removed from the ball that he began to find his range. 

Mr. Johnson was poor with the new ball, as were Ben Hilfenhaus and Peter Siddle, but when it started to swing, things improved. Strauss was beaten by Mr. Hilfenhaus from round the wicket to a ball that appeared to move late, but replays suggest did not move at all, although given that the bowler had been swinging the ball back consistently, a straight ball had the illusion of movement away from the left-hander as he shaped to leg. 

The immoveable object that was Mr. Trott at Melbourne lasted only six deliveries. Forward to a wide ball from Mr. Johnson, he inside-edged onto his stumps, a consequence possibly of the ball before which moved back a fraction, stirring memories of Perth, and persuading Mr. Trott to play at something he ought to have left alone. Mr. Pietersen, prepared no doubt this time for Mr. Johnson's swing, survived the initial threat and was looking to prosper when surprised by the left-armer's pace and bounce. 

It brought Jimmy Anderson to the crease to protect Paul Collingwood, the man who needs runs the most, but those who have written Mr.Collingwood's obituaries this week would do well to dwell on his contributions earlier in the day when he removed Mike Hussey with the ball and then pouched Steven Smith at slip. 

With the new ball looming and Mr. Hussey apparently set, as if in concrete, Mr. Strauss threw the ball to his ersatz all-rounder, more to pass time than in hope or expectation of a wicket. Mr. Collingwood's whole career, though, has been about confounding expectations and with the final ball of the 79th over, he squeezed one onto Mr. Hussey's edge and onto the stumps, via the batsman's thigh pad. 

Mr. Hussey left the crease with the expression of a man who had spent the whole evening chatting up the best looking girl in the bar, only to see her snatched away from under his nose as last orders sounded. A further reminder of Mr. Collingwood's all-round ability came when he snapped up Mr. Smith at third slip, as ever making a difficult catch look thoroughly regulation, the edge coming quickly from a wild and loose drive once Mr. Anderson had taken the second new ball. 

This was Mr. Anderson's second wicket of the morning, his first that of Brad Haddin, caught at the wicket after sparring at a wide ball with a bat that was neither horizontal nor straight. This coming in his 22nd over meant that Mr. Anderson had an unusually long wait for his first wicket, but with Mr. Haddin and Mr. Smith in his pocket, he added Peter Siddle, also caught behind the wicket to a lovely late-swinger, so that he had taken three in 27 overs. 

At this stage, at 189 for eight, Australia looked like capitulating for fewer than 200, but Mr. Johnson and Mr. Hilfenhaus carried the home team to something resembling a competitive total with some enterprising batting. Mr. Johnson's faith in his partner was such that at the start of their 76-run partnership he turned down easy singles to keep him from the strike which Mr. Strauss reacted to by pushing the field back, rarely a wise move. Suddenly, as so often happens when a captain goes onto the defensive, the runs began to flow. 

Mr. Johnson hit the spinner Graeme Swann for one huge hit over mid-wicket, and Mr. Hilfenhaus contributed two of his own, one each off Tim Bresnan and Mr. Swann, the former a huge blow into the old pavilion. Mr. Bresnan then pegged back Johnson's off-stump and Anderson found Mr. Hilfenhaus's edge as the batsman ran down trying to swat the highest of bouncers. Australia's total was probably below par, just, but more than they would have hoped for at the end of the first day. Their innings ended with both referrals in tact—a curiosity in this technological age. 