Patients told by their physicians they were overweight or obese were more likely to acknowledge a weight problem and try to do something about it, a new study shows.

Researchers from the Medical University of South Carolina and Imperial College London found that getting an honest assessment from a physician appeared to be a key factor in whether or not study participants considered themselves overweight. 

Among the participants who were overweight according to their body mass indexes and didn't report hearing that news from a physician, almost 37% didn't think they were overweight. And 19% of obese participants whose physicians didn't talk to them about weight said they didn't think they were overweight. Only 6% of overweight and 3% of obese participants reporting a weight-focused conversation with a physician thought they weren't overweight. People with a BMI of 25 or greater are considered overweight, and those with a BMI of at least 30 are considered obese. 

The study authors wrote: "Participants who reported that they had been told by a physician they were overweight were more likely to desire to lose weight and attempt to lose weight." The research was published in the Feb. 28 issue of the Archives of Internal Medicine.

The researchers used data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey that looked at 7,790 adults between the ages of 20 and 64 who had their body mass index measured. Participants answered a questionnaire as part of the survey. Only 45% of those qualifying as overweight said they'd ever been told that by a physician. Among those with a BMI qualifying them as obese, 66% reported being told by a doctor they were overweight.

Because Americans have gotten heavier in the past few decades, people may not "see themselves as overweight because people around them are overweight," said Robert Post, an author of the study and now an attending physician with Virtua Family Medicine Residency in Voorhees, N.J. (He conducted the survey while at MUSC.)

These results suggest it's important for physicians to tell their patients if their BMI puts them in the overweight or obese category, even if it would seem to be obvious, Dr. Post said. 

The study can't say for sure whether it was the conversation with the physician that caused patients to alter their perceptions of their weight or attempt to lose pounds. Nor can it say if people were successful in their attempts.