Lois Lowry's acclaimed 1993 novel, "The Giver," brought young readers into an apparently utopian society where an insistent atmosphere of serenity eventually fails to disguise the existential darkness of the place. Now Ms. Lowry turns her agile pen to a more pleasant and nonfictional utopian community, a Shaker village in Maine during the final days of World War I. The latest in the "Dear America" series, "Like the Willow Tree: The Diary of Lydia Amelia Pierce" (Scholastic, 224 pages, $12.99) begins with 11-year-old Lydia expressing annoyance that a new strain of influenza has spoiled her birthday plans. With appalling swiftness, however, the sickness strikes home, and within a few pages Lydia and her elder brother, Daniel, have been orphaned. The Spanish flu that will eventually kill as many as 50 million people around the world has taken their parents and baby sister.

The children soon find themselves signed over into the care of Shakers, orderly, celibate pacifists whose tidy communities were, by the turn of the 20th century, in fatal decline. Stripped by disease of her family, Lydia is soon stripped by the Shakers of her belongings: As the girl discovers, Shakers are firm communitarians. "One doesn't have a choice here," she marvels. "There are rules, and everybody follows them."

But Lydia soon finds consolation in the Shakers' strange ways. Though it is odd to live apart from her brother—the Shakers insist on separation of the sexes—she begins to admire the simplicity of Shaker spiritual life, the elegance of their handicrafts and the gentleness with which they treat one another. Ms. Lowry smuggles enough period detail into Lydia's diary that girls age 8-14 will come away not merely having read a compelling story but knowing a good deal about an all-but vanished sect. 

A generation later, with the U.S. on the brink of joining World War II, another 11-year-old girl finds herself on the coast of Maine in Phoebe Stone's delightful novel "The Romeo and Juliet Code" (Arthur A. Levine Books, 304 pages, $16.99). Raised in London by a glamorous British mother and a dashing American father, Felicity Bathburn Budwig takes pride in behaving with proper British ness. Still, it's a struggle for her to control her feelings when her parents drop her abruptly at her American grandmother's wind-whipped house and drive away.

The Maine house is a disconcerting place, filled with "big and strange and sad" relatives. There's Uncle Gideon, a kindly yet tormented figure who has nailed the piano shut and who seems continually surprised at the sight of Felicity's face. There's Aunt Miami, who changed her name from Florence (which lacked pizzazz) and always dresses as if for a party. And then there's Captain Derek, a mysterious invalid who plays jazz records behind a closed door upstairs.

Any child who has ever been left reluctantly with relatives, even for a short time, will recognize Felicity's sorrow and confusion as the weeks turn into months with no word from her parents in London—no word, that is, except for letters in her father's handwriting that her uncle will not let her see.

Meanwhile, war rages on the Continent. Felicity feels kinship with the European refugees she sees in the newspaper: "[T]hey didn't belong anywhere either. Not belonging is a terrible feeling. It feels awkward and it hurts, as if you were wearing someone else's shoes." Slowly, with witty self-possession, this thoughtful heroine decides that she must untangle the narrative strands around her. What she discovers, and how she discovers it, should keep children ages 8-13 engaged, amused and, eventually, stirred.

We leave Maine and go to the West Coast for Lawrence Yep's endearing fictionalized memoir, "The Star Maker" (Harper, 100 pages, $15.99). Specifically, we step back into San Francisco in 1953, a time and place when many Chinese-Americans had few options but to live in "Chinatown." There was a bright side: Members of extended families lived near one another, so everyone celebrated birthdays and holidays together. Alas, "our parties weren't much fun for me," confesses Artie, Mr. Yep's alter ego. "I was the youngest and the smallest. So I was never smart enough or strong enough to win any game."

Artie is also the target of his meanest cousin, a spoiled boy named Petey. One day, Artie allows himself to be goaded by Petey into making a disastrous boast: Artie announces that not only will he have his own firecrackers for Chinese New Year but "I'll have so many I'll . . . I'll give them away." It's a dreadful and funny moment, for of course Artie has no way of procuring so many fireworks.

Or does he? Artie turns out to have an unlikely ally in his Uncle Chester, a gambler who can't seem to settle down and who, like him, knows the sting of being the youngest of his generation. This charming dollop of a book is filled with amusing details about family dynamics, Chinese traditions and a neighborhood so lively and sharp-elbowed that people learned to protect their ribs while they shopped.