 Paul Gigot: This week on "The Journal Editorial Report," the new Obama. The president courts business and says the era of big regulation is over. But is his move to the middle for real? Plus, Chinese President Hu Jintao visits the United States amid a new round of hand-wringing over American inferiority. But is China dominance a myth? And Tim Pawlenty. It's no secret he's considering a run for the White House. He's here to tell us why his eight years as Minnesota governor make him a serious contender. 

 Gigot: Welcome to "The Journal Editorial Report." I'm Paul Gigot. 

First up this week, the new Obama. After a humbling rebuke in the midterm elections, the president is looking to boost his pro-business bona fides. He brokered a bipartisan agreement on tax cuts and reached outside his inner circle for a new chief of staff with ties to the corporate world. This week, he took to our editorial pages to declare the era of big regulation over, announcing a new executive order to root out rules that impede job creation and economic growth. So is this move to the middle for real? 

Joining the panel this week, Wall Street Journal columnist and deputy editor Dan Henninger, OpinionJournal.com columnist John Fund and Washington columnist Kim Strassel. 

So, Dan, who is this president we're watching here? Is this Kevin Klein in the movie "Dave," kind of taking over the White House? Or is this the real Obama, just moving to the middle because he really believes it? 

 Henninger: Well, I'll tell you, Paul, I think it's something pretty close to "Dave." You know, there's something strange about the modern presidency. It's such the center of our obsessions these days. It's all we talk about. And I think that in Obama's case, he's proving that it helps a lot if you appear presidential in a way people expect an individual to be presidential. 

 Gigot: The Tucson speech would have helped him. 

 Henninger: The Tucson speech would have helped him. I think that that the tax cut--agreeing to that helped him a lot. There were a lot of upscale independents out in the suburbs that were staring down the barrel of a big tax increase, and they're very relieved. He is targeting three groups, I would say: minorities, young people and upscale independents in the suburbs. If they can--if he can get them to feel that he's acting more like a president, then he's going to raise his numbers and be on an even--even keel with his Republican opponents. 

 Gigot: Kim, I would say that the first thing to conclude from this move to the middle, real or feigned, by the president is, none of this would be happening if he hadn't had the big election rebuke in the fall. If Nancy Pelosi were still speaker, he would not be doing this. He realizes he's got to at least show that he's responding to the voters. 

 Strassel: That's exactly what this is. And you know, it was interesting. Right after that midterm defeat, he didn't look very repentant. But what you have seen since then is this gradual shift. Sometimes with a concrete thing, like the tax cuts that he--I mean, the tax extension that he agreed to. So far, since then, though--I would just add, since we're talking about how real this is, it has all been rhetoric so far this year. You know, what we are hearing is talk about how we might be interested in corporate tax reform, talk about how it would be good to have a regulatory review. Nothing so far, though, totally concrete that suggests that this is an actual move. That has yet to be figured out. 

 Gigot: John, Bill Daley, chief of staff, that is a concrete move. He's very much a product of corporate America and very comfortable in those precincts. Now he's named Jeff Immelt, the CEO of GE, to take Paul Volcker's place running his economic--the president's Economic Advisory Council. Is a lot of this stuff designed to bring Big Business into the Obama tent, back in where it was, I think, in 2008, and then they left him? 

 Fund: Big Business is clearly a constituency Obama wants. And he's trying a little bit to reach out to small business with this regulatory relief measure. But on the big-ticket item, which small business complains about a lot--the EPA endangerment finding, declaring carbon emissions a pollutant and regulating them--so far, there is no sign of retreating on that. 

Now remember, Bill Clinton had this big midterm loss in 1994. 

 Gigot: Right. 

 Fund: He actually moved to the center in many respects. 

 Gigot: Passing welfare--signing welfare reform. 

 Fund: Absolutely. 

 Gigot: Agreeing to a balanced budget. 

 Fund: They called what Clinton did triangulation: He's moving between congressional Democrats and the Republicans. So far, I think what Obama's practicing I call diversion--which is, say you are a centrist, pretend you're a centrist, but on all of the big-ticket items--health care, environmental regulation--so far there's been no movement. 

 Gigot: Yeah, the EPA said that they didn't think they had to change a single rule at all based on this. 

 Henninger: No. 

 Gigot: I want to read you some language from the president's executive order. He said that cost-benefit analysis should always include, quote, "values that are difficult or impossible to quantify, including equity, human dignity, fairness and distributive impacts," end quote. Sounds a lot like spreading the wealth. 

 Fund: You know what that is? That's saying to business: Talk to the hand. 

 Henninger: Well, the reality of these issues, like the carbon finding or even financial regulation, is they're extremely arcane. They're very complex. The president can engage, but those things will bog down into very prolonged negotiations. And as long as he seems to be engaged with them, I think his standing with the public will stay high. That doesn't mean anything will get done. 

 Gigot: But he's getting a bump here, John, from--in the public approval ratings. So they must--the people--Americans must like what they see. 

 Fund: The most significant number is only 45% of Americans think Barack Obama is a liberal. That is the lowest percentage ever since he was a national figure. Lower than when he was inaugurated. 

 Gigot: Kim, what do you expect from the president in the State of the Union next week? You expect him to show--sound like he is a real fiscal hawk now? 

 Strassel: That's what it is going to all be about. Part of this, too, you know, is the president is also trying to minimize the differences that Republicans are out there suggesting that there are between them and him. And so he's going to come out in the State of the Union, he's going to say, "Yes, I know, everyone, their top concern is jobs and also spending. Believe me, I'm a fiscal hawk as well." And he'll probably give some proposals. This is both going to be, again, to create the perception that he is focused on this. Also, to say, "Look, you know, I'm on the same page as Republicans," even though there are going to be huge differences.

 Gigot: All right. We're going to watch how this battle plays out. 

When we come back, the red-scare reprise. China's president visits the United States, amid a new bout of American hypochondria. Is China really dominant? And what's behind our own inferiority complex? Our panel weighs in, next.  

 Gigot: Chinese President Hu Jintao concluded his four-day visit to the United States yesterday amid a new round of hand-wringing over China's rise and America's supposed inferiority. More respondents to the latest Wall Street Journal poll say China will be the world's dominant power in 20 years than think the U.S. will retain that mantle. Such fears have been fueled in recent months by ads like this one, from Citizens Against Government Waste. 

  "Beijing, China, 2030 A.D.," man addressing seminar in Chinese with English subtitles: Why do great nations fall? The ancient Greeks, the Roman Empire, the British Empire and the United States of America, they all make the same mistakes: turning their back on the principles that make them great. America tried to spend and tax itself out of a great recession. Enormous so-called stimulus spending, massive changes to health care, government takeovers of private industries, and crushing debt. Of course, we owned most of their debt, so now they work for us [audience laughs]. 

 Gigot: We're back with Dan Henninger. Also joining the panel, Wall Street Journal foreign-affairs columnist and deputy editor Bret Stephens and editorial board member Mary Kissel. She's the former editorial page editor of The Wall Street Journal Asia.

So, Mary, you did follow China for many years. Is America--are Americans overestimating China's economic power? 

 Kissel: Well, I think to a large degree, yes, they are. I mean, you have to remember that the per capita income in China is still less than $7,000. It's still a very poor country. 

 Gigot: And ours is what, $45,000 or $50,000? 

 Kissel: Exactly. And secondly, remember that China is highly unstable inside the country. There are more than 80,000 protests every year in China, and that's just the official numbers. We have absolutely no idea how many other problems are erupting all over the country. 

 Gigot: Wait a minute. But the perception in a lot of places, including some folks on the New York Times editorial page, is that that's a strength, because they don't have to worry too much about democratic dissent and they can actually get--go in the direction they want and--with infrastructure projects and that sort of thing. 

 Kissel: Well, yes, that might be what the New York Times thinks, but you also have to remember that we're not allowed in to see many of these problems in China. When you have 3,000 people out on the streets protesting because their kids are drinking bad, polluted water or their property has been taken away, we're not allowed in there to report on that. So we actually don't have any idea of the breadth of the unrest within that country. 

 Gigot: But they have huge trade surpluses, Bret. They built those up. They have an export juggernaut. They have increasing per capita income. Three hundred million Chinese have risen out of poverty. That's good. We like at least that part of it. But what about this economic juggernaut and trade juggernaut? Is that something that gives them the advantage over the United States? 

 Stephens: Well, I mean, we also have advantages from being able to purchase inexpensive Chinese goods. Look, Germany is an export juggernaut as well. But we don't think of Germany as being a major economy, although we did in the 1980s. And I think there is some historical perspective that we have to bear in mind. I remember when I was in high school and college, everyone thought that Japan was going to be--you know, there was Japan as No. 1.

 Gigot: Right. 

 Stephens: Your generation, Sputnik--well, maybe--

 Gigot: Oh, you're going to pay for that one, Stephens.

 Stephens: You had the hysteria about Soviets beating us as well. So this is a bit of an old story about democratic societies fretting about their own shortcomings. And there's some value to that. This goes to something that you raised with Mary. Here in the United States, we make lots of mistakes. But we have self-correcting mechanisms built in. We have elections. We have open markets. People change. People adapt. The problem with the Chinese system that is that, for all of its strengths, it's also very brittle, because it doesn't have the same self-correcting mechanisms. 

 Gigot: We have to remember our own strengths, is what I think the bottom line of what Bret is saying. We've forgotten some of those--vitality, innovation--and we've gotten, especially in the last four years, where we've built up this enormous debt, as that TV ad I think rather brilliantly described.

 Henninger: Yeah, well, I'm going to dissent a little bit, if one may use that word in this context. I think we're in a real competition with China. I would go so far as to say they do constitute a threat. They are producing enormous wealth. A lot of that wealth flows into their military. When we talk about the Chinese threat, what are we talking about? It's their high growth rates: 9%-plus growth, year over year. 

 Gigot: Compared to ours, the last couple years, 2%. 

 Henninger: That's exactly the point. If the United States is going to stay in the game, we're going to need much higher growth rates than we have now. It relates to the conversation we just had about Obama and this Congress. They have got to do what is necessary to raise our growth. For instance, lowering the corporate tax rate to 15% would be a huge shot in the arm. Unless we do that sort of thing, I think China's going to gradually, continuously--

 Gigot: Yes, but, since Stephens thinks that I'm so old, I remember the '70s, when there was another bout of America hypochondria, and what cured that, Mary, was a rapid growth rate and the recovery under Ronald Reagan. Is that the ultimate cure here for our own malaise? 

 Kissel: Well, yes, I think that's right. And I think that's what we're seeing with Obama trying to move to the middle in the tax compromise. But we need to do much, much, much more. 

And just to Dan's point, the Chinese are starting to threaten us militarily. They've been very aggressive in their pushes out to the South China Sea against Japan, in declaring actually the whole South China Sea a core interest of China's. So we not only need to revitalize our economy, we need to make sure we have military strength in Asian Pacific and that our rhetoric also pushes back on the Chinese and tells them, "Look, you know, we want to include you in the global trading system. We want you as a partner. But we're not going to allow to you push us out."

 Gigot: OK. Sorry, Bret, we've got to go. Mary gets the last word. 

When we come back, former Gov. Tim Pawlenty. It's no secret is he's considering a run for the White House. So what accomplishments does he point to in Minnesota as proof that he's presidential material? And with health-care repeal efforts at the top of the Republican agenda, what does he think of rival Mitt Romney's legacy in Massachusetts? I'll ask him, next. 

 Gigot: Finally this week, my conversation with Tim Pawlenty. He's just finished up two terms as governor of Minnesota, a record sure to be scrutinized if, as expected, he jumps into the Republican presidential race. I asked him what he thought were his most significant accomplishments in those eight years. 

 Pawlenty: I think what Minnesota experienced over the last eight years is what the country's going to experience in the upcoming eight-year period. In other words, we had to tame spending from a ridiculous level to sustainable; reduce taxes; market-based, not government-based, health care reforms; performance pay for teachers; lawsuit abuse reform. But really, I think the hallmark of all of that is taking a place, in my case, a very liberal place, that I love the people, but the politics there, as you know, are a little challenging, Paul--

 Gigot: Right. 

 Pawlenty: --and taming it. And if we can do it in Minnesota, you can do it anywhere. 

 Gigot: Well, I was looking at the Tax Foundation records of where Minnesota ranks in terms of business tax climate. And it says it's still 43rd, which is way down the list. Do you think not being able to change that business tax climate was a defeat? 

 Pawlenty: No, not at all. In fact, the Tax Foundation, I think, using Census Bureau data, said that Minnesota moved out of the top 10 in taxes during my time as governor. And every governor for 40 years promised they were going to do that. None of them ever did. I did. 

 Gigot: What were the big taxes that got cut that really changed that business climate that you point to?

 Pawlenty: Well, for starters, we didn't make it worse. So we kept a lid on taxes and didn't raise taxes. Adn then we did reduce taxes $800 million net over my time. CNBC, another news source--

 Gigot: That's the competition. 

 Pawlenty: Yeah, I understand. But they moved us to the seventh- or eighth-best business climate in the country, up from 30th, or mid-30s, based on taxes as well as a variety of other business considerations. And we had similar rankings, so there was progress under my watch. More to do. 

 Gigot: So you think that what the Republican agenda should be in Washington right now, with the new House Republicans, is, what? What are the one or two things you think they should do--the two most important things that would help Minnesota but also, more broadly, the nation? 

 Pawlenty: Well, of course, jobs and the economy is what is most on people's minds. But let's take one step back and say, remember the security of our nation is always first, because people aren't going to deploy capital, take risks, start businesses, dream, design, innovate--

 Gigot: Right. 

 Pawlenty: --and invent unless they feel safe and secure. So let's not forget that. But then, No. 2, we have to get the entrepreneurial economy moving again. We have to get banks to make loans. 

 Gigot: How do you do that? 

 Pawlenty: Well, let's create an environment for the job providers to say, "I'm more likely to do that, not less likely to do that." Let's reduce the tax burdens, not keep increasing the government burdens, speed up the regulatory and permitting process, reduce the burdens on lawsuit abuse and reform. Let's get students and workers of the future to be focused on skills and education that are relevant and rigorous. There's a lot of work to be done, but those are some of them. 

 Gigot: Repeal the health-care bill that passed last year? 

 Pawlenty: Absolutely. I mean, there's a number of things we can do to get into the specifics. Let's repeal and really fix health care with an eye towards cost containment--not ObamaCare, but the kinds of market-based reforms I did in Minnesota. Let's go back and look at the financial institutions bill and fix the real problem, which was Fannie and Freddie and the political connections between Congress and the cronyism between Congress and Fannie and Freddie. Let's have a tax code that's simpler, flatter, barer and more pro-growth. 

 Gigot: So you support tax cuts like the sort that David Camp of the House Ways and Means Committee is talking about--reducing the top rate and closing some loopholes. In concept, you're in favor of that? 

 Pawlenty: Yes, and in fact, I go back to Kemp-Roth. You and I are both old enough to remember the early 1980s. 

 Gigot: Sure, that was what happened in the '80s. 

 Pawlenty: Yeah, there's a lot of details associated with it. But in general, the direction should be lower rates and clean out the earmarking--not just the new appropriations, but clean out the earmarking in the tax code as best we can. We'll have to keep some, like charitable contributions and home mortgage interest deduction, but we it want flatter, simpler, clearer, more transparent, less cronyism reflected by earmarking in the tax code. 

 Gigot: You mentioned health care, and of course, one of your potential competitors in the presidential run, former governor of Massachusetts Mitt Romney, has passed a very prominent health-care bill in that state, which he has continued to defend, criticizing some details. But what's the main difference, do you think, between what you did in Minnesota and what he did in Massachusetts? 

 Pawlenty: Yeah, I'm not going to--this is not directed it at you, but I'm not going to get sucked into criticizing Mitt. I consider him a friend. 

 Gigot: That's my job, Governor. That's my job. And if you're going to be running--

 Pawlenty: I understand. My job is to tell you what I did. 

 Gigot: --you two are going to be competing on that idea. 

 Pawlenty: Here are some things we did in Minnesota, talking about my record. One is we have one of the highest, if not the highest, rates of usage of health savings accounts in the country. They work. No. 2, we moved towards getting consumers in the driver's seat, getting them good information about price and quality, giving them financial incentives to use it wisely, incentivizing producers the providers of the service--the hospitals, the clinics, the doctors--to be measured not just by the volumes of procedures that they're performing, but the outcomes, whether people are getting better, and aligning money to those outcomes. 

We have also now taken Minnesota's health care for our state employees in a direction where we've got the cost increases down to almost zero percent many of the last five or six years, and much more. But that is a market-oriented, consumer-driven model, not a bureaucratic-driven model. And lastly, for people who say, "Well, how are you going to help the disadvantaged who need it?"

 Gigot: Right. 

 Pawlenty: Well, let's give them the help to the extent we can afford it. But let's give it to them directly. Let's not run it through some government bureaucracy. Let's give them a voucher, a credit, a stipend. Let them be in charge, and give them incentives to make wise decisions. 

 Gigot: If you do run, would you ask Gov. Romney to say he made a mistake--ask him whether he made a mistake in passing that bill in Massachusetts?

 Pawlenty: You know, I'm going to abide as best I can by Ronald Reagan's 11th Amendment and say what I have done and what I stand for and try my best to avoid criticizing my friends and colleagues on the Republican team.

 Gigot: Do you have a deadline at all in your own mind about when you might declare, if you do? 

 Pawlenty: Yeah, I'm seriously considering it. I'm not trying to be coy. 

 Gigot: No, everybody knows that. 

 Pawlenty: I'm going to make a final decision and announcement sometime in the late winter, early spring time frame.

 Gigot: All right, Governor. Thanks so much for being here. We'll be watching. 

 Pawlenty: Thanks for having me, Paul. 

 Gigot: We have to take one more break. When we come back, our "Hits and Misses" of the week. 

 Gigot: Time now for our "Hits and Misses" of the week. Dan, first to you. 

 Henninger: Paul, with Sen. Joe Lieberman's announced retirement, we're going to see the end of a revered Democratic tradition of producing strong advocates of national defense and America's interest abroad. This lineage dates back at least to FDR, runs through Harry Truman, John Kennedy and such notable senators as Scoop Jackson, Pat Moynihan and Sam Nunn, and now, finally, Joe Lieberman, of Connecticut. This is a true bipartisan tradition, and it is going to be sorely missed. 

 Gigot: Last of the Jack Kennedy liberals. 

 Henninger: Yeah.

 Gigot: Kim? 

 Strassel: Also a hit to a retiring senator, this one North Dakota Democrat Kent Conrad. Although this hit is for his deciding to save taxpayers any more of his definition of fiscal responsibility. For 25 years, as senator and head of the Budget Committee, he has presented himself as the biggest deficit hawk, even as he has voted for just about any spending bill that came to the chamber, which has led to the deficits we see today. So here's to hoping his replacement in 2012 has a little more realistic definition of the word "tightwad."

 Gigot: OK, Kim. Bret? 

 Stephens: Ricky Gervais, the British comedian, was the host of the Golden Globe Awards last week, and he ripped into his ballroom audience of Hollywood celebrities. It was absolutely merciless. Nobody got away. The audience was gasping. This is an audience that pretends it likes to pretend it speaks truth to power when it's Washington, but doesn't like to hear the truth about itself. Two big thumbs up for Ricky Gervais. 

 Gigot: Ricky Gervais. All right, Bret.

And remember, if you have your own "Hit or Misses," please send it to us at jer@foxnews.com. That's it for this week's edition of "The Journal Editorial Report." Thanks to my panel and to all of you for watching. I'm Paul Gigot. We sure hope to see you right here next week. 