With his brush-cut hair and ripcord-and-steel manner, Richard Brooks looked just like the Marine he used to be. But Richard Brooks wasn't really Richard Brooks. As Douglass Daniel notes in his very welcome biography "Tough as Nails," the movie director was actually Reuben Sax, the son of a Russian-Jewish clothes-cutter who came to America in 1908 and settled in Philadelphia, where Reuben was born in 1912. The change of names is a fascinatingly evasive strategy in a life that was otherwise focused on ramming straight ahead.

Mr. Daniel's book doesn't fully explain this complex man, but it enables us to appreciate the ferocious drive behind the writer and director of "The Blackboard Jungle" (1955), "The Professionals" (1966) and "In Cold Blood" (1967), who had worked in New York during the 1930s as a newspaper reporter, playwright and novelist ("The Brick Foxhole," "The Producer") before coming to Hollywood in 1940. He began using the name Richard Brooks professionally in New York but didn't make the change legally until 1943. 

On the movie set, Brooks was an explosive martinet. As Mr. Daniel makes clear, the director seems to have counted the day a failure if he hadn't reamed somebody out. He had a hair-trigger paranoia similar to that of Sam Peckinpah, except Peckinpah was fueled by tequila and cocaine and Brooks was fueled by raw ambition and a furious belief in the power of words.

The frustrating thing about art is that you never know what's going to last and what isn't. Brooks's stabs at prestigious literary adaptations ("The Brothers Karamazov" in 1958, "Lord Jim" in 1965) verge on the unwatchable, and his sojourns into the ravaged loneliness of Tennessee Williams—"Cat on a Hot Tin Roof" (1958), "Sweet Bird of Youth" (1962)—are inferior to Elia Kazan's. But a lot of his earnest films remain worth watching—for instance, "Elmer Gantry" (1960), if only because of Burt Lancaster's come-to-Jesus performance, and "In Cold Blood" has retained its gloomy power as well. And let's not overlook "The Blackboard Jungle," with its gritty portrait of rough inner-city schools and its use—daring at the time—of the song "Rock Around the Clock" under the opening credits.

Right up there with "Elmer Gantry" is "The Professionals," a superb, late-in-the-day western set during the Mexican Revolution—not the equal of Peckinpah's "The Wild Bunch" but not far behind. It's got one of the great high-testosterone casts (Lee Marvin, Burt Lancaster, Robert Ryan, Woody Strode). It's also got adventure, a sardonic attitude, a little sex (Claudia Cardinale), Conrad Hall's stunning photography and philosophical, Hemingway-esque dialogue about the inevitable disappointments of all revolutions. "The Professionals" is a vastly entertaining action picture by a man who didn't have a reputation for making them.

 By Douglass K. Daniel   University of Wisconsin, 249 pages, $26.95

I knew Brooks slightly—and had one long night of cordial conversation and drinking at his house in 1977. He was alone, the house was eerily quiet, and he seemed glad to have someone to talk to. (His marriage to the actress Jean Simmons was probably coming to an end; they were divorced three years later.) He was a splendid raconteur and hard-core print guy, with fond, hilarious stories about his scuffling days in Philadelphia, writing unbylined short pieces for the sports pages. His passion for newspapers comes through in his film "Deadline-U.S.A." (1952), with Humphrey Bogart as a both saturnine and driven editor.

What also came through in conversation with him was Brooks's wary, grudging respect for the old moguls who had given him his start at MGM, where he and John Sturges were part of a postwar youth movement whose members flourished only when they left the studio. Truthfully, it took Brooks a long time to figure out what kind of filmmaker he was supposed to be. Lots of directors, in his era, were adept at getting the studios to pay for what were clearly personal artistic pursuits, but men like John Ford and Elia Kazan were smooth operators whose great gifts, in any case, were primarily visual. Brooks didn't have their manipulative skills or their versatility. His films as a contract director at MGM, like "Battle Circus" in 1954, have little to recommend them. Brooks couldn't phone it in; he needed to be personally invested if his work was to have any resonance.

His primary mentor was John Huston, with whom he wrote "Key Largo" (1948). Huston directed the movie—and offered Brooks the gift of access: "Huston was the first director to allow him to watch a film being shot," Mr. Daniel writes. Brooks later said: "Huston always said that a writer should direct his own script, that it's the only way to protect yourself." Like Huston, Brooks was drawn to literary material, and his images were often dependent on the cameraman for their stylistic flourish. But unlike the jauntily fatalistic Huston, Brooks never developed an artistic personality of his own, and he had a hard-to-conceal didactic streak.

Brooks's later years were unfortunate. He was a man of his time, as "Looking for Mr. Goodbar" (1977) showed all too plainly. The story of a promiscuous schoolteacher who is murdered drew howls from feminists and brickbats from some critics, but the movie—aided by controversy over its lurid ending—was Brooks's last box-office success. Landlocked by a couple of late professional stiffs in the 1980s, he chafed at his irrelevance, drank too much, even let his personal hygiene go. He died in 1992, just short of his 80th birthday. Engraved on his tombstone is the legend "First Comes the Word"—his frequently stated core truth, pointing to the primacy of the writer in all narrative forms.

I liked Richard Brooks a great deal, and I like Mr. Daniel's biography so much that I wish there were more of it. The author is very good about individual movies and the overall career, but when it comes to Brooks's life and inner motives he moves his narrative too briskly; the book could certainly have sustained more personal detail. That said, you can't help but be glad "Tough as Nails" exists; consider it a sizable down payment on an American life deserving of a larger investment.

 Mr. Eyman is the author of "Empire of Dreams: The Epic Life of Cecil B. DeMille." 