India Prime Minister Manmohan Singh is struggling to restore faith in his government. The latest effort is likely to fail with the business community. 

Mr. Singh's new cabinet, announced on Wednesday, comes amid allegations of corruption and mismanagement.

The shuffle shifted several ministers into new roles, elevated some and stripped others of their responsibilities. 

Bad governance has come under the spotlight in recent months. Preparations for last year's Commonwealth Games were exposed as shoddy, and a government auditor revealed that the telecom ministry cost India around $40 billion in potential revenue by mishandling a spectrum auction. 

The pertinent question is how investors and companies will perceive the response. Already, some are holding back. Even as the government has sought billions in infrastructure investments, foreign direct investment between April and November was down 27.4% from a year earlier. 

Business leaders are unhappy. In a letter to the government released Monday, a group of 14 industrialists, former central-bank governors and retired judges warned that corruption was harming India's growth and suggested a provincial-level approach to rooting it out.

"We are alarmed at the widespread governance deficit almost in every sphere of national activity covering government, business and institutions," wrote the group, which includes the chairmen of India's biggest housing-finance company and information-technology company Wipro. 

Recent decisions out of New Delhi raise questions about its ability to deliver key reforms.

For example, India desperately needs energy and other resources, but the environment ministry is notoriously slow and sometimes reluctant to approve projects. 

Five years after South Korea's Posco applied for environmental clearance to build a $12 billion steel plant—which would be the largest-ever direct investment into India—it only just received a panel's recommendation for approval. It's still waiting for the environment ministry's final go-ahead. 

Protecting the environment is important, but doing so by delaying investment, rather than by finding solutions that meet India's needs, is holding development back. 

Here Mr. Singh missed an opportunity, leaving the environment ministry alone during his government shuffle. 

More pressing, perhaps, is the persistent rise in food prices that is now undermining the rise of India's middle class. This has its roots in decades of neglect of food production, storage and distribution. Solving the problem now will require a thorough overhaul and a long-term investment. 

Mr. Singh's measures on this front seem aimed at pacifying public outrage over price gains. India's agriculture minister will no longer also oversee the ministry of consumer affairs, food and public distribution. 

But he retains his job and also picked up a new portfolio: food processing.

Mr. Singh has promised that he will make more-extensive changes after the federal budget is released next month.

Seeing will be believing.

 Write to  Harsh Joshi at harsh.joshi@dowjones.com 