Through years of art fads, changing tastes and market booms and busts, one unlikely category has quietly kept a hold on American collectors: the blue-and-white painted pottery known as Delft. 

Next week, one of the world's foremost collections of the pottery will hit the auction block at Christie's in New York. One plate has a high estimate of nearly $200,000.

Named for the city in the Netherlands where some of it was made, Delft pottery is hand-painted, tin-glazed earthenware that first emerged in Europe in the 15th and 16th centuries, intended to imitate Chinese porcelain. Much of the most valuable Delft pottery in collection's today, however, was made in England, sometimes by Dutch craftsmen who had relocated there, says Jody Wilkie, Christie's European ceramics specialist. A popular import to America from Europe during the colonial period, Delft often turns up at Americana sales in the U.S. as a relic of early American history.

Pieces in next week's sale range from a leaf-shaped pickle dish with a flower motif that's expected to sell for between $800 and $1,200 to a blue-and-white candlestick from 1653 that's expected to sell for as much as $100,000. Ms. Wilkie says it's one of four remaining of its type in the world—and the only one that's in a private collection. 

The Longridge collection, which Christie's will auction off on Jan. 24 in New York, was owned by the late collector Syd Levethan, who lived in Connecticut and founded an Italian shoe design and manufacturing company. He assembled his collection over 30 years, and went on a buying spree in the 1990s when several single-collector auctions brought an unusual spate of the pottery to the auction, outbidding the other major collectors in the field at the time. An avid collector with wide-ranging tastes, Mr. Levethan also owned medieval artwork, sculptures and pocket watches, among other objects. The first half of his collection went on sale in New York in June. 

Ms. Wilkie says the death of several high-profile collectors and dealers over the past few years has changed the market for Delft pottery, but some younger collectors have shown interest.

Mr. Levethan, she says, was particularly drawn to dated pieces that gave a glimpse into the lives of their original owners, like 17th-century wedding or retirement gifts that were initialed on the back. 

For collectors, Delft has proven to be a fairly steady investment, but blockbuster returns are rare. A piece that Mr. Levethan purchased in 1995 at a Sotheby's auction for $89,225 went for $169,648 in the June sale, a rise of about 4.4% a year. "Delft is something that's slow and steady," says Katherine Jentleson, director of analytics at Art Research Technologies. 

Though they may at first glance resemble the type of blue-and-white china that your grandparents displayed in their dining room, the valuable pieces in Christie's sale usually date back to before 1750, says Ms. Wilkie. Delft is still made today in the Netherlands, but most of it is mass-produced for tourists.

—Candace Jackson