ARLINGTON, Tex.—In many ways, the Yankees' win Sunday over the Rangers wasn't the prettiest.

The team committed four errors and made two other fielding blunders that won't necessarily show up in the scorers' book. CC Sabathia, the team's best pitcher, tied a season-high with four walks—three of which came across to score early on.

But when all was said and done, the Yankees seemed to overcome all their miscues by simply knocking the ball out of the park.

Shortstop Derek Jeter had a breakout game, racking up four hits—two of them home runs— and little-used backup catcher Francisco Cervelli hit an eighth-inning grand slam to open up what had been a tight contest to help the Yanks to a 12-5 victory.

Jeter's first blast, in the fifth inning, marked his first in 259 at-bats, dating back to August 24 of last year. The second came on Jeter's following plate appearance in the seventh frame. Both shots landed in the right-field seats, leading hitting coach Kevin Long to say the homers were hit in "typical Jeter fashion."

"Everybody needs a day like this, regardless of whether you're swinging well or not swinging well," said Jeter, whose hitting had been heavily scrutinized to start the year. 

Jeter, who finished with three runs batted in, said he has been feeling better about his swing since the club's last series in Detroit. "I just want to be comfortable, and if you're comfortable, the hits will come."

Jeter's hitting seemingly put the team in a comfort zone, as Curtis Granderson, who has a league-leading 11 homers, and Mark Teixeira also homered during the game. 

The power display, put on at one of the league's most hitter-friendly parks, helped mask New York's less-than-stellar day on the field.

"We did not play well early," manager Joe Girardi said of the team, which has committed nine errors over the past four games. "CC had two errors himself today. I told our club, 'We gotta stop making it so hard on ourselves. We're a good team, but we're making it hard on ourselves in those situations."

Sabathia got off to a rough start, tossing 31 pitches—17 for balls—in the first inning, when the Rangers touched him up for three quick runs. An Elvis Andrus single in the second inning pushed the Texas lead to 4-0.

From that point, though, Sabathia settled. He finished with a season-low two strikeouts, but improved his command as the game progressed. 

The Rangers would score once more, shortly after reliever Joba Chamberlain came in to replace Sabathia. The Yankee ace went six innings, allowing five runs, though only three of them were earned.

Jeter put New York on the board in the third inning, hitting a shallow liner into right field to score Brett Gardner. Granderson followed with a single of his own to bring in Cervelli and cut the deficit in half, 4-2.

The Yankees struck again when Jeter hit his first home run to cut the lead to one, and Alex Rodriguez's groundout in the fifth, which scored Granderson, knotted the game at 4.

After Jeter and Granderson hit back-to-back home runs in the seventh, the Rangers came right back with their fifth run off an Adrian Beltre single.

The turning point was Cervelli's line-drive home run in the eighth, which barely cleared the center-field fence to give the Yankees a 10-6 edge. "The first time I noticed the bases were loaded was when I made it back to the dugout," said Cervelli, who slugged the homer on a full count.

Girardi said he didn't consider pinch-hitting for Cervelli, whose longball was just the second of his career. It was his first in 307 at-bats, and it couldn't have come at a better time for his team.

And by the time the Yankees had tacked on two more insurance runs later in the inning, many of the 48,000 or so fans that helped make the game a sellout headed for the exits.

 Write to  Chris Herring at chris.herring@wsj.com 