SAN'A, Yemen—At least two protesters were killed and dozens injured in Yemen's capital of San'a Tuesday after the army fired live rounds and tear gas into a crowd during a demonstration, according to medics at the scene. 

Protests have been relatively peaceful in the Yemeni capital, and the violence has the potential to bring more demonstrators to the streets.

Shooting started when about 20 tribesmen tried to enter the grounds outside San'a University with a large tent but were prohibited from entering by the army, according to witnesses. An argument ensued, and the army fired shots in the air to disperse the crowd. The army was subsequently overwhelmed when protesters ran over to help the tribesmen and soldiers fired into the crowd, witnesses said.

Protesters told the Wall Street Journal that the tribesmen were from the eastern province of Kholan, and had traveled to San'a in a bus on Tuesday to join the antigovernment demonstrators.

A doctor at the protest said two people had died, and bullets, teargas and flying debris injured more than 100 people. A nearby mosque was transformed into a makeshift medical center to treat the wounded. Crowds parted as ambulances ferried the injured to hospital, and many of the wounded were treated on the ground.

There was no official confirmation on casualties, but the Yemeni government said the men trying to enter the protests were armed. "Police discovered individuals with a stash of fully automatic rifles hidden inside thick blankets and camping equipments," a government official said in a statement released in the early hours of Wednesday morning. "The suspects resisted arrest and soon thereafter a gunfight broke out, injuring dozens of suspected militants, policemen and innocent bystanders. Panic from the shootings set off a raging stampede in the area," he added.

Thousands of antigovernment protesters have been camped outside San'a University for the past two weeks, demanding President Ali Abdullah Saleh end his three-decade rule. Many of the protesters haven't left the mass sit-in and sleep in tents, which line the streets around the university. Each day the area occupied by the protesters grows as more demonstrators come bringing tents and food.

The army has attempted to prevent protesters from expanding the area, but has had little luck. 

This is the first time the army has fired on protesters in San'a. Previous clashes have been between pro- and antigovernment demonstrators and 27 people have died since protests began in January, according to Amnesty International.

On Sunday, Yemen's political opposition vowed to intensify protests against Mr. Saleh, who has refused to leave power until elections in 2013.

The U.S. government has advised all Americans in Yemen to consider leaving. "The security threat level in Yemen is extremely high due to terrorist activities and civil unrest," read a travel warning issued by the U.S. Embassy in San'a.