(See Corrections and Amplifications item below.)

New York City tennis players' prospects for an enjoyable spring following a long, dreary winter have dimmed somewhat, as fees for public tennis courts are likely going to double.

The Parks Department has proposed increasing to $200 from $100 the price for the seasonal adult tennis permit. Single-play tickets, for those who do not purchase permits, would increase to $15 from $7 per person, per hour. The Parks Department will make a final decision on the change in 30 days; it is seen as very likely to pass.

The proposal has irked tennis advocates, who say the cash-strapped city is taking advantage of people who are often incorrectly cast as wealthy and able to pay top dollar for an hour of tennis.

"We have big budget problems in the city, but I don't think this is going to achieve a balanced budget," said Council Member Stephen Levin of Brooklyn. "I think this particular method would deter people of modest means from playing tennis."

The Parks Department also plans to double the membership fee for recreation centers that have indoor pools, to $150 from $75, and for those without pools to $100 from $50. It would adjust the fees for softball and baseball fields to $12.50 an hour, from $16 per session.

A member of the McCarren Tennis Association in Brooklyn, Sean Hoess, argued that the price of tennis was high when compared to other sports, even considering the recreation center and field increases.

"It's not that we wouldn't support some increase; obviously everyone has to pitch in," Mr. Hoess said. "The issue is, we're already paying more than other sports. And it's particularly galling when you have to go out and resurface your own courts."

Last year, Mr. Hoess and his fellow members raised enough money to resurface one of McCarren Park's seven courts, which he said hadn't been touched in more than 20 years. Their efforts were later noticed by the U.S. Tennis Association and American Express, which resurfaced the entire facility at a cost of $56,000.

"That's money we saved the city," he said.

Philip Abramson, a spokesman for the Parks Department, said tennis permits are "a great deal," even after the increases. He disputed the claim that tennis costs more than other recreational sports, as the one-time fee covers a long season, from April to November.

"Ball field users actually pay far more than tennis users over the course of the year," he said.

Tennis permits, single-play tickets and court reservations have brought in between $1.8 million and $1.9 million annually for the past five years. The money goes into the city's general fund; Mr. Abramson said the Parks Department does not track how much it spends each year on tennis court maintenance. The department has several court resurfacing projects slated for this spring, including a $1.2 million renovation in Inwood Hill Park and two smaller facilities in Harlem.

Last year, the Parks Department sold the fewest adult permits—12,416—since 2006, and nearly 1,700 less than in 2009. The Parks Department expects another 5% decline in permit purchases after the fee hike, but a net gain of $1.2 million in revenue.

The city's Independent Budget Office suggests the revenue increase might not be so large. When the Parks Department doubled the price of tennis permits in 2003, to $100 from $50, it resulted in a 40% drop in permit sales from the previous year and a marginal increase in revenue.

"Given what happened the last time, it seems like a fairly optimistic number," said Ana Champeny, the IBO's supervising analyst for housing, environment and infrastructure.

Mr. Levin pointed out that $30 an hour—the cost for two non-permit holders to use a public court—is close to what some private clubs charge, excluding membership fees.

 Corrections & Amplifications 

City Council Member Stephen Levin's first name was misspelled as Steven in an earlier version of this story.