In February of 2003, Stephen and Audrey Mininni were shoveling in front of their Bensonhurst home when they were approached by a furious neighbor who accused them of pushing their snow onto his property.

The neighbor,  Carmelo Calabra, then punched Mr. Mininni in the face and swung a shovel at Ms. Mininni while threatening to kill them and set their home on fire, according to court papers filed in the case.

That incident was emblematic of the strained relationship the Mininnis had with Mr. Calabra. The couple would eventually get 17 orders of protection against their neighbor between 2003 and 2007.

That uneasy existence boiled over on Tuesday when Mr. Calabra, 77 years old, was shot and killed by the Mininnis' son, an off-duty city corrections officer who was attacked by the elderly neighbor as he sat in a Brooklyn barber's chair, police said.

According to a law-enforcement official with knowledge of the case,  Michael Mininni appeared to act in self-defense and likely will not face criminal charges.

The official said Mr. Calabro entered the barber shop holding a small .25-caliber pistol and almost immediately struck the officer in the head with it. Mr. Mininni attempted to disarm the gunman, but was bitten several times. He eventually pulled out his service firearm and shot five rounds, striking Mr. Calabro multiple times and killing him, the official said.

The official said Mr. Calabro's gun was loaded but was never fired. The safety switch was in the on position, indicating Mr. Calabro had perhaps sought to scare Mr. Mininni and not shoot him, the official said.

Still, the circumstances of the case, along with corroboration of Mr. Mininni's narrative by four witnesses in the shop, indicates "this homicide appears to be justifiable," the official said.

On Wednesday, authorities said Mr. Calabro had long been a troubling presence in the Mininni family's life. In the February 2003 case, Mr. Calabro pleaded guilty to menacing and was ordered to stay away from the Mininni family.

But he did not, according to authorities. He was the subject of eight police complaint reports filed by Stephen and Audrey Mininni, records show. Mr. Calabro in turn filed six complaints against his neighbors, none of which were substantiated, the law-enforcement official said.

On Bay 13th Street, where the feuding parties lived next door to each other, neighbors described Mr. Calabro, who was known as Carl, as enigmatic: kind in one moment and prone to violent rage at others.

Mr. Calabro was also known on the block for a troubling 2000 incident in which he threatened a former neighbor with a shotgun for blocking his driveway. He was arrested, but the disposition of that case wasn't immediately available.

He was the father of three children; one son is a detective with the NYPD and another was a firefighter who died in the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.

Michael Mininni, 25, was described by neighbors as a member of a very "traditional family." "It's a horrible thing, terrible thing to happen," said John Tag, 56. "[Michael] is the last kid on earth who would ever want to hurt someone, let alone kill someone."

—Alison Fox contributed to this article. 