Six years ago, three professors at Harvard Business School tackled a far-reaching question: How might the mission of a university change in the 21st century?

Read the complete  Next: Planning & Living the New Retirement report .

Their eventual answer: Throw open the doors to older adults—and give them the tools to help change the world.

Today, that mission is taking shape in Harvard's classrooms. The university's Advanced Leadership Initiative, now in its third year, invites late-career professionals and executives to spend nearly a year on campus. Participants can audit virtually any of the university's hundreds of academic offerings, take part in think tanks and seminars, and meet regularly with faculty and students.

In return, Harvard asks each student, or fellow, to develop a "social purpose project," a plan for addressing significant problems in education, health, the environment and other areas.

In short, the program represents a new, "third stage" in higher education, says Rosabeth Moss Kanter, the initiative's co-founder and director, and one of the three Harvard professors who in 2005 first envisioned a wider role for the nation's colleges and universities. Such institutions have long launched young adults into the world from undergraduate and graduate/professional programs. Now, she says, these schools need to do the same for older adults.

"Clearly, we need additional leaders to take on social challenges—and here we have this large population of adults leaving first careers who are going to live for another 20 or 30 years," Prof. Kanter says. Higher education "can be the resource that gives these individuals the skills and direction they need."

For now, the Harvard initiative remains small: About 20 to 30 fellows a year take part. That said, Prof. Kanter expects the program to grow steadily—and, ideally, to be replicated at schools across the country.

Indeed, the initiative is a "sign of things to come," says Marc Freedman, chief executive of Civic Ventures, a San Francisco nonprofit focused on expanding the contributions of older Americans. Already, he notes, a growing number of resources—community colleges, webinars, alumni groups and life coaches, among others—are helping the 50-plus crowd transition into jobs and careers in the social-service and nonprofit arenas.

Eventually, these multiple pathways, Mr. Freedman adds, will "enable individuals in the second half of life to move seamlessly from 'what's last' to 'what's next.' "

The Harvard initiative runs from January through November, with a summer break (primarily for field work and research). Fellows are asked to cover the costs of the program (which the university doesn't disclose publicly), although some financial assistance is available for individuals from public-service careers. 

When considering candidates, the faculty looks for "people of accomplishment who have the potential to accomplish more," Prof. Kanter says. (Specific guidelines are at www.advancedleadership.harvard.edu.) Such individuals, she adds, must be motivated to "take on a societal challenge at the local, national or global level."

Put another way, the year isn't meant to be a leisurely transition into later life, and hand-holding is all but nonexistent. "It's relatively nonstructured, which means you have to be a self-starter," says Doug Rauch, age 59. Mr. Rauch is the former president (for almost 14 years) of Trader Joe's, a chain of specialty grocery stores, and is now a "senior fellow" at the initiative (back for a second year).

Mr. Rauch had a general idea of the problem he planned to tackle before he joined Harvard's initiative—the tons of perfectly good food that end up in landfills each day in the U.S. (from restaurants, grocers and others), even though hunger is on the rise. Still, he wasn't sure where to start.

Working closely with faculty, graduate students and his colleagues in the program quickly changed all that. "You can't imagine the wealth of experience," Mr. Rauch says. He attended courses in agribusiness, recruited students to help survey existing efforts in the field, enlisted a law professor to examine regulatory barriers, and shared his ideas with other fellows—who, in turn, pointed him to additional resources.

The result: Mr. Rauch will soon start an operation in a "retail environment" that will redistribute so-called excess food in inner cities.

Junko Yoda, 54, also a senior fellow this year, says the fact that the Harvard initiative is a university-wide program makes all the difference. "I can go to [the] public health [school], or the law school, or the business school, and find help," says Ms. Yoda, a former Deutsche Bank managing director in Singapore and Goldman Sachs vice president in Japan. "That's a very powerful platform." Her project: creating programs to assist victims of human trafficking in Thailand and Indonesia.

Of course, returning to school in later life isn't always easy—especially if an "accomplished" individual (again, Harvard's preference) is accustomed to working at the highest levels of business or government.

Susan Leal, 61, a fellow in 2009 and former head of the San Francisco Public Utilities Commission, says the transition can be "humbling." "You're going from the corner office, where someone kept your calendar for you, to a cubicle, and you're sitting there with your little BlackBerry," she says. "That can really take some people out of their comfort zone." She recalls a day when she asked to speak with a professor and was squeezed into a 15-minute time slot—"just like any other graduate student."

What's more, participants are challenged at every turn, Ms. Leal says—by faculty, students and one another. The questioning is polite but persistent, she says: What is your project? Where does it stand? What comes next? "They push you to delve deeper." Ms. Leal knew she wanted to focus on shrinking water supplies in the U.S. and overseas. Eventually, she partnered with a Harvard professor and wrote a book: "Running Out of Water: The Looming Crisis and Solutions to Conserve Our Most Precious Resource."

Today, Ms. Leal is asked to participate in, or serve as the keynote speaker for, conferences around the world where water "sustainability" is the focus. The Harvard initiative, she says, "gave me a platform that has allowed me to contribute in ways I never could have before."

That platform could soon be adopted elsewhere. A meeting in Miami in June will give other schools a chance to learn about Harvard's model for educating advanced leaders, Prof. Kanter says. She likens the effort to the growth of the nation's business schools, which began to appear at the turn of the 20th century and are now a familiar part of the academic landscape.

"We think someday this will be a stage of higher education that many colleges and universities will want to have," Prof. Kanter says. "We want to make this a movement."

 Mr. Ruffenach is a reporter and editor in the Atlanta bureau of The Wall Street Journal and the editor of Next. He can be reached at next@wsj.com. 