  PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla.—The conversation lasted only a few minutes. At 7:30 a.m. Monday, Carlos Beltran arrived at the Mets' spring training complex and requested a meeting with manager Terry Collins. It was time, he told Collins, for him to move to right field.

But for Beltran, this was a decision nearly two years in the making. And it was about much more than which outfield alignment would be best for the Mets in 2011. This was about his knee, his next contract and the rest of his career.

The conversation that set all this in motion happened in the summer of 2009, not long after Beltran developed a bone bruise in his right knee. That is when his agent, Scott Boras, first suggested to him that it might be best, for the sake of his career, to move to a less demanding outfield spot.

  Greater New York Sports News and Analysis  

  Isringhausen Earns Close Look From Mets  

"He said, 'Later in your career, you have to think about maybe making a move to a corner position,'" Beltran said. "I was like, 'Why should I make a move?' And he said, 'Your bat is important in the game. You're going to play a good defensive outfield if you're in the corner. Plus, you're going to be fresh for the long run.'"

It was too soon then for Beltran to think about abandoning center field, the position he had played with pride and distinction for most of his life. But by the time he reported to spring training, about 10 days ago, circumstances had changed.

More than a year removed from surgery, Beltran still hadn't regained full mobility in his arthritic knee. He was entering a contract year, with his seven-year, $119 million deal with the Mets set to expire at the end of this season. And he had a ready and willing replacement in Angel Pagan, who was more than happy to relieve Beltran of the arduous task of patrolling center field.

Finally, Beltran was ready to heed his agent's advice.

"It wasn't that difficult," Beltran said. "This is not about Carlos. It's about the team."

But really, it's about both. Beltran's decision was by no means a selfish one. But it would be naïve to think it was a selfless one. Rather, this was the perfect intersection of a team and a player's best interests.

Collins called his chat with Beltran Monday morning "the most professional conversation I've ever had with a baseball player." And Beltran deserves credit for not making the Mets force him into the move. He could not have handled the situation any better.

But there's a reason Boras was pushing this, and it's not because he was enamored with Pagan's range. By playing right field instead of center, Beltran gives himself a better chance to stay healthy.

That gives him a better chance to showcase what will be his most marketable asset next winter: his bat.

A team looking for a centerfielder might not want to take a chance on Beltran's knee. But at age 33, Beltran could still have several good years left in him as a corner outfielder.

"That's what I'm thinking," Beltran said. "I give [other teams] options. If I feel great after the end of the season and somebody needs a centerfielder, I'll be there. If somebody needs a rightfielder, I'm there. Whatever teams are looking for. I have to think about my future, my career. If I can play three or four more years in right field, it would be great."

And in the meantime? Well, if Pagan wants to run himself all over Citi Field, all the better. Beltran can pull up a lounge chair along the right-field line and work on his tan, his glove in one hand and a frozen beverage in the other.

"Now, I'll let Pagan catch everything," he said, sitting next to Pagan in the Mets' dugout at Digital Domain Park.

The two of them laughed, and it became even more clear: This is going to be good for everyone involved, not least of all Carlos Beltran.

 Write to  Brian Costa at brian.costa@wsj.com 