Sen. Joe Lieberman, the Connecticut independent who gained a national reputation as the Democrats' vice presidential candidate in 2000, has told close associates that he won't run for a fifth term next year.

Mr. Lieberman plans to announce his retirement in Stamford, Conn., on Wednesday—just one day after former Connecticut secretary of state Susan Bysiewicz, a Democrat, Tuesday announced she would run for the Senate seat. Also considering a run are two House Democrats from Connecticut, Reps. Joe Courtney and Christopher Murphy.

Mr. Lieberman left the Democratic Party in 2006 when, under fire from left for his support of the Iraq war, he was defeated in the primary by a liberal challenger. But he went on to win election as an Independent and has since still caucused with Democrats in the Senate, providing a crucial vote for the party when they held a bare 60-vote majority early in President Barack Obama's administration.

Mr. Courtney issued a statement Tuesday saying, "Over the past few months, people from across Connecticut whose advice I respect have encouraged me to consider a senate run. I am seriously considering that challenge."

The National Republican Senatorial Committee was gleeful at the news that Mr. Lieberman was leaving, coming on the heels of the announcement early Tuesday that Sen. Kent Conrad (D., N.D.) would retire.

"With yet a second member of the Senate Democrat caucus preparing for retirement within a 24 hour period, all of us are left to wonder how many more Democrats may follow in their footsteps,'' said Brian Walsh, spokesman for the GOP committee. 

But Democrats said that their party's position will be stronger in Connecticut as a result of Mr. Lieberman's decision. If he had run as an Independent, Democratic strategists feared that he would have siphoned support from the Democratic candidate and created an opening for a Republican to win. 

Mr. Lieberman's decision to retire underscored the political perils that face party switchers. Like Mr. Lieberman, former Sen. Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania found it difficult to seek re-election after switching parties. After leaving the GOP to become a Democrat in 2009, Mr. Specter lost his seat in the 2010 primary under fire from his new party's left. 

Mr. Lieberman earned the ire of Democrats in Connecticut and nationwide with his support for the Iraq war; his open support for the GOP presidential campaign of Sen. John McCain; and his divergence from the Democratic party line on health care. At a crucial point in the 2010 Senate debate on the health-care overhaul, Mr. Lieberman blew up a crucial compromise on the public option—an element that was especially important to the party's liberal wing. 

Still, Democratic leaders in the Senate had relatively little to complain about in Mr. Lieberman's voting record on domestic issues. He was counted as a reliable vote for the party line on most matters. He led the charge for repealing the military's ban on gays serving openly in the military, and for imposing new restrictions on greenhouse-gas emissions.

 Corrections & Amplifications  Susan Bysiewicz is Connecticut's former secretary of state. An earlier version of this story said she is former state attorney general.

 Write to  Janet Hook at janet.hook@wsj.com 