Before Aretha Franklin became the Queen of Soul, she was a budding Princess of Pop. Fresh from Detroit in 1960, the 18-year-old gospel singer signed with Columbia Records and went to work recording the American songbook—combining Ella Fitzgerald's lyricism with Mahalia Jackson's earth-moving passion.

On March 22, Sony/Legacy will release "Take a Look: Aretha Franklin Complete on Columbia"—an 11-CD box plus one DVD that spans Ms. Franklin's entire output for the label between 1960 and 1965. Two narratives emerge from the music: Ms. Franklin developed rapidly as a church-belter of jazz standards, and Columbia didn't know quite what to do with her—a riddle that would be solved when Ms. Franklin switched to Atlantic in 1966.

From 1960 on, no female singer has matched Ms. Franklin's ability to sell a song. Over the course of her 50-year career, she has recorded an unrivaled 73 Billboard Hot 100 hits, winning 20 Grammys and ranking No. 1 among all female solo artists in the pop chart's 52-year history. 

Eight of those hits were for Columbia. Clearly, the pre-"Respect" Franklin could ace anything the label put before her—from Hoagy Carmichael's "Skylark" to Neal Hefti's "How to Murder Your Wife." But as the years passed, Columbia's outdated pop strategy for Franklin gained little traction with the exploding youth culture and civil-rights movement.

Yet this set provides an illuminating look back at the superstar's awakening. Among the standouts on the set's seven previously released albums are "Aretha With the Ray Bryant Combo" (1961), a jazz-gospel date that includes the demanding "Right Now," and "Unforgettable: A Tribute to Dinah Washington" (1964), featuring a slow-motion "What a Difference a Day Made" and an arm-swaying "Soulville."

Also included in the set are two unissued album projects with Clyde Otis and Bobby Scott, as well as an unreleased compilation and a disc with her last seven Columbia recordings. The Otis sessions are somewhat uneven, ranging from stirring gospel smack-downs like "I'll Keep on Smiling" and "Take a Look" to all-wrong choices like "People" and "That's Entertainment." The horn-heavy Scott session faced the same problem—spiritual gems like "Here Today and Gone Tomorrow" co-habiting with "Moon River" and "Harbor Lights." The DVD features an appearance by Ms. Franklin on "The Steve Allen Show" in 1964.

Perhaps Ms. Franklin's finest album in the box is "Laughing on the Outside" (1963)—produced, arranged and conducted by Robert Mersey. Here, Ms. Franklin is framed by strings and a hushed choir, delivering standards at the tempo of your pulse. Her patient rendition of "Make Someone Happy" is hair-raising for its soaring fluidity.

By 1965, Ms. Franklin's producers finally decided to take aim at her hit-making rivals. On "Runnin' Out of Fools," produced by Mr. Otis, she covered Dionne Warwick's "Walk on By," Mary Wells's "My Guy" and Betty Everett's "Shoop Shoop Song (It's in His Kiss)"—giving each a gospel wallop.

And then there's "One Step Ahead," a song recorded in December 1964. It was to have been included on "A Bit of Soul," an album that was assigned a master number but mysteriously never released. Instead, the song was released as a single. In this one seductive love song—treated as a light bolero—Columbia finally had captured what would become the famed Aretha sound. Apparently no one at the label noticed.