 U.S. radar-jamming aircraft and combat jets flew sorties to strike Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi's ground forces and air defences, as coalition forces moved quickly to impose a no-fly zone over Libya. In Tripoli, a defiant Gadhafi said he would arm all Libyans and called on citizens, especially those in the eastern rebel bastion of Benghazi, to rise up against what he called a foreign aggression to occupy the country and steal its oil wealth.  

 The Libyan revolution is posing crucial questions for the U.S. and allies: Who, if anyone, is in charge, and what does the disparate rebel coalition want to achieve beyond ousting Gadhafi? 

 The shift in French President Nicolas Sarkozy's diplomatic efforts in Libya highlights how France is trying to regain its past influence in the Arab world and gives Sarkozy the chance to burnish his credentials on the world stage ahead of next year's presidential elections in France. 

 China "expressed regret" over the use of military force in Libya even as it decided last week not to block authorization of the strikes at the United Nations Security Council. China's rare acquiescence moved it further away from its longstanding foreign policy based on non-intervention. 

 Bahrain's security forces arrested nearly 20 people, including doctors and youth activists, as the government ratchets up its efforts to silence the protest movement on the strategic Gulf island state. 

Yemen's president, Ali Abdullah Saleh, has fired his entire Cabinet amid escalating protests demanding his ouster. Saleh is facing a monthlong popular uprising against him that has turned increasingly bloody in the past few days as security troops opened fire on demonstrators. 

 Egyptians approved a referendum on constitutional changes, with the country's elections commission chief saying 77% of voters voted "yes." The changes eliminate restrictions on political rights and open the way for parliamentary and presidential elections within months.  

 The effort to bring the troubled Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant in Japan under control may be turning a corner, a development that could ease a nuclear emergency that has gripped the nation and riveted the world.  

Plant operator Tokyo Electric Power said some reactors have been reconnected to the power grid, greatly aiding its ability to reduce the possibility of overheating. The connected reactors include No. 1 and No. 2, which were among the more troublesome. Tepco wants to make sure all equipment inside these facilities function properly before actually allowing power to start flowing.

 Authorities are likely to cast a much wider net for possible food contamination in Japan after elevated levels of radioactivity were discovered in more milk and spinach near the stricken nuclear plant, drawing intense scrutiny toward the safety of the nation's agricultural products. Officials raised the death toll Sunday to 8,450 people, with another 12,931 reported missing, increasing the likelihood that the ultimate toll could be in the tens of thousands. 

 Higher oil prices sparked by unrest in North Africa and the Middle East could push up inflation among countries in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development but policy makers may not need to react, the group said.  

 The euro zone posted its largest external trade deficit on record in January as imports rose from a month earlier but exports fell sharply. 

 The European Central Bank stepped in to buy Portuguese government bonds in the secondary market, as the country's Prime Minister José Socrates urged lawmakers to reach an agreement over new austerity measures and avert a bailout. The ECB bought short-dated bonds, with one trader citing buying of at least €300 million ($425 million).  



U.K. Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne said the government won't soften its ambitious austerity measures to tackle the budget deficit despite the headwinds of rising unemployment, inflation and slowing economic growth. 

 U.K. gross mortgage lending grew at the same pace in February as in January, suggesting the housing market will stay subdued as a cloudy economic outlook keeps prospective buyers away from the market. 

A British judge sentenced a former British Airways computer specialist to 30 years in prison for plotting with U.S.-born extremist cleric Anwar al-Awlaki to blow up an airplane in an attack intended to kill hundreds of people. Rajib Karim, a 31-year-old Bangladeshi man, was convicted last month of four counts of engaging in preparation for terrorist attacks. 

 French voters slammed President Nicolas Sarkozy in the first round of local elections, as the ruling UMP party fell well behind the opposition Socialists and close to the extreme-right National Front, which is now seen as a first-rank contender in next year's presidential elections. 

 Hundreds of fans of Knut the polar bear flocked to his enclosure at Berlin's zoo to mourn the sudden death of the celebrity who burst into the limelight as a cuddly, fluffy cub hand-fed by his keeper. The beloved four-year-old died Saturday afternoon in front of hundreds of visitors, taking keepers, animal experts and fans by surprise. 

As President Barack Obama approaches a summer of decisions on Afghanistan, one of the trickiest will be whether to promote his battlefield commander, Gen. David Petraeus, to chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. 

U.S. Ambassador to Mexico Carlos Pascual resigned, another diplomatic casualty of the Wikileaks cables scandal, and a sign of growing strains between Washington and Mexico over the country's fight against powerful drug gangs.

 Haitians voted as a popular singer and a former first lady vied to be the next president of the beleaguered nation, amid misgivings over the election's validity fueled by the return from exile of the populist ex-President Jean-Bertrand Aristide. 

In the Philippines, suspected communist rebels stormed the main police station in a southern city, killing an officer and wounding four others in an attack that was repulsed by outnumbered police officers. 

Tibetans across the world began voting for a new leader to take up resistance against Chinese rule over their Himalayan homeland, as the Tibetan parliament-in-exile debated how to handle the Dalai Lama's resignation from politics. 