WASHINGTON—The Supreme Court heard its first "state secrets" case in 60 years Tuesday, a legal fight the justices viewed more as a business matter affecting contract law than one with broader implications for terrorism-related disputes. 

The case stems from the ill-fated A-12 Avenger project, which the Defense Department canceled in 1991, after contractors produced stealth fighters too heavy for aircraft carriers to handle. The government says it is entitled to a refund of $1.35 billion from contractors  Boeing Co.
BA


-0.34
%




 and  General Dynamics Corp.
GD


0.24
%




 They sued, countering that they are owed an additional $1.25 billion for work they had yet to bill. 

The companies lost on all their claims but one—that their inability to produce the plane was the government's fault, because the Defense Department withheld crucial stealth technology from the contractors. The government refused to provide information that the contractors needed to make that claim, asserting that disclosure would endanger national security.

The government has also cited the state-secrets privilege to quash lawsuits by former detainees and others alleging abuse by the U.S. after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks. 

However, the justices and lawyers for both sides stayed away from the detainee suits during arguments Tuesday. No party questioned whether the Defense Department had the right to keep information from the companies. Instead the question was whether the government, once it exercised the privilege, should be forced to concede its case.

Although no clear majority emerged, the question seemed to divide the court along ideological lines, with conservative justices sympathizing with the military contractors and liberals tacking toward the government's side. 

In the 1953 ruling establishing the state-secrets privilege, U.S. v. Reynolds, the court made clear that the privilege applied only to civil lawsuits, not to criminal prosecutions.

The contractors' lawyer,  Carter Phillips, likened his clients to criminal defendants and the government's action to that of a prosecutor. Because the government canceled the contracts and then withheld crucial evidence when the aerospace suppliers challenged that action, they should effectively win by default, he argued.

"You could say we're sort of being a little greedy," Mr. Phillips said, but that's what "basic contract law" required.

Justice Antonin Scalia agreed that the government was the "moving party" because it initiated the contract termination. But he suggested that courts should stay out of the dispute, letting the contractors keep the money they already have without forcing the government to pay them more.

"It's granting nobody relief. We're leaving you where you are. 'Get out of here,' is what we're saying," Justice Scalia said.

Chief Justice John Roberts seemed sympathetic to that approach. "Why don't we call the whole thing off? Nobody's at fault; that means it's terminated not for fault, but for convenience, and that's it," he said.

But Justice Sonia Sotomayor suggested that could be unfair to the government. Boeing and General Dynamics are "two sophisticated contracting parties" that "entered a contract knowing the government could invoke state secrets," she said. "It has, and so you bear the risk of that," she said. 

Justice Stephen Breyer said the prosecution analogy was dubious. To "apply it to government contracting, where sophisticated contractors are perfectly capable of negotiating their own contract, we are not just throwing a monkey wrench into the gears of government contracting; we're throwing the whole monkey," he said.

Acting Solicitor General Neal Katyal, representing the government, pointed out that the aerospace suppliers had initiated the lawsuit after a Pentagon contracting officer canceled the contract for nonperformance. Regardless, he argued that the contractors were familiar with the pitfalls of defense work. "I don't think anyone held a gun to their back," he said.

However the justices decide, they appear unlikely to create a clear precedent for the former detainees' complaints. 

Legal observers said if the court wishes to explore the limits of the state secrets privilege, it might choose to accept an appeal from one detainee alleging abuse, who recently lost at a closely divided federal appeals court in the case called Mohamed v. Jeppesen DataPlan.

"There's a deprivation of liberty at stake in that case," something of a different order than a contract dispute, said  Charles Stimson of the Heritage Foundation, a former Pentagon official in the George W. Bush administration. 

In the post-Sept. 11 cases, courts have granted government motions to dismiss the lawsuits in their entirety, even though plaintiffs have said they would base some or all of their arguments on public information. 

Peter Raven-Hansen, a law professor at George Washington University, said lower courts need more guidance on striking a balance between individual rights and national security, perhaps by adapting methods used to protect classified information in criminal cases for civil litigation.

"That kind of experimentation hasn't been undertaken much in these state-secrets cases, but it isn't evident that it wouldn't work," he said.

 Write to  Jess Bravin at jess.bravin@wsj.com 