A pretty five-minute walk from Riga's Old City, past crooked medieval houses, cobbled streets and handsome municipal buildings, takes you to the elegant Kronvalda Park. Once the playground of 19th-century sports club the Rifleman Society, the park was given to the public in 1930 so they could enjoy strolls along rose-lined paths and over ornate bridges, with the calm waters of the Riga City Canal passing below. Adjoining the park is Kronvalda Boulevard, a grand, leafy avenue along which trams rumble to and from the historic center. Here, in a simple but elegant 19th-century former army storehouse is Taka Spa, one of the most luxurious additions to Latvia's burgeoning spa scene.

Established in 2006 by former health journalist Dina Vjatere and her friend Agnita Vavere, the focus is on a holistic approach. "Our aim is not to work just for relaxation, but for results," says Ms. Vjatere. "Many therapists work together and we prefer doing things with hands than with machinery. It gives us the ability to understand the clients' needs better."

Taka Spa (www.takaspa.lv) caters to a wealthy, mainly local crowd, which flocks here for treatments that include lymphatic drainage, Elemis lime and ginger scrubs and wraps, as well as yoga and Pilates classes in the airy space in the converted loft at the top of the building.

Ultimately, the aim is to provide an escape from the stresses and strains of everyday life. Aija Ozolins, a regular customer, says, "I love it for the facials—using a firm, gentle touch, massaging my face and shoulders into deep relaxation with the application of natural oils."

On the other side of the park—and at the opposite end of the scale from the intimate, cozy approach of Taka Spa—is the glitzy ESPA (www.espariga.com), attached to the Radisson Blu Hotel Latvija, which opened in 2009. Leading the show in the city in terms of swank, the six-floor building caters to the new, rich Latvians and wealthy tourists. 

A giant Swarovski chandelier hangs down from the atrium. The dark subterranean swimming pool is more reminiscent of a disco. Gold-flecked walls shimmer, music is moody and there is a bar serving Cristal champagne, fresh-fruit smoothies and sushi. There is also Riga's most expensive gym, a vast space kitted out with the latest Technogym equipment. Upstairs on the top level, sauna pods are located with an outside plunge pool and there is a large relaxation area, complete with white leather sofas, modern art and piles of loganberries and apples to snack on, as well as the latest glossy magazines.

Treatments are both restorative and relaxing. The Stressbuster combines head and shoulder massage and a soothing eye treatment, while the spa's Amber Crystal treatment involves skin brushing, exfoliation and a cleanse, with chakras massaged by amber crystals.

Those looking for a more boutique experience can try one of the treatments at the pretty Dome hotel (www.domehotel.lv), located in a 400-year-old merchant house in the heart of Old Riga. Here, a stone's throw from the Romanesque and early Gothic Dome Cathedral, city-weary guests can relax with a Kamisimo massage—a Japanese technique using warm rice—or a body shine in the hammam, using olive paste. This is a good option for weekenders looking for a fuss-free option in a great, historic location. 

As a contrast to these city spas, the scenic coastal resort of Jurmala—about an hour outside Riga—offers something for spa-seekers looking for a longer beachside escape. Jurmala has long been a plush destination for the wealthy. Spa resorts—established for the area's mineral springs and mild climate—were built in the 1800s, catering to Russian soldiers following the Napoleonic Wars. It was also a popular destination for Pioneer camps, which sprang up here in the Soviet era, and where children would come and spend the summer in the restorative air. 

Many of the handsome 19th-century wooden villas that once graced the chestnut-lined avenues of Jurmala have been torn down and replaced by more-elaborate holiday homes with manicured lawns and stone peacocks. The scores of blacked-out SUVs in the driveways hint at the wealthy residents inside. 

The Amber Spa (www.amberspahotel.lv) is a modern and polished addition to the historic spa scene here. Located on a quiet street, five minutes from clean white sands and calm seas, the spa has been catering since 2009 to the scores of Russians and Latvians who still flock to the area, and is now targeting the international market.

The spa was established by former Latvian table-tennis champion Vadim Sokolov after seeing the benefits of therapies he experienced as an athlete. It offers complete weeklong programs such as weight-loss and sports therapy; locally inspired treatments using traditional herbs, buckwheat and birch; and amber massage, which uses the stones to stimulate muscles.

Rooms are furnished in orange and yellow tones, as befits the theme of the spa (Amber is Latvia's national stone). Its excellent restaurant, My Life, offers healthy spa food such as pork loin with cranberries and, for breakfast, homemade yogurts and breads served with alpine berries. 

The spa offers a traditional Russian banya experience, involving a ritual of hot saunas, cold baths and an invigorating banya besom treatment—a stimulating massage using birch or oak twigs. Vanity goes out of the window. You are asked to don a tasteful cap and are otherwise nude for much of it. Refreshments between treatments come in the form of cranberry juice, pickled herring and gherkins. The setting in the main spa is clean, serene and attractive, and the treatments have curative aims—the sporty male masseurs finding knots you never knew existed.

Even the sanatoriums of old, holdovers from the Communist-era in both feel and style, are adopting improvements. Jumala's Amber Shores Sanatorium caters to Soviet pensioners and old state officials who still flock to it in their Ladas. For around €80 a night, guests can sleep in simple, pine-clad rooms, dine on comfort food such as borscht in the canteen and be treated to mud baths and mineral soaks, administered in ancient cast-iron tubs by stern babushkas. While basic, it's considered luxury by locals, says director Viktor Daniloh: "Before, you used to just lie down in a mud pool in the cold. But it was difficult for the heart to take." 

 Write to  Jemima Sissons at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 