In the 1950s, the streets of New York famously buzzed with arguments over which team had the best centerfielder—the Giants' Willie Mays, the Yankees' Mickey Mantle, or the Dodgers' Duke Snider, who passed away this week at 84.

The players were so similar, and so prominent, that it could be endlessly debated. Today, the rival Yankees and Red Sox now have the players in place to foster similar barroom debates: which first baseman, Mark Teixeira or Adrian Gonzalez, is superior? 

With Teixeira choosing New York over Boston in 2008, and the Red Sox openly pining for Gonzalez to fill the void thereafter, the two long-connected first basemen are set up to be faces of this rivalry for the foreseeable future, assuming Gonzalez signs a long-term deal with Boston as expected.

"I'm sure there will be a little bit of that," Teixeira said of the inevitable comparisons. "But at the end of the day, the Yankees and the Red Sox are bigger than any one player or any two players. That's what's fun about the rivalry. No matter what the situation, no matter who's in first, who's out of the playoffs, it's like a rock concert every game."

While acknowledging they're similar players, Gonzalez said he's not facing off against Teixeira directly, and doesn't feel competitive with the first baseman. 

"I wouldn't say there's a competition between us, but it's great for competition in general,'' he said.

But long before they were linked as representatives of the dueling juggernauts of the American League East, the two were actually teammates, hoping to be the long-term answer at first base for the Texas Rangers.

Two years older, Teixeira was more ready to produce at first base, and put together a strong rookie campaign in 2003. But that summer, the Rangers acquired Gonzalez in trade from the Florida Marlins, and they expected big things from him, as well. 

As soon as Gonzalez showed up, Teixeira said he saw the potential there. 

"From everyone's viewpoint, they knew he was going to be a great player," Teixeira said. "Real sweet swing. A lot of guys were waiting for his power to develop, but they knew it would. That was the key." 

As the younger, less experienced player, Gonzalez tried to pick up what he could from Teixeira, who at the time was busy establishing himself as one of the best young players in the game. 

"I wouldn't say I patterned my game after him, but watching him, and next to him, I picked up things," Gonzalez said. 

But while Gonzalez was still developing, Teixeira's power had already arrived, and a 38-home run season in 2004 gave him a firm hold on the job.

 With the first-base job not an option in Texas, the Rangers traded Gonzalez along with Chris Young for starter Adam Eaton, reliever Akinori Otsuka, and Billy Killian, a minor league catcher.

"That's really the only reason we traded him, because I was there," Teixeira said. "Looking back, the Rangers probably made the wrong choice. Probably should have traded me earlier." 

Knowing how good Gonzalez could be, Teixeira was dubious about that trade from the start. 

"When we were with the Rangers and he went off for his first year in San Diego, everyone was doubting that trade a little bit. We gave up Chris Young and Adrian Gonzalez, two really good players. The Padres did great in that trade," Teixeira said. 

From that point forward, both players blossomed. Teixeira established himself as one of the best in the American League, and Gonzalez set himself up as the centerpiece of the Padres lineup. 

The two have put up remarkably similar statistics as they have torn their way through the league. Teixeira's career batting average is .286, Gonzalez' .284, and both have on-base percentages around .370. They hit 30-to-40 home runs per year, never steal a base and pound out doubles. They both play a Gold Glove-level first base, and play through pain. 

When Teixeira hit free agency after spending the end of 2008 with Anaheim, the Red Sox targeted him right away. Yankees GM Brian Cashman made aggressive offers, but expected that that Red Sox would snag him. 

"Mark Teixeira was hanging out there, and I was full-in on Mark Teixeira. I've spoken about this in the past," Cashman said. "I personally felt that Mark Teixeira was not going back to Anaheim, that he was going to Boston."

But as Boston owner John Henry has repeatedly opined, it seemed to him that Teixeira always wanted to sign with New York. Regardless, Teixeira's signing left a void in Boston that the Red Sox immediately set about trying to fill. And Teixeira may have been the difference in sending New York to the 2009 World Series. 

With Teixeira off the market, fans and management alike turned their eyes toward Gonzalez in San Diego. The Red Sox finally acquired Gonzalez this winter, for three top prospects. 

Gonzalez acknowledged that once Teixeira landed in New York, it made Boston a more likely destination for him. But he refused to consider whether people see him as a replacement for Teixeira in Boston. 

"I can't go off of perception or what people might think. I just arrived here," Gonzalez said. 

If Gonzalez produces as expected, it should heat up an already scorching rivalry. Teixeira remains something of a villain to Red Sox fans for spurning them to sign with the Yankees, and his comments this spring that he embraces an ''underdog'' role for the Yankees after the Sox acquired Gonzalez and Carl Crawford raised eyebrows in Boston. 

Teixeira, for one, still likes to measure himself against his old teammate, among others.

"I think so," Teixeira said. "My entire career, first base has been so deep. You look at the top players in baseball, every single year, it's the first basemen. You have Albert Pujols, every single year, perennial MVP. Then you have Justin Morneau and Miguel Cabrera, and now Gonzalez in the American League. You could name a dozen others. It makes it fun to compete against those guys day in and day out." 

The two teams face off for the first time Friday night in Tampa. Gonzalez remains on the shelf after minor shoulder surgery, but is expected to be ready for the start of the regular season. 

After that, let the comparisons begin. 