  Massey Energy Co. disputed each of the points federal safety officials made earlier this month about the likely causes of the explosion at a company mine that killed 29 workers last April. 

Massey general counsel Shane Harvey said the company doesn't believe that missing water sprays or worn bits on a piece of mining equipment contributed to a methane ignition followed by a massive coal-dust explosion. 

Instead he reiterated the company's view that natural gas erupted through the mine's floor, overwhelming the mine's safety procedures, including a ventilation system that was supposed to sweep explosive gases out of the mine. 

"We continue to believe there was a massive inundation," said Mr. Harvey, speaking to reporters in a 30-minute telephone briefing Friday. 

He cited gas readings taken shortly after the explosion by the government, with a methane content that is more consistent with deep natural-gas reserves. He said a crack in the mine at the site of the explosion is still venting similar concentrations of methane. 

Mr. Harvey presented supporting photographs and videos from inside Massey's Upper Big Branch mine. In one video, a worker brushed a soot-covered wall of the mine to reveal a white surface of non-flammable crushed limestone known as rock dust. 

Mr. Harvey said the video demonstrates that the Mine Safety and Health Administration's argument that Massey didn't rock dust the mine adequately is incorrect. Instead he said that MSHA's samples were contaminated by soot from the explosion. 

MSHA said Friday that it stands by its earlier findings and that investigators are still reviewing evidence.

Massey and MSHA have been at odds since the accident occurred. Mr. Harvey said he could not explain why the two sides had reached such different conclusions about the explosion. 

"We all have access to the same evidence. I guess reasonable minds can disagree," he said. 

Massey also briefed relatives of the deceased miners at a hotel in Charleston, W.Va., for four hours Friday. The accident is the subject of civil state and federal investigations and a separate federal criminal probe. Massey's board is weighing takeover bids from other coal companies. 

 Write to  Kris Maher at kris.maher@wsj.com 