"It's funny that the during the bling years, beige was the color of choice," says Luke Irwin, a British rug designer whose "doves and stripes" rug was gifted to U.S. President Barack Obama from the nation of Ireland. With the economy wobbly, European homeowners are going to the extreme opposite end, not only choosing vibrant colors, but also mixing them with pattern and textiles, wallpaper and just about anything else that doesn't necessarily match, he says, adding that "when people spend more time at home, they start wanting a shot of color." 

Not surprisingly, ikat—the name of a weave dating back hundreds of years that is still made in mills in Turkmenistan, and is produced using a technique similar to tie dye—has become the hottest trend in interiors. Mr. Irwin's bright ikat from £500 per square meter) rugs are selling so well from his new London showroom, he calls it "boom time." Often they're bought on a whim, like a handbag, he says.

Though ikat was popular in the '70s, its overnight revival is partly to do with fashion (where it is being used extensively) and partly to do with a new appetite for taking risks. Rifat Özbek, the former fashioner designer, teamed up with partner Erdal Karaman to create a collection of hand loomed and printed ikat and other cushions called "Yizkat," which translates from Turkish into cushion. The duo chose to display them upright on white shelves, like paintings. Mr. Özbek's new London store (he already has two in Turkey), which opened two weeks ago, sold out of the vintage collection instantly. "Ikat cushions give an explosion of color to any room," says Mr. Özbek, who is based in London. "I would kill myself if I had to live in a taupe house," he says. Priced between £200 and £900, the velvet and silk printed ikat cushions and hand embroidered Suzanis, a different kind of weave, also have the advantage of being double sided.

ikat is appearing on sofas, beds, lampshades and even walls.

Ornamenta, makers of hand-blocked wallpaper, turned the bold pattern into a wall cover (with nine different colors to choose from, £190 per roll). The company won the 2010 Focus design award. Ornamenta Founder Jane Gordon Clark thinks the sudden revival in wallpaper, and graphic fabrics like ikat reflect a "desperate urgency for color and the that fact that everyone is bored stiff of international taupe, the stuff of luxury hotel chains."

This isn't to say homeowners should throw out what they now have and start again. Nicolas Mauriac and Emmanuelle Fouks, who previously worked in fashion and art and founded the cult Maison de Vacances homeware collection in Paris five years ago, have purposely planned each range so as "not to be outdated and binned." Though every season's collection of cushions, throws and accessories (made of fur, leather, velvet, ostrich feathers, some with happy face, flag, "Love" and skull prints) is often brighter and wilder than the one before, the idea is to layer and combine the new with the old. The latest catalog, released this week, was shot in different styles of interiors, including an apartment in Versailles, to show the many ways to create a distinctly unique look. "The idea is you use the cushion as a frame and then you dress it up," says Mr. Mauriac. "We are one. The way we dress should always be the way we live." 

Also back in fashion is toile de jouy, which is the name of a print that was originally wood-blocked in France. Manuel Canovas, the French textile company now owned by decorating firm Sibyl Colefax & John Fowler, has long been famous for their bright toiles and bold floral prints. The difference now, says Wendy Nicholls, managing director of the company and designer, is in the application. "In the old days you covered everything—walls, furniture and curtains—in one matching toile," she says. Now we're using it as a statement on one individual piece and pulling out bits of clashing color to use elsewhere." Of course, mixing the new Canovas "Balleroy" "Balata" or " Tortuga" toiles in pink, orange and brown with other patterns isn't for the faint-hearted. "Eclectic design is tricky," says Ms. Nicholls. It's all about scale, balance, and color. It can't be formulaic."

The designer credited with starting this bold eclectic style is Britain's Kit Kemp, co-owner of the Firmdale Hotels, who opened the Crosby Street Hotel in New York to big fanfare last year (a second hotel is planned for New York in 2012). She challenged the conventional hotel look by creating a unique bright style that changes with each corridor, let alone room. She not only uses residential fabrics but she also gives clients a mood board, which is a frame with swatches and the names of the fabrics and wallpaper used in their hotel rooms to help guests reproduce the look at home. Ms. Kemp uses ikat fabrics on walls and mixes Canovas toiles with stripes, paisleys, color and wallpaper, a welcome change to the "cookie-cutter style of brown sofas with neutral fabrics and black-and-white photographs," she says. "The consumer is braver and travels widely and wants to keep grandpa's old chair but perhaps cover it in a new fabric, with a braid or some buttons." 

In fact, guests at the Crosby Street Hotel are encouraged to take design risks. A businessman might, for example, be encouraged to stay in a room that combines gray flannel on the walls with pink fabrics on the chairs and a bold floral bedhead. You wouldn't think to combine that with psychedelic '70s prints on the walls, but it works. In fact, clients have been known to send their designers to stay at the hotel for inspiration.

More than anything, the current appetite for ikat, color and bold patterns has to do with wanting to create spaces that are uniquely ours. It's a sentiment shared across most European capitals. "When we opened in Spain, we were told that our floral carpets wouldn't work here, only to find the opposite," says the Rug Company's co-founder Chris Sharp. "Our top 20 best sellers are our top 20 best sellers everywhere, including New York." What is selling the most, he says, are statement pieces such as Alexander McQueen's new "Hummingbird" hand-woven carpet (£10,030) which has a waiting list. "I think everyone wants to feel special. People used to want their houses to look like their friends': now it's individuality that counts," he says.

The runaway success of rug designer Christopher Farr's fabric collection (designed by famous names, including Ptolemy Mann and Ilse Crawford)is that it appeals to all tastes. "There are no rules anymore," says Michal Silver, cloth director. "People are trying to be individualistic.They're experimenting with colors and texture. They will match two to three of our different fabrics." In fact, the Christopher Farr fabrics are so art-like that many are being used on walls (a cushion collection is planned for the immediate future) instead of paintings.

Though this look may look random and therefore easy, it's not. It requires a lot of planning. 

Paris based French architect and designer Fabrice Bejjani, who mixes stripes with patterns and yellow-colored animal skins, suggests a starting point from which to build upon. 

"Begin with something you like," he says. "It could be a painting, a photograph, details such as molding or the view from an apartment. I try to have neutral bases mixed with luxurious materials such as natural stone, natural wooden floor, then add touches of wooden carpentry. Then I play with the colors. Once the base is fixed and strong in its choice of material, we can afterward combine all sorts of design patterns."

For those whose homes reflect the "bling" era of neutral beige, the arrival of ikat and Maison de Vacance's bright colored velvets and furs offers a breath of fresh air. And the advantage of using cushions and textiles, rather than say art, to bring a room to life is that, one, cushions are cheaper and two, they can easily be packed away into a closet, like shoes, when you fancy a moment of calm.

 Write to  Helen Kirwan-Taylor at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 