JCDecaux, the world's largest seller of outdoor advertising, said it is considering a bid for U.S. competitor CBS Outdoor as it prepares to take an active part in this year's expected consolidation of the sector.

It also said 2010 net profit jumped seven-fold to €173 million ($240.5 million) from €24.5 million in 2009, thanks to higher revenues on higher sales, acquisitions and foreign-exchange gains. 

 Toyota shook up its management team in a move to sharpen the Japanese auto maker's focus on hybrid vehicles and emerging markets, while forgoing the kind of aggressive growth targets that it pursued in recent years.  

Navistar International reported a fiscal-first-quarter loss of $6 million, compared with a prior-year profit of $19 million, as results weakened at each of the commercial-truck maker's main manufacturing segments. 

Parts maker Visteon's fourth-quarter profit dropped 69% to $86 million as sales and margins fell amid a reorganization. 

Ford plans to expand the range of vehicles it sells in Southeast Asia as part of a wider effort to boost its market share in the region, with one new car launched there every year for the foreseeable future. 

 European Aeronautic Defence & Space said it swung to a fourth-quarter net profit of €355 million ($493.4 million), due to increased aircraft deliveries, cost savings and improved performance in non-Airbus divisions. 

Aeroflot completed a $2 billion deal with Boeing to purchase eight Boeing 777 airliners, with the first set for delivery in 2013, in time to help with long-haul flights needed to prepare for the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi, Russia.

Qantas Airways increased the charges it adds to international fares to compensate for higher jet-fuel costs for the second time in as many months, joining airlines around the world attempting to shield themselves from the rise in crude-oil prices.

Cathay Pacific Airways said its 2010 net profit nearly tripled to 14.05 billion Hong Kong dollars (US$1.8 billion) and said it signed deals to buy a total of 25 jets from Airbus and Boeing at a total catalog price of US$5.99 billion. It also said it is in discussions to buy an additional 14 planes. 

 HSBC Holdings will halt its push for new clients of HSBC Premier, its flagship banking service aimed at wealthy international clients, as it tackles company-wide cost overruns the bank flagged in its 2010 annual results last week. 

Northern Rock, the "good bank" hived off from the nationalized U.K. mortgage lender, said it is making progress on its planned return to the private sector, as it reported a £223.5 million ($361.1 million) net loss in 2010 on a negative-interest margin and high operating costs.

 Lloyds Banking Group said its insurance and retail heads will leave the group, as new Chief Executive Antonio Horta-Osorio puts his stamp on the bank's future direction.  

 Exxon Mobil, the largest U.S. oil company by market value, plans to boost its capital spending this year by more than 6% to $34 billion and increase oil and gas production between 3% and 4%. 

Tullow Oil said it has agreed to terms with the Ugandan government that will allow it to sell a portion of its oil licenses in the country to Total and China National Offshore Oil Co., but was still unable to give final closure to the long-delayed deal. 

 Prudential, the U.K.'s largest insurer by market value, reported its 2010 net profit more than doubled to £1.43 billion ($2.31 billion), from £676 million a year earlier, helped by strong sales in Asia.  

ING started preparations for a possible sale of ING Direct USA, an online savings bank that the Dutch financial services company wants to keep despite an order from the European Commission to divest it before the end of 2013. 

Hannover Re, one of the five largest reinsurers world-wide by gross premium revenue, said fourth-quarter net profit rose 22% to €166.9 million ($232 million) as a substantially higher contribution from investments and higher premiums more than offset a moderate bill for major claims. 

 CME Group is losing interest in teaming up with Nasdaq OMX Group, in a potential bid to break up NYSE Euronext's deal with Deutsche Börse, people familiar with the matter said.  

 French media group Lagardère said net profit for 2010 rose 19% to €163 million ($226.6 million), and expects profits to bounce back in 2011 as it aims to refocus its main media assets.  

 Extract Resources, which holds a key uranium project in Africa, said it wants a Chinese state-owned company that may make a takeover offer for its largest shareholder to extend any offer to its own shareholders. 

Wal-Mart Stores-owned Asda said its foray into smaller-format stores through the acquisition of the Netto grocery store chain had been cleared by the U.K. Office Of Fair Trading, subject to certain agreed divestments. 

Nokia Siemens Networks said its planned acquisition of most of Motorola Solutions' network-equipment assets won't be completed in the first quarter as it is still waiting for Chinese antitrust authorities to review the deal. Motorola said China's antitrust regulator extended its review of the deal for up to 60 days, without giving a reason. 

Mexico's largest phone company, Telefonos de Mexico, said it plans to split into two companies, one of which will serve rural and marginalized areas where competitors haven't invested.

MTN Group, Africa's largest mobile-network operator, said it is unlikely to engage in major mergers or acquisitions, and said full-year pretax profit rose 9% to 28.1 billion rand ($4.1 billion). 

 The U.K. government plans to ban the display of tobacco products in shops and may introduce plain packaging, as lawmakers seek to curb smoking and improve public health.  

 Rolls-Royce Group and Daimler will launch a €3.2 billion ($4.45 billion) public tender offer to buy German diesel-engine maker Tognum to create a leading player in the industrial engines market.  

German energy giant E.ON said net profit in 2010 fell 31% to €5.85 billion ($8.13 billion), owing in part to lower disposal gains, and forecast its operating earnings this year would decrease by up to 16% before recovering in 2012. 

Finmeccanica agreed to sell a 45% stake of its Ansaldo Energia unit to U.S. private-equity firm First Reserve with the deal valuing Ansaldo Energia at €1.23 billion ($1.71 billion). 