TOKYO—The U.S. scrambled to contain the damage to its relationship with Japan after a diplomat's alleged remarks disparaging Okinawans caused a furor among leaders in Tokyo and people in Okinawa, a southern Japanese island that serves as a U.S. military hub for East Asia.

In an attempt to calm the surge of anger in one of America's closest allies, the State Department took the unusual step of removing the head of its Japan section Thursday, replacing him with a respected Japan expert retired from the Foreign Service. The U.S. ambassador to Japan, John Roos, flew to Okinawa Thursday to apologize to its governor and other local officials. 

That was just one of many apologies that American officials have rushed to deliver this week.

"I have, and Ambassador Roos has, apologized deeply to all key players in the Japanese government," Assistant Secretary Kurt Campbell told reporters during a Japan visit Thursday. "We do believe this has caused some harm, and it is appropriate for the United States to act responsibly to address those issues. "

The hasty arrangements came after top officials in Tokyo complained Wednesday that the flap over Kevin Maher's remarks has made even tougher the already-difficult relocation of a marine air base on Okinawa—a matter that has strained the normally friendly relations between the two allies.



The Japanese media reported earlier in the week that Mr. Maher, the head of the State Department's office of Japanese affairs, made derogatory comments about people in Okinawa, which hosts three-quarters of U.S. military facilities in Japan.

Specifically, the media said, Mr. Maher told a group of university students in Washington in December that people in Okinawa were "masters of manipulation and extortion" in their relations with Tokyo. According to a written account of his off-the-record lecture obtained by Kyodo News and others, Mr. Maher also said Okinawans were so lazy that their production of bitter gourd—an idiosyncratic Okinawan vegetable—fell short of that in other parts of Japan. 

Mr. Maher told Kyodo the report was "neither accurate nor complete." He declined to speak to The Wall Street Journal.

"Coming from a State Department official working on Japan, those remarks, if true, are extremely inappropriate," Foreign Minister Takeaki Matsumoto said at a news conference Wednesday. "They hurt the feelings of the Okinawans and the Japanese people as a whole. They are simply unacceptable and highly regrettable." 

The decision to remove Mr. Maher was conveyed by Mr. Campbell to Mr. Matsumoto and Defense Minister Toshimi Kitazawa in meetings Thursday.

"I expressed on behalf of the United States government deep regrets" about the alleged comments, Mr. Campbell said later at the news briefing. "I just wanted to reaffirm that these in no way reflect the views of the government of the United States and the people of the United States." He cited "the utmost respect the United States has for the Okinawan people. We are grateful for their daily commitment to our relationship."

Effective immediately, Rust Deming, a longtime Japan expert who has served as deputy chief of mission at the embassy in Tokyo in the 1990s, was appointed to succeed Mr. Maher. Mr. Deming retired from the State Department in 2005 after 38 years, though he continued to work there part-time as a consultant.

Mr. Campbell said Mr. Maher—whom he described as as a "fine officer" who has devoted his career to Japan-U.S. relations—will remain in the State Department in an unspecified position, despite his removal from the job of running the Japan desk. Mr. Campbell declined to confirm whether Mr. Maher had actually made the reported remarks to the students.

Earlier in the week, several local assemblies in Okinawa voted on a resolution condemning Mr. Maher and seeking apologies. The condemnation by the city assembly of Naha, the prefectural seat, described Mr. Maher's comments as "discriminating" against people in Okinawa and treating the southern island as if it were a U.S. "colony." 

Such strong reaction comes as anger and frustration run high in Okinawa about the controversial plan to shift core functions of the Futenma Marine base from central Okinawa to a new facility to be built on the island's northern coast. During its election campaign in 2009, the Democratic Party of Japan promised to move the relocation facility to outside of Okinawa, fueling hopes among the Okinawans who felt the island shouldered an unfairly large share of the U.S. military weight. But under the pressure from Washington, the DPJ gave up the plan after it rose to power.

The continued strong opposition from local officials and residents has held up the relocation plan, keeping the two nations from moving on with other bilateral security issues. That is one reason officials from both governments have been so upset by the Maher furor: It appears to have intensified the already powerful opposition.

As a sign of commitment to the U.S.-Japan alliance, Mr. Campbell said working-level officials from Washington and Tokyo will be intensifying preparations for a meeting between foreign and defense chiefs of the two nations. The coming meeting, known as a "Two Plus Two," will be of "historic nature," he said, with the allies laying out their plans for defense cooperation and their regional security goals.

"I believe that in every one of our meetings, there were recognitions that given pressing regional and global developments in Asia and in the Middle East, in Northeast Asia in particular, it was critical to hold a Two Plus Two," Mr. Campbell said. "I think there is a strong desire to nail down the date and get busy on final preparations." 

Mr. Campbell said such a meeting will likely be held in early spring.



 Write to  Yuka Hayashi at yuka.hayashi@wsj.com 