SEOUL—The Bank of Korea raised its benchmark interest rate Thursday, while the government issued a package of steps to stabilize consumer prices, moves that show the concern among policy makers about building inflationary pressures as the economy recovers.

The central bank's surprise decision to raise its policy rate by 0.25 percentage point to 2.75% and the government's set of measures, including a freeze on public-service charges such as those for electricity and gas, show how the authorities now view inflation as one of their main policy challenges.

President Lee Myung-bak urged his cabinet last week to take a tough stance against inflation. He told them to aim this year to keep it around 3%, the midpoint of the central bank's target band of 2% to 4%.

Annual consumer inflation remained above 3% for a fourth consecutive month in December, at 3.5%. Annual producer inflation, a reliable leading indicator of changes in consumer prices, hit a two-year high of 5.3% in December.

The Bank of Korea expects inflation to accelerate to 3.5% this year from 2.9% in 2010, but has pledged to focus on price conditions at its interest-rate reviews. The finance ministry has promised to do whatever is needed to keep inflation in check.

Seoul's package of inflation-fighting measures includes monitoring price movement in products used widely by low- and middle-income households, as well as tariff cuts on items including coffee beans and powdered milk. The government will also increase the supply of new apartments earlier than scheduled and rent unsold apartments of state-run construction companies to those on lower incomes.

"We will put the first half's top policy priority on price stability and do everything we can do to fight inflation," government ministries led by the Ministry of Strategy and Finance said in a joint statement. "All related (government) parties will closely cooperate for an appropriate policy mix."

The Bank of Korea is the latest Asian central bank to raise rates in an attempt to head off surging inflation, following a 0.25-percentage-point increase Wednesday by the Bank of Thailand. In recent weeks, central banks in China and Taiwan also have raised interest rates to fight inflation, and the Reserve Bank of India is expected to resume its rate-increase cycle when it meets this month.

The step highlights a conundrum facing Asian policy makers. Higher interest rates are a magnet for international capital; as governments across the region implement capital controls to prevent inflows from driving up their currencies and forming asset bubbles, authorities are trying to walk a fine line between fighting inflation and attracting yet more funds into their markets. 

Following the rate increase, the won rose against the dollar, although the central bank was believed to intervene to stem the gains. The stock market was little changed, although shares in insurers rose on hopes for higher income.

Analysts expect the central bank to continue its monetary tightening throughout the year to contain inflation, albeit at a moderate pace so as not to compromise economic recovery.