Each morning I would awake at 5 o'clock. Was it the 20-hour trans-Pacific jet lag? Perhaps. Yet the romantic in me likes to believe it was the natural pace and aura of Luang Prabang—the former royal capital of Laos—that was rousing me each dawn, the sky turning a hazy purple over the tropics of north-central Laos. Something in the air seemed to be urging me: "Get up—this is a morning city."

Or rather, a morning town. As it's a mere sliver of a peninsula formed at the confluence of the earth-colored Mekong and Khan rivers, one can traverse the length of the main historical area of Luang Prabang in about an hour. But rushing through it—past the centuries-old temples and their magnificent Buddhas, the street vendors selling hand-woven silk, the fragrant Gallic and Laotian cuisine served at restaurants in crumbling Art Deco edifices—would do yourself an egregious disservice. True, ambitious visitors could spend just a night in Luang Prabang, a stop-off on a whirlwind tour of Indochina, but they'd be missing out on so much: seeing everything, discovering nothing. 

This may sound like mystical hyperbole, but it's true. Luang Prabang has had this effect on people, visitors and townsfolk alike for ages. According to old lore, the first settlers may have decided to build a city here over 1,000 years ago to be close to the sheer beauty of Mount Phousi, the verdant hill that is the town's centerpiece. In the first half of the 20th century, while the city was part of Indochina, French colonials quickly fell in love with its languid nature—to many, it was the perfect antidote to Paris. And today, linen-and-Pashmina-clad travelers, hearing of its reputation as the last "untouched" city in Southeast Asia, make pilgrimages here. Subsequently, a smattering of luxury boutique inns have sprung up, the French provincial façades restored to their past glory.

Still, despite Luang Prabang's growth as a destination for the off-the-beaten-path traveler, it remains a magical, fabled place. And like the surrounding meandering rivers, the soul of the city will be revealed only at its own pace, a speed as lulling as a drifting longboat.

If you should rise at dawn in Luang Prabang, as I did, you will be rewarded with one of Asia's most spectacular sights: a Buddhist alms procession. Each morning, beginning at 5:30, hundreds of monks from the town's 30 or so temples walk barefoot in the streets, single file, oldest in the front, youngest trailing behind, all clad in burnt-sienna-colored robes and toting alms bowls over their shoulders. Awaiting them on the side of the roads are locals, kneeling on mats with bamboo baskets of kao neaw (sticky rice) cradled under one arm. As monks pass, the locals drop pinches of rice into the alms bowls.

It's a remarkable sight, a simple act of giving and receiving, yet as quickly as it happens, it ends. The monks return to their temples. The locals go about their days. 

You may want to join this stunningly meditative religious procession. Many tourists do. But unless a local invites you, position yourself at a respectful distance and simply observe. Luang Prabang excels at making one feel like it's a lost city on the Mekong; with the dense, jungle mountains encircling it, it's certainly removed enough from the rest of the world to be one. And because it's a Unesco World Heritage town, crass overdevelopment may never arrive. Still, you may find yourself caring for the survival of Luang Prabang's authenticity in a more fervent way than one would, say, Phuket's. There appear to be no signs of tourist snobbery here, nor the hustling and con games so many travelers face when visiting destination ports.

Because this place really isn't like anywhere else. Just hike the steep, winding stairs leading to the top of Mount Phousi, where That Chomsi—a Buddhist monument with a brilliant gold spire—sits and you'll see. At dusk, the mountaintop is crowded with onlookers who have come to watch the sun set over the Mekong. In the morning, however, the perch provides clear, unobstructed views of the rivers to the north and west, the rolling mountains to the east, and Luang Prabang, with its orange-tiled roofs and gleaming spires, laid out to the south. 

 GETTING THERE 

 Flights to Luang Prabang from Bangkok, Chiang Mai, Siem Reap and Hanoi are available from Lao Airlines, Bangkok Airways and Vietnam Airlines. The airport is a quick cab ride from the center of town. 

You can also take a two- or three-day cruise up the Mekong from the Thai border near Houei Say, Laos: $243 to $525, depending on the season and whether you stop at lodges en route (luangsay.com).

 WHERE TO STAY  

Amantaka, from $700 per night, amanresorts.com; La Residence Phou Vao, from $340 per night, resdencephouvao.com

 WHERE TO EAT 

L'Elephant, elephant-restau.com; Tamarind Café, tamarindlaos.com

 SIDE TRIPS 

About two hours by boat up the Mekong are the Pak Ou Caves. Carved out of limestone cliffs, the caves contain thousands of wood and gold Buddhas in a multitude of sizes. The organic feel of the caves is a nice contrast to the more ornate temples in the region. You can charter a boat from near the docks along the river, but if you are staying at the Amantaka, book their luxurious private long boat for an unforgettable cruise. 

To cool off during the rainy season, take a taxi ($10-$15) one hour south to the Tad Sae Falls, a series of tiered, cascading waters with swimming holes.

 WHAT TO PACK  

While many tourists don't, it's best to dress modestly. Avoid shorts, strappy dresses and sleeveless shirts. Go for cotton or linen pants and long sleeves, which will also keep mosquitoes at bay. And, yes, bring bug spray.

These hours are also the time to visit the city's temples, many of which are only open before noon. There are a few standouts: the Lotus Stupa, known for its watermelon-shape; Wat Visoun, the oldest temple in the city; and Wat Xieng Thong, the most ornate. There's nothing spiritual about Google Map-ing them on an iPhone, however. Instead, take a more laissez-faire approach—I rode my bicycle (most hotels rent them for $1), visiting temples as I happened upon them, chatting with monks along the way who were eager to practice their English, and I my Thai.

It may seem so at first, particularly in the mornings, but Luang Prabang isn't all karmic pursuits. Elsewhere in the Old Town (as its historic district is called) one can settle in and watch tuk tuks—those ubiquitous, three-wheeled taxis—putter by from one of the town's many French cafés clustered around Sisavangvong Road. 

And, of course, there is the nonactivity of lounging around your hotel and taking a dip in the pool, something I highly recommend come noontime, when, although I visited in 70-degrees October, the humidity can still be brutal. There are several guesthouses that put you in the middle of the Old Town, and two ultra-luxe hotels: La Residence Phou Vao, a sprawling French colonial mansion with lush gardens of frangipani and palm trees, and the recently opened and rather magnificent Amantaka, a former French hospital. Amantaka, where I stayed, is reason enough to come to Luang Prabang. Most of its 24 suites hold private pools, and the amenities and service are on five-star levels by any standard. The vibe though, was pure aristocrat-colonial: cold towels at the ready each time you returned to its confines; the staff as knowledgeable as they were pampering. 

After a swim (and a nap), I hopped on the bicycle again, making my way down the road closest to the Mekong and opted for a cold Lao Beer (try it over ice as the locals do) and an appetizer of grilled, sweet Lao sausage. There are several outdoor bars along the river, all of which seem to bleed into each other—like the temples, it's best to simply wander into any that feels right. The one for me was Big Tree Café because, as the name indicates, it was canopied by magnificently large branches and covered in moss.

Nights here are best spent dining. There are dozens of restaurants, but I found myself going back to two of them. I loved L'Elephant for the kind of classic French cooking—homemade charcuterie, braised lamb shank, cream of pumpkin soup—you'd expect to get in, well, France. And, located further down Ban Vat Nong Road, there was Tamarind Café, its menu like a crash course in Lao cuisine: fried riverweed (think: a heartier seaweed), stuffed and fried lemongrass, fragrant local fish steamed in banana leaf. Few cafés and bars stay open past 10 p.m., mandated by a 11:30 p.m. curfew (I told you this was a morning town), so forget about grabbing a last call, and instead make your way to the lantern-lit Night Market to pick out some silk scarves and silver jewelry.

At day's end, you may feel like you've done everything, and, if traveling were a checklist, maybe you have. But if you've allowed yourself to be enchanted by this town, by its quaintness, by its singularity and natural beauty, by its pungent, spicy food and tuk tuks and well-worn streets, you will look up and see the illuminated temple atop Mount Phousi—seemingly floating in the night sky like a second moon—as a sign that it's time to go to bed, early, and do it all over again the next morning, choosing to go left where yesterday you went right, trusting that Luang Prabang will take care of the rest. 