MOSCOW—Russian inflation grew more than previously thought in December, defying Prime Minister Vladimir Putin's recent prediction and increasing chances that the central bank will raise interest rates.

Data issued Tuesday by the federal statistics service Rosstat showed consumer prices grew 1.1% last month, bringing inflation for the year to 8.8%—same as in 2009.

Rosstat had earlier published preliminary figures showing consumer prices rose 8.7% for the year, which would have given Russia its lowest inflation reading since the fall of the Soviet Union.

At a meeting last month with the heads of Russia's Higher School of Economics, Mr. Putin said inflation was "unlikely to be higher than last year.

"Probably, it will be lower," the Itar Tass news agency quoted him as saying.

But Fitch ratings agency said in a report last week, "Russia has a track record of relatively high and volatile inflation, which discourages long-term local currency savings, encourages offshore or foreign currency intermediation, and contributes to macro-financial instability." As a long-term issuer, Russia is rated "BBB" by Fitch with positive outlook.

The latest government estimate for annual inflation in 2010 was 8.5%, a revision of earlier forecasts predicting 6% to 7% inflation after the country's worst drought in decades sent food prices soaring during the summer.

The central bank responded by tightening monetary policy in December for the first time since 2008, raising the deposit rate by 0.25 percentage point.

Inflation risks continue to be "quite high," a Bank of Russia official said Tuesday, refusing to rule out further changes to interest rates this year.

Prices for cereal rose 7.6% over the month, while sunflower oil became 6.6% more expensive, and vegetable prices jumped 8.6%, the data showed. Inflation was also stoked by strengthening consumer demand and a traditional surge in government spending in December, analysts said.

Russia may allow the ruble to strengthen this year to help battle rising prices, Uralsib's  Chris Weafer said in a research note Monday.

"For currency traders that may be a good combination; a safe fiscal and macro backdrop, no real threat of capital restrictions and either rates will rise or the central bank will allow for greater ruble flexibility," he said.