Candidates are already campaigning to succeed Miami-Dade County's ousted mayor, just days after voters booted Carlos Alvarez by a nearly 9-to-1 margin in a recall election on Tuesday.

The candidates—ranging from a mayor to a former hip-hop star—are catering to the anti-tax, anti-establishment movement that led the recall effort. 

Tuesday's election results were certified Friday, formally removing Mr. Alvarez from office. A special vote to replace Mr. Alvarez isn't likely for at least two months, and it won't be known how many candidates will join the race until an election date is set and candidate registration is held.



For now, those who have declared themselves candidates are logging 14-hour days, visiting African-American churches, fund raising in the backyards of donors and stumping at senior centers. They're all making similar promises: lower property taxes, scrub out corruption and reform the county charter to weaken the power of the county's 13 commissioners.

"We need to run government like a business—without affecting core services," Julio Robaina, mayor of Hialeah, a city of 221,000 located eight miles northwest of Miami, said in an interview. As a candidate, Mr. Robaina said he wants to reduce duplication in county government, making his point by noting it takes visits to five different buildings to get a single county building permit.

At senior centers all across Miami-Dade County this week, Marcelo Llorente, a former Florida state house representative, was showered with applause when he told people of his plans to slash the mayor's office budget—and his own salary—by 10%. 

"I drive a 2003 Ford Explorer with 65,000 miles, and it works just fine," Mr. Llorente said, a nod to Mr. Alvarez's BMW, which had been partially subsidized by an official $800-a-month car allowance—on top of two other county-issued vehicles.

Luther Campbell, the lead singer for hip-hop group 2 Live Crew, is another declared candidate. On his campaign website, a photo of Mr. Campbell—nicknamed "Uncle Luke"—shows him wearing a dark suit and red tie and gesturing with a peace sign. Mr. Campbell did not respond to an email request for comment.

The winner of a special vote would finish out Mr. Alvarez's current term, which ends in November 2012. The interim mayor will be elected this summer in a special election, or the next scheduled countywide vote early next year, county commissioners said. In the latter option, the county commissioners would appoint an acting mayor to serve until January 2012, though this option is unlikely, commissioners said.

Many of the top candidates, such as county commissioner Carlos Gimenez, planned to run 18-month campaigns for the 2012 election. Now, they've got weeks.

"This is going to be a sprint," said Mr. Gimenez, 58 years old, who now gets up at 6 a.m. every day to hit the campaign trail, returning home at 9:30 p.m., fueled throughout the day by Coke and Pepsi. He's been fund raising in the backyards of family and friends, usually with a spread of Cuban finger foods, like croquetas and pastelitos. 

More than half of Miami voters are undecided about whom they would choose if the special election were held today, according to a recent poll by Miami-based Bendixen & Amandi International Inc. 

The top vote getters in that poll were: Hialeah's Mr. Robaina at 28% of the vote; Mr. Gimenez with 9%; and Joe Martinez, the current county commission chairman, who plans to run in 2012 but not in a special election, with 4%. 

The majority of voters, political affiliation aside, said they most wanted a candidate to be "honest and ethical," according to the poll.

 Write to  Timothy W. Martin at timothy.martin@wsj.com 