NEW YORK—Japan's yen surged against other major currencies after a devastating earthquake set off expectations that companies will repatriate yen to help pay for rebuilding efforts.

Traders swiftly sold the yen just after the earthquake before reversing course. The dollar fell about 1.3% against the yen on the day, while the euro was down about 0.4% against the yen.

"Speculation in advance of repatriation, that's what is driving the yen up right now," said  Jeffrey Young, head of North American FX Research at Barclays Capital in New York.

Traders are betting that insurers with exposure to Japan and companies based in the country will soon need to buy large quantities of yen to cover damages and pay out insurance claims. They would be forced to exchange foreign currencies for yen, further hurting the dollar, euro and other major units.

But it is still too early to assess the extent of the damage and how much money may be needed to rebuild parts of the country that were destroyed by the earthquake and tsunami it triggered, leading to some uncertainty about longer term currency moves.

"I'm personally not expecting a huge yen appreciation, but the net impact is probably negative for dollar/yen," said a portfolio manager at a London-based hedge fund.

This person expects some Japanese firms to repatriate cash, but only gradually—and he doesn't expect a massive flow of yen back into Japan.

The long-term effects on Japan's economy and the yen were still not known. But Moody's Investors Service said it was highly unlikely the country's debt rating would be affected by the earthquake.

Japan is trying to emerge, like much of the world, from an economic downturn. Analysts said money spent to rebuild the parts of the country affected by the earthquake and tsunami could spur growth. However, it could add to the country's already high debt burden.

Japan's debt to gross domestic product level is near 200%, the highest level among industrialized countries. 

Late Friday, the euro was at $1.3903 from $1.3789 late Thursday. The dollar was at 81.89 yen from 82.93 yen, while the euro traded at 113.86 yen from 114.36 yen. The U.K. pound traded at $1.6085 from $1.6051. The dollar was at 0.9293 Swiss franc from 0.9320 franc.

The ICE Dollar Index, which tracks the U.S. dollar against a trade-weighted basket of currencies, was at 76.73 from 77.276. 

The euro also strengthened against the dollar, adding to its gains late in the New York trading day after European leaders reached an agreement on a competitiveness pact. That agreement was considered a necessary precursor to European Union leaders hammering out a deal to overhaul the 17-nation bloc's bailout fund.

EU leaders have said they want to expand the European Financial Stability Facility by the end of the month. Greece and Ireland have already tapped the bailout fund and market participants widely expect Portugal will need financial support as well.

—Neil Shah contributed to this article.

