  Warren Buffett's annual letter to shareholders, unveiled last weekend, made no mention of  Rajat Gupta. But surely the famed investor would have plenty to say about the former board member of  Goldman Sachs Group
GS


0.07
%




 and  Procter & Gamble,
PG


0.16
%




 two of  Berkshire Hathaway's biggest investments, who stands accused by the Securities and Exchange Commission of leaking inside information about both companies to Galleon Group founder and accused insider trader  Raj Rajaratnam.

I can't speak for Mr. Buffett, and he didn't respond to my request for comment. Indeed, the silence from America's corporate leaders, many of whom knew Mr. Gupta from his days as chief executive of consulting firm McKinsey & Co., has been deafening. 

Mr. Gupta is, of course, entitled to his day in court, and through his lawyer, he has denied any wrongdoing. But the SEC's detailed allegations, if proved, are damning. According to the SEC's complaint, Mr. Gupta called Mr. Rajaratnam just before the market close on the very day Goldman's board approved a $5 billion investment in Goldman by Berkshire, a vote of confidence in Goldman that came at the depths of the financial crisis. Mr. Rajaratnam promptly bought Goldman shares and then sold them, earning a quick profit of $900,000, according to the complaint.

Mr. Gupta also leaked confidential information about Goldman's and Procter & Gamble's earnings, which enabled Mr. Rajaratnam to make more than $17 million in illegal profits and avoid losses, according to the SEC complaint. There has been no allegation that Mr. Gupta profited directly from passing the information, but he was both an investor in and director of one of the Galleon hedge funds. As of yet, no criminal charges have been filed against him.

If I were Mr. Buffett, I would say, first and foremost, that the passing of confidential information by a board member is illegal, a shocking and inexplicable breach of trust, and bad business. Even more fundamentally, I would say it is stupid. Why trade on inside information from Mr. Buffett when you can simply mirror his strategies after they've been made public?

Let's use the Goldman investment as an example. As I pointed out at the time, average investors could pretty much replicate the Buffett trade in Goldman by using call options and bonds. I recommended buying Goldman's January 2010 calls (then trading at $10 a share) and deeply discounted bonds then yielding 10%. 

Goldman shares were trading at over $150 a share when those options expired. If they exercised the calls and then sold the shares, investors would have made a profit of $40 a share on an investment of $110 per share. And today the bonds are trading over par.

Compare those results to Mr. Rajaratnam's. According to the SEC, on Sept. 23, 2008, after talking with Mr. Gupta, Mr. Rajaratnam bought 175,000 Goldman shares, adding to the 120,000 he had bought earlier that day and the day before, also after talking with Mr. Gupta. The shares closed just over $125 on Sept. 23.

The next day, after the news of Mr. Buffett's investment was released, Goldman shares jumped to $133, and Mr. Rajaratnam liquidated his position, realizing a profit of about $900,000, according to the SEC. 

This week Goldman shares were trading at $165 share. Had Mr. Rajaratnam bought Goldman shares at $133, after the news was released, and held them, he would be looking at a total gain of $9.6 million. Similarly, after allegedly learning from Mr. Gupta that P&G's results would be disappointing, Mr. Rajaratnam shorted some 180,000 P&G shares on Jan. 29, 2009. The next day, after the results were released, the shares dropped more than 6%, and Galleon funds reaped a gain of $570,000.

P&G shares traded at $54.50 on Jan. 30. This week P&G shares were trading at over $62. Had Mr. Rajaratnam simply waited for the results, bought 180,000 shares and held them, he would have a gain of $1.35 million.

There are at least two important lessons for investors in all this. First of all, insider trading is a fool's game. Second, follow Mr. Buffett's words and deeds. I have periodically recommended companies in which Mr. Buffet has a stake. In this year's letter, he extols his acquisition of Burlington Northern and the potential for rail companies in general. It is too late to buy Burlington Northern, but there are other publicly traded railroads. I have recommended and own  Norfolk Southern,
NSC


0.66
%




 on much the same rationale articulated by Mr. Buffett.

—James B. Stewart, a columnist for SmartMoney magazine and SmartMoney.com, writes weekly about his personal investing strategy. Unlike Dow Jones reporters, he may have positions in the stocks he writes about. For his past columns, see: www.smartmoney.com/commonsense.