The Northeast hunkered down for a major snowstorm Tuesday night, while the South struggled to find its footing as stubborn ice and snow snarled air traffic and kept the region largely at a standstill. 

Meteorologists predicted the storm—which has led to at least 10 deaths in the South—could drop as much as 15 inches of snow on New York City and as much as two feet on Boston.

New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg promised the response to this storm would be better than the handling of last month's blizzard, with city agencies communicating more and extra private contractors pitching in. The mayor placed the city under a weather emergency Tuesday evening. 

The city's mass-transit system—also crippled by the December storm—would be better prepared, Metropolitan Transportation Authority officials said. 

Some airlines were already canceling flights at the region's three major airports Tuesday afternoon, a spokesman for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey said. 

In Atlanta,  Delta Airlines Inc.
DAL


0.67
%




 and AirTran Airways, a subsidiary of  AirTran Holdings Inc., canceled most of their flights in and out of Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport for a second day in a row. 

Delta canceled 1,700 flights, about 30 percent of it is total flights systemwide, and has canceled 800 flights scheduled for Wednesday. Most of those flights are in the northeast.

AirTran canceled about 260 of its flights Tuesday, more than a third of its daily national total. Most were either to or from Atlanta. AirTran also canceled 50 flights to and from Northeast airports in coming days. 

Major Southern cities worked to clear roads Tuesday, but the region isn't prepared for so much ice and snow. 

Frigid conditions are expected to last until the weekend, keeping many roads dangerous. The treacherous driving led to many accidents, from fender-benders in quiet neighborhoods to jack-knifed trucks that stopped expressways.

Most businesses and schools remained closed in the South. The Postal Service and commercial-delivery services suspended operations in many areas. Transit bus service was halted in most cities and suburbs. Commercial bus lines also shut down their routes. Several Atlanta charities and even a local jail brought food, water and supplies to about 300 stranded passengers at the city's Greyhound bus terminal, the Associated Press reported. 

As state legislatures began their 2011 sessions, many lawmakers had difficulty getting to their respective capitols. In South Carolina, only 20 of 45 state senators made it to Columbia, the Associated Press reported. 

The state Senate quickly recessed because it didn't have enough members to elect officers and begin business.

 Write to  Andrew Grossman at andrew.grossman@wsj.com 