On Sunday, in the genteel leafy London suburb of Dulwich, there will be a special birthday party. 

Celebrating with a concert of music by local schools, falconry displays, free entry to the permanent collections and fireworks to cap it all, Dulwich Picture Gallery will be 200 years old. Though it feels remote from central London, Dulwich Picture Gallery is in fact only 13 minutes and a short brisk walk from Victoria Station. Here, in serenity, it embodies a paradox that lies at the heart of its appeal. 

Founded as a result of a series of accidents, it is hailed not just as the first but as the model for all subsequent public art galleries. Its world-class collection of 16th- to 18th-century European masterpieces, including works by Poussin, Van Dyck, Rembrandt and Rubens, has won it a global reputation. 

The highlight Sunday will be the unveiling of Sir Thomas Lawrence's portrait of Sir John Soane, the first of a series of 12 significant masterpieces, loaned, in monthly homage, from some of the world's most eminent art institutions. 

This first painting, on loan from Sir John Soane's Museum, honors the gallery's great idiosyncratic neoclassical architect, whose elegant sequence of daylight-filled spaces will now set off his own portrait to its best advantage. "Soane's enfilade at Dulwich Picture Gallery is one of the great jewels in the world," says gallery Director Ian Dejardin. "I wanted to have some element of the celebrations based firmly in this feature." 

The succession of what Mr. Dejardin refers to as "presiding geniuses" will include Velázquez's "El bufón Don Sebastián de Morra" from the Prado, El Greco's astonishing "The Vision of Saint John" from the Metropolitan Museum in New York, Veronese's "Venus and Mercury before Jupiter" from the Uffizi and Rembrandt's "Titus as a Monk" from Amsterdam's Rijksmuseum. 

This weekend marks strictly the bicentennial of the death of Sir Francis Bourgeois (1753-1811), who bequeathed the entire founding art collection to Dulwich College in his will, with the stipulation that the 360 paintings be available to "inspection by the Public." An Anglo-Swiss painter of modest reputation, Bourgeois had been a partner in one of Georgian London's most successful picture dealerships. 

In 1790 he and his friend, Frenchman Noël Desenfans, were commissioned by Stanislaus Augustus, King of Poland, to form a Royal Collection that would not only bring great honor to Poland but also "encourage the progress of the fine arts in Poland." 

Rapidly they amassed an exemplary didactic collection. "Our founders put together a history of western art as it was then understood," Mr. Dejardin explains. "So it is important as a document in the history of taste." The bias toward the later Flemish and Dutch schools; the magnificent Poussins, "the academic artist par excellence," as Mr. Dejardin says; the emphasis on baroque rather than renaissance art and the almost entire neglect of British painting, were all "very much of its time." 

Unfortunately, in the interim Poland had been torn apart by its more powerful neighbors, and in 1795 the King of Poland was forced to abdicate. Bourgeois and Desenfans were left with an orphaned "royal" collection on their hands. Some of the pictures they sold privately and upgraded, but their main ambition was to persuade a national government to buy the collection as a whole. 

The idea wasn't new. Across Europe in the late 18th century, inspired by the spirit of the Enlightenment, princely collections had been nationalized and opened to the public—and the British Museum had opened its doors in 1753. But whether owing to snobbery (both Bourgeois and Desenfans, as foreigners, remained outside the art establishment) or bad timing, the British Government, as also the Tsar of Russia, turned down the opportunity. 

Desenfans died in 1807. With increasing urgency, and reluctant to bequeath their hard won treasures to the British Museum, whose trustees he judged too "aristocratic" and "arbitrary," Bourgeois settled his collection on Dulwich College, stating in his will that he wanted it to "go down to Posterity for the benefit of the Public." In addition, sums of money were provided for the refurbishment of the college's existing gallery and the building of a mausoleum for Bourgeois, Desenfans, and, eventually, Desenfans' widow—with the strong recommendation that Soane, a close friend of Bourgeois, be entrusted with the project. Soane began work at once, boldly reinterpreting the brief: in 1817 the first purpose-built art gallery opened its doors to the public.

Since then both building and collection have been significantly augmented. The Linley family group of portraits in 1935 and the centenary Fairfax Murray Gift in 1911 of mostly English portraits, "transformed the Gallery," according to Mr. Dejardin, "and brought the British school into the picture." The Gainsboroughs, especially, have always been popular, while the number of important paintings by Poussin, Rembrandt and Rubens has ensured the Gallery's permanent reputation as a worthy rival to the National Gallery, founded in 1824. 

But the Gallery has also faced more difficult times. Ruskin's rudeness about Bolognese painting and Murillo cast a blight over British appreciation of Dulwich's Italian and Spanish works for many years and in 1944 a Doodlebug obliterated the west façade. In the 1990s on-going financial difficulties almost led to the Gallery's closure. 

Part of the extravagant joyfulness of this year's celebrations comes from the remarkable renascence the gallery has enjoyed as a consequence of three main factors: its highly regarded education program; the tactful modern extension designed by Rick Mather, which furnished a café and lecture rooms, completed in 1999, and its imaginative temporary exhibitions. 

Mr. Dejardin, who became director in 2005, succeeding Desmond Shawe-Taylor, says: "We had established that you could do three shows a year, but we can't do blockbusters. If we get 160,000 to 170,000 [visitors] a year that is an absolute limit. We have to plough a different furrow and I think we should plough as different a furrow as possible."

This year's temporary exhibitions exemplify his approach. Until March 27, Norman Rockwell's America, continues Mr. Dejardin's strong theme of American shows. The Friends Easter Open Exhibition will follow (April 22-May 8), the fourth biennial of work by the gallery's foremost supporters. Then we have the brave, unmissable Twombly and Poussin: Arcadian Painters (June 29-Sept. 25) setting ancient and modern beside each other as if they were contemporaries. "The idea came from Twombly himself, who said in an interview that if he could come back as any other artist it would be Poussin," Mr. Dejardin explains. 

Finally, Tom Thomson and the Group of Seven (Oct. 19-Jan. 18, 2012) indulges a passion of Mr. Dejardin. "I have been a fan since the 1980s," he says of this vibrant early twentieth century group. "In Canada these artists are gods. They define to this day how Canadians see their landscape." 