Did you know that you could get hit with an extra $5,000 in interest payments on a $20,000, five-year car loan because you didn't treat your credit score with the utmost of care?

That ups the total cost of the car by 25% because you didn't pay your bills on time or you charged up a credit card to the limit.

The sad truth is many consumers still don't understand how their credit scores work, according to a survey conducted by the Consumer Federation of America, a nonprofit association, in partnership with VantageScore Solutions, a credit-scoring company that uses scores from all three major credit-reporting companies -- Experian,  Equifax
EFX


-0.10
%




 and TransUnion -- in its calculations. (You can take the quiz at creditscorequiz.org.)

A few other things most respondents didn't seem to know:

 Credit scores aren't about your ability to pay the loan, but about the risk of you not paying the loan. Your income could be high and your debt outstanding more than manageable to easily assume that $20,000 car loan, but if your track record of paying bills on time is far from stellar, that makes you a credit risk.

 The strength of your credit score depends on the scale used. A FICO score of 700 is great because FICO scores run from a low of 300 to 850. But a 700 on a VantageScore, which starts at 501 to a high end of 990, wouldn't be so good.

 Age and marital status aren't calculated into your credit score, but the length of time you've had a score is. If you're 30 and you've spent a few years accumulating an excellent score, then you're as good as the 45-year-old who has done the same.

 Your credit isn't one tidy score, but many different scores that are either generic or lender-based. To make matters worse, different lenders look at different scores when making their decisions.

 Liens, foreclosures, short sales and bankruptcies can wreak havoc on your credit score. These can wipe out 100 to 300 points. But you can recover from a lien or poor on-time payments in about nine months of good performance. Foreclosures, short sales or bankruptcies, however, will haunt you for years.

—Jennifer Waters  MarketWatch.com 

Deferred-payment plans. Rock-bottom rates. Even loan balances wiped out for good behavior. These are all features of new loans designed to help college students and parents swallow the increasing costs of college. But they may not be as generous as they sound.

Sallie Mae will resurrect a loan that allows students to defer payments until after graduation.

For colleges that agree to replace grant programs with loans, National Education Servicing introduced a loan program that forgives 25% of the original balance for students who graduate and make every payment on time.

As appealing as they first appear, experts say these loans may also feature rising rates, extra fees and longer repayment periods -- all of which add up to higher debt levels for students.

With colleges raising tuition costs, states cutting back on free aid to students and colleges replacing grants with loans, private-loan debt may grow faster than in previous years, says Mark Kantrowitz, founder of FinAid.org, which tracks financial-aid trends.

Wesley College, which has signed up with National Education, says it's replacing some grants with loans in financial-aid packages for about 20% of incoming freshmen -- a decision that will forestall further cutbacks in its budget and existing grants, says  Eric Nelson, vice president for finance at Wesley in Dover, Del.

In February, Georgia's governor proposed funding a loan program in part for some stellar students who would otherwise receive the Hope scholarship, which currently covers tuition at in-state public colleges and up to $2,000 per semester at in-state private colleges. The program, which could kick in as early as this fall, would offer up to $10,000 per year, a 1% fixed interest rate and a 10-year repayment period.

While competition in the market may eventually lower costs for students and families, for now, these new loans mostly represent higher costs across the board. First, they replace primarily free aid -- which automatically makes the final price tag more expensive. And many loans also come with origination fees of up to 10.5%, according to FinAid.org.

—AnnaMaria Andriotis  SmartMoney.com 

Battered during the recession, some state 529 college-savings plans have developed the ultimate pitch to lure investors: free money.

Virginia recently launched a program that offers up to $2,000 for high-school students who qualify academically and financially. New parents in Rhode Island get a $100 bonus if they start a 529 plan within the child's first year. A bill in the Oregon state legislature seeks to do the same. Experts expect other states to follow suit.

And there are a series of proposals in Congress that make saving in a 529 plan potentially more lucrative.

In the grand scheme of things, the incentives are small, says  Andrea Feirstein, managing director of AKF Consulting, which advises states that administer 529 plans.

Also, the free money could deter parents from comparison shopping and make them blind to fees or poor performance, says  Laura Lutton, a director for Morningstar's fund research group, which studies and grades 529 plans.

—A.A.  SmartMoney.com 

—The Aggregator features news and commentary from The Wall Street Journal and other publications. Email: cristina.lourosa@wsj.com 