Later generations may well look back upon our time and marvel at the profusion of novels that invited 21st-century American teenagers to fantasize about rejecting the rigidly rule-bound futures laid out for them by adults. In "Divergent" (HarperCollins, 487 pages, $17.99), Veronica Roth pulls together familiar skeins—a ruined landscape, a radically reorganized culture, violent authoritarianism beneath the illusion of order—to create a dystopia set in what once was Chicago. 

After an unspecified cataclysm, society has been divided into factions based on character traits: Abnegation, Amity, Dauntless, Erudite and Candor. At 16, every child undergoes personality testing and then, in a blood ceremony, must choose a faction. The decision may cut a youth off from all she has ever known or loved; in the new order, it's "faction before blood." Those who don't fit in—and what teenage protagonist ever really fits in?—are either declared Factionless and set adrift among society's untouchables or they are Divergent—and must be eliminated. To be Divergent is to possess skills and qualities from across the range of categories and thus to be a threat to public order.

No points for guessing where our heroine, Beatrice Prior, fits—or doesn't fit. From the modesty of her upbringing in Abnegation, Beatrice adapts so quickly to the violent atmosphere of the Goth-dressing Dauntless that she begins to attract unwelcome notice from the authorities. Yet when murderous revolutionaries seek to overthrow the system, only a Divergent may have the wits and skills to fight back.

With images of brutality and a fairly specific bedroom scene, "Divergent" is probably best suited to teen readers on the older end of the spectrum. The book is for them anyway, since the whole story is really an extended metaphor about the trials of modern adolescence: constantly having to take tests that sort and rank you among your peers, facing separation from your family, agonizing about where you fit in, and deciding when (or whether) to reveal the ways you may diverge from the group.

There's not even a whiff of dystopia in Ann Hodgman's chronicle of her goofy girlhood in "How to Die of Embarrassment Every Day: A True Story" (Henry Holt, 208 pages, $16.99), unless you think being a bad slumber-party guest or a smarty-pants big sister gives off emanations of the dark stuff. In these light and funny pages, grownup Ann looks back with unmerciful self-deprecation on herself as she was in the early 1960s, and the result is a book that children ages 8-14 can enjoy as a kind of genial historical artifact and that their parents can read with affectionate winces at the quirks and obsessions of long-ago childhood.

The author remembers poring over the pages of the Sears & Roebuck catalog and marveling at the surreal smoothness of the girls' underpants. She detested birthday parties and once tried to persuade her mother to get her out of a miniature-golf bash by claiming that "it's against our religion." She confesses to wearing an occasional daub of men's cologne so as to seem tomboyish and to using masking tape at night to flatten her bouncy curls. As the tallest of her friends, she always got to play "trainer" to their wild mustangs in the game of Horses: "They would nervously paw the ground and sniff the wind, sensing something was wrong, until I flung the jump rope around the waist of one of them and wrestled her to the ground. She was shrieking and whinnying with fear, but not too loudly because we didn't want any of the mothers on the street to see us playing with jump ropes that way." The book is dotted with black-and-white family photographs that add to the charm. There is a nice shot of the author, about 6, wearing a petticoat and posing with a bow and arrow, and another snap of the author's stuffed animals: Girl-Ted and Girl-Ted's "unimportant wife, Boy-Ted." 

If the spectrum starts on one end with dystopia, then in picture-book terms it surely must end in a place like the idyllic countryside depicted in Dori Chaconas's "Hurry Down to Derry Fair" (Candlewick, 40 pages, $16.99). Rhyming text describes the frantic efforts of Dinny Brown, a little boy who is desperate to go to the fair but whose family is taking far too long. He starts with his mother, but she is baking pies for a contest. He beseeches his father: "Hurry, Daddy! Please! It's time / To walk to Derry Fair. / The rabbits, chickens, woolly sheep, / And horses will be there!" But his father is busy chopping wood to sell. His sister can't be hurried either; she is grooming her animals to show them. Finally the child corrals his grandmother, and the two embark downhill across a pasture to the wonderful place, with its Ferris wheel and hot-air balloon, its carousel and pony rides. Their departure is just the impetus the rest of the family needs, and they follow at speed: "Running down the road to town / To see the fair with Dinny Brown!" Gillian Tyler's pastel-and-ink illustrations are the sort that children ages 4-10 adore: Each page is filled with tiny details—roosting doves, scurrying mice, even a line of distant wind turbines—all part of a green and lovely landscape. The final two pages fold out on either side to reveal the fair in all its happy glory.