On the heels of the tragedy in Japan, many investors are confused about how to react. The earthquake, tsunami and resulting nuclear crisis have resulted in terrible losses. They also have shaken confidence in the global economic recovery and raised questions about the short- and long-term economic health of Japan.

Even investment pros are unsure in the wake of the heartbreaking events. The nuclear accident suggests to some that the prices of oil, natural gas and coal will rise, as Japan and other nations move away from nuclear power. Others say events in Japan will cause a slowdown in overall economic activity, something that should hurt oil prices.

Lately, some have voiced confidence in Japan, predicting a sharp rebound as the nation finds its feet.  Warren Buffett last week said the 10% tumble in Japanese shares after the catastrophe likely represented a "buying opportunity," a sentiment that some others shared. But Japan's economy was stagnant before the earthquake hit. Unless investors are selective in their bargain hunting they could see losses, analysts and investors say.

The crisis also has raised questions about the future of nuclear power, raising doubts about that industry, but potentially creating opportunity for natural-gas companies, as well as those that could profit from the reconstruction effort in Japan.

There are good reasons to be optimistic about prospects in Japan, and about the country's stock market. The nation rebounded strongly from the devastation of the Kobe earthquake in 1995, and is expected to spend billions of dollars to rebuild from the current devastation. At the same time, the Japanese stock market is quite cheap, trading at about 1.2 times its book value, or assets minus liabilities. By comparison, the U.S. stock market trades at 2.4 times, while Europe is 1.7. Japan also is inexpensive on earnings and other metrics.

Meanwhile, Japanese companies are becoming more shareholder-friendly, and could issue more dividends or buy back shares since the average Japanese public corporation has 29% of its assets in cash, argues  Alan Zafran, co-founder of Luminous Capital, a Los Angeles-based investment adviser.

Japan-stock exchange-traded funds posted the biggest weekly inflows in history last week as investors spotted bargains.

But it's likely too early to pile into Japanese stocks and the recent buying could be a mistake. The Japanese economy was in a weaker position before the tragedy than it was before the Kobe earthquake. Japan's government debt is a whopping 220% of its gross domestic product. The cost of the current devastation has been pegged at $300 billion, adding a further burden. It's not clear how much of the expected rebuilding will add to future growth, perhaps by modernizing destroyed buildings, and how much is simply replacing what has been lost.

At the same time, Japan faces demographic issues because its population is older than most other nations', likely crimping growth by limiting the work force and encouraging consumers to save, not spend. And the nation's political leadership is weak, with a series of prime ministers and finance ministers in recent years unable to take bold steps.

"Japan is a net importer of commodities in an environment where commodities prices may well be escalating," says Mr. Zafran.

The Japanese stock market and economy likely only will heat up if the Bank of Japan can continue to push the value of the yen lower, helping exporters and pumping cash into the economy. But the yen has shown surprising resilience, raising questions about how successful the effort will be.

A better idea than rushing in: wait for a further pullback before buying up Japanese shares.

"Usually markets re-test their lows after an earthquake or similar external shock," and a subsequent rebound, says  Samer Nsouli, chief investment officer of Lyford Group, a New York hedge fund.

Mr. Nsouli advises investors to wait for a further drop of around 10% before buying shares in Japan. His favorite play at that point: the iShares MSCI Japan Index Fund (EWJ), a low-cost ETF that attempts to mirror the Japanese stock market.

Mr. Nsouli is upbeat on Japan's future, saying money will be spent to rebuild that will "make the market go higher."

Others say the best way to bet on the coming rebuilding of Japan is to buy shares of construction-related companies, such as  Caterpillar
CAT


-0.71
%




 (CAT).

"What happened in Japan will benefit Caterpillar once the rebuilding starts," says  Jeffrey Rubin of investment firm Birinyi Associates.

But Caterpillar is close to its 52-week high, and has almost doubled in the past year. So Mr. Nsouli advises investors to buy the shares only if they experience a pullback.

Others are bullish on natural gas. As Japan and others became more wary of nuclear power, and on the heels of oil's climb, some investors say natural gas will become more popular. Among them are  Jack Ablin, chief investment officer of Harris Private Bank in Chicago.

The problem, Mr. Ablin notes, is that many natural-gas ETFs don't do a good job tracking natural-gas prices.

Instead, some say investors should focus on well-run natural-gas producers.  Gary Evans, a former trader and author of the Global Macro Monitor blog, recommends  Devon Energy
DVN


-2.73
%




 (DVN) and  EnCana
ECA


-3.60
%




 (ECA), and low-cost producers such as Ultra Petroleum (UPL) and  Southwestern Energy
SWN


-1.02
%




 (SWN).

Another step some say to take is to buy gold. The Japanese reconstruction effort will result in government spending, adding to efforts in other nations to get their economies rolling. All that "loose" money already is pushing inflation higher, and could result in further inflation, which could help gold.

Others recommend corporate inflation-protected securities, or CIPS. These are private-sector bonds that come with a specific interest rate that's adjusted periodically for inflation. They pay income based on the consumer-price index on a monthly basis, another advantage over Treasury inflation-protected securities, or TIPS.

—Email: gregory.zuckerman@wsj.com 