'Mumblecore," the flippant term for any number of recent microbudget American independent films that favor low-key realism over technical fireworks, has come home this month to the place where it began.

The South by Southwest (SXSW) film festival in Austin, Texas, which opened last week, is the mother ship for the movement. During a 2005 interview in a bar there, the sound editor Eric Masunaga popularized the name—one that the director Andrew Bujalski is credited with coining, much to his regret. Mr. Bujalski's "Funny Ha Ha" is often called the first mumblecore film. Released in 2002, this amiable tale about friends adrift after college has a loose-ended plot to match. The aches and pains of unrequited love provide what drama there is. And yet to many critics the simple camera set-ups and tongue-tied dialogue proved that committed amateurism can be superior to professional vacuity. 

In the years since, SXSW has nurtured other directors—Jay and Mark Duplass, Aaron Katz, Lynn Shelton, Joe Swanberg—who share this aesthetic. Spinning goofy or risqué yarns about themselves and their contemporaries, they have embraced unscripted hazards. Typically shot on HD video in natural light, the films rely on unfamous actors willing to collaborate within improvised situations. Notwithstanding storylines about aimless young people, the finished products are often tightly edited. Almost never do these full-length features—some of them made for less than $10,000 and few earning much more at the box office—run a full two hours.

Mr. Katz's "Cold Weather," which premiered last year at SXSW and is now playing at small theaters around the country, as well as on cable through IFC on Demand, represents a new stage in the movement even as it affirms some of the key mumblecore values.

Its most striking departure from many earlier films in the style, including Mr. Katz's "Dance Party, USA" and "Quiet City," is the semblance of a traditional plot. "Cold Weather" is a mystery/thriller of sorts that some have dubbed "mumblecore noir." There's a bag of money stolen from a motel room, a woman who goes missing and may be involved in porn, a sinister cowboy in a pickup truck, a fake mustache and a secret code based on baseball statistics. The amateur detectives are a sister, a brother and his co-worker, who set out to find their missing friend and the cash. It's like David Lynch's "Blue Velvet" sans the kinkiness or violence.

In another departure, professional actors fill out the cast. Trieste Kelly Dunn, who has a list of TV credits, plays the sister; Raúl Castillo, from New York's LAByrinth Theater Company, is the brother's co-worker. Andrew Reed's cinematography exhibits an assurance not seen in his work for "Quiet City." That film was made for under $2,500; "Cold Weather" had a budget in the low six figures and was shot with the state-of-the-art digital Red One camera.

What hasn't changed is a belief in place as essential to storytelling. "Cold Weather" unfolds within Portland, Ore.'s middle-class apartment complexes and under its leaden skies. Rain-soaked colors convey the soggy melancholy of the Pacific Northwest as distinctly as the thin, smeared palette in "Quiet City" reflected the dim electric cheerlessness of New York subways and diners at night.

In tracing the ancestry of mumblecore, critics have cited the jazzily improvised films of John Cassavetes, the show-about-nothing comedy of "Seinfeld," and "Slacker" by director Richard Linklater, an Austin resident. The deadbeat males in that 1991 indie hit might be relatives of the lead character in "Cold Weather," a drop-out from forensics school who has taken a night job in an ice factory.

But just as prominent in some of these films is the lingering gaze of the camera upon particular locales. The genial passivity of so many of its characters is mirrored by long takes and leisurely cutting, as though neither actors nor audience should be in any rush to go anywhere or accomplish much. This zenlike acceptance by the people in the films of Mr. Katz couldn't be further away from the urban twitchiness and high-decibel dialogue of the men and women in such Cassavetes films as "Shadows" and "Faces." 

Mumblecore's directors have molded the world as they found it on the street or at the kitchen table, much as photographers once did before they became labeled as artists and found themselves drawn to making pictures about pictures and other forms of self-reflexive commentary. Instead of enhancing reality or inventing one with computer graphics, these filmmakers have tried to make something cinematic out of materials all of us with theatrical friends and access to a camera have on hand.

The DIY approach of mumblecore has attracted many sensibilities. The acute feeling for light and locale in Mr. Katz's films is not as pronounced in those of Ms. Shelton or Mr. Swanberg. Mr. Bujalski has darted between styles and places. His "Funny Ha Ha" used the white college ghettos of his native Boston for his wan love story. In "Beeswax" (2009), he turned his characters loose in Austin's down-market neighborhoods. "Mutual Appreciation" (2005) was a homage to Cassavetes in the guise of a drama about struggling Brooklyn musicians. 

This year's SXSW saw the North American premiere of Mr. Swanberg's latest project, "Silver Bullets," about an actress caught in a rivalry between two film directors. Dustin Guy Defa's "Bad Fever," the mumblecore story of a disturbed young comic, ran opening day and will be screened again on Thursday. 

Of course, these filmmakers are not the only independents keeping things real. Director and writer Kelly Reichardt is as alert to the mood of landscape as anyone in movies today, and the presence of celebrated actors in her works ("Old Joy," "Wendy and Lucy" and "Meek's Cutoff") has not distracted audiences from the vivid naturalism of her stories and characters. 

Mumblecore is a conflicted genre: It's the offspring of digital technology, and online distributors such as IFC, Amazon and Netflix are now the easiest way for audiences to view the work. Yet its directors prefer raw stories and seem careful not to let electronic toys dominate human experience. People in these films still communicate intensely in the flesh rather than on their smart phones. 

Media theorists claim that we live in the nowhere land of cyberspace. Many of us supposedly can no longer distinguish reality from simulacrums and have begun to prefer the ersatz. But one of the clues in "Cold Weather" involves a photo. Intimate with their city from having lived there, the amateur detectives figure out from the details where the picture was taken. They solve the mystery not with Google maps, but from memory—by knowing which side-street in Portland has a wilting palm tree.

 Mr. Woodward is an arts critic in New York. 