The phrase "inspired by a true story" affixes itself to novels like a warning label: Beware sententious moralizing. Book may contain encyclopedia gleanings disguised as narrative. Heightened risk of grating period-piece dialogue.

Pulitzer Prize-winner Geraldine Brooks is unable to avoid these harmful side effects in her historical novel "Caleb's Crossing"   (Viking, 306 pages, $26.95). As she informs us in an author's note, the book is based on the life of Caleb Cheeshahteaumauk, a member of the Wampanoag tribe on an island that is now known as Martha's Vineyard. In 1665, Caleb became Harvard College's first Indian graduate.

Ms. Brooks describes her "hope of honoring the struggle, sacrifice and achievement of this remarkable young scholar." Curiously, though, Caleb is a remote and quietly long-suffering figure in this novel, which instead concentrates on a young woman named Bethia Mayfield, a white settler on the island. Bethia befriends Caleb as a young woman and by happenstance accompanies him to Cambridge, where she is obliged to work as an indentured servant to pay tuition for her brother, Makepeace.

"Caleb's Crossing" is written as Bethia's "spiritual diary," but social equality is more on her mind, and the book is engaging when she takes up the gauntlet to fight for women's rights—however unlikely that might seem in the wilds of 17th-century America. Her situation recalls that of the hypothetical sister that Virginia Woolf imagined for William Shakespeare in "A Room of One's Own," a brilliant woman denied education or self-expression. 

"Tend to your huswifery," Bethia's father tells her, "or look to developing some herb lore, if you must be learning something." But Bethia picks up Latin, Hebrew and even the Wampanoag tongue by eavesdropping on her brother's lessons. She wages a fierce resistance against men who would "strive to put a bridle on my mind."

Readers, however, are kept at an emotional distance from this struggle—and from Bethia's friendship with Caleb—by Ms. Brooks's mannered efforts to mimic Puritan speech. When Bethia complains of her "chilblains a-throbbing" or Makepeace shouts at powwowing natives, "Cease your foul and clamorous noise!," the book feels like a rather hammy historical re-enactment.

Meanwhile, obscured by the affected language and kept on the outskirts of the plot, something momentous does happen: The Wampanoags are ravaged by smallpox, aggressively converted to Christianity and herded onto reservations. Ms. Brooks may intend to honor the memory of a largely forgotten historical figure, but she merely glances over the tragedy of his people.

The consequences of colonialism are more subtly explored in Rahul Bhattacharya's spirited debut, "The Sly Company of People Who Care" (Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 278 pages, $26). The title is unwieldy, but the book—set in present-day Guyana—is a deft synthesis of travelogue and Bildungsroman, by turns antic and introspective.

It is narrated by a nameless young Indian, a cricket journalist who quit his job and came to Guyana "seeking adventure." He is at first thrilled to find a country of messy social and cultural ferment. "You want bandit, we got bandit," brags one of his hosts. "We got blackman, redman, buck, chinee, coolie, dougla all lashin each other." The narrator recruits a man named Baby, who boasts a criminal background, to take him into Guyana's jungle interior, the sights of which move Mr. Bhattacharya to naturalist reveries: "I would watch dragger-ants carry off whole lemon rinds upon their backs like a trail of palanquin bearers." The aim of the trip is to go porknocking—that is, diamond prospecting—but the narrator is just as interested in the backwater bacchanals. "He come fuh teach Indian sexual posture to gals in the bush," Baby says by way of explaining his sponsor's presence.

The escapade takes a calamitous turn when Baby, wielding a cutlass, robs a fellow prospector of his haul. The narrator's jaunty outlook shifts abruptly when he is suddenly made conscious of the longstanding hostility that divides the Indo-Guyanese—the descendants of Indian coolies—and the Afro-Guyanese, whose forebears were slaves. As our storyteller gradually becomes an accomplice in Baby's comic, Naipaulian "scampery," the duo's roguish stunts stand in for the country's political and racial exploitations. And when the narrator falls in love with a Guyanese woman, he finds himself promising her material comforts and a commitment that he knows he can't provide, reprising the ageless deceptions of colonizers to win her over. It's this deepening self-consciousness, added to the vibrant dialect and descriptions, that makes Mr. Bhattacharya's novel so satisfying.

I had high hopes for Chris Adrian's "The Great Night" (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 292 pages, $26). Five years ago, Mr. Adrian produced a minor masterpiece: "The Children's Hospital," a warped and wondrous allegory about illness. Alas, "The Great Night" is a bewildering misfire. The author imagines Titania, the fairy queen of "A Midsummer Night's Dream," as the grief-stricken fairy mother of an adopted human child who has died. In a fit of self-immolating despair, she looses her evil servant Puck on a rampage in current-day San Francisco's Buena Vista Park. Three mortals, bound by recent heartbreak, are trapped in the park and must join with fairies in combating the chaos. 

But why is the mischievous Puck here depicted as a satanic force? (He is called "The Beast" and appears as "the image of one's worst fears or most troubling anxiety.") Why are we supplied so much ponderous and irrelevant background about the humans whom Puck attacks? Why is the chronology so needlessly scrambled? The answer, I think, is simply that this book never came together for Mr. Adrian. Rather than puzzle over it further, I'd just urge you to read "The Children's Hospital" instead.