STUTTGART, Germany—Chancellor Angela Merkel's conservatives are struggling to avoid a historic election defeat in their own heartland, Germany's prosperous southwest.

Opinion polls show Ms. Merkel's center-right coalition trailing its left-leaning opponents with only days to go before March 27 elections in the state of Baden-Württemberg, a region that conservatives have ruled for nearly 60 years.

The opposition, led by Greens, has pulled ahead in recent days thanks to a surge in public anxiety over nuclear power amid a potential reactor meltdown in Japan. Backpedaling by Ms. Merkel on the use of nuclear energy, which the chancellor had promoted until last week, has only hurt her credibility with voters, say political analysts.

Sunday's election outcome remains open, and conservatives have not given up hopes of victory. But senior members of Ms. Merkel's Christian Democratic Union fear that Japan's nuclear disaster may have tipped the scales in favor of Germany's rising Greens and their allies, the Social Democratic Party.

Defeat for the CDU in its strongest bastion could create a crisis for Ms. Merkel within her own party, where many members have long viewed the chancellor as too pragmatic and not conservative enough.

Losing Baden-Württemberg wouldn't sink Ms. Merkel's national government, or trigger an outright revolt against the chancellor. Ms. Merkel faces no obvious challenger for the leadership of Germany's conservatives, thanks to a string of resignations and retirements that have depleted her party of heavyweight contenders.

But victory for the opposition would greatly boost the Greens' and SPD's belief they can win Germany's next national elections in 2013, and that Ms. Merkel's star is beginning to fade after five years in office. 

Ms. Merkel has already alienated many CDU supporters, including Germany's business lobby, by holding back on tax cuts and market-friendly overhauls. Her decisions to bail out near-bankrupt Greece and to pump rising amounts of taxpayer money into a safety net for other euro-zone countries have also proved controversial.

Her government's decision last week to abstain in a United Nations Security Council vote to authorize military force in Libya has been panned in Germany, where critics across the political spectrum have accused the chancellor of trying to steer clear of risks, rather than taking a clear stand.

"You can't stay in power by trying to avoid all problems," says Silke Krebs, a leader of the Greens in Baden-Württemberg.

In the wealthy southwestern state, home to 11 million people, rolling vineyards and high-tech manufacturing, the CDU and its junior Free Democrat allies are headed for about 43% of the vote, according to the latest opinion poll for state broadcaster ZDF. The poll puts the Green-SPD alliance several points ahead on 47.5%.

The CDU's problems in the region stem largely from its own complacency after 57 years in power, analysts and opponents say.

Last year, a sense that conservatives were out of touch with ordinary people spilled over into passionate demonstrations against the demolition and redevelopment of Stuttgart's beloved central train station.

"Above all it's about one thing: We don't want to be manipulated by politicians," says Gangolf Stocker, who helped to organize the demonstrations. that drew tens of thousands of middle-class burghers and the attention of the nation last fall.

The CDU state premier, Stefan Mappus, was still struggling to recover from the train-station debacle when Japan's nuclear crisis caught him flat-footed. The disaster in Japan has turned German public opinion against nuclear power only months after Ms. Merkel's coalition had allowed Germany's energy companies to extend the lives of their nuclear reactors. A previous plan to phase out nuclear power by 2021 was slowed down considerably.

Mr. Mappus has been an unflinching advocate of nuclear power, while his main challengers, the Greens, have benefited from their consistent opposition, on environmental and safety grounds.

Ms. Merkel has speedily reversed course on nuclear power since Japan's crisis began, ordering the temporary shutdown of Germany's older reactors and a moratorium on her earlier plan to extend plants' lives. On Tuesday Ms. Merkel said expert reviews of Germany's reactors might lead to shortening their life spans after all.

Opinion pollsters say many voters aren't buying the chancellor's sudden change of heart. "People might give a party the benefit of the doubt when they gradually modify their position, but when they abruptly drop something like this it's seen as opportunistic,

"If CDU supporters are really irritated by this and stay home, and Green voters are energized by it, that could be all that's needed" to put the Greens in power, said Manfred Güllner, head of the Forsa opinion-polling institute.

Ms. Merkel's shifting stance on nuclear power "certainly didn't help us in the near term," says Thomas Strobl, the CDU's secretary-general in Baden-Württemberg.

 Write to  Patrick McGroarty at patrick.mcgroarty@dowjones.com and Marcus Walker at marcus.walker@wsj.com 