An animated tale of a chameleon with an identity crisis, "Rango" was shot in 2-D, a once-popular process that allows moviegoers to watch pictures on a screen without having to wear special glasses. One of the D's stands for width, the other for height. Under the right circumstances these dimensions can combine to create pictures of great beauty. The circumstances here are right as rain, even though the action takes place on a desert, and in a desert town, called Dirt, that's starved for cool, clear water. The landscapes are gorgeous, the creatures that inhabit them are wildly inventive (as well as wonderfully voiced) and the visual references range from "High Noon" and the spaghetti Westerns of Sergio Leone through "Stars Wars," "Gulliver's Travels" and "Chinatown" to the grotesqueries of Daumier and the Dali dream sequences in "Spellbound." The only thing that's missing is an emotional dimension. I watched this postmodern mashup with as much bafflement as wonderment, thirsty for any trace of warm, clear feeling.

The hero, voiced by Johnny Depp, doesn't have a name at the outset; it's only later that he calls himself Rango and passes himself off as the fearless sheriff that the downtrodden citizens of Dirt desperately need. That's a welcome development, since the first big but tentative sequence promises a film about a lizard struggling to survive on the Mojave without a plot. (He's an actor lizard—or a lizardly actor—sandbagged by neurotic concern about who he really is.) "Rango" the movie has no identity crisis at all. It's being marketed on the strength of Mr. Depp's popularity in "Pirates of the Caribbean," plus the reputation of the director, Gore Verbinski, who directed the "Pirates" trilogy, and the brilliance of its visuals will surely make it a huge hit. (Industrial Light & Magic did the animation, a first for the special effects giant. Mark "Crash" McCreery designed the production, and John Logan wrote the script.)

Those visuals illustrate vivid characters. There's Rango, of course, speaking in tongues as varied as those of Peter Lorre or Hugh Griffith, and constantly changing costumes as he searches for the creature he was meant to be. (Yet his complexion seldom deviates from green. Isn't changing skin color, rather than identity, what chameleons are famous for?)

Isla Fisher is the voice of Miss Beans, a spunky, bug-eyed heroine with a freeze-up affliction that could be petit mal. Abigail Breslin is young Priscilla, lemuresque in her pointy physiognomy and goth in her poignant bleakness. Alfred Molina is Roadkill, an armadillo mystic out of the writings of Carlos Castaneda. Ned Beatty, a superb actor with an unmistakable voice, is Dirt's mayor. Like a road-company Elmer Gantry, the mayor presides over weekly ceremonies that give Dirt's citizens their measly rations of water ("Acolytes, prepare the Holy Spigot.") Another superb actor, Bill Nighy—he was the voice of Davy Jones in the "Pirates" films—is Rattlesnake Jake, Rango's toothsome, slithersome nemesis.

In describing these individuals—mention should also be made of four owl mariachis who function as a Greek chorus—I've made a good case for seeing "Rango," and why not; an eye feast is still a feast in this lean multiplex season. Be advised, though, of the film's peculiar deficits. The narrative isn't really dramatic, despite several send-up face-offs. It's more like a succession of picturesque notions that might have flowed from DreamWorks or Pixar while their story departments were out to lunch. The tall tales that Rango tells aren't very funny. And the smash finish is a splash finish that doesn't quite make sense, notwithstanding its ecological message. "No man can walk out on his own story," an intimidated Rango is told at one point by an Eastwood-esque man-with-no-name. But what if there's no story to walk out on?

This free adaptation of "Adjustment Team," a 1950s short story by the science fiction writer Philip K. Dick, is two movies for the price of one, though only one of them—a fragmented romance within a ponderous parable—qualifies as a bargain.

Matt Damon gives a strong, unforced performance as David Norris, a popular Brooklyn congressman with a bad-boy reputation whose seemingly unstoppable campaign for a seat in the U.S. Senate—his onscreen supporters include Michael Bloomberg and Madeleine Albright—is derailed at the last moment by the New York Post's decision to publish a photo of him mooning someone in college. "The Post did not have to run the photo," he says with rueful humor to a beautiful ballet dancer, who replies in kind, "At least not full-page." No, the dancer isn't Natalie Portman redux. Her name is Elise, she is played by the marvelous Emily Blunt, and her scenes with David are spontaneous, intimate and consistently delightful, from the moment they first meet in a Waldorf-Astoria men's room. What she's doing there is more plausible than why he can't recover from his collegiate folly, and anything they do to stay together—it's love at first sight—is more plausible than any efforts of the Adjustment Bureau to keep them apart.

The Bureau, a mysteriously omniscient operation with cosmic overtones, is represented by unsmiling men sporting 1950s-style fedoras. (One of them is played by Anthony Mackie, whose talents are squandered here.) The Bureau's determination to thwart the romance has to do with a host of ideas borrowed not only from the Dick story but from sources that seem to include "The Matrix," "The Manchurian Candidate," "Inception," "The Butterfly Effect" and, for all I know, "Monsters, Inc." But this movie's basic idea, or thumbsuckingly deep notion, has to do with free will versus predestination. Are David and Elise free to pursue true love, or are they—and we, and the whole human race—governed by unseen forces that we choose to bundle under the rubric of government, or of God?

I dunno, though I'd pose the question somewhat differently. Were the people who made this film—among them the writer and first-time director George Nolfi—governed by such unseen forces as knee-jerk sententiousness, studio imperatives, marketing experts and focus groups? Clearly the movie's vital center was its romance. Almost as clearly, the supernatural stuff around the lovers was straining to break free from conspiracy clichés by becoming blithe comedy—think "Defending Your Life" or an updated "Here Comes Mister Jordan." Instead, grandiosity and production-value lust conspired against fun.

In the blue-tinged opening sequence of this beguiling and much-celebrated film from Thailand, it is night, and the camera gazes at a water buffalo tied to a tree. Is the placid beast Uncle Boonmee in one of his previous incarnations? Maybe he is or maybe he isn't—sometimes a water buffalo is just a water buffalo—but the silent apparition at the end of the sequence, an upright creature with bright embers for eyes, is definitely more than a man in a monkey suit. "Uncle Boonmee Who Can Recall His Past Lives"—I enjoy typing all the words of the title—is a special taste, dreamlike and sometimes opaque, or at least translucent, to logical analysis. 

The widower of the title, dying from kidney disease, doesn't recall his previous lives so much as summon up visions from them, and entertain beloved revenants from the life he's about to lose—specifically his late wife, who remains young and beautiful in his eyes, and their late son. "Heaven is overrated," they tell him. "There's nothing there. Ghosts are attached to people, to the living."

The beautifully photographed production, which was written and directed by Apichatpong (Joe) Weerasethakul—his previous films include "Syndromes and a Century" and "Tropical Malady"—is often funny, and sometimes comforting in its details: the simple but effective medical treatment dispensed by an unlicensed male nurse, the tender way Boonmee's sister-in-law hugs his weakened body. I can't pretend to understand the intricacies of the Buddhist belief system that informs the surreal story, or the fantasy system in which Boonmee, embodying Thailand, recalls his nation's history and shimmering myths. Yet no effort of understanding is needed to be moved by Boonmee's descent into a limestone cave shaped like a womb. It's where he was born, and where he will die while ghosts attached to him watch his passing.

 Write to  Joe Morgenstern at joe.morgenstern@wsj.com 

In the last of the Man With No Name epics, Clint Eastwood teams up with a pair of gunslingers played by Eli Wallach and Lee Van Cleef. The trio searches a visually sumptuous Southwest for a strongbox containing $200,000 in gold. Sergio Leone directed this and the previous films in the trilogy, "A Fist Full of Dollars" and "For a Few Dollars More," as well as the now-classic "Once Upon a Time in the West." Few directors of Westerns have been more widely imitated, or more widely separated at birth—in Rome, in 1929—from the genre's roots. 

Emily Blunt, Amy Adams and their director, Christine Jeffs, bring a steadfast sense of truth to Megan Holley's story of two sisters trying to jump-start their stuck lives and grow up. Ms. Blunt is a comic whirlwind with a still, grave center. She is Norah, the younger sister who lives with their father—he's played by Alan Arkin—and who joins Ms. Adams's fearful but courageous Rose in the bizarre career of biohazard removal and crime-scene cleanup. The excellent cast includes Steve Zahn, Mary Lynn Rajskub, Clifton Collins Jr. and Jason Spevack.

Last month I mentioned this German fantasy, beloved by some and admired by many, in connection with "Unknown," the common denominator being Bruno Ganz. He played an ex-Stasi secret cop in the Liam Neeson thriller and, in this Wim Wenders film, an angel stationed over Berlin who falls in love with a circus performer. I mention it again as an example of a fantasy that, unlike "The Adjustment Bureau," goes right in spite of its solemn style. The circus beauty is played, beautifully, by Solveig Dommartin. Peter Falk, as a convincing version of himself, helps talk the angel back to earth.

—Joe Morgenstern