ISLAMABAD—A car bomb explosion near a military intelligence agency in eastern Pakistan killed at least 20 people Tuesday, the latest in a new wave of militant attacks in the strife-torn Muslim nation. 

The explosion occurred at a gas station in a congested commercial district of the city of Faisalabad, the nation's textile-producing hub. 

The bomb appeared to be targeting an office of the Inter-Services Intelligence, Pakistan's military spy agency, local police officials said. But other government and commercial offices bore the brunt of the explosion, which killed mainly bystanders, police said. 

Scores of people were trapped under the rubble of the fallen buildings. The office of Pakistan International Airlines, the state-owned national carrier, also was severely damaged. Several vehicles were gutted as the explosion set gas cylinders on fire. 

No one took immediate responsibility for the attack. It was unclear whether the car bomb was detonated by a suicide attacker or remote control. 

Police said they suspected militants operating under the banner of the Punjabi Taliban were involved in the attack. 

The Taliban, which is locked in a war with Pakistan's security forces, has in the past attacked police and military targets in major cities. The group is loosely allied with the Afghan Taliban. 

"The car explosion at the gas station was meant to cause maximum damage," said Aftab Cheema, the city's police chief. "It was an act of terrorism." 

The latest attack highlights a growing stridency by the militants, who are increasingly targeting the country's most populous province of Punjab, of which Faisalabad is a major urban center.

Faisalabad has rarely been targeted, though Islamic militants are suspected to have increasingly used the city as a hideout in recent years.

Tuesday's bombing came days after militants gunned down Shabaz Bhatti, the only Christian minister in Pakistan's government, in Islamabad, the capital. 

A little-known group calling itself the Taliban movement of Punjab claimed responsibility for the death of Mr. Bhatti, who was a vocal critic of the country's controversial blasphemy law. 

In January, Salmaan Taseer, Punjab province's governor, was shot dead by his police guard at a shopping center in Islamabad. Mr. Taseer also strongly criticized the blasphemy law, which has been used to persecute Christians and Muslims from minority sects.

Mumtaz Ghazi, the police guard who killed Mr. Taseer, is in detention awaiting trial but has been feted as a hero by lawyers and Islamic clerics. 

Pakistan has seen a wave of bombs in the past three years, many in the northwest near the border with Afghanistan, where Pakistan's military is battling the Taliban insurgents. The violence has left thousands dead. 

Despite claims by the military of having driven out the militants from their strongholds in the tribal regions, there hasn't been any fall-off in violence. Last week, a suicide bomber rammed his explosive-laden car into a police station in the northern city of Karak, killing more than two dozen people. 

