When a pair of Connecticut developers bought the Reader's Digest headquarters at the end of 2004, they acquired an iconic building and 114 acres of prized Westchester County real estate. Six years later, the property looks more like quicksand.

Summit Development and Greenfield Partners planned to add luxury housing on the sprawling property in the Hamlet of Chappaqua, which is home to Bill and Hillary Clinton and many Wall Street commuters. But they ran face first into the economic downturn, the Reader's Digest's bankruptcy filing and—most frustrating for them—resistance by the town to their development plans.

Now the developers, who paid $59 million for the site and have spent $10 million more, say they want out. 

On Friday, they filed a lawsuit in New York state Supreme Court demanding that the town of New Castle, which includes Chappaqua, buy the property from them. The lawsuit includes charges that the town is promoting racial, age and socioeconomic discrimination.

"The town has made it abundantly clear that it has no intention of approving any of our applications," says  Howard Stahl, an attorney for the venture. He says that's largely because the town opposes "affordable" housing.

The lawsuit represents a novel twist on an age-old battle between developers and residents in New York's affluent suburbs. Some Chappaqua residents fear that the proposed project, known as Chappaqua Crossing, would choke their suburban streets with too much traffic. Others worry that children from new homes would overwhelm the schools, the pride of this affluent community. But while such tensions are common, few developers take the unorthodox step of trying to force a local government to buy them out. "Where would we get the money?" asks  Barbara Gerrard, the New Castle town supervisor.

Ms. Gerrard says the city's delay in approving the developers' plans is mostly due to their request to change zoning rules for the site's commercial space to allow more homes. She says the discrimination charge "simply isn't true."

Since buying the property, the developers have proposed three different sets of plans, none of which have been accepted. Summit Development Chief  Felix Charney says he realized the extent of the community opposition to development five years ago when the town board organized a two-day "vision session" at the junior high school to solicit public comments on alternative plans for the site.

"Most people wanted the property turned into a community garden," Mr. Charney says.

Mr. Charney once thought the Reader's Digest property would be a perfect fit for his firm, which specializes in mixed-use projects in Connecticut and the New York metro area. "Everyone sees this building when driving on the Saw Mill River Parkway," Mr. Charney says of the three-story red-brick building topped by a white cupola and surrounded by rolling lawns.

Their plans were hurt in 2009 when Reader's Digest broke a 20-year lease by filing for bankruptcy. Since then they've leased only 95,000 of the 700,000 square feet of office space.

Meantime, they have locked horns with the town. In January 2006, the developers presented their first plan, which required the town board to change its zoning laws. The plan called for demolishing 100,000 square feet of commercial space and using some of the freed-up space to build residential units. The 348 new units would be restricted to people at least 55 years old, an effort to ease town concerns about young families flooding the schools.

After getting feedback from the town, the developers offered a scaled-down version three months later. But the town board rejected that plan, saying it was too dense, with buildings too tall for the woodsy suburban area.

When the developers came back with a third plan, they changed their approach in a way that would escalate the war of words with many residents.

Rather than asking the town to approve a zoning change, the developers pointed to a 1975 state court case that ruled New Castle's zoning laws were unconstitutional because in effect they prohibited multifamily homes from being built.

The latest plan calls for 199 residential units, with 20 of them set aside for "affordable" housing. 

Besides the 1975 case, the developers point to a settlement between Westchester County and the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, which mandated the creation of 750 fair and affordable housing units in 31 Westchester communities by 2015.

The 31 communities, chosen for their low percentage of African-American and Hispanic residents, include New Castle, which is 90% white, according to court documents.

In their lawsuit, the developers charge that the town is stalling because it is trying to thwart the construction of affordable housing, making "innumerable requests for additional and duplicative studies" that have compelled the developers to spend more than $10 million, according to court documents.

The lawsuit also alleges failure of due process and equal protection under the law because the town has not yet approved their building applications that include affordable housing. The developers are also suing the town and town officials in federal court, alleging violation of the Fair Housing Act.

 Property rights are extremely important. While zoning laws needs to be in place and enforced, it shouldn't mean that the local community should be able to dictate what the owners can do with the property. Sounds like the "yes, but not in my back yard" society. 

—Ken Norberg

Ms. Gerrard said the developers' request to convert commercial space into housing is worrisome because only about 3% of the town's revenue comes from tax on commercial property. The vast majority of town revenue comes from residential property taxes, and homeowners don't want to see that share rise, she added.

Some local residents critical of Chappaqua Crossing say the discrimination charges are a smokescreen. They point to Hunt's Lane, a proposed affordable housing project near the Chappaqua train station.

  Robert Greenstein, a Chappaqua homeowner and prominent opponent, says he has 900 signatures on his petition to oppose the developers' current plan. "Summit Greenfield is asking us to change the zoning for them and accept negative environmental, social and economic impacts so they can maximize their return on investment," he says.

The developers also are upset that the town won't change a rule that the property must have at least one tenant occupying 200,000 feet of space or more. They maintain that the rule effectively prevents the space from being leased. 

Ms. Gerrard says the town doesn't want to address the commercial restrictions without also agreeing on a residential plan. A vote on the developers' latest plan is expected by the end of the month, she said.

 Write to  Craig Karmin at craig.karmin@wsj.com 