SINGAPORE -- India will likely allow domestic refiners to utilize the government's emergency crude oil reserve facilities, the first of which will only be completed by January 2012, federal Oil Secretary S. Sundareshan said Wednesday.

This would be a change from the government's earlier position that the strategic reserves would only be used by the government to meet any supply disruptions.

"It's quite possible that we will let the refiners use the facilities," he told Dow Jones Newswires. "They [refiners] may also help us in filling the reserves."

State-run Indian Strategic Petroleum Reserves Ltd. is building 5.33 million metric tons of strategic crude oil storages at three locations in south India--1.3 million tons at Visakhapatnam, 1.5 million tons in Mangalore and 2.5 million tons at Padur.

The reserves will account for about 3% of India's annual crude import, which stood at 159.26 million tons in the year through March 2010.

Regional crude oil markets will be closely watching as India enters the market to buy nearly 9.5 million barrels of crude as its first facility gets ready in January next year, later than previously expected.

India will be buying mostly high-sulfur crude to take advantage of lower costs, but how much volume it buys from the spot market remains to be seen.

ISPRL said last April that it will mechanically complete the Vizag facility in October this year, the Mangalore facility in November next year and the Padur storage next December.

The ISPRL website showed the terminals--excluding the cost of crude oil for filling the caverns--were estimated to cost 24 billion rupees ($533.3 million), according to September 2005 estimates.

India currently imports around 80% of its crude oil requirement, and the emergency reserves can also serve as a buffer against fluctuations in crude oil prices.

Separately, Mr. Sundareshan said that there is no proposal from any oil producer to build strategic storage facilities in India.

"That is not happening. I don't think there will be anybody building a storage facility in India."

Indian media earlier reported that the South Asian nation had invited oil producing nations in west Asia to set up storage facilities on the country's coastline.

Mr. Sundareshan also said he expects a resolution of an issue with Iran oil payments by Jan. 18. Iran and India have been trying to find an alternative payment mechanism after the Reserve Bank of India stopped Iran-related payments through the Asian Clearing Union.

An Indian delegation, comprised of officials from the finance ministry, the central bank and State Bank of India, will visit Iran Friday to find a solution to the issue.

Mr. Sundareshan said he expects an amicable solution during the delegation-level meeting.

 Write to  Gurdeep Singh at gurdeep.singh@dowjones.com and Rakesh Sharma at rakesh.sharma@dowjones.com 