FLORAM PARK, N.J.—Since Rex Ryan became the head coach of the Jets in 2009, the team's calling card has been its formidable defense.

Ironically, though, in the two drafts after Ryan took the job, the Jets had drafted just one defensive player. The offense-heavy selections led some of the team's defensive coaches to pull Ryan aside prior to Thursday night's first round to remind him of that.

"They all came up to me and said, 'Look, you've had seven picks since you've been head coach here, and only one defensive player," Ryan said. "Now we've got two, and we're excited about it."

The Jets selected Temple defensive tackle Muhammad Wilkerson, a 6-4, 305-pound pass rush specialist. The Linden, N.J., native was one of the draft's top defensive line prospects, having tallied 17.5 sacks over his last two years in college.

Wilkerson, 21 years old, fills a need for the Jets, who were looking to replace former defensive tackle Kris Jenkins. He was one of 12 defensive linemen taken in the first round, a draft record.

General manager Mike Tannenbaum, known for orchestrating big draft-day trades, said he fielded cursory calls about trading the team's 30th pick. But it didn't appear that the Jets were ever close to making a move. "When Muhammad was on the [board], we were really excited about that opportunity," Tannenbaum said.

Wilkerson, in a conference call late Thursday, said he had a sense that the Jets would take him with their pick. "I thought it was going to happen. I had a great visit. Once that 30th pick came around, I had that feeling they were going to pick me up," he said, speaking from a restaurant in Linden, where about 90 guests were to celebrate his selection.

Wilkerson said he didn't grow up a Jets fan, but that he was excited about the opportunity to play close to home and to play with one of the league's best defenses. He said he felt he could contribute to the unit, saying he was versatile and could play any position along the defensive line.

"I think I can come in and help them be more disruptive than they already are," he said.