SYDNEY—Flooding in Australia's coal-rich state of Queensland was expected to worsen as rain in the region continued Wednesday, adding to the economic impact of a disaster that already has cost billions of dollars in damage and lost exports from the state's mines.

More rain is forecast to fall over the next week and will "certainly increase the river levels over areas that have already seen significant flooding," said Tony Auden, a meteorologist with the Australian Bureau of Meteorology.

Australia's government has intensified relief efforts, sending navy helicopters to help with evacuations, resupply efforts and medical emergencies around the city of Rockhampton, where 77,000 people have been cut off by the floodwaters of the Fitzroy River. 

Swaths of the city, including the airport, are underwater. Rockhampton residents have been warned to stay out of the Fitzroy, which is known to harbor crocodiles.

Rockhampton residents also are battling poisonous snakes seeking dry ground. Among the most common snakes in the area is the Eastern Brown, a breed that can grow more than six feet long and is considered the second-most-venomous snake in the world. 

"We have extra vials of antivenin at the hospitals in surrounding flooded areas," Queensland State Disaster Coordinator Ian Stewart told Australian Broadcasting Corp. television Wednesday. "We've made sure we've warned communities that snakes are coming out." 

"I've heard a report from one homestead. They had an area of ground the size of a football [field] around their property on high ground. The only people there were the two owners and about one thousand snakes," Mr. Stewart said. 

State Premier Anna Bligh, who oversaw an emergency meeting of Queensland legislators, said Wednesday that "this is a disaster on an unprecedented scale, and it is going to take an unprecedented, sustained effort to rebuild regional Queensland." 

Officials agreed to set up a task force headed by an army general to address the recovery, but fell short of announcing a comprehensive package of financial aid.

The severity of the floods in Australia's main coal-mining region could trim economic growth in a country that has benefited from a resource boom. According to energy advisers Wood Mackenzie, almost four dozen of the state's coal mines have been affected by the downpour, the worst on record since 1991.



Fear that the flooding could hurt mining companies weighed on the country's main stock market Wednesday, which fell 0.6% to 4714.9. 

  Macarthur Coal said disruptions to its sites from the floods would push profit for the six months ended Dec. 31 to the lower end of its guidance.

Australia's five biggest miners by output,  BHP Billiton Ltd.,  Rio Tinto
RIO


-0.39
%




 PLC,  Xstrata PLC,  Peabody Energy Corp.
BTU


-2.99
%




 and  Anglo American,
AAUKY


-1.02
%




 have declared force majeure on their Queensland coal fields. 

The state supplies close to two-thirds of the seaborne trade in the high-grade coking coal used for steelmaking. 

"I don't think any of it has sunk in properly," said  Stuart Smith, a client adviser at Bell Potter Securities. "The market's just saying 'enough's enough' for the time being."

In the port city of Mackay, the Dalrymple Bay Coal Terminal—the world's third-busiest—was working through the night to clear a backlog held up by a coal-train derailment on Christmas Eve.

The port was operating at around two-thirds of its capacity due to the dearth of coal coming down the track, with the offshore ship queue of 47 vessels at average levels. 

The volume of coal arriving was expected to taper further over the coming week as the backlog was cleared, spokesman  Andrew Garratt said.

Economists lowered their outlook for fourth-quarter gross domestic product on concerns over the effect of the floods on exports. National Australia Bank shaved 0.1 percentage point off its forecast for the quarter. 

National Australia Bank now forecasts total fourth-quarter GDP growth of 0.5%, with the latest forecasts from the country's central bank showing GDP growth of more than 3.5% for 2011, with 4% growth forecast for both 2012 and the first half of 2013.

"There is going to be uncertainty for a number of weeks in terms of the impact on the economy, but the floods do cause some near-term downside risk," said  Paul Bloxham, chief economist at HSBC Holdings PLC in Sydney.

Mr. Bloxham is among several economists who expect the country's central bank to pass on raising interest rates next month because of the floods. Successive rate increases by the central bank have pushed the Australian dollar up about 20% since late 2009. 

The now six-month rally in the Australian dollar has also been affected by the floods, after a push at the end of last year helped propel the Australian dollar to a high of US$1.0253. 

Since the start of the new year the currency has fallen back down to US$1.002, with National Australia Bank saying fair value on the Australian dollar is off about US$0.0060 because of the impact of the floods.

Agriculture in the state has also been hit by the flooding over an area bigger than France and Germany. 

The floods will constrain beef production and limit exports from the second-biggest global beef exporter after Brazil in coming months, said  John Berry, the director and manager of corporate and regulatory affairs at Swift Australia.

Major destinations for Australian beef exports, which account for two-thirds of national beef production, include Japan, the U.S., South Korea, Russia and many other Asian nations, including China, in an annual trade of about US$5 billion.

 "Queensland is the powerhouse of beef production" in Australia, with 40% of the national herd, so the floods will have a significant impact on the industry and implications for export beef processing, Mr. Berry said.

—Gavin Lower and Lyndal McFarland in Melbourne  and Ray Brindal in Canberra contributed to this article.

 Write to  Geoffrey Rogow at geoffrey.rogow@dowjones.com 