 92Y Tribeca  200 Hudson St., (212) 601-1000  Friday-Saturday 

A native of Philadelphia who is commonly assumed to be English—he's lived in London since the early 1950s and got his first break writing for Peter Sellers—Richard Lester turns 79 next week. To mark the occasion, here's a weekend revival of vintage favorites from a director who assisted in constructing the Beatles as pop icons ("A Hard Day's Night," "Help!") and rounded out his career tending to the "Superman" franchise. Good stuff, too: "The Bed Sitting Room" dispatches the irreverent comedy team of Dudley Moore and Peter Cooke in a post-nuclear Britain. "The Knack … and How to Get It" takes a winking, satirical glance at the swinging London that the Austin Powers films could only imagine. And "How I Won the War" stars John Lennon in his only comedic role unrelated to the Fab Four.

 Film Society of Lincoln Center  165 65th St., (212) 875-5601  Through Jan. 27 

Celebrating its 20th anniversary, the NYJFF assembles 29 films (plus shorts), including the notable directorial debut of New York rock legend Lou Reed, whose "Red Shirley" profiles the musician's 101-year-old cousin. Eve Annenberg's "Romeo and Juliet in Yiddish" turns Williamsburg into the setting for a contemporary adaptation of Shakespeare, shown with "Seltzer Works," a short documentary about the last seltzer bottler in Brooklyn. "The Klezmatics: On Holy Ground" follows the dizzying New York klezmer musicians, who became something like the Rolling Stones of the traditional music they helped repopularize. "Grace Paley: Collected Shorts" is an intimate portrait of the much-loved writer. There also are revivals, including "Lies My Father Told Me," Jan Kadar's 1975 period drama about life among Montreal's Jewish immigrants of the 1920s, and "Houdini," the 1953 biopic with the late Tony Curtis as the Brooklyn-born escape artist.

 Museum of Modern Art  11 W. 53 St., (212) 708-9400  Wednesday 

Before his death in 1982, Rainer Werner Fassbinder made 41 movies in a 14-year spree that saw him escalate from the Warholian funk of "Beware of a Holy Whore" to international acclaim for the historical allegories of "The Marriage of Maria Braun" and "Lola." Amid all that activity, which included the epic televised miniseries "Berlin Alexanderplatz," there were lost items that became obscure and grail-like. Chief among them is "World on a Wire." 

The movie, broadcast in two parts on German television in 1973, falls between "The Bitter Tears of Petra Von Kant," a Sapphic chamber drama, and "Ali: Fear Eats the Soul," an homage to "All That Heaven Allows," in the director's canon. But it's scarcely a bridge from one moody psychodrama to another. Instead, it's Fassbinder's "Alphaville" – with wider neckties. The futuristic sci-fi is set in an antiseptic corporate strata where scientists have invented a computer capable of generating a simulated world – a cybernetic projection of our own. 

Based on Daniel F. Galouye's 1964 novel "Simulacron-3," the story tracks the existential crisis of Dr. Stiller (Fassbinder regular Klaus Löwitsch), a scientist obsessed with multiple mysteries, including the death of a colleague and the increasingly strange nature of his own reality, which appears to be disassembling itself before his eyes.

As the next-to-last entry in MoMA's annual series "The Contenders," its screening revisits one of 2010's most buzzed-about revivals. "Wire" had only been shown once before in the United States, in 1997, but this new 35mm print was something else again, blown up from sources that included the original 16mm and a digital transfer under the eye of its cinematographer, Michael Ballhaus. This encore presentation offers a chance to see a movie that directly influenced "The Matrix," in philosophical concept if not CGI wizardry, as most of the drama is carried by dialogue, and surely anticipated the Syfy network's recently canceled "Battlestar Galactica" prequel "Caprica." 

Cyberpunk before anyone coined the term, the film posits a meltdown between the real and the computer-generated realm peopled by some 10,000 "identity units." Fassbinder situates the talky exposition in a haute '60s mise-en-scene of glassy surfaces, white-on-white décor, and globular furnishings that emulate Stanley Kubrick, whose "A Clockwork Orange" came out two years before (itself borrowing design schemes from William Klein's 1969 satire, "Mister Freedom"). And like Jean-Luc Godard's "Alphaville" before them, paranoia and technology are flipsides of a coin. But beyond the immediate pleasure of Fassbinder's style and the generous company of his ensemble casts, the film offers deeper observations. It's less about latter-day angst than the evergreen dream-within-a-dream puzzle that philosophers have forever tried to solve. 

 Anthology Film Archives  32 Second Ave., (212) 505-5181  Through Jan. 20 

More than a decade in the making, this documentary offers a deep exploration of Chinese social structures, as the superpower's dramatic push toward economic dominance has left the common man to manage with his own devices. Director Zhao Liang follows the causes of individuals who make a pilgrimage to Beijing to petition the court for justice in various life-altering matters in which they have been wronged. The system moves so slowly that these poor workers and farmers may linger for years to get a verdict, forming their own subculture. Also being screened is Mr. Liang's "Crime and Punishment," a 2007 documentary about military police on the job in a dirt-poor mountain village along North Korean border.

 IFC Center  323 Sixth Ave., (212) 924-7771  Friday-Tuesday 

Someone could think of Gaspar Noé's latest cinematic provocation as a scuzzball "2001," a visionary film whose mind-blowing formal ambitions frame a set of characters orbiting the lower reaches of a neon hallucination of Tokyo. The story cycles repeatedly through the lives of Oscar (Nathaniel Brown), a young American drug dealer, and his sister Linda (Paz de la Huerta), a stripper. The orphaned siblings' Japanese reunion is complicated when Oscar gets shot to death in a police bust. But that's just the beginning of things, as the film becomes a life-after-death meditation in which the camera floats above Tokyo amid endless flashbacks and computer-generated dazzle. This full 160-minute director's cut betters the shorter version that was released last year, more strongly evoking Mr. Noe's desire to simulate a drug trip on film. Don't be late. The opening credits are pure op-art.