Plug the term "Prius shortage" into a Web search engine, and you'll find news articles and hand-wringing in online forums about how Toyota Motor Corp.'s U.S. dealers will run out of the nation's best-selling hybrid car just as gas prices head toward $4 a gallon.

But while Japan's deadly earthquake sent shock waves through the world economy, a long-term shortage of Japanese cars is unlikely.

Over the next couple of months it is quite possible that the exact Prius you want won't be in stock, and the pickings on dealer lots will be slender. Toyota's U.S. dealers had just 32 days' supply—just under 18,000 cars—on hand at the end of February, according to Autodata Corp., a supplier of car-market data. 

But don't be fooled if a dealer tries to use this to justify a higher price. Toyota is already gearing up to restart its Japanese production lines, beginning this week with production of parts. The plants that supply the Prius's batteries and assemble the cars weren't damaged by the quake, a company spokesman says. 

Assuming Toyota is able to continue ramping up output over the next few weeks, the quake's toll on production may be felt in leaner deliveries to dealers in April or May. But by summer—again assuming Japan doesn't suffer a wrenching reversal in efforts to stabilize its electric grid—Prius shipments could be back to normal. 

Any shortages would then be driven by demand, and the Prius is a hot seller when gas prices rise.

Still, a spokesman for AutoNation Inc., the biggest U.S. auto retailer, says dealers aren't seeing a run on Japanese cars, adding they have ample supplies of the Prius and other models.

Tom Rudnai, president of Longo Toyota in El Monte, Calif., the nation's largest single Toyota dealer, said his dealership is still offering a $259-a-month, three-year lease on certain Prius models, and 2.9% financing for five-year loans. 

"We have sufficient ground stock and we have vehicles coming in," he says. Supplies could get tighter in coming weeks, he adds, but that was already factored into Longo's plans. Rising gas prices had driven up demand for the car before the quake in Japan.

Thirty years ago, or even 10 years ago, Japanese auto makers could count on consumers to wait for their fuel-efficient cars because Detroit offered inferior alternatives. 

That isn't the case anymore, and now Toyota and Honda Motor Co. also have to worry about well-designed models from South Korea's Hyundai and Kia brands, both units of Hyundai Motor Group.

Many of Toyota's other Japanese built models—including the Scion small-car line and most Lexus luxury models—are in good supply, the company says. Indeed, Toyota dealers had a 102-day supply of the top-selling Scion tC coupe on hand, and 64 days' worth of the Lexus IS, according to Autodata. 

The tC's inventory levels are high by any standard, the Lexus IS stocks are at the high end of normal. 

Other Japanese brands are telling a similar story, and discounting speculation among analysts that there will be a significant increase in prices for Japanese cars as a result of the quake disruptions. 

Honda told its dealers on March 17 that it won't take orders for May production of its Japanese-made models, including several of its most fuel-efficient: the Honda Fit, Civic hybrid and Insight hybrid. 

Honda said it plans to build cars in May. But because cars ordered to be produced in March will now likely be built in April, May will be a catch-up month.

What does that mean for potential car buyers? Nothing—unless you can't live another minute without a brand new Honda Fit. A company spokesman says Honda doesn't plan changes to its current sales promotions. 

Nissan Motor Co. spokesman  David Reuter says the company restarted its Japanese factories Monday, mainly producing parts for overseas production. 

Nissan builds 70% of the cars and trucks it sells in the U.S. in North America, and 95% of the parts for those vehicles come from North American suppliers, he said. Among the parts made in Japan are the flat-panel screens for navigation systems, he said.

Mr. Reuter says Nissan isn't planning any big changes in its pricing strategy. "We need to remain competitive in the marketplace," he says.

At Subaru of America, which markets all-wheel drive cars made by Fuji Heavy Industries Ltd., inventories were tight before the quake and are now headed below 30 days' supply, says spokesman  Michael McHale. 

The rolling blackouts ordered by the Japanese government to offset the loss of power produced by the crippled Fukushima Daiichi nuclear complex have made it hard for Fuji to restart production, Mr. McHale says.

That means tight supplies, for now, of popular Japanese-made models such as the Impreza WRX or Forester. But Mr. McHale scoffs at the idea that Subaru will be able to raise prices significantly as a result.

"Any one saying there's a limitation on product is trying to sell you something," Mr. McHale says.

 Write to  Joseph B. White at joseph.white@wsj.com 