LONDON—The number of new psychoactive substances identified in Europe last year doubled from 2009, in a sign of the rapidly developing global market for "legal highs," health officials said Wednesday.

Governments world-wide are struggling to keep up with a flood of new powders and pills that are closely related to illegal drugs such as cocaine, ecstasy and marijuana. They are concocted in laboratories and sold online by chemistry-savvy entrepreneurs seeking to exploit the gray zone between legal and illegal drugs. 

Many of the new drugs crop up in Europe first, in part because European consumers are more accustomed to buying drugs online. Last year, authorities identified 41 new psychoactive substances in Europe, up from 24 new substances in 2009 and 13 in 2008, according to a report issued Wednesday by the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction and Europol, the agency that coordinates the work of police forces across Europe. 

The bodies called for increased law-enforcement action to combat the problem, including more efforts to buy and analyze new substances. 

According to the report, in October the U.K. reported three deaths associated with the stimulant desoxypipradrol, which first appeared in Finland in 2009. It is similar to pipradrol, a drug once prescribed for weight loss and other uses that fell out of favor because of its potential for abuse. Other new substances caused consumers to suffer "severe and prolonged psychosis," anxiety, and raised heart rate and blood pressure. Italy reported a number of hospitalizations in 2010 of people who took new marijuana-like drugs called "Forest Green" and "Jungle Mistic Incense," the report said.

Sellers of the drug often label them as bath salts or plant food that are "not for human consumption," a ruse meant to reduce the sellers' liability. 

Officials often ban new substances when they spot them, giving them the "class B" status assigned to amphetamines. But they say their resources are already stretched fighting "class A" drugs such as heroin and cocaine. New psychoactive substances are also a growing problem in the U.S. and Asia, where states and governments are taking steps to ban the products.

The report said European officials last year identified for the first time derivatives of two well-established drugs—the anesthetics ketamine and phencyclidine, or PCP. Officials also found new stimulants belonging to the cathinone family, and new synthetic cannabinoids, which are similar to marijuana. New drugs belonging to the phenethylamine, tryptamine and piperazine families were also identified. 

"With rapid technological advances, for example, cheap organic synthesis coupled with the increased use of the Internet for marketing and selling new drugs, it may be expected that synthetic analogues of various drug groups will continue to appear," the report said. 

 Write to  Jeanne Whalen at jeanne.whalen@wsj.com 