It looks like the European Union is settling on a strategy to save the euro. It's called extend, pretend... and pray.

Negotiations are under way to make permanent the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF), the bailout fund launched last year as a temporary backstop to deal with sovereign debt crises ripping through the euro zone. 

Not only that, but there's talk of increasing the quantity of funds the EFSF can lend.

As it stands, the EFSF is funded to the tune of €440 billion ($588 billion), but credit guarantees imposed on it mean that only about €250 billion can be disbursed. Some EU members are looking at ways of making the full €440 billion available, unless, that is, the fund can be boosted even further. They're also hoping it'll be used to buy government debt from fragile sovereigns. 

The markets like what they're hearing. But the optimism is overdone.

The EU is hoping fresh loans at cheaper rates may keep these crippled countries afloat for a few more years, until domestic growth starts to take off and they can once again manage to meet their obligations. Until then, the answer to their problems is more lending and more austerity.

But the premise hinges on peripheral Europe's eventual ability to pay back the huge amounts of public and private sector debt it already owes. That's improbable.

High interest rates and rising amounts of debt mean that, for instance, Spanish interest payments will rise from 1.8% of GDP in 2009 to 4.5% in 2016, while for Ireland that burden will rise from 2.2% to 5.4%, according to  Citigroup
C


0.57
%




 estimates. The Greeks are likely to hemorrhage even more of their income, something north of 6% of GDP to foreign creditors, according to other estimates. When set against real GDP growth expectations of less than 2% for the coming five years across most of peripheral Europe (although Ireland is likely to average about 3%) these sort of debt repayments will be politically crippling.

For peripheral Europe to avoid another more severe debt crisis down the line, one that would likely prove fatal to their euro membership, these countries need to be able to shake off the bulk of their debt burdens and at the same time be allowed to nurse their economies back to health.

But the only way this will happen is for core Europe, particularly Germany, to share substantially in the periphery's pain. 

The richer countries would have to forgive a hefty amount of peripheral Europe's debt or, alternatively make them equally large transfer payments. And at the same time, Germany would have to accept significantly higher than hitherto acceptable inflation rates in order to spare countries struggling with austerity from having to deflate their way to competitiveness.

To be sure, the new European rescue fund may be able to replace expensive funding at a more reasonable rate. For instance, Ireland and Greece are paying an interest rate of about 5.2% on the emergency finance they've been given by the International Monetary Fund and the European Union under its EFSF and EFSM programs, well below what the market demands.

But the rescue fund is also presented with a tricky balancing act. The interest rates it demands of borrowing countries need to be low enough to give them financial relief, but without inducing wholesale abandonment of the market.

It's doubtful the fund is big enough for a large country like Spain to tap it, as currently projected. And if Belgium and Italy, which are overloaded with sovereign debt, follow suit there definitely won't be enough money in the kitty.

But ultimately, even on easier terms, many of these countries will have to default on their debt. It's not something Germany will like—large German banks are exposed to some €210 billion of peripheral European debt, the equivalent to about 13% of Germany's GDP. A default with a 50% recovery would be very, very painful for the German taxpayers backstopping German banks. The alternative of equally massive direct transfer payments from the core to the periphery is likely to be even less palatable to Germans, according to a recent paper by  Otmar Issing, formerly the European Central Bank's chief economist.

Nor is this the only price Germany would likely have to pay to rescue the euro. Wages have been deflating in the euro zone's periphery as these countries struggle to regain competitiveness now that they can't devalue. It would help if Germany were willing to allow domestic inflation, and with it domestic wages, to rise substantially. That, though, isn't happening. Germany's inflation rate is lower than those across much of peripheral Europe. Nor is it likely to happen in future. Germans are allergic to inflation.

The message from Germany about doing anything more than backing a permanent fund is nein, nein and nein. Germans, the Dutch and the Finns expect peripheral Europe to take ever bigger doses of austerity in order to qualify for bailouts. 

For peripheral Europeans, that means big drops in living standards. Ireland's GDP per capita was 69% of Germany's in 1989. By 2009 it was 112%. This gain in relative wealth is now fast reversing. As people across the periphery start to feel substantially less well off, their resentment against Germany and other core states will only rise. Eventually, they'll ask what exactly they're getting for all the pain they're taking. 

If the answer is "poorer," the urge to default will be hard to resist. Even if it means withdrawal from the euro.

 Write to  Alen Mattich at alen.mattich@dowjones.com 