LONDON—Jaguar Land Rover PLC has launched a £1 billion ($1.6 billion) bond sale, according to its parent,  Tata Motors Ltd., making the luxury-car manufacturer the latest in a string of borrowers with ties to India seeking cheap funds overseas. 

Two of the bankers handling the deal said the British unit of Tata Motors and its advisers were meeting with investors in Europe and the U.S. ahead of a planned three-part bond issue. One banker said the series of meetings, known as a road show, began Monday and will end Wednesday. 

The senior unsecured notes will be guaranteed by Jaguar Cars, Land Rover, Jaguar Land Rover North America LLC, Land Rover Exports and Jaguar Cars Exports, Tata Motors said in a notice to local exchanges, The company is India's largest vehicle maker by volume. 

The proceeds are to be used to refinance debt. Tata Motors bought the British unit from  Ford Motor Co.
F


-0.41
%




 in 2007 for $2.3 billion. 

The bond issue signals the growing confidence of the maker of Jaguar and Land Rover vehicles, especially after it was able to post revenue growth in the last five quarters. It also highlights the British company's ability to raise debt without relying on its Indian parent's backing. 

The deal insulates Tata Motors from Jaguar Land Rover's accumulated debt, allowing the Indian company to focus on its own expansion in its large home market.

  Citigroup Inc.,
C


1.11
%




 Credit Suisse Group AG, J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. and  Standard Chartered
STAN


-0.39
%




 PLC are handling the issue. 

The issue will comprise a sterling bond and dollar bond, both with a seven-year maturity. Both will be non-callable for three years. 

The final tranche will be a 10-year dollar-denominated bond that will be callable after five years. 

Jaguar Land Rover is rated B1 by Moody's Investors Service, B+ by Standard & Poor's Corp. and BB- by Fitch Ratings. 

 Write to  Hannah Benjamin at hannah.benjamin@dowjones.com and Bijou George at bijou.george@dowjones.com 