When Yankee bench coach Tony Pena was still playing in the majors, he got the good news that his Boston Red Sox teammate, Kevin Romine, had a second son, a boy he named Austin. 

Now that Austin is a catcher in major-league camp with the Yankees, Pena doesn't ever let him forget that he remembers when he was born, and that he still pictures Austin as a baby. 

"Oh yeah, Tony's told me everything. I've heard all the stories about my dad," Romine chuckled. "But Tony, the first time he saw me, he was like, the last time I saw you, you were a little baby. Well, I'm not a kid anymore."

In some ways, that is true. But in others, absolutely not. At 21, Austin Romine is a mature, advanced baseball player with an understanding of catching well beyond his years. Catcher is the hardest position on the diamond to learn. Catchers often don't graduate from the minors until their mid-20s, and Romine has never played a game above Double-A. 

But with one day left in spring training, Romine is still in a heated competition for the Yankee backup catcher's job, despite hitting only .182 with one home run this spring.

To Pena's way of thinking, that's a testament to Romine's maturity: the kind that you can't necessarily teach, unless, like Romine, you have a father who lived it and has schooled you in it from a young age. 

"Those kids, they grew up in baseball, they grew up in the field," Pena said. "They have an idea of how to act in a big-league clubhouse. They have lived it their whole life. It's nothing new to them.''

Economists Steven Leavitt and Stephen Dubner, in their book "Superfreakonomics,'' say that there are no predictive factors—height, weight, little league average—that can significantly impact if a young boy will become a major leaguer, save one. Sons of big league fathers are 800 times more likely than the average child to make the majors. 

There are just over 200 players in baseball history with fathers who played in the bigs, including Austin's brother, Andrew, who debuted last season for the Los Angeles Angels. The two brothers were schooled in how to be big leaguers when other kids were learning how to pick up a bat. 

"Since a young age, that's what we've been bred to do," Romine said. 

That breeding worked so well that Romine remains in the mix for the major-league backup's job, perhaps even ahead of more highly rated and experienced catching prospect Jesus Montero.

 The job is likely to go to journeyman Gustavo Molina, but the fact that Romine is still in contention speaks volumes. 

In a world where prospects come up quietly and can struggle to fit in, children of major leaguers exude a confidence that others can labor to find. Nick Swisher always remembers being confident and comfortable in a major league clubhouse.

 The son of major leaguer Steve Swisher, Nick attributes that to the years he spent in minor league clubhouses after his father retired and moved to coaching. 

"I wasn't in the big-league locker room, I was in those ratty minor-league clubhouses,'' Swisher said.

Anecdotally, players with Romine's lineage might have a better chance for success, but Yankee general manager Brian Cashman doesn't see it. He drafted Romine for his potential, not his pedigree.

"We had David Parrish, who was Lance Parrish's son, and he didn't make it,'' Cashman said.  "There's a lot of guys who don't have any family history in the big leagues, and they're pretty good." 

Romine has talked to his father every day this spring as he fights to make the roster. Whether he makes it or not, Pena said Romine's confidence and saavy have made an impression. 

"We're still working every day on some things, but he's a great kid, and everybody loves him," Pena said. 