MOSCOW—President Dmitry Medvedev said terrorism is "the main threat" that Russia faces and vowed to find and eliminate those responsible for Monday's deadly suicide bombing at the country's busiest international airport.

Speaking to security officials, Mr. Medvedev said airport officials and police responsible for what he called lax security at Moscow's Domodedovo Airport would be punished.

But Monday's bombing, which killed 35 people and wounded more than 150, highlighted the persistence of terror attacks in the Russian heartland. 

Terrorists have struck the capital twice in the past 10 months, breaking a relative lull in attacks there that had lasted for several years.

"Terrorism is the main threat to our state," Mr. Medvedev said. He warned that extremist groups would be targeting major international events Russia is scheduled to host in the coming years, including the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi. 

Several foreigners were among the dead Monday, including a Briton, a German and a Bulgarian.

Some officials and analysts questioned whether the Kremlin could stop the attacks.

"We can't handle these first of all because we are a country that's corrupt—everything can be bought and sold," said Gennady Gudkov, a senior legislator from the pro-Kremlin Just Russia party. 

See a timeline of terrorist acts in Russia since 1999.

"Extremist groups and suicide bombers are appearing like mushrooms after the rain," he added.

There was still no claim of responsibility for Monday's attack, but Russian officials said it bore the hallmarks of similar suicide strikes by Islamist extremists from the restive North Caucasus region. 

In recent years, the groups have spread beyond their origins in Chechnya to other predominantly Muslim regions nearby. They have called for turning the area into an Islamic state.

Mr. Medvedev said security officials and citizens had let their guard down after the previous attacks in the capital, the twin bombings in March 2010 that killed 40 people in the Moscow subway and led to a short-lived tightening of security. 

"A loss of control and alertness happens," he said. "Terrorists take advantage of that."

Already Tuesday, finger-pointing had begun over who was to blame for Monday's bombing.

Mr. Medvedev, who an aide said still planned to arrive Wednesday at the World Economic Forum in Davos in time to deliver the keynote speech, blasted Domodedovo for what he said were "critical shortcomings." 

But airport officials rejected the criticism, saying security in the public zone outside international arrivals where the bombing took place was the responsibility of the police.

Access to that area—where visitors await arriving passengers—isn't tightly controlled in most international airports world-wide, officials said. 

Scanning everyone entering an airport would be time-consuming and costly.

 This is very sad. Acts of terror have innocent victims, including those who are indirectly affected with lingering awful memories and pain. May God give Russians the strength to overcome. 

—Hubbard Morris

"The expense would be serious, requiring 5-10 times more checkpoints," said Andrei Nedosekov, deputy minister of transport.

He said authorities dramatically tightened controls over passengers and baggage after suicide bombers bribed their way onto two domestic flights from Domodedovo in 2004, killing 90. 

But the public area of the airport outside those checkpoints isn't as closely monitored, with police doing only spot searches.

Mr. Nedosekov said there was no heightened alert at Domodedovo before Monday's attack.

The latest wave of major attacks to hit Moscow was in 2004, when suicide bombers struck rock-music festivals, subway stations and the flights from Domodedovo, killing scores.

The culmination came in the southern Russian town of Beslan, where terrorists seized a school. When Russian troops stormed the building in an attempt to end the siege, 331 hostages, more than half of them children, were killed.

World-wide revulsion over the siege and heavy insurgent losses at the hands of Russian forces may have helped push the insurgent movement into a lull, according to Russian experts on the mostly Muslim Caucasus region.

In the years that followed, the insurgents rebuilt their battered underground networks with a new generation of men and a growing number of women bent on revenge, while the root causes of the conflict—the region's poverty, corruption and dominance by Russian-led counterinsurgency forces—remained unchanged, these experts say.

"The use of brutal, indiscriminate force in the Caucasus, the systematic use of state terror, has proven to be not only ineffective but also counterproductive," said Yekaterina Sokiryanskaya, a program director in the region for the Moscow-based Memorial Human Rights Center. "Young, educated people were drawn to armed jihad."

Instead of trying to mediate the conflict, the Kremlin early last year appointed a special envoy to lead the region's economic development. But this only appeared to provoke fierce resistance by the insurgents, who stepped up their attacks, provoking harsh crackdowns.

"Expectations at the start of last year were very high that something could change for the better," said Alexei Malashenko, a specialist on the region at the Moscow Carnegie Center. "But they came to nothing. Now I don't see a real political solution. The crisis in the Caucasus is eternal."

The number of major terror attacks in the region last year doubled to 14, according to Russian officials.

The legacy of hatred for ethnic Russians in the region has alarmed Russians elsewhere in the country, creating a backlash that further aggravates the conflict. 

In December, Russian nationalists marched in Moscow and lashed out violently at Caucasians after migrants from the region killed a Russian soccer fan in a street fight.

 Write to  Richard Boudreaux at richard.boudreaux@wsj.com and Gregory L. White at greg.white@wsj.com 