PITTSBURGH, Pa.—Rex Ryan is the coach who plays like the kid down the street, the overgrown buddy who's one of the guys.

Mike Tomlin is the coach who plays pool in the locker room, his trim build suggesting he actually is one of the guys.

Welcome to the new breed of NFL coach.

As the Steelers and Jets met in the AFC Championship game Sunday night, they did it behind two men who shucked staid and stuffy forever ago—if they ever actually exhibited either trait.

 Mr. Ryan's bombast and anti-authoritarian ways are well known in New York and around the league by now, snagging headlines and selling stories all season.

But before Mr. Ryan was hired in New York, Mr. Tomlin was, albeit more quietly, building the same sort of reputation in Pittsburgh.

It was exactly four years and a day before Sunday's title game that the Rooney family hired Mr. Tomlin, then—and still now at 38—the NFL's youngest coach. He's quickly proven the genius in that, winning the Super Bowl in his second year and guiding his team to a second conference championship game this year. 

It's the way the results have been forged—just as with the way the Jets' successes have—that upend the traditional image of the tough disciplinarian NFL coach.

"He's one of us," rookie receiver Emmanuel Sanders said.

"He's been the exact same guy since he got here—someone who never panics," 13-year veteran receiver Hines Ward said.

From his first press conference, Mr. Tomlin oozed self-confidence and Mr. Ward laughed just trying to imagine any instance of doubt he's seen in the coach since. A perennial Pro Bowler, Mr. Ward said he doesn't know if he's ever seen anyone as confident, including the much more obsequiously secure Mr. Ryan.

"You know what it is? He knows he's good and so we know we're good," second-year receiver Mike Wallace said. 

That certainty in his self means Mr. Tomlin, again like Mr. Ryan, doesn't need to control every aspect of his team. He's always run a Tampa Two defense, from Tampa Bay to Minnesota, and that system's base alignment calls for four down linemen and three linebackers. But when he was hired by the Steelers, he kept on legendary—and now Hall of Fame—defensive coordinator Dick LeBeau, whose defense uses three down linemen and four linebackers.

His players uniformly talk about the William and Mary graduate's incredible intellect. Corner Ike Taylor said he knows "a ridiculous amount about the game, and by ridiculous I mean everything." But at the same time, the players say Mr. Tomlin knows when to defer.

Like to linebacker James Farrior, a player he said this past week "sets the tone for this outfit." He allows Mr. Farrior to make the final comments to the team before a game, unimaginable to many a coach in the AFC.

"Besides his bank account being a little bigger, he is the same guy," Mr. Farrior said. "He has been the same guy since he has been here. He has a been a very good coach in the aspect of knowing what the players need, helping us out and keeping us fresh. He is a very good motivator."

Sometimes it's with a quiet word as he strolls through the locker room, something the former college receiver does daily. Sometimes it's with a stronger word, or with a joke, Mr. Wallace said.

The Steelers unequivocally know he has their back—as he did in publicly scolding a television reporter this week who revealed before last week's divisional playoff game that the Steelers would run a trick play. He most definitely is no patsy.

"He's the cool dude, but it's still clear, 'I'm your coach.' What he says goes—always," Antwan Randle-El said. He's played for four coaches now, Bill Cowher with the Steelers, two with the Redskins and now under Mr. Tomlin and he said he can't help but compare him to Mr. Cowher, who won a Super Bowl and spent 15 years here.

"They both give you this little extra edge," he said, "and they both make you want to play for them just like you do your teammates."

 Write to  Aditi Kinkhabwala at aditi.kinkhabwala@wsj.com 