NAIROBI, Kenya—Mobile-phone companies across Africa are drawing battle lines to capture the rising middle-class consumer. But in Kenya, the war already is well under way, stocked with ammunition from abroad.

In the past year, units of India's Bharti Airtel Ltd. and the U.K.'s  Vodafone Group PLC have been locked in competition. Vodafone's Safaricom Ltd. dominates the Kenyan telecommunications sector, with 77% of the market. 

But in the third quarter, Bharti's Airtel Kenya boosted its market share to 15% from 11% in the second and captured 60% of new mobile customers each month, according to  Rene Meza, Airtel's managing director in Nairobi. Airtel Kenya is on a path to "market leadership," the 33-year-old Paraguayan says.

  Read profiles of three African consumers  

Across town in a multistory tower, Safaricom Chief Executive  Robert Collymore scoffs at his rival's prediction. "It's not the first time a competitor has said, 'We will unseat Safaricom,' " the 52-year-old responds. "That is a clearly stupid thing to say. I don't want to come off as being dismissive of our competitors, but I've got more important things to do." 

Their battle reflects rising investor interest in Africa, one of the world's last big emerging markets, with one billion consumers and growing. Consumer spending in Africa rose at a compounded annual rate of 16% to 2008 from 2005, according to McKinsey & Co. The consulting firm estimates that within five years, about 220 million Africans who now can meet only basic needs will join the middle class as consumers. 

Telecom is one of the continent's more robust industries as the cellphone market expands to include Internet access, mobile banking and retail transactions. Mobile service also has brought telephones to people in remote areas that never had land lines. Africa has about 400 million mobile subscribers, according to McKinsey, which predicts that data and rural voice services will generate $12 billion to $15 billion in telecom revenue by 2012. Telephone services broadly, not just mobile, generated $40.5 billion in revenue in 2009, according to market researcher Euromonitor International, with Kenya contributing $1.6 billion. 

Bharti Airtel declines to discuss the company's broader strategy for Africa. But in Kenya, Mr. Meza's plan is to whittle away at Vodafone's Safaricom by cutting prices and expanding Airtel Kenya's network, spending $280 million by year-end. That's been a boon for consumers as it heightened competition in the market, which includes  France Télécom SA's Orange Kenya and the Yu brand of India's Essar Group.

"I'm calling now without fear," says John Wambiri, a 42-year-old street-corner flower dealer and Airtel customer. Mr. Wambiri says because of low rates, he no longer uses the once-common "flash" method of keeping in touch: dialing a number and hanging up after the first ring so the recipient will call him back at no cost to Mr. Wambiri.

Multinational corporations are racing to make the most of Africa's burgeoning middle class. With reporters on the ground there, a Wall Street Journal series examines the changes.

Next: how African entrepreneurs are capitalizing on growing demand for used American cars in Nigeria, where young professionals want to avoid perilous public buses.

When Airtel executives moved into their high-rise tower off Nairobi's main highway in June, they rolled out a marketing strategy aimed at injecting new life into their brand. Mr. Meza says that the day after receiving clearance from Kenyan regulators, he started advertising a roughly 50% reduction in rates to about three cents a minute and a penny to send a text message.

Mr. Meza was following a model Bharti had used in India: betting that customers will buy more airtime if it costs less. The company has the heft to subsidize initial losses until new call habits take hold, Mr. Meza says.

Rivals Yu, Safaricom and Orange Kenya followed suit soon after.

Safaricom, which reported $587.5 million in revenue for the six months through September, said it had no choice but to cut its rates to stay competitive but that the duration of calls hasn't increased. Mr. Collymore says the price war will damage cellphone providers by forcing call rates lower than is affordable in the long term. 

"The fact that you have three mobile operators reacting to it and complaining that it may not be sustainable is something positive for us," Mr. Meza says. "If it wasn't [sustainable], the main mobile operator in the market today would not follow us." Airtel declines to provide figures for its Kenyan operations, but the parent's profit dropped 27% to 16.6 billion rupees ($368.7 million) for the quarter ended Sept. 30, partly because of reduced rates in Africa and increased competition in India.

Mr. Collymore says his company's focus is on data. Safaricom is Kenya's only provider with fast Web access for desktop computers as well as cellphones, which has revolutionized Internet use in a country that had been stuck at dial-up speeds. The company plans to introduce fourth-generation mobile service in coming years. Safaricom also controls M-Pesa, a mobile banking and retail-transaction service that has swept Kenya and served as a model for similar services across the continent.

But Airtel Kenya is attacking Safaricom on that front as well. Airtel plans to introduce 3G service in the coming months and is investing in its own fledgling mobile money-transfer service, Airtel Money. Airtel also is considering a move into other sectors, such as cable television. Late last year Airtel began plastering its red-and-white logo on billboards that show images of Kenya, including a traffic jam and a lion on a game preserve.

"Kenya has its challenges; its culture, its market position is completely different" than in India and elsewhere in Africa, Mr. Meza says. Airtel is "a global company with global ambitions in Asia and Africa, but it wants to be locally relevant."