It has been over a week since Carmelo Anthony debuted as a Knick. Since then, the hype has only grown and the Knicks have become known for having one of the most famous collections of stars in the league. 

But in the fourth quarter on Wednesday night, the Garden crowd began chanting the name of Jared Jeffries, the newly signed role player who added exactly zero points in 24 minutes. It was official: even the most anonymous Knicks are contributing to this star-studded affair.

The Knicks beat the Hornets 107-88 on Wednesday night without the aid of point guard Chauncey Billups, who had a bruised quad, but with the help of Toney Douglas, who started in Billups' absence and scored 24. The Knicks improved to 3-2 in the Anthony era, and Wednesday night might have marked their most well-rounded team performance after their biggest win, against the Miami Heat on Sunday, was driven by Anthony and Billups' heroics. 

On Wednesday, Amar'e Stoudemire scored 24 and Anthony scored 22, both totals below their season average. Stoudemire added seven rebounds. Shawne Williams had 16 points.

The defensive lapses that were apparent against the Magic on Tuesday, giving up 116 points and 52% shooting, did not appear on Wednesday. The Hornets struggled to find a rhythm and shot 46% to the Knicks' 54% from the field.

Chris Paul, the Hornets point guard whose free agency in 2012 will be the sequel to the Anthony affair we just witnessed, was quiet for the whole night. He scored two points through three quarters and finished with four points in 36 minutes. He added 10 assists but was clearly the second-best point guard on Wednesday night.

Coming into the game, the Knicks looked shorthanded without Billups, the point guard who was acquired seemingly as a throw-in with Anthony but has emerged as his near equal. Billups' left leg collided with the leg of Magic big man Dwight Howard in the fourth quarter on Tuesday, and Billups was forced to leave the game with a bruise on his left quadricep. He said he felt much better on Wednesday but not nearly well enough to play. He was non-committal about playing on Friday against the Cleveland Cavaliers. He said he told Douglas to be assertive and play whatever style he wanted. Douglas, who had five assists, has become the Knicks' up-tempo specialist at point guard since Billups arrived and introduced a slower style of play.

Douglas was one of only three Knick players to score in the first quarter—the Knicks scored 27 points in the period with 10 from Douglas, nine from Anthony and eight from Stoudemire. 

Jeffries, the defensive-minded forward who played for the Knicks from 2006 to 2010, made his debut after signing a deal on Tuesday. He fell out of favor as a Houston Rocket and played in just 18 games this season. He was bought out of his contract last week and was brought in by the Knicks to give the team a defensive spark they lacked after trading for some offensive-minded stars. He did his job on Wednesday, boxing out routinely and grabbing six rebounds.

How giddy was the Garden? With four minutes to go, the crowd, inexplicably, began chanting the name of Roger Mason, the veteran who has occupied the deepest seat on the bench this season. A small roar broke out when he checked into the game, and even Knicks owner James Dolan chuckled.

On Wednesday night, every Knick had star power. 