At first blush, it appears unfortunate—even tragic—that India's most immediate memory of Bhimsen Joshi's long, magnificent career as a classical vocalist is his cameo in a state-sponsored film about national integration. The music video, titled Ek Sur ("One Melody"), more commonly known (and searchable online) by its refrain "Mile sur mera tumhara," aired on state television in India in 1988. Only the recollection of how heartwarming it seemed back then saves it from sounding cheesy when I revisit it now on YouTube. 

The song's refrain—"Mile sur mera tumhara / To sur bane hamara"—offers a sweet, earnest suggestion: "Marry your melody to mine / And it becomes our melody." In the six-minute video, this sentiment is gaily expressed and re-expressed, in different languages and by different people. The song's opening lines are sung by Joshi, which proves an inspired decision. Standing near a river in his trademark attire of pristine white, Joshi, with his stentorian voice and his craggy profile, instantly invests the libretto with nobility and grandeur. A less sincere rendition could have turned the whole song into pabulum. Instead, Joshi inaugurates a ballad of patriotism, a whole new national anthem.

Then again, this memory isn't entirely inappropriate. Joshi, a giant of Indian classical music, who died last Monday at the age of 88, is perhaps the classical musician most representative of independent India. It isn't just for his role in "Mile Sur Mera Tumhara." His entire career was, in a sense, an exercise in national integration, knitting together disparate corners of a very large, very diverse country. 

Joshi was born in the northern part of the state of Karnataka, where south India begins to bleed gently into west India. To pursue a musical education, he ran away from home at the age of 11, travelling north to Gwalior and Delhi and Lucknow, and east to Kolkata (then known as Calcutta). Having been dragged back home by his father, Joshi found that the musical education he sought elsewhere lay in his own backyard—in the form of his eventual teacher, the maestro Sawai Gandharva.

Joshi performed his first live concert when he was 23 in 1946, one year before India won its freedom. The careers of Joshi and of independent India thus have run on nearly parallel tracks. In one of his rare interviews, Joshi stated: "A musician, these days, should be connected to . . . the health of the nation."

Within the ambit of north Indian classical, or Hindustani, music, Joshi belonged to the "Kirana gharana," a school of singing that originated in a town in the northern state of Uttar Pradesh but that absorbed many aspects of south Indian classical, or Carnatic, music. With the casual fluency of the best Indian classical vocalists, Joshi sang in the languages of Kannada (the language of Karnataka), Hindi and Marathi (the language of the western state of Maharashtra). His versatility extended to medium as well: He sang for Hindi and Kannada films, thus also participating in that great Indian art form of the 20th century, cinema. 

His most famous collaborations were with M. Balamuralikrishna, a Carnatic singer whose voice matched Joshi's in tenor and pliability. Their duets were remarkable: As if bringing estranged brothers back together, they synthesized two musical traditions with common roots but divergent tracks. "He never sang Hindustani, nor I Carnatic, in our concerts," Mr. Balamuralikrishna once noted. "What we sang was Indian music." This sounds like a lofty mission statement, but their concerts were hardly made of such dry purpose. If anything, Joshi and Mr. Balamuralikrishna performed the best kind of duets, ones in which the musicians appear to aim to delight each other. The resonance of Indianness was purely unintentional.

Through it all there was the voice—a rich, rugged voice, soaring and swooping in perfect pitch, addicted to drama but never averse to touches of whimsy. Even during his last few performances, when Joshi's frail frame had to be assisted by one or two people onto the stage, his singing still throbbed with vitality. His voice could flit with ease through and around the microtones of a scale, and his eyes would roll upwards in accompaniment, as if he were watching the notes evaporate in front of him. In the throes of an "aalaap"—the freeform improvisation that characterizes Indian classical music—Joshi would toss off a faultless note or phrase almost imperiously, the act of a man who knew his treasury would never run dry. 

To listen to him sing in such fashion was to be reminded, in various ways, of India in the latter half of the 20th century—of the confidence of its freshly minted freedom; of the simultaneity of its hoary history and art; and of the bold experiment in multiculturalism that was this new nation, an experiment that has already succeeded by giving rise to Joshi's music.

 Mr. Subramanian is the Indian correspondent for The National and the author of "Following Fish: Travels around the Indian Coast" (Penguin, 2010). 