A leading politician from Pakistan's ruling party was gunned down in a wealthy neighborhood of Islamabad Tuesday by a member of his security detail after speaking out against the country's controversial blasphemy laws, an assassination that highlights the nation's struggle to contain extremism even among those close to the center of power.

Salmaan Taseer, governor of Punjab, Pakistan's most-populous province, and a member of the ruling Pakistan People's Party, died after a member of his security team fired multiple shots into his car at a shopping complex, police said. 

His attacker, Malik Mumtaz Qadri, who surrendered to police, admitted he was angered by Mr. Taseer's opposition to the blasphemy laws, Interior Minister Rehman Malik told local television.

Mr. Taseer had become a leading opponent in recent weeks of a court decision in November to sentence a 45-year-old Christian farm laborer, Asia Bibi, to death for blasphemy against the Prophet Muhammad.

The case attracted international attention, with Pope Benedict XVI and human-rights groups calling for her release. Mr. Taseer had attacked the court's decision and recently had been urging supporters on Twitter to take to the streets in protest against the blasphemy laws. His opposition had been condemned by Islamist political parties.

In a Dec. 31 post on his Twitter account, a day before Islamists took to the streets across the country to demand the laws stand, Mr. Taseer wrote: "I was under huge pressure ...2 cow down b4…pressure on blasphemy. Refused. Even if I'm the last man standing."

The assassination—the first of a prominent politician since former President Benazir Bhutto was killed by a bomb in 2007—illustrates the difficulties the U.S. faces in attempting to bolster secular elements in Pakistan, a key U.S. ally in fighting Islamist extremists that operate from the border region between Pakistan and Afghanistan and fight both the Pakistani military and U.S. troops across the border. The Pakistan Taliban, an affiliated extremist group to the Taliban in Afghanistan, have regularly attacked Pakistani cities and towns in the past two years.

The U.S. has poured billions of dollars in civilian and military aid into the effort to dim the appeal of radical Islam among Pakistan's mostly poor population of 180 million people.

But Mr. Taseer's assassination by a member of an elite police unit shows how religious extremism pervades even segments of society that are close to the centers of power, a result of decades of official Islamization stretching back to Pakistan's founding in 1947 out of a newly independent India.

Islamist political groups had called for Mr. Taseer's ouster as governor over his opposition to the blasphemy laws and saw in his stance a Western conspiracy to roll back Pakistan's religious edicts and turn the country into a secular democracy. One party issued an edict condemning Mr. Taseer for blasphemy.

"We tend to draw these neat lines between Islamists and secularists but those lines in daily life in Pakistan are constantly blurred," said Sadanand Dhume, resident fellow at the American Enterprise Institute in Washington.

Pakistan's religious laws were tightened under the rule of Gen. Zia-ul-Haq, a military dictator who oversaw an Islamization of the nation's institutions such as the army and judiciary in the 1980s.

Since then, Pakistani authorities have charged scores of minority groups under the laws, including at least 50 members of the heterodox Ahmadi Muslim community in 2009, many of whom remain in prison, according to Human Rights Watch.

In no cases have the death sentences been carried out, with courts commuting sentences on appeal.

Despite some instances—like Mr. Taseer's calls to end the blasphemy laws—Pakistan's secular politicians have largely failed to unite to combat religious extremism out of fear of sparking a backlash, and in some cases have even courted extremist groups, analysts say.

Officials from the U.S., India and other countries say some elements of Pakistan's military, continue to have close ties with Islamist groups, especially those that don't operate inside Pakistan but instead hit targets in Afghanistan and India.

The secular elite, meanwhile, are widely viewed as corrupt by ordinary Pakistanis, in some cases increasing the appeal of Islam among Pakistan's poor.

The assassination also comes at a time of great political and economic instability in Pakistan and is likely to further paralyze the government of President Asif Ali Zardari. Last weekend, the coalition led by Mr. Zardari's Pakistan People's Party, of which Mr. Taseer was a leading member, lost its majority in the National Assembly after a key ally joined the opposition.

On Tuesday, the Pakistan Muslim League (N), the largest opposition party, headed by former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, said it wouldn't launch a no-confidence motion in the government, providing the coalition with a measure of stability.

But Mr. Sharif told a news conference it would do so unless the government agrees to a series of measures over the next 45 days, including cutting government expenditure, taking action against corruption and rolling back fuel-price increases.

The political fighting comes as the U.S. and other foreign donors are increasingly worried about Pakistan's growing budget deficit, which the government is funding by borrowing from the central bank, essentially printing money and stoking inflation. Rising prices for food, fuel and other necessities could further destabilize a country that is still recovering from the summer's floods, which killed almost 2,000 people and affected 20 million others.

The U.S. wants the government to raise taxes on the rich to pay for programs to help lift Pakistanis out of poverty and combat the draw of Islamist groups, who often run their own charity arms.

Some observers, however, say the case of Ms. Bibi shows how hard it is to dislodge Islamist ideologies.

Ms. Bibi was accused in June 2009 by local village women in Sheikhupura, a district of Punjab province, of blasphemy against the Prophet Muhammad, which under Pakistani law can carry the death penalty.

Ms. Bibi, who is in jail, says the women hated her because she was a Christian, a minority in Pakistan, and had gotten in a fight over their refusal to drink water she had touched. She is appealing the court's November decision to impose a death sentence.

One radical cleric offered $6,000 to anyone who would kill Ms. Bibi.

Mr. Taseer became vocal in defending her, saying Mr. Zardari, the president, would overturn the decision if necessary. Mr. Taseer's supporters later Tuesday placed wreaths on the spot where he died.

—Zahid Hussain and Rehmat Mehsud contributed to this article.

 Write to  Tom Wright at tom.wright@wsj.com 