 Metropolitan Museum of Art  1000 Fifth Ave., (212) 535-7710  Through Sept. 18 

Brassaï (Gyula Halász) made his reputation in 1933 with the publication of "Paris de nuit" ("Paris by Night"), a rakish book of the city's monuments and dives, boulevards and brothels. It is still in print. Several of Brassaï's nocturnal images are in the show at the Met, including "A Pillar of the Corvisard Metro" (1934), which shows how dramatic even an architectural feature can be after dark. Berenice Abbott's "Nightview, New York" (1932) is on display, an example of her cool brilliance: It required a 15-minute exposure for this bird's-eye view of Midtown buildings with all their lights on. Peter Hujar's "Man in Park, 1981" sits perched on the top of the back of a park bench with one hand between his legs, peering off into the darkness for prey.

Curator Mia Fineman's exhibit examines the way things look different after dark, and how different photographers took advantage of what would ordinarily be a handicap. All we see in Hiroshi Sugimoto's "Ionian Sea, Santa Cesarea" (1990) is two shades of black that meet at the horizon, but we are drawn into the mystery of night, distance, sea and sky. The elderly woman selling "Old English Lavender" from a suitcase in Louis Faurer's "New York, NY" (1951) gains poignancy for still working after dark. Weegee's "Human Head Cake Box Murder" (c. 1940) was shot from overhead and includes a photographer under the focusing hood of a Graflex: It is absurdly noir.

 Museum of the City of New York  1220 Fifth Ave., (212) 534-1672  Through July 10 

The Aperture Foundation commissioned five photographers to document the New York City Department of Health's program that sends hundreds of independently owned produce carts into neighborhoods where fresh fruits and vegetables might not otherwise be available. The five brought their own special interests to bear on the project. A handsomely designed exhibit at MCNY provides separate space and a tabloid-size brochure for each photographer.

Thomas Holton explored the work and private lives of two Bangladeshi vendors, showing them on the street with their carts amid passersby, and in the small Bronx apartment they share with three others. 

Shen Wei took simple but elegant still lifes of the produce sold from the carts: a single banana with the skin peeled back, a pineapple and quenepas, string beans and plums. 

Will Steacy documented the less healthy food alternatives available in areas served by the Green Carts, such as fried chicken and Philly cheese steak. The only one to photograph in black and white, LaToya Ruby Frazier, concentrated on the vendors and their carts in situ, traditional subjects for street photography. It was "the human relationships formed around food" that prompted Gabriele Stabile to photograph customers not just at the carts, but in their homes preparing meals. The five interpretations of a common theme complement each other nicely.

 Schomburg Center for Research In Black Culture/N.Y. Public Library  515 Malcolm X Blvd. (212) 491-2200  Through June 30 

The 135th Street station of the West Side IRT is directly in front of the Schomburg Center, but I got off at 125th Street by mistake. The 10-block walk along Malcolm X Boulevard was a little tour of the dramatic changes taking place in the neighborhood, and an excellent preparation for the work of the 23 members of the New Harlem Renaissance Photographers. The photographers have varying degrees of professional experience, but a uniform passion to document the social, cultural and political evolution of Harlem and, to a lesser degree, other aspects of the African diaspora.

In Isseu Diouf's chromogenic print "Shaykh Ahmadou Bamba Day in the streets of Harlem: men of the Murid Brotherhood walk on Saint Nicholas Avenue towards Saint Nicholas Park, Harlem, New York, July 28, 2010," the figures of the marchers mingle with the figures on signs. Beverly Terry's series of black-and-white portraits of writers includes Nikki Giovanni, Charles Barron, Kevin Powell and more. Klytus Smith's interest is politics; "Fidel Comes to Harlem, NYC, 1960" recalls the Cuban dictator's visit. 

June Delairre Truesdale's "Emmanuel Church of God and Christ, Harlem, April 12, 1990" is a wee pale-green structure squeezed between a canary-yellow tire service and a dilapidated furniture store. And among Tyrone Rasheed's pictures of entertainers is "The Godfather of Soul James Brown lying in state at the Apollo Theatre, Harlem, NYC, December 28, 2006," the open casket and the Apollo sign theatrical but appropriate.

—Mr. Meyers writes on photography for the Journal. To see his work, visit williammeyersphotography.com.