Two hours after play, with the last remnants of the celebratory ticker-tape blowing around the Sydney Cricket Ground, the Ashes in safe keeping and the series secured, the England players and their families made their way out of the changing rooms. The SCG belonged to them, and to English cricket.

Andy Flower held hands with his daughters and walked them to the middle; Matt Prior lay on the floor for a photograph with his little one; Andrew Strauss strolled around the outer with his two boys and Kevin Pietersen cradled his son in his arms. An impromptu game of cricket then started between those sons and daughters old enough to play but too young to sup, as the players retired to celebrate some more.

The blood and thunder was done, all emotion was spent and it was time now for gentle reflection with those who have to live with the nerves, the bad moods, the ups and downs and the frayed tempers that are a regular part of any professional sportsman's life.

But these were moments to treasure. Two hours before, after Chris Tremlett had wrapped up the victory by replacing Beer with champagne, Mr. Strauss had been presented with the Ashes for the second time in two years, Alastair Cook accepted award upon award in recognition of his achievements and the lap of honour was begun, around past the half-empty Brewongle Stand and towards the Victor Trumper Stand where the bulk of England's supporters had gathered.

They were proud of their team. Not just that Mr. Strauss's players were winners, although clearly after 24 years the victory was important, but that they were so obviously a team united in a common cause and a team who had committed themselves, every single day of the last seven weeks, to something bigger than themselves.

Four years ago, when England lost here 5-0, it was not the defeat that hurt those who follow the team so much as the manner of it. That is always the case, I believe, with England supporters, which is why someone like Paul Collingwood, who finished as a Test player in the grandest style imaginable, will always be fondly remembered. He typifies the best face of English cricket.

This team, too, showed the best side of English cricket: the discipline, the professionalism (in the true sense of the word) and the sense of hard but fair play. Those of us who have worn the England cap can be thankful because they have restored faith in the English game in a part of the world that had come to look upon it with scorn.

I have made eight trips to Australia, in various disguise or other, and this is the first time that England have emerged victorious, the first time almost that there has been a contest to treasure. The English game is suddenly looked upon in a different light: to paraphrase one local journalist here, this place of cold pies and warm beer really does still know something about the game it invented. The lions and the crown on those blue caps, treasured by those who wear them now and have worn them, suddenly glint a little brighter.

Special days, then, for those who thought that they might never see England win in Australia again. One such is a friend of mine who came to Adelaide four years ago. It was a bad trip for two reasons: one because England snatched defeat from the jaws of a draw, and second because he found out he had cancer. He said then that the chances of his seeing England win in Australia were remote, probably nil. Well, he is still here and England have done now what he thought impossible. This one is for you, Stephen. No doubt there are countless such tales. It is what sport can do.

How does it feel to win here? Time to quote the cricket correspondent of another national newspaper the last time England won in Australia: "Even at this time of triumph it is important to remember the verities of cricket between England and Australia. Winning is not what matters: the Ashes are about renewing old friendships in a spirit of sporting endeavour between two nations with a common bond. But, by God, isn't it great to beat the bastards."