Which way now for the U.K. economy? Inflation is surging, public finances took a turn for the worse in February and the squeeze on wages points to a gloomy outlook for growth—all before the government's austerity cuts begin to bite. But neither the Bank of England nor Chancellor  George Osborne, who delivers his budget Wednesday, has much choice but to stay the course. 

Inflation hit 4.4% in February, far above the BOE's target of 2%. While this will increase the pressure on the Monetary Policy Committee, the arguments for leaving rates at 0.5% still hold. Much of the inflation isn't domestically generated; there are few signs of second-round effects. Last week's BOE inflation survey showed that few people are thinking of asking for pay rises. Instead, many intend to boost their saving. The Institute for Fiscal Studies estimates real household incomes will have fallen by 1.6% in 2008-2011, the biggest three-year drop since 1980-1983. That suggests inflation could yet fall sharply as demand contracts and tax effects drop out. 

Even so, manufacturing firms are increasingly inclined to raise prices. The MPC may yet be forced to raise rates. 

A rate increase, however, threatens growth and the government's fiscal targets. Borrowing in February was far higher than expected at £11.8 billion ($19.3 billion), dealing a blow to any hopes of a big deficit reduction this year. Borrowing in 2010-2011 should still come in below the Office for Budget Responsibility's forecast of £148.5 billion, but the margin is shrinking. A slowdown in the economy could crimp tax receipts while inflation could push government spending higher, threatening deficit reduction in future years. Mr. Osborne has already signalled there will be no major change to fiscal policy in the budget. In truth, he has no option other than to follow the path he has set out. 

Monetary and fiscal policies are locked together. For now, fiscal tightening is balancing out inflation concerns, keeping borrowing costs low; 10-year gilts are yielding 3.6%. That is vital given the need to issue £160 billion to £170 billion of gilts in the coming fiscal year. Maintaining current policy may be uncomfortable, but it remains the best bet. 

 Write to  Richard Barley at richard.barley@dowjones.com 