Ivory Coast president Alassane Ouattara took oath of office on Friday as authorities of the Western African country try to turn the page on the months-long civil conflict that followed a contested election.

"It is the start of a new era of reconciliation," Mr. Ouattara said in a short speech after the ceremony.

Mr. Ouattara and ousted leader Laurent Gbagbo were engaged in an armed conflict after the latter refused to relinquish his president's post following his loss in the November election. Mr. Gbagbo was put under house arrest after he was pulled from a basement bunker at his residence on April 11.

Life is slowly returning to normal in Abidjan, Ivory Coast's commercial hub: Banks have reopened for business and cocoa export companies are girded to resume trade, though many complain about racketeering.

Officials have had to deal with sporadic uprisings in recent weeks. On Friday, the United Nations dispatched investigators to inspect the site of alleged massacres in one Abidjan district.

In the normally bustling district of Youpougon, two U.N. tanks guarded the short dusty road that led to a field where children once played soccer and marriage receptions were held. An official said at least 44 dead bodies were now buried in mass unmarked graves there, surrounded by looted shanty homes and a mosque with a caved-in roof.

"A group of volunteers came to bury some of the bodies that were rotting in the sun three weeks ago," said 24-year-old Alberto Samake, holding three unclaimed identity cards found among the strewn belongings. "While we were doing that, Gbagbo's militiamen came and started shooting again."

Meanwhile, Ivory Coast prosecutors were scheduled to question Mr. Gbagbo on Friday as part of a preliminary probe aimed at determining his role in the nearly five-month standoff. Two French lawyers for Mr. Gbagbo said they could not meet with their client on Friday because they were denied entry into Ivory Coast on the grounds that their visas were not valid. 

Habiba Toure, a third lawyer for Mr. Ggabgo who had remained in Paris, said prosecutors had to allow for the presence of a counsel to question their client.

Mr. Gbagbo is held under house arrest on the grounds of a 1963 law aimed preventing public unrest. Prosecutors have said it was too early to say what charges might be pressed against him.

Prosecutors, however, have said they would not look into possible accusations of crime against humanity—something they would leave to the Hague-based International Criminal Court.

The ICC has said it was planning to launch an investigation into alleged widespread killings in Ivory Coast, a probe that could involve both sides of the conflict.

Ivory Coast government officials said an inquiry will look into the mass graves of around 800 people found in the western town of Duekoue last month. Human rights groups said forces loyal to Mr. Ouattara were behind the massacres.

Mr. Ouattara has said no crime would be left unpunished, even if perpetrated by his own supporters.

 Write to  David Gauthier-Villars at David.Gauthier-Villars@wsj.com 