LOS ANGELES—After months of public battling, union and city leaders reached what they called a landmark deal Thursday that forced concessions from a coalition of city unions, and could shape other labor negotiations.

"This is a watershed moment, make no mistake," Los Angeles Mayor  Antonio Villaraigosa, said of the deal Thursday afternoon.

Union members still must vote to approve the deal. If they do, more than 14,500 city employees would nearly double their contribution to retirement benefits from six to 11 percent of their salaries starting July 1. Workers would also forgo planned salary increases, and overtime pay.

In return, the city would end furloughs, when workers were required to take unpaid time off, and avoid 600 layoffs in the next fiscal year.

City leaders said the deal will save the city $400 million over the next three years. Union union and city officials said the deal also represents long-term structural changes to the municipal labor contract—such as requiring union members to contribute to retirement healthcare for the first time. The city estimates that could save Los Angeles $1 billion over 30 years.

"The structural impact will go on forever," said  Bob Schoonover, president of SEIU local 721, which is part of the coalition of six unions that negotiated the deal. Making the deal, he said "was a very difficult thing…at times we felt like we weren't getting anywhere."

But Mr. Schoonover said the deal will ensure the end of furlough days, which have hurt city services and meant painful pay cuts for union members. 

The deal in the country's second-largest city could have a ripple effect elsewhere as cities around the U,S struggle with the same economic forces, including healthcare and retirement costs and shrinking revenues.

Thursday's deal was a sign that "unions are beginning to see which way the winds are blowing and it's not really in their favor when it comes to these bargaining points," said  Jessica Levinson, a professor at Loyola Law School in Los Angeles and director of political reform at the nonpartisan Center for Governmental Studies. "As the economic crisis continues there's only so long that anyone can hold out without layoffs or significant concessions."

Mr. Villaraigosa, a long-time labor organizer who was elected with the backing of the city's unions, has been at odds with an array of unions representing librarians, police and sanitation workers as he has sought to cut costs.

The city still faces a $450 million shortfall for the next fiscal year. Mr. Villaraigosa signaled Thursday that the deal would be used as a model for future budget negotiations with other city unions—who represent 20,000 workers. In all, the city employs more than 34,200 workers, not including the city's around 9,900 police officers. "We're going to vigorously argue that all our employees should pay more for pensions and retiree health benefits," Mr. Villaraigosa said.

Union leaders said the concessions were painful, but prove that "collective bargaining does work," said Barbara Maynard, spokeswoman for the Coalition of LA City Unions, which struck the deal. That, she said, is an important point to make against the backdrop of strife in Wisconsin, where a new law limits public-employees' collective-bargaining rights. On Saturday, 20,000 union supporters are expected to gather in Los Angeles for a march in support of collective bargaining rights, Ms. Maynard said. 

 Write to  Tamara Audi at tammy.audi@wsj.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications  City leaders in Los Angeles last week reached a labor deal with a coalition of municipal unions that included, for the first time, concessions on such issues as union members agreeing to contribute to retirement health care. A previous version of this article incorrectly implied that it represented the first time the city had won concessions from the unions.