TOKYO—Despite progress at Japan's troubled Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant, dangers remain that could plague the government-led effort to tame radiation discharges. 

As of late Sunday, power was still out at reactors No. 3 and No. 4, the two most troublesome during the nine-day fight to keep the nuclear plant from spinning out of control. 

Until  Tokyo Electric Power Co.
9501


0.14
%




 fully restores power at the reactors and turns on cooling systems knocked out after the March 11 earthquake and tsunami, it faces continued radiation leakage from spent fuel rods stored at the two reactors. Those fuel rods are stored in pools of water that have been depleted, although Tokyo Electric Power, known as Tepco, says the water hasn't completely disappeared, contrary to some reports.

See all the graphics on the situation in Japan -- from before and after photos to the status of the reactors to survivors' stories.

Repeated spraying of water by military and fire-department personnel appears to have raised the water level, but without a permanent solution the rods still could overheat and possibly break apart, spewing more radiation into the air.

"We can't be complacent," chief government spokesman Yukio Edano said Sunday. "Even if things go well, we'll certainly see ups and downs."

The reactor cores also remain a problem area, highlighted Sunday by a rise in pressure within the No. 3 core. That prompted Tepco officials to consider a venting operation that would relieve the pressure while releasing radioactive materials into the air. They later said the pressure was under control and called off the venting. The reactor core is the main part of the reactor, housing the active fuel rods that provide the heat that generates power at the plant. 

The operation to connect power to the No. 3 and No. 4 reactors and turn on the standard cooling systems is expected to last at least several days. Until then, some experts believe the rods are at risk of full meltdown, which could damage the containment vessel and cause a radiation release that would dwarf those so far.

For the moment, however, injections of seawater appear to have created a modicum of stability inside the cores of the two reactors.

A separate storage pool for spent fuel rods also is drawing the attention of some Tepco and safety officials. The area, which takes fuel rods from all six reactors, is located near the No. 4 reactor. The pool is nearly full with 6,375 units of fuel, according to Tepco.

Joonhong Ahn, a professor of nuclear engineering at the University of California, Berkeley, said he believes there is no immediate threat. Still, he said, the number of fuel rods is "such a huge amount. While they are aged a bit and are therefore easier to control, we need to pay close attention as their temperatures go up." 

Hiro Hasegawa, a Tepco spokesman, said the situation is under control, although the company is watching temperatures in the tank and evaporation.

 Write to  Peter Landers at peter.landers@wsj.com and Norihiko Shirouzu at norihiko.shirouzu@wsj.com 