  Google Inc. is creating a new set of winners and losers on the Web following its move to punish sites that it believed offered little useful information yet still ranked high in its search results.

Websites affected by the change are retooling themselves to try to adapt to Google's new standards. At the same time, several companies that benefited from the change—such as Encyclopaedia Britannica Inc.—have praised Google and are predicting increased revenue.

Another site, Ezinearticles.com, which publishes articles by "expert authors" on everything from erectile dysfunction to fixing a leaky faucet, said it is racing to meet Google's expectations and fears the 57 million unique monthly visitors it had before the change could be cut in half. 

In addition, several little-known blogs that generate original content complained that they were punished by the changes while sites that copied their content saw gains. 

The widening fallout follows Google's announcement last week that it was changing its mathematical search formula to better weed out "low-quality" sites that offer users little value. Some such sites offer just enough content to appear in search results and lure users to pages loaded with advertisements. 

Google didn't name specific sites that would win or lose prominence in its rankings, but it said that original content "such as research, in-depth reports, thoughtful analysis and so on" will move up.

Google search engineer  Amit Singhal said in an interview Wednesday that the overwhelming majority of responses to the change have been positive, based on Google's regular tracking of users' satisfaction with their search results.

"People are saying this change did exactly what it promised to do, which is to reduce low-quality content" and demote sites that copy content from original-content creators, Mr. Singhal said. 

He added that Google's search results are "always a work in progress" and that the company is working on "further improvements to the algorithm" that helps rank sites according to how relevant they are to a search query. 

The algorithm "is not 100% accurate, even though it's very, very accurate," he said.

The changes rolled out to U.S.-based Google users last week, and the effect on websites, will accelerate when Google extends the upgrade to non-U.S. users in the near future.

One company that has seen a lift is Encyclopaedia Britannica, which publishes the venerable reference books found in libraries world-wide. 

Since the Google change, Britannica.com has been the top Google search result 15% more often than before and among the top three 18% more often, said  Gregory Barlow, chief marketing officer of Encyclopaedia Britannica. The result: Visits from Google users rose 40%.

Even a small rise or drop in the rankings for certain search queries can significantly affect traffic to a site. People searching on Google for "Mrinal Sen," an Indian filmmaker, will now see a Britannica link as the seventh result, up from 10th before the change, Mr. Barlow said. 

For terms such as "Max Born," the German physicist, and "Apapane," a Hawaiian bird, Britannica's link rose one spot, he said.

In addition to driving up revenue from ads on the site, Mr. Barlow said he expects a bump in the number of new premium subscribers, who pay about $100 a year to access the full array of Britannica.com's content. The site has about 500,000 consumer subscribers, which doesn't include institutions such as schools and universities.

Other beneficiaries of Google's change include online retail sites such as Buy.com Inc.  Jeff Wisot, Buy.com's vice president of marketing, said that since last week, the site had seen an 11% increase in overall traffic from search engines, which make up a significant portion of its overall traffic. "We absolutely feel this will lead to an increase in sales," he said.

  Morris Rosenthal, a 47-year-old computer consultant in Northampton, Mass., said he may lose 50% of his income from a reduction in online sales of his computer books because his two websites have dropped in the search results.

Mr. Rosenthal, whose laptop troubleshooting book is one of the top-selling computer books on  Amazon.com,
AMZN


-0.68
%




 said he believes that sites such as  Demand Media Inc.
DMD


-0.17
%




's eHow.com moved up in the rankings even though they offer less detail and have information he called inaccurate. 

Before last week's Google change, a Web page from one of Mr. Rosenthal's sites, www.daileyint.com, ranked No. 1 when users typed the phrase "toshiba troubleshooting" in the search box. Today that page, which includes 2,200 words of instructions, images and a video, is ranked fifth, while a 200-word eHow article with no images or video is ranked first. The author of the Toshiba article has also written articles for eHow on "How to Take Crease Marks Out of Posters" and "How Do Genital Herpes Spread."

An eHow spokeswoman declined to comment.

Google's Mr. Singhal wouldn't comment on the experience of individual sites. But he said "people generating original content and maintaining high-quality websites" benefit Google. "If our algorithm has made a small amount of mistakes, we would study those and improve in the coming weeks," he said. The company doesn't manually improve rankings for individual sites, he added.

 Write to  Amir Efrati at amir.efrati@wsj.com 