WASHINGTON -- Rep.  Gabrielle Giffords became a shooting casualty just days after she was sworn in to a third House term, one of a handful of swing-district Democrats to survive the Republican wave of the mid-term elections.

Photos from her career.

She won re-election narrowly—by less than 4,000 votes—while Arizona voters ousted two of her fellow Democrats from the House.

Ms. Giffords, 40 years old, is a former Fulbright scholar who ran her family's automotive tire supply business before entering politics. Married to astronaut  Mark Kelly, a Navy captain who is scheduled to command a space shuttle flight next spring, she is the stepmother to two girls from his previous marriage, ages 13 and 15. 

She came to Congress four years ago as part of a new generation of Democrats that included many from Republican-leaning districts like her own. Like many others in the Class of 2006, she had been recruited to run by Rahm Emanuel, then a senior House member and later chief of staff to President Barack Obama.

Ms. Giffords was shot while appearing at a public event known as "Congress on Your Corner," a constituent-greeting format that Mr. Emanuel pioneered as a congressman and encouraged new Democratic lawmakers to use regularly when back home.

Ms. Giffords had told friends as recently as during the year-end congressional recess that she liked her local appearances and would not cut back her schedule. She said she never missed weekend trips from Washington back to her district.

Authorities have given no motive for the attack.

Ms. Giffords represents southeastern Arizona, where illegal immigration is a flashpoint. The district includes part of Tucson and large stretches of ranch lands stretching to the Mexican border, where anger at illegal immigration runs strong.

She has been a vocal critic of her state's popular but controversial new immigration law, which requires state police to check the immigration status of people they detain for other offenses. She called the measure divisive and ineffective in accomplishing what she said should be the top priority, securing the border.

However, Ms. Giffords broke with critics of the law who had called for a boycott of Arizona to protest its passage. She also opposed the U.S. Justice Department's lawsuit aimed at overturning the law.

Ms. Giffords has tacked to the right on some fiscal issues, as a member of the Blue Dog Coalition, a faction of conservative Democrats in the House. She voted in 2009 against a $14 billion bailout for U.S. automakers and against a vehicle trade-in program known as "cash for clunkers." In 2010, she voted with Democrats on party-line votes only 60% of the time, according to a Congressional Quarterly study.

In another departure from her party last week, Ms. Giffords was one of 19 Democrats, most of them Blue Dogs, who refused to vote for Nancy Pelosi as speaker. Ms. Giffords voted instead for Rep. John Lewis (D., Ga.).

Ms. Giffords has, however, stuck with her party on many issues, such as President Barack Obama's 2009 economic stimulus plan and the push to repeal the "don't ask, don't tell'' policy barring gays from serving openly in the military. She supported the Democrats' health care overhaul. After the House voted for the health care bill, Ms. Giffords' Tucson office was vandalized.

Republicans put high priority on her defeat in 2010, and her race drew considerable money and advertising from conservative groups and the national Republican Party. Sarah Palin, the former GOP vice presidential candidate, included Ms. Giffords on a map posted on her Facebook page of Democrats targeted for defeat.

Her husband's status as a Navy captain makes Ms. Giffords the only House member with a spouse on active military duty. Her brother-in-law, also an astronaut, is currently aboard the International Space Station.

Ms. Giffords brought her interest in space travel to Congress. Two years ago, she scored a political coup when she was tapped by Democratic leaders to head a House science subcommittee with authority over NASA. A staunch supporter of NASA's manned exploration programs, she has been skeptical of proposed commercial alternatives. She frequently stresses the importance of children needing role models, such as astronauts. 

Ms. Giffords was elected to the Arizona House in 2000. Two years later, at the age of 32, she became the youngest woman elected to the Arizona Senate. She ran for the U.S. House in 2006 after the Republican incumbent announced he was retiring.

Although her district includes many centrist voters, the GOP is divided between centrists such as  Jim Kolbe, who preceded Ms. Giffords in the House seat, and more conservative voters.

A centrist Republican hand-picked by Mr. Kolbe to succeed him was beaten badly by  Randy Graf, a conservative who ran on an anti-illegal immigration platform. He, in turn, lost to Ms. Giffords.

The pattern repeated itself in 2010. While Arizona Democrats were swamped in November, Ms. Giffords survived in large part because Republican primary voters picked the most conservative candidate to challenge her. She won by less than 2 percentage points over Republican  Jesse Kelly, a tea party favorite.

—John Emshwiller and Alexandra Berzon contributed to this article.

 Write to  Andy Pasztor at andy.pasztor@wsj.com 