Earlier this spring, actor Hugh Jackman decided to put together a stage revue during a break in his film schedule. But the Hollywood star had a problem: He only had a vague sense of what his show would be about.

Lack of a roadmap, however, wasn't an issue for San Francisco-based producer Carole Shorenstein Hays. The founder of theater company SHN signed Mr. Jackman to launch his performance with a two-week engagement not on Broadway, but at San Francisco's Curran Theater.

"We both were artistically and spiritually aligned," said Ms. Shorenstein Hays. "He said yes, and I said unbelievable."

Taking those sorts of risks has helped Ms. Shorenstein Hays build SHN as a conduit for newly conceived theater productions, a number of them bound for Broadway. And in the process she has helped raise the profile of San Francisco in the theater world.

Broadway producers once saw San Francisco and the West Coast as a destination for shows that needed work far from the critical eyes of Broadway. These days the Internet has largely removed the ability of a theatrical work in progress to hide, while Bay Area audiences have proven receptive to new projects. 

"San Francisco is perceived as an arts-friendly, theater-friendly community that is open to a broad range of experiences," said Howard Sherman, executive director of the American Theatre Wing, the nonprofit group that gives out the Tony awards. 

Two years ago, Berkeley Repertory Theater hosted the world premiere of "American Idiot," a musical that since moved on to success on Broadway. This month, San Francisco's American Conservatory Theater is launching "Tales of the City," a musical created in part by the Broadway talent behind the hit "Avenue Q." Both groups are nonprofits.

Coups such as Mr. Jackman's 10-day run at the Curran Theater, where he performs Broadway hits and shares stories from his stage career, have helped SHN, the Bay Area's largest for-profit theater company, become a heavy hitter. In the last decade, SHN has hosted world premieres or pre-Broadway runs of hits including "Wicked," "Mamma Mia!" and "Legally Blonde."

In an interview, Mr. Jackman said he was drawn to San Francisco in part because SHN agreed to give him a week to work out his show on the Curran stage itself. "I had nothing…I didn't even know what the numbers were going to be," he said. San Francisco audiences have been forgiving of flubs, he added.

Residents and tourists are willing to pay for culture, said SHN's chief executive, Greg Holland. During the depths of the recent recession SHN's ticket revenue fell 8% to 10%, a drop he called moderate, and is still off about 2%. He declined to release revenue or profit figures for the company.

SHN is a joint venture between Ms. Shorenstein Hays, whose family became wealthy in real-estate development, and Robert Nederlander, a member of a family that is a longtime owner of Broadway theaters and backer of shows. This week, SHN said its 2011-12 season would include a pre-Broadway run of "Bring It On: The Musical," based on a movie about competitive cheerleading.

Not all of SHN's premieres have become New York hits. "Lennon" was launched in San Francisco in 2005 but played for less than six weeks on Broadway. "Mambo Kings," which also had its 2005 debut in San Francisco, never reached its Broadway goal.

Inside SHN, "there is a lot of conversation about risk and reward," said Mr. Holland. "But we have been financially successful [in San Francisco] in every world premiere we have launched."

 Write to  Geoffrey A. Fowler at geoffrey.fowler@wsj.com 