 Paul Gigot: This week on "The Journal Editorial Report," Japan's nuclear crisis echoes around the world. Does the disaster spell the end for America's nuclear energy industry? Plus, Saudi Arabia sends military forces into Bahrain despite American objections. And Moammar Gadhafi bombs his way to the brink of victory against the Libyan rebels before the U.N. finally votes to intervene. Where was President Obama? And what a world without U.S. leadership looks like, next. 

  President Obama: Our nuclear power plants have undergone exhaustive study and have been declared safe for any number of extreme contingencies. But when we see a crisis like the one in Japan, we have a responsibility to learn from this event and to draw from those lessons to ensure the safety and security of our people.  

 Gigot: Welcome to "The Journal Editorial Report." I'm Paul Gigot. 

That was President Obama on Thursday promising a safety review of all U.S. nuclear plants. As the crisis in Japan deepened this week, calls here at home to shelve nuclear energy programs grew, with New York Governor Andrew Cuomo calling for the closure of the Indian Point power plant outside New York City and Connecticut Sen. Joe Lieberman saying we should put the brakes on building any new reactors in the U.S. 

So could what happened in Japan happen here? And does the disaster spell the end for the nuclear power industry in the U.S.? 

Joining the panel this week, Wall Street Journal columnist and deputy editor Dan Henninger, Business World columnist Holman Jenkins and Washington columnist Kim Strassel. 

Kim, you have been reporting this story all week. What is the U.S. nuclear industry saying about the disaster in Japan? 

 Strassel: There are big differences here, Paul, and it shouldn't stop U.S. nuclear power, at least from a safety perspective. Here is why. One of the worst things that can happen to a power plant is a station blackout. That is the total cutoff from the electrical grid that powers the pump that keeps the plant cool. And because the facilities are so concerned about this, they always have backup plans.The Japanese had backup plans. What we are discovering is they were not robust enough to deal with a tsunami the size that came in. It swept away the fuel tanks that ran the backup generators. It swamped a lot of their equipment. 

What the American industry has said is, "Look, after Three Mile Island we were worried about station blackout, and we have gamed all of the scenarios and we are designed, as the president states, to deal with multiple incidents that could happen at the same time. And we have already made the changes they are going to need to do in Japan."

 Gigot: Kim, OK, but what would happen in the U.S. if, for example, there was no electricity to the diesel--to the generators that cool the plants? 

 Strassel: Well, for instance, what the industry has pointed out is, with any luck, they wouldn't get to that state. For instance, most of our nuclear facilities have both their diesel generators and the fuel tanks for them either underground or in concrete bunkers, precisely to protect them from water. Their equipment is placed above sea level so that water can't come in and damage the vital switch gear for the pumps, which is what happened in Japan. There are some things that they have already done to protect. In addition, they also have lots of different contingency plans of how you move immobile generators, et cetera. 

 Gigot: OK. Holman, do you agree with that? 

 Jenkins: To a point, yes. It is 1960s-era technology in Japan. We have improved a lot since then. But it is irrelevant at this point. The economics have gone completely out of nuclear in this country. Congress did not enact cap and trade. That kept coal more than competitive with nuclear. With shale drilling--

 Gigot: That would have raised--that would have put coal out of business. 

 Jenkins: We have shale gas from drilling in the Northeast that has brought down the price of natural gas from $14 to $4 for a million BTUs. Nuclear is not competitive. And then you add on all of the extra safety costs after Japan. I don't think anybody really wants to build a nuclear plant in America. 

 Gigot: Nuclear provides even now, Dan, about 20% of all American electricity, though we haven't built a plant since 1979, although one is supposed to go on line in 2013. Holman paints a pretty negative scenario for it even before this. 

 Henninger: The numbers are pretty overwhelming. As Holman said, the cost of shale gas is getting down to $4. The nuclear industry itself admits they need the costs to be around $7 or $8 for plants to begin to be economically viable. They are admitting they are in a deep hole in terms of the economics. 

I think the larger problem is our energy market is generally getting so distorted in the United States. The president, Obama, said earlier this month he is for drilling for oil. We need more oil, and we need more gas. But his budget is raising taxes on oil and gas. Nuclear needs subsidies to happen, as does his alternative sources, both wind and solar. I think what ultimately you are doing is so distorting the price of energy in the United States that it is going to be very difficult to make capital investments in that market. 

 Gigot: Kim, President Obama actually this week defended U.S. nuclear power. Of course, he endorsed last year more nuclear power plants, in part because he did want that to be part of a deal with Republicans, who have tended to support nuclear power, in return forgetting some kind of cap-and-trade deal--tax on carbon of the kind that Holman talked about. Is that deal that President Obama talked about probably done now? 

 Strassel: I think it is. The White House is going to be very careful now. Wait and see what happens in Japan and see how--it seems hard to believe the president will go out there and actively promote this as aggressively as he had done. 

One point here too--we have to remember, the economics of nuclear are not competitive in many ways. They also suffer from a huge disadvantage, cost disadvantage in terms of the regulatory costs of getting nuclear up and going in this country. And if you don't have the political will there and there is a lot of uncertainty, it raises costs even further. 

 Jenkins: We haven't even mentioned the "not in my backyard" problem. I don't think there's a chance of getting a plant licensed now. 

 Gigot: Not in your hometown? 

 Jenkins: No. Absolutely. 

 Gigot: One of the other problems we are seeing at the Fukushima plant is, it is the rods that were not operating at the time of the accident that created a problem. We have at a lot of American plants similar fuel rods because we don't know what to do yet with the nuclear waste. We were going to build the nuclear waste site at Yucca Mountain in Nevada, but it has been blocked by politics, particularly Democratic Sen. Harry Reid. 

 Jenkins: that's right. There are 104 of these waste sites around the country, just like in Japan, these open pools of water, where the spent fuel is kept and has been there for decades and will be there for decades. 

 Henninger: But we will remain in a global competition. China in the next 10 years plans to build 60 nuclear plants. 

 Gigot: You think that will happen in China or do you think there's a democratic counterweight in the country, Dan, who will be able to stop it? 

 Henninger: Yes. I think Harry Reid will be over there sitting on their backs. No, I think they will do it. And let's hope they know what they are doing. That's a lot of radiation. But you have to compete. You have to get your energy from somewhere, right? 

 Gigot: OK, all right, thank you all. 

Still ahead, the U.N. finally votes to act against Moammar Gadhafi. Why did it take so long? And where was President Obama? 

 Gigot: At long last, the U.N. Security Council on Thursday approved a resolution authorizing military intervention in Libya. The vote and U.S. support for the measure came weeks after President Obama first declared that Libyan strongman Moammar Gadhafi must go. 

We are back with Dan Henninger and Kim Strassel. And joining us, Wall Street Journal editorial board member Matt Kaminski. 

Is it too late, Matt? 

 Kaminski: They really cut it close. You have troops, Gadhafi, about 100 kilometers from Benghazi, the stronghold of the rebels. They waited until the absolute last minute. At least they did something. It wasn't really thanks to the U.S. It was the French and Arab League that pushed us here. By doing it so late, they made it much harder for this to succeed. Even a week ago, you had a no-fly zone, if we had recognized the rebel government, and if we had perhaps armed the rebel government, this would have been easier to accomplish. Now I think you will see it will stop Gadhafi. But you may end up with a stalemate where Gadhafi says, it is a cease-fire, let's talk. You may have a divided and very messy Libya. 

 Gigot: What do you think changed the dynamics, Dan? Why did the U.N. finally decide to move? 

 Henninger: They finally decided to move because, as one of the rebel commanders in Benghazi said, the blood of the international community is on their hands. They were sitting there ready to die and get hammers. And I think they just--the international community finally said, it has gone too far and we have to do something. The people are sitting in their homes watching it on television. 

 Gigot: Hold on. It was the potential for political embarrassment-- 

 Henninger: Oh, yes. 

 Gigot: --for what would have been a massacre? 

 Henninger: Yes, I think so. 

 Gigot: Just something as simple as that? 

 Henninger: It is something as cynical as that, Paul. You have to ask yourself, why has it taken the United States so long to act? 

 Gigot: That's the question I want to ask. Why do you think that is? 

 Henninger: Because I think they have an ideological aversion to the United States acting on its own. There are at least three--

 Gigot: So this is a worldview? This is a view of American power in the world? 

 Henninger: It is a worldview articulated by Democratic foreign policy intellectuals for at least 10 years. Three of them are serving in high positions in this administration. And they are on television right now. Susan Rice, the ambassador to the United Nations, Ivo Daalder, our ambassador to NATO, and James Steinberg, who is the deputy secretary of state, together wrote a document in 2008 saying the United States should be willing to have others lead alongside them or ahead of them in an international crisis. 

 Gigot: This is interesting. This is very different from the last Democratic administration, the Bill Clinton administration. Madeline Albright, the secretary of state, called the United States, famously, "the indispensable nation." What happened to Democratic foreign-policy elites between the Clinton administration and the Obama administration, Matt? 

 Kaminski: Bush happened. They are very much obsessed and that, for them, is the reference point--is the Iraq war-- 

 Gigot: Reaction for or against? 

 Kaminski: It's the reaction against Bush. But the Arab League has forgotten about Bush. They are the ones calling for us to intervene. The Europeans are desperate for us to do something. It is only we, in America, who are still worried about how will they react. It used to be a saying: Blame America first. But I think this crowd is much more embarrassed about America, they're embarrassed about American power. 

 Gigot: Oh, oh. That's a serious charge. They are embarrassed about American power? They think American power in the world is counterproductive? Is that what you are saying? And that's why we need to wrap it in like we are Gulliver and Lilliput with all the limitations of the Arab League and the permission of the Italians and the French and the U.N.? 

 Kaminski: Look at the way they behaved here. Even after this U.N. resolution passed, we were the ones trying to stand back. There was no comment from the White House on it. It was, "Oh, no, they are the ones leading. We are another country, like Qatar or Italy, that is going to take part in the effort."

 Gigot: Do we have to push now, Dan? Do we have to push Gadhafi all the way out of Tripoli? Now, we are committed. The United States, United Nations have said--well, the president already said Gadhafi has to go. And now the U.N. says, we will try to give you the means, short of ground troops. It will have to be air, but we can do that. Are we going to let a stalemate happen? Can we afford strategically to let a stalemate happen? 

 Henninger: I don't see how we can, Paul. Basically, what you would be talking about is a partition in Libya, where the rebels hold Benghazi in the east and Gadhafi gets the west in Tripoli. It would still give Gadhafi access to oil revenue. If he gets the oil revenue, he will behave in a very bad way. We have gotten to the point where Gadhafi does have to go because he owes nobody anything, and he will get back into the terror business. 

 Gigot: Kim, you wrote a column this week called "President 'Present,' " which is a reference, of course, to his many votes of being "present" when he was in the Illinois state Senate. You suggest there is a political calculation on the president's passivity on some of these big issues like Libya and the budget fight here and in Washington. Explain that. 

 Strassel: I agree with Dan that there is an ideology that is pushing this. But I do think it is overhung by a political calculation. That is this administration is petrified of being compared to the Bush administration, the warmongers in the Bush administration. They look out there--they already have many on the professional left who are howling that Obama might take them into another war. They are worried that the public doesn't have appetite for any military conflict. This is a White House that is very focused on 2012. They want to keep the president's approval rating in the high 40s, get him through until such a time as he has a GOP candidate. Then he can go into opposition campaign mode and that's when he is best. 

 Gigot: But, Kim, there are lots who are supporting the no-fly zone and more action in Libya. 

 Strassel: Yes, they are. But this White House--but, again, it's not just on--look at them across the board, not just on Libya, not just on Bahrain. Look at them on the budget, on trade deals and on the Japan nuclear crisis. It was only late this week the president finally said something. They do not want to touch anything controversial right now. 

 Gigot: OK, Kim. 

Libya is not the only place influence is lacking these days. When we come back, trouble expands to the gulf, with Saudi Arabia spurning U.S. requests to stay out of Bahrain. What their intervention says about the threat there, and what it signals about America's new place in the world. 

 Gigot: Libya is not the only place where the U.S. leadership vacuum is being felt. Saudi Arabia this week sent military forces into Bahrain to help put down an uprising by the majority Shiites against the Sunni monarchy. They did so despite U.S. advice not to intervene. 

We are back with Dan Henninger, Holman Jenkins and Matt Kaminski. 

So, Dan, why did the Saudis ignore the U.S. entreaties? 

 Henninger: I think they ignored U.S. entreaties because they saw the United States was, in fact, being passive. They had no reason to hold back. It is a very bad sign that they did this. They not only intervened. Later in the week, the Bahraini army and the Saudis teed off on the protesters pretty hard. 

 Gigot: They arrested the leaders of the opposition for-- 

 Henninger: But physically, they hammered them. Days later, in Yemen, the Yemeni government killed 31 protesters. I think what we are seeing here is that any of the uprisings, any of the movements are going to discover that, in the wake of Libya, they will get hit hard by their governments. They feel no constraints from the United States. 

 Gigot: The U.S. has big interests, Holman, in Bahrain. The Fifth Fleet is there. 

 Jenkins: They have big interests in Saudi Arabia too. These are friendly governments. Part of the issue here is, if we devoted more efforts to destabilizing the governments we don't like, like Iran and Libya, we might have a little more room to let our friends do the things they feel they need to do for their security, as unpleasant and unattractive as it is. 

 Gigot: The lesson, I think, that the Saudis are drawing, Matt, is if you are a friend of the United States, as in Egypt or Tunisia, you fall. If you are an enemy of the United States, such as Iran or Libya, you survive as long as you are ruthless enough in putting down unrest. 

 Kaminski: I think it is exactly right. This is an indictment of U.S. presidential leadership, or lack thereof in the region. But the other important issue is for Saudi Arabia, Bahrain is a proxy war. And it is becoming a proxy conflict with Iran. Bahrain is a majority Shiite principality or nation. 

 Gigot: As is Iran. Iran is a majority Shiite nation. 

 Kaminski: And the Saudis see--exactly. And the Saudis see Iran as a great threat and this rising regional power. They saw Iran take over Lebanon through Hezbollah. They saw Iran take over Gaza through Hamas. And there were some reports, unconfirmed, that there were Hezbollah fighters among the protesters in Bahrain. 

 Gigot: We don't know. There are mixed reports about to what degree the Iranians are playing a role in Bahrain. There is an awful lot of middle-class people who are not radical Shiites who are participating in this uprising in Bahrain. 

 Kaminski: Of course. Of course. But I'm just trying to sort of see it from the Saudi point of view. That's what they see. and that's their worry. It is unfortunate because this is not the way we want this Arab spring-- 

 Gigot: Have the Saudis concluded therefore that the United States will not stop an Iranian nuclear weapon and will not stop Iranian adventurism in the Middle East? If that the conclusion that--if you read between the lines, they have reached? 

 Henninger: I think it is a fair conclusion based on what we have been saying in this program today. What has happened in the Middle East shows that the United States has a tendency not to want to intervene in these situations. Certainly, they have an aversion to using military force. 

Believe me, Paul, this is a very dangerous moment. If people like the Saudis or the Iranians or the Chinese conclude that the United States has got all of its weapons holstered, they are going to start moving forward on their own. You are putting a lot of dangerous forces in motion. 

 Gigot: Does this mean, Holman, that this Arab spring we have been reading so much about and following is--could be ending? 

 Jenkins: The turnaround in events in Libya may extend it a bit more. People are beginning to see now that maybe the Americans and the West will come in on our side. So it increases the uncertainty, but it increases the potential for some of these groups to continue to push. 

 Gigot: You get--actually acting against the dictator in Libya may enhance the chances for reform and democracy in pro American regimes in the Middle East? 

 Jenkins: I should think so. 

 Gigot: And do you agree with Dan about the Iranian conclusion by the Saudis? 

 Jenkins: There is no reason for our allies in the region to give our policy the benefit of the doubt right now. They need to do what they have to do because they are not going to trust us. 

 Kaminski: And one great danger is when countries start freelancing in the absence of American leadership. That's far more dangerous than having America assert itself as it has. 

 Gigot: Every country starts to look out for itself. 

OK, we have to take one more break. When we come back, "Hits and Misses" of the week. 

 Gigot: Time now for "Hits and Misses" of the week. Dan, first to you. 

 Henninger: Well, Paul, on Tuesday, 88% of the voters in Miami-Dade County voted to recall Republican Mayor Carlos Alvarez. They just elected him in 2008. What was his problem? After getting elected, he promptly raised property taxes an average of 13%. He handed out pay raises to public employees. And this is in a county with an unemployment rate of 12%. I think basically what the voters said, "Mr. Mayor, you are out of here. We are suffering." And I'd like to see this trend spread to the rest of the country. 

 Gigot: Eighty-eight percent? 

 Henninger: Yes. 

 Gigot: All right, Kim? 

 Strassel: A miss to Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, who this week refused to hold a vote on a Republican amendment to block the EPA's new crushing carbon regulations. He had to stop it because it looked as though enough Democrats would defect to the Republicans to pass this thing. A big embarrassment to the Obama administration. So what you have here is an EPA that first undermined Congress by passing rules that should have been done by legislation, and now a majority leader who is unilaterally stopping those elected officials from reining in the EPA. Bad news all around. 

 Gigot: All right. That's news, Kim, thanks. And Matt? 

 Kaminski: Paul, the NFL and its players are facing off and possibly headed toward a strike. But I want to give a hit to Minnesota Vikings running back Adrian Peterson. Peterson, who makes $11 million a year, compared playing in the NFL to modern-day slavery. I think this absolves us from really caring about this dispute between millionaires and billionaires until they resolve it next fall. 

 Gigot: I think you hold out for the $11 million contract. 

OK, That's it for this week's edition of "The Journal Editorial Report." Thanks to my panel and to all of you for watching. I'm Paul Gigot. We hope to see you right here next week. 