JUPITER, Fla.—For a professional athlete, Brad Emaus is a little bit doughy. He is barely 6 feet tall. He runs at a plodding pace. He doesn't hit for much power. And his next highlight-reel defensive play will be his first.

"He's not glamorous to look at," said J.P. Ricciardi, the Mets' head of pro scouting.

What Emaus does well is this: He gets on base. He works the count. He wears pitchers down. He avoids fundamental mistakes. He does these things as well as anyone on the Mets. And for that, he will likely be their starting second baseman.

The release of Luis Castillo last week left Emaus, 24, as the front-runner for the job. And the Mets' decision to send Justin Turner to minor-league camp Wednesday makes it all but official: Emaus will start at second. Daniel Murphy will be the utility infielder.

No one with the Mets is saying that publicly just yet. But no one is denying it, either. General manager Sandy Alderson pointed to the fact that Emaus started at second in Wednesday's exhibition game against the St. Louis Cardinals, while Murphy started at third. "I think the lineup card is probably as revealing as anything I can say," Alderson said.

When Emaus makes his major-league debut on April 1, he will be among the most anonymous starting position players in baseball.

He was assigned No. 68 for his uniform this spring, the kind of high number usually reserved for players with no shot of making the team (he plans to wear No. 4 once the regular season starts). His initial locker location put him next to players who have long since been sent back to the minors.

But Emaus is not a surprise pick for the job. And his selection is indicative of the traits that Alderson and his staff will value as they look to remake the roster in the years ahead.

The Toronto Blue Jays drafted Emaus in the 11th round in 2007, when Ricciardi was their general manager. But because he had yet to be called up to the majors, he became eligible for the Rule 5 draft in December. At Ricciardi's urging, the Mets took him.

"I think the appealing thing for us is, he sees a lot of pitches," Ricciardi said. "As we go forward, that's the type of team we'd like to have, guys that do get on base, guys that grind out walks."

In 87 games with Triple-A Las Vegas last season, Emaus reached base in 39.5% of his plate appearances, the 10th-highest mark in the Pacific Coast League. He walked just as often as he struck out. 

And while there are no statistics available on how many pitches he saw per plate appearance, his plate discipline is an asset the Mets need.

The Mets swung at 31% of all pitches outside the strike zone in 2010, according to FanGraphs.com, the sixth-highest mark in baseball. It was no coincidence that their team on-base percentage (.314) ranked just 25th in the majors.

Emaus may not be a prodigious hitter, but he takes pride in making pitchers work for outs. "It's an advantage to our entire offense and defense in the sense that, the more pitches you get out of that guy, the more quickly he's going to get out of the game," Emaus said. "He might get tired or throw some pitches over the plate to the other guys."

The only concern with Emaus is that, for as much as the Mets like his track record in the minors, he hasn't done much to impress them this spring. Alderson and Ricciardi may be wary of making too much of small sample sizes, but Collins wants to see Emaus' ability for himself.

After going 0 for 3 Wednesday against the Cardinals, Emaus is batting just .216 this spring (8 for 37), though he also has six walks. He will start at second in the majority of the Mets' seven remaining spring games. But Collins said he might not name an Opening Day starter until the last day or two of camp.

"I want to see, when he's out there every day, is he going to be able to make the adjustments?" Collins said. "How's he going to handle it when their pitching starts to make adjustments to him? I want to see what kind of a defender he's going to be."

Collins may not be enamored with Emaus, but he has little choice. Murphy's defense is still a work in progress, to put it politely. And though Collins threw a minor-leaguer named Luis Hernandez into the mix a couple weeks ago, the front office doesn't view him as a serious candidate.

Perhaps the most revealing comment Wednesday came from Turner, who said as he cleared out his locker in Port St. Lucie, "I'm sure Brad is feeling pretty good about himself right now."