 Boston 

Some top frequent fliers these days have fur coats, floppy ears and whiskers. And sometimes the rigors of air travel can cause serious injury and even death. 

With 2,000 pets traveling through Logan International Airport, the Fire Rescue Department has outfitted two ambulances to respond to pet medical emergencies, part of its unique year-old "Passengers with Paws" program. Paramedics, firefighters, state police troopers and even airline baggage handlers receive special training in bandaging pet wounds, safely handling dogs and cats and giving CPR to patients as small as 20 pounds.

"We tagged it as an emerging customer demographic," says  Robert Donahue, chief of the Massachusetts Port Authority Fire Rescue Department. Despite hefty fees airlines now charge, more people are taking their pets with them on vacation, buying pets from breeders in other parts of the country and using service animals. "For the customer—the dog—we want to provide compassionate services," Chief Donahue says.

Animals on airplanes face all kinds of stresses and strains—from temperature changes to dehydration to self-inflicted wounds if they panic and try to chew or claw out of cages. A few pets get lost escaping from plastic crates and kennels. 

"Transporting animals truly can be done more safely," says  Ed Freni, aviation director at the Massport, which operates Logan Airport.

Last year, 39 animals died while in the care of airlines, up 70% from 2009, according to the U.S. Department of Transportation. Thirteen animals were injured and five were lost, DOT said. Delta Air Lines Inc. had the largest increase, with 16 deaths and six injuries in 2010 compared to six deaths and no injuries in 2009. 

A Delta spokeswoman said that in recent months, the airline has worked to enhance handling procedures and ensure regular training for employees responsible for transporting animals. The company is also working with local animal-rescue groups to identify best practices.

In a classroom at Logan's main fire station, about 30 airport workers attended a class last week led by  Amy Breton, a veterinary technician and Meeko, a seven-year-old mixed-breed dog. A veteran of the training classes, Meeko sat patiently while bandaged about the head, seemingly playing to the audience with a sad, even sick, face. When Ms. Breton started to demonstrate the proper way to turn a dog onto its back for CPR, Meeko anticipated the maneuver and simply rolled over, feet in the air.

The class teaches proper handling of animals, such as safe ways to muzzle dogs or apply a leash in an emergency, or get a pet out of a crate without any opportunity for an escape. (Tip it upright and work a slip-lead type leash around the animal's neck.) 

Ms. Breton told airport workers to use comforting words with pets, but avoid trying to make friends with them. Too often, pets escape when transport kennels are opened by a well-meaning worker trying to walk the dog, or animals are so frightened that even the most docile pet could bite. 

First-responders were shown how to take the temperature and heart rate of dogs and cats, and told what normal ranges are for animals at rest and pets that are moving or nervous. CPR is performed while the dog is on its back with chest compressions and blowing into the nose. 

Airport workers are encouraged to sound the alarm when pets look distressed, aren't responsive, don't appear healthy enough for flying, or have already bent bars on crates, broken their own nails or teeth trying to escape, or are drooling excessively. Pink gums are a sign of good health; other colors mean trouble and pets shouldn't fly.

"Time spent waiting is a huge issue," said Ms. Breton. It can increase thirst and lead to dehydration.

Animal deaths that occurred during transportation on U.S. airlines:

Because of dangers from hot airport ramps and cargo bays, many airlines refuse to accept animals as checked-baggage shipments if the temperature is above 85 degrees. Brachycephalic dogs—short-nosed breeds like pugs and English bull dogs—are particularly susceptible to overheating and breathing issues. The DOT says about 60% of dog deaths aboard airlines are brachycephalic dogs.

Planning for Logan's program started after two 2008 pet incidents. Firefighters responded to a dog in cardiac arrest and tried basic life support, but had no training and no equipment for dealing with the pet emergency. In addition, by law, ambulances can't transport an animal. The state police canine team ended up sending a vehicle to take the dog to an animal hospital, but the dog died. 

The other incident involved a show dog that escaped when a gust of wind blew his carrier off the baggage belt at the plane's cargo bay. State police cruisers with loud speakers patrolled the airport calling out the dog's name, and several pilots reporting sightings on the airfield. The dog was captured, but not until several days later.

So far, airport officials say there haven't been any escapes since the program started because airline workers are better trained in how to handle and open dog crates. Paramedics have responded to four dog emergency calls, all involving respiratory distress in which oxygen was administered. Two dogs were taken to animal hospitals; two were "treated and released." All survived. 

Logan's emergency responders are equipped with animal control and medical gear, such as long snare poles, gloves, muzzles, oxygen masks designed to fit animals and bandages for dogs and cats.

The equipment and training have also come in handy when pets come to the airport to greet returning family members and escape, or when animals wander to the airport from the wild. An otter turned up at Terminal E last week and evaded animal control officials and firefighters for hours before disappearing.

The program is run in conjunction with the Massachusetts Emergency Management Agency, which provides vets to train workers, and the Animal Rescue League of Boston, which now parks a pet ambulance at the airport to transport sick animals to a veterinary hospital.

On Thursday, Selina Melski, her husband Terry and their Parson Russell terrier, Finnegan, arrived in Boston on a United Airlines flight from California. When baggage handlers delivered the dog kennel to the oversized baggage delivery area, a hungry dog was excited to see his owners.

"He goes with us everywhere we go," said Mrs. Melski said. "He's a great traveler."

 Write to  Scott McCartney at middleseat@wsj.com 