 Spyker Cars, owner of financially distressed Saab Automobile, said it secured short-term funding through a €30 million ($44.4 million) convertible loan agreement with Gemini Investment Fund, and it hopes to restart production within a week.  

Saab will also make a drawdown request to the European Investment Bank for €29.1 million, expected to be next week, bringing the total funds secured to €59.1 million. 



 Chrysler Group said rising vehicle sales led to a small net profit of $116 million for the first quarter, the auto maker's first since exiting bankruptcy almost two years ago. Chrysler had reported a loss of $197 million in the first quarter of 2010.  

Separately, the auto maker gave the details of a plan to raise financing from a group of banks to pay off its government loans to lower its interest costs and reduce its ties to the U.S. and Canadian governments. 



Honda told U.S. dealers it will stop taking orders for vehicles made in Japan until further notice and delayed the introduction by at least a month of a restyled CR-V cross-over vehicle because of parts shortages stemming from the March 11 earthquake.

Honda also restricted paint colors on models that contain a pigment made at a damaged plant in Japan. The auto maker reiterated that production would likely be constrained until near year-end.



New auto sales in Japan posted their biggest-ever drop in April, falling 51% from a year earlier in April to an all-time low of 108,824 vehicles, as a parts shortage caused by the March 11 earthquake and tsunami cut into production of vehicles and reduced supplies of new vehicles to dealerships, the Japan Automobile Dealers Association said. 



 General Motors has stepped up its lobbying in Washington in recent months, U.S. records show, as Detroit's two rescued auto makers unwind their ties to the government and return to pursuing their own interests—which sometimes are at odds with the Obama administration. 



 The International Civil Aviation Organization said it wants to make the digital flight data and cockpit voice recorders of commercial aircraft easier to find after an accident.  



Air India cancelled about 88% of its flights as pilots accusing the airline of unfair wage practices continue to strike for a sixth day, said a spokesman at the national carrier, adding that all the cancelled flights were on domestic routes. 



 Commerzbank said first-quarter net profit rose 41% to €1 billion ($1.48 billion) from a year earlier, helped by contributions from all its main operations, lower provisions for bad loans and a gain made on measures aimed at boosting capital.  

More than a dozen U.S. banks have raised dividends so far in the second quarter of this year, on top of the 39 financial institutions that raised payouts earlier in 2011, after nearly 300 had reduced or discontinued their dividends since 2008, saving the industry nearly $100 billion in shareholder payouts, according to boutique investment bank Keefe, Bruyette & Woods.



Siemens on Wednesday is set to report a significant increase in net profit on a one-time gain from the sale of a minority stake in nuclear-power venture Areva NP, while its sales pipeline is set to benefit from the continuing rebound across its business lines. 



Gazprom, the world's biggest producer of natural gas, is preparing to drill its first production well at its massive Sakhalin-3 gas project in Russia's Far East this year as part of its accelerated plans for the project, a company executive said. 



 French retail-to-luxury group PPR said it launched a friendly all-cash offer for Volcom that values the U.S.-based sportswear group at $607.5 million, its first major move to bolster its sports brands alongside Puma. 



 Sovereign wealth funds from Singapore and the Middle East are in advanced talks to acquire shares in Swiss commodities giant Glencore International's dual listing on the London and Hong Kong stock exchanges, according to people familiar with the situation.  

Danish food ingredients and enzymes manufacturer Danisco said its board has decided unanimously to back the raised takeover offer by chemical giant DuPont. 

 Community Health Systems boosted its hostile takeover offer for U.S. hospital chain Tenet Healthcare by 20% to about $4.07 billion in cash, the latest move in a contentious fight.  



Terex Industrial Holding, a unit of U.S.-based crane and industrial-machinery maker Terex, said it has offered €884 million ($1.31 billion), to buy Germany's Demag Cranes. 



Arch Coal agreed to acquire International Coal Group for $3.4 billion in a deal it said would make it the second-largest U.S. producer of the coal used in steel production. 



 Teva Pharmaceutical Industries has agreed to buy Cephalon for $6.8 billion, building its branded and specialty-pharmaceuticals business as it seeks growth to meet its 2015 revenue targets.  



Actelion dismissed criticism from investor Elliott Advisors, which bashed management for having lost a legal battle that could cost Europe's largest biotech more than $500 million and renewed its call for a board overhaul, urging investors to back its proposals at this week's shareholder meeting. 



Dutch mail and express company TNT reported a 14% decline in first-quarter net profit to €123 million ($182.2 million) due to falling earnings at its mail business, just a couple of weeks after it gave a profit warning for its express business. 

Google's collection of location information from millions of mobile devices and personal computers is "extremely valuable" to the company's future business, according to an email written by a Google product manager last year. 



 Facebook's business is growing faster than it forecast several months ago, raising the stakes for an initial public offering as early as spring of next year, said people who have seen Facebook's recent financial information.  



Magazine publisher Time reached a deal with Apple to make all its iPad editions free for print subscribers, marking a break in the impasse between publishers and Apple and lending support to Time's contention that it's business-as-usual after the ouster of its CEO.



 Research In Motion unveiled the latest iteration of its BlackBerry Bold smartphone, which will have a touchscreen as well as a keyboard and added video chat to its PlayBook tablet.  



French utility giant GDF Suez said its first-quarter total revenue rose 6.9% to €25.5 billion ($37.8 billion), while earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization rose 6.1% from a year earlier to €5.5 billion. 