TOBRUQ, Libya - Barely a hundred yards from a checkpoint manned by two sleepy rebel soldiers here,  Abdelaziz al Kahashi, a burly man in a military jacket, looked up in disgust when a questioner mistook him for a supporter of Libya's month-long uprising against Col. Moammar Gadhafi's rule.

"We're all with Moammar Gadhafi, he is my leader. We are here to defend our country," Mr. Kahashi, 28, proclaimed as he stood on the edge of the road leading to this key port city from Ajdabiya, the rebel stronghold that was seized by regime forces on Tuesday, in a blow that threatens to snuff out the country's young revolution.

Then, Mr. Kahashi waved a passing pickup truck. One of the two men inside, also dressed in a camouflage jacket, winced at the Ajdabiya road. "Gadhafi will always be our leader, and the only forces that will be coming here from there are our troops," he scoffed, and proceeded to question the reporter about the purpose of his visit.

As the revolutionary movement in Libya suffers setback after setback under relentless assault by Col. Gadhafi's forces, emboldened regime loyalists who had vanished in the rebels' eastern Libyan heartland are coming out of the woodwork — undermining rebel zones from within.

This shift in momentum is making it much easier for Col. Gadhafi to achieve battlefield successes, as ordinary citizens switch sides to back the expected winner of what has become a bloody civil war.

In some eastern Libyan cities, revolutionary graffiti have been whitewashed by residents eager to avoid punishment from returning regime troops. At the intersection where the Ajdabiya road leads into Tobruq, a city of 130,000 that was one of the first to shake off Col. Gadhafi's rule last month, the wild-haired cartoon of the Libyan leader that the rebels had daubed on the wall was repainted overnight with the green banner of the regime.

Following the seizure of Ajdabiya, which sits on the strategic crossroads leading into the rebels' de-facto capital of Benghazi to the north, and to Tobruq in the east, Col. Gadhafi's son Saif-el-Islam has pledged to complete the military operations against the rebels within 48 hours.

"Yes, people are afraid. We anticipate Gadhafi to come any moment," says  Tawfiq Rajab, a 21-year-old laborer who lives in Tobruq.

The regime's forward march accelerates as the United Nations continued debating proposals for establishing in Libya a no-fly zone , a plan that would deny Col. Gadhafi the use of air power to bomb his own cities.

In Ajdabiya, a new series of air strikes and shelling killed civilians and destroyed entire neighborhoods Wednesday, residents said. Col. Gadhafi's warplanes, Navy ships and Grad missile launchers pounded the city after his soldiers, who came under hit-and-run attacks from the remaining rebels on Tuesday night, retreated to a cordon on Ajdabiya's outskirts.

On Wednesday, the regime's forces firmly controlled the road leading from Ajdabiya to Benghazi, shooting at anyone attempting to travel that way, witnesses said. The only way out left for the trapped civilians was a 400-kilometer road cutting across the desert and leading to Tobruq and the Egyptian border.

"My kids haven't slept for two days because of bombardments," said  Ahmed Ali, a 55-year-old day laborer, who left Ajdabiya at noon for Tobruq. "Gadhafi has adopted a scorched earth policy in the city."

Still nervous after the escape, Mr. Ali said he had a message for President Barack Obama: "Tell Obama I'm pleading with him - launch just one air strike here. Prove that Gadhafi was wrong when he said that America only cares about business interests, not human rights."

Pulling up right behind in a minivan packed with possessions and children, 43-year-old  Ali Moussa Mohammed said he fled Ajdabiya after two of his neighbors were killed by Col. Gadhafi's bombs Wednesday morning. "He's just bombing us at random," he said.

Control of Ajdabiya could allow Col. Gadhafi's forces to cut off the rebels' vital supply and communications lines at the Egyptian border, encircling the rebel heartland.

Though such fears have prompted the exodus of foreign aid workers and journalists from eastern Libya, lawyer  Nasib al-Haboni, one of five members of the revolutionary committee that's governing Tobruq, insisted that his city had nothing to worry about.

"Gadhafi cannot come here. He doesn't have enough fuel, he doesn't have enough tanks, and his people just fight for the money — while our people fight for freedom," Mr. al-Haboni said.

A rebel soldier who manned an improvised checkpoint at the Ajdabiya's road's end in Tobruq,  Nasr Mohamed Ramadan, explained that the rebels have prepared hidden ambushes all along the way, in case Col. Gadhafi's forces tried to push through.

"We're sure that we can protect the city," he said. "We have no fear except the fear of God."

Though Tobruq may be a harder target than Ajdabiya, revolutionary leaders in that city were making similarly bullish predictions as recently as Monday - a day before rebel lines collapsed in less than an hour.

Refugees streaming into Tobruq from Ajdabiya on Wednesday said they saw no visible sign of rebel defenses along the strategic route. "There was no-one on that road," said  Hajji Jibril Zwei, a 55-year-old who escaped with 12 relatives crammed into a Toyota pickup truck. "Not Gadhafi forces and not the rebels."



 Write to  Yaroslav Trofimov at yaroslav.trofimov@wsj.com 