Two New York-area police officers were killed in separate incidents over the weekend, one shot by a fellow officer and the other pushed down a staircase by a violent suspect, authorities said.

On Long Island, Geoffrey Breitkopf, a 12-year veteran of the Nassau County Police Department, was shot and killed by a Metropolitan Transit Authority officer after a tense standoff with a 21-year-old suspect who lunged at officers with a pair of knives, police said.

The suspect was shot and killed late Saturday. Minutes later, Mr. Breitkopf, a member of the elite Bureau of Special Operations, was fatally shot as he responded to the scene in Massapequa Park, police said.

According to Nassau County Police Commissioner Lawrence Mulvey, Mr. Breitkopf had arrived in an unmarked police cruiser and was in plain clothes when he began walking toward the scene holding a rifle. Mr. Mulvey characterized the shooting as accidental and said a full investigation is under way.

He said it was unlikely the MTA officer, who wasn't identified, would face charges but investigators were still trying to determine what led him to perceive Mr. Breitkopf as a threat.

"We would think he determined there was danger afoot and misconstrued the circumstances," the commissioner said.

Mr. Breitkopf, 40, was shot in the right side of his chest and was declared dead at about 9:15 p.m. at Nassau University Medical Center.

The confrontation had begun an hour earlier when the MTA officer, who worked at a nearby Long Island Rail Road station, responded to a report of a man with knives who had been menacing motorists and pedestrians.

Anthony DiGeronimo was confronted by police on Front Street before running into his home on Fourth Avenue, where he lived with his parents, police said. 

Police said Mr. DiGeronimo made his way through a hallway in the home and barricaded himself in a back bedroom. 

Officers followed Mr. DiGeronimo into the home and evacuated his parents, Mr. Mulvey said. They then spent several minutes trying to convince him to come out of the room, after which he suddenly opened the door and lunged at police officers with knives in both hands. Two of the officers fired a total of seven shots, killing Mr. DeGeronimo.

Mr. Mulvey described the suspect as wearing leather "satanic-like garb and a mask," and said he had several knives attached to his outfit. On his Facebook profile and on a separate website, Mr. DiGeronimo described himself as a "Theistic Satanist" and an "anarchist." 

Several of his friends posted missives of "Rest in Peace," along with angry messages about the police involved in the shooting. 

Police said their only previous contact with Mr. DiGeronimo was questioning him during a drug investigation. He was never charged with a crime, police said.

The MTA in a statement offered condolences to the slain officer's family and said it was cooperating with Nassau County police and the district attorney in the investigation of the accidental shooting. 

Mr. Mulvey said MTA police routinely assist Nassau police and vice-versa. "This is a tough job sometimes," Mr. Mulvey said. He called it a "tremendous tragedy not only for us but I can imagine what the [MTA officer] is going through."

In Brooklyn, New York Police Department officer Alain Schaberger, 42, was killed at about 5 a.m. Sunday while attempting to arrest a suspect in a domestic violence case, authorities said.

Mr. Schaberger was allegedly pushed by George Villanueva, 40, over a porch railing and fell about nine feet onto concrete pavement on St. Marks Place in Boerum Hill, police said. He broke his neck in the fall and was pronounced dead at Lutheran Hospital.

Mr. Villanueva, who was tasered twice while allegedly resisting arrest, was eventually subdued. He was charged with first-degree murder late Sunday. He has 28 prior arrests, mostly for robbery and burglary, police said. 

—Andrew Grossman contributed to this article.

 Write to  Tamer El-Ghobashy at Tamer.El-Ghobashy@wsj.com 