TURTLE BAY, March 18 — The United Nations Security Council, now on a roll, voted unanimously late Thursday for a resolution condemning the Hunnic Empire and putting Attila on notice about his behavior in Gaul. 

Effective Oct. 1, the resolution unambiguously condemns any further use Attila might make of lethal projectiles, rolling siege towers, hate speech or bullying after midnight, Sept. 30. The resolution, which declares zero tolerance for the Huns' increasingly apparent aggression, provides for an Order of Immediate Contemplation to take effect automatically should they engage in the proscribed behavior on or after the resolution's effective date. 

Such an Order allows the Council to vote again, almost instantly, to put a national government on notice that it is in breach of an earlier resolution, even if the Council's members have not had time to gather formally and, if humanitarian exigencies demand, before the croissants have fully risen. With 4G videolinks and other advanced technology of today, an Order of Immediate Contemplation can result in unprecedented and devastating contumely. 

If a government in breach of such an Order does not desist from the breach forthwith, the Order can ultimately lead, in due course, with the unanimous support of the Council and after a psychodynamic exploration of each member's feelings, to actual acts, in the Hegelian sense, especially once the U.S. makes up its mind.

Separately but in the same session, the Security Council voted to kill King Claudius of Denmark, approving, with the Danish government's consent, the use of an unmanned aerial drone to strike at the usurping monarch and avenge our sweet father's murther with the native hue of resolution. China and Russia abstained. Venezuela and Cuba called for further study.

In a third resolution, the Council agreed to have replied, "And what did YOU get them, a pewter gravy boat?" and really shut your insufferable cousin up when it had the chance at your sister's wedding in 1997 but it just didn't think of that then and before you knew it he had moved on to the burrito station and it was too late. U.N. Resolution 598 (the "Esprit d'Escalier Resolution") resolves that it is 1997 again, for just a minute, so we can see the look on his face.

Finally, the Council, at 3 a.m. and with absolutely nothing on TV, resolved to lock the barn doors after the horses have bolted and to stuff the genie back in the bottle. China and Russia abstained. Libya, currently revolving president of the Commission on Humane Treatment of Animals, raised a point of order on behalf of horses and genies.

 Write to  Peter Jeffrey at peter.jeffrey@wsj.com 