DAVENPORT, Calif.—About the only thing you can't seem to get in this laid-back coastal town about an hour south of San Francisco is a straight answer.

It isn't that this community of around 500 residents doesn't try. Asked about Davenport's most prominent man-made feature, the five-story-high cement plant that dominates the landscape, they can only guess at why it shut down in 2009. 

Some people blame taxes, others blame the red-legged tree frog, and a couple of locals said the plant owned by Mexico's  Cemex SAB was regulated out of business—or was just in a slump. Some pause, take a deep breath and mention chromium 6, the chemical that made lawyer  Erin Brockovich famous. Some business owners just shrug. Either they don't know or don't want to talk about why the plant closed.

  Satish Sheth, vice president of environmental affairs at Cemex's U.S. division, said the decision was due to the "economic downturn."

After poking around Davenport for a week, it was clear to me that the community isn't that different from hundreds or even thousands of places across the U.S. that pinned their fortunes to a one-company existence. It also underscores how communities struggle to balance healthy living with the benefits that come from big industry.

Davenport could just as well be a coal-mining town or meatpacking hub. As politicians in Washington debate which regulations to keep and which to throw out, Davenport is trying to find its place in the new economy even as it holds on to the old economy, in the form of a cement plant.

No one, however, seemed to know for certain why it had closed or if it would ever open again.

The plant opened in 1906, and became a big part of local history, responsible for providing cement to the growing Bay Area. It produced much of the material used in the Golden Gate Bridge, employed as many as 300 people as recently as about 10 years ago, and layoffs were rare even when the plant suffered losses. 

Cemex bought the plant in 2005 and modernized it. The new owners were great corporate citizens. They donated to charity, paid for the bulk of Davenport's water and garbage service, and sent its own maintenance workers if Pacific School, the public elementary school, had a leaking roof, clogged plumbing or minor emergencies.

In 2008, though, the relationship between Cemex and government officials such as the Environmental Protection Agency and Santa Cruz County grew strained. The conflict centered around chromium 6. The chemical is believed to cause cancer and is especially dangerous to children.

That year, routine testing in and around the plant found high levels of chromium 6: eight times the acceptable level at the school and 10 times at Davenport's fire station.

The cement plant was shut down, and the county spent nearly $500,000 testing and cleaning up the pollutant.

Even though the plant soon reopened, chromium 6 was the last straw for liberal-minded Davenport and bigger neighbor Santa Cruz. For decades, the cement plant's emissions had covered Davenport in dust. The EPA called the plant one of the worst emitters of mercury and carbon dioxide in the nation.

In 2009, critics kept pressing Cemex. New tests by regulators showed emissions had fallen to safe levels. Some people didn't believe the results or worried that the town had been exposed to years of contamination. Others thought the scare was overblown. There were debates about land contracts and a diesel spill that the company didn't report. 

Meanwhile, the number of workers at the plant dwindled to about 125. The cement market was tanking. Cemex was closing plants around the globe. In March 2010, Cemex announced it would suspend production at Davenport. A few weeks later, the plant was shut down for good.

From the outside, the plant still looks sparkling new, and its smokestacks and storage tanks are visible for miles.

In the wake of the closure, many local residents now promote the community as the forefront of a "slow coast" movement: coffee and surf shops, natural beauty, tomatoes and artichokes by the sea, and cattle in the coastal hills. They see Davenport as a respite from city life. Since more than half of the plant's workers came from out of town, Davenport has a deeper sense of community these days, these people say.

The owners and managers of the Whale City Bakery and Cafe and Arno's Grocery lament the loss of business that came from employees at the plant. Sales are down 50%. They hope the plant will reopen. Some aren't sure they can survive on the Highway 1 traffic and local spending alone. 

For them, there is hope. Pressed by U.S. corporations, the Obama administration has promised to review its regulations, including environmental rules aimed at protecting clean air and water. Maybe that will encourage Cemex to come back.

The cement industry is still struggling. Cemex reported a net loss of $4.54 billion in 2008, a small profit in 2009 and a $1.3 billion loss last year. Cemex is weighed down by debt following a series of acquisitions. Still, sales in the latest quarter were encouraging, also fueling hopes that an economic recovery might entice Cemex to revive the Davenport plant.

Rumors around Davenport are that Cemex plans to dismantle the Davenport plant, putting much of its machinery up for sale. Cemex declined to comment but said it has ruled out reopening the plant because it couldn't reach an agreement with local authorities on expanding the plant's quarry. Still, Cemex says it hasn't decided the plant site's fate.

Across America, similar questions are being asked. What risks are citizens willing to bear to keep jobs and revive their economies? Companies are wrestling with their own costs that go beyond the basics of doing business. For both sides, the answer seems to be knowing when it is time to move on.

 Write to  David Weidner at david.weidner@dowjones.com 