TOKYO—The Bank of Japan jumped into action Monday to temper the economic blow from the earthquake, tsunami and nuclear emergency that hit northern Japan, doubling the size of its asset-purchase program and pouring a record 15 trillion yen ($183.17 billion) into money markets to ease liquidity concerns. 

"What we were most concerned about was the possibility that increases in anxiety and risk-aversion moves would negatively affect the real economy, so we judged it appropriate to mainly boost purchases of risk assets," BOJ Gov. Masaaki Shirakawa said after the bank's policy board meeting, which was cut to one day from two because of the crisis. 

The board boosted its purchases of riskier financial assets, such as corporate debt, exchange-traded funds and real-estate investment trusts, by a total of 3.5 trillion yen. It also will buy an additional 1.5 trillion yen of government debt. 

That doubles the size of the central bank's asset-purchase facility—part of a temporary fund established on the bank's balance sheet—to 10 trillion yen. The BOJ also has a program under the fund to provide 30 trillion yen in three- and six-month loans at 0.1% interest. 

The BOJ's asset-purchase program is unusual among central banks since it includes riskier assets such as corporate bonds, exchange-traded funds and real-estate investment trusts. According to a BOJ statement, board member Miyako Suda voted against the move because she approved of buying risk assets, but not government debt. 

Responding to a reporter's question, Mr. Shirakawa said none of the board members considered the scale of Monday's expansion "shabby."

"We think we raised the size of risk-asset buying considerably," he said. 

With damage from the quake so geographically widespread, Mr. Shirakawa said "uncertainty over the economic outlook has become high." 

For the time being, "production is likely to decline and there is also concern that the sentiment of firms and households might deteriorate," he said.

But the BOJ maintained its optimistic view of the economy, saying it's "emerging from the current deceleration phase." 

The bank expects year-to-year changes in Japan's consumer price index to turn "slightly positive in the near future," though a planned revision to the base year in August could put some downward pressure on the index. 

Sufficient macroeconomic data on the quake's impact aren't available yet, so the BOJ will examine the fallout from the disaster more closely at its April meetings, Mr. Shirakawa said. 

The government praised the BOJ's moves Monday, with Finance Minister Yoshihiko Noda calling them "appropriate and prompt." Mr. Noda said he wants the BOJ to continue its close cooperation with the government. 

Not everyone was impressed, however.  Susumu Kato, chief Japan economist at Credit Agricole, said the BOJ should have been more aggressive. 

"The Bank of Japan's whole aim today was for an announcement effect to help calm markets, but there should have been a bigger expansion, by around 10 trillion yen or more, to have had that desired impact," he said. 

The bank left its unsecured overnight call loan rate unchanged in a range of 0.0%-0.1%. Economists say rates are already so close to zero that cutting them further wouldn't spark an increase in lending.

The enhanced asset-purchase program, initially launched in October, is designed to help in Japan's long battle against deflation. Even though the central bank for years has pushed rates in the financial markets to near-zero levels, banks have few customers interested in borrowing given the economy's general lethargy. 

In another move to keep monetary conditions accommodative, the BOJ pumped a record amount of cash into money markets before the meeting, offering same-day funds that effectively make money available immediately rather than after a settlement period. It was the BOJ's first same-day fund injection since last May. 

"The short-term market is a starting point of all financial and economic activities, so the bank judged that it's important to relieve any concerns regarding liquidity," Mr. Shirakawa said. 

He said the central bank will examine market conditions carefully and announce operations as needed from Tuesday. 

The central bank's purchase of three trillion yen of Japanese government bonds via a reverse repurchase agreement, its first such action since July, will start Wednesday. 

—Tatsuo Ito and Takashi Nakamichi contributed to this article.

 Write to  Megumi Fujikawa at megumi.fujikawa@dowjones.net 