TOKYO—Managing relations with China will be one of the top priorities for Japan's new Foreign Minister Takeaki Matsumoto, as a couple of months of relative calm between the two countries seems to be coming to an end.

Questions on China dominated the news conference Wednesday where Yukio Edano, the government's chief spokesman, announced Mr. Matsumoto was promoted from his deputy position to succeed Seiji Maehara, who stepped down abruptly Sunday on the news he had accepted donations from a foreign national in violation of Japan's campaign-fund laws.

Tokyo sees Beijing's behavior in the resource-rich areas in the East China Sea, where both nations assert territorial claims, as increasingly aggressive. 

Just before the conference, Tokyo had warned Beijing to keep away from disputed islands in the area after a Chinese fishing-patrol boat was seen entering waters nearby, Mr. Edano said. 

A collision in that same area in September between a Chinese fishing boat and a Japanese coast-guard vessel escalated bilateral tensions to levels not seen in years.

Mr. Edano said various Japanese agencies will increase cooperation to ensure sufficient surveillance there.

This was the second sighting in five days of a Chinese ship near the disputed islands: Senkaku to the Japanese; Diaoyu to the Chinese. 

In the months after September's clash, which led to the detention of a Chinese captain by Japan, Chinese ships entered the area repeatedly, but none had been spotted since January.

In a region where there is growing concern about sharp increases in China's military spending and capabilities, other neighbors of China are on guard over the actions of Chinese vessels. 

The Philippines last week deployed warplanes to another disputed area in the East China Sea after oil explorers reported harassment by Chinese patrol boats. 

Vietnam and South Korea both have complained to China in the past week or so about separate incidents involving its ships in sensitive areas.

The China-Japan relationship hasn't completely soured. The Chinese foreign ministry announced Monday that Premier Wen Jiabao will visit Japan in May for a three-way meeting that includes leaders of South Korea. 

But the perceived provocations come at a particularly inconvenient time for Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan, who is fighting for the survival of his administration in the face of a divided parliament.

His hardship deepened on Sunday as Mr. Maehara, a popular lawmaker previously seen as a leading candidate to succeed him, was forced out of office.

Mr. Maehara, the ruling party's leading foreign-policy expert, was known for his staunchly pro-American views and tough attitude toward neighboring countries—namely China and Russia—over territorial issues. Mr. Matsumoto was a close associate to Mr. Maehara, but his policy preferences aren't known.

Turning to news reports that China has started production from a long-disputed gas field in the East China Sea, Mr. Edano said at the conference that Japan had yet to verify the information.

"That a report with an attributable source had come out at all is regrettable," he added.

Those news reports Tuesday quoted a top official of China National Offshore Oil Corp. saying the state-run company already was producing oil from the field, known as Shirakaba in Japanese and Chunxiao in Chinese. 

This came after Tokyo protested to Beijing that a Chinese helicopter came close Monday to one of its destroyers, according to Japanese news reports, near the disputed field.

—Toko Sekiguchi  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Yuka Hayashi at yuka.hayashi@wsj.com 