  General Motors Co.
GM


0.28
%




 is replacing its head of product development, a move aimed at shoring up what Chief Executive  Dan Akerson has identified as a key trouble spot. 

The car maker plans to put a company insider in the role, said a person familiar with the matter, replacing product guru  Tom Stephens, who is moving into a new position. The transition is one of a series of recent executive shake-ups by the new CEO.

Mr. Stephens, who will remain a vice chairman, will take on the newly created role of global chief technology officer, where he will work to develop new automotive technology and oversee research and development, GM said Wednesday. GM is expected to name a replacement as soon as Thursday, the person familiar with the matter said.

Creating a more high-tech aura around GM has been a key goal for Mr. Akerson, a former telecom executive who sees technology—from fuel-saving features to in-car entertainment systems—as a key battleground in the global auto industry.

With the management moves, Mr. Akerson, who took over as CEO last fall, is beginning to put his stamp on the company.

On Tuesday, he installed a former telecom executive,  Linda Marshall, as head of GM's OnStar division, replacing  Chris Preuss after less than a year. Mr. Akerson had been vocal about his dissatisfaction with OnStar, which provides crash assistance, driving directions and other features.

Also Tuesday, GM announced that  Chris Perry, who had run the Chevrolet brand, would become head of U.S. marketing. Last month, the CEO created a global marketing position and moved former U.S. marketing chief  Joel Ewanick, who joined GM last year from Hyundai Motor Co., into the elevated role.

Mr. Stephens' successor as product chief—whose name GM wouldn't disclose—will take over at an important time for the auto maker. GM's vehicle lineup, particularly in the critical North American market, is among the most pressing issue facing the company this year and next. GM is looking to win U.S. market share and also enter new segments of the industry in growing markets outside the U.S.

Mr. Akerson is pushing the company to speed up vehicle development, worried that GM will face a gap in new vehicles this year and next. He acknowledged last week at the Detroit auto show that GM's product development is about a year behind schedule because of cost-cutting moves that led up to GM's government-funded bankruptcy reorganization in 2009.

Mr. Akerson's public acknowledgment of GM's product shortcomings brought to light what the company's top executives and new investors have been fretting about for months. In 2007 and 2008, as GM's financial distress increased, the company halted development of key vehicle programs, including a new line of full-sized pickup trucks and sport-utility vehicles, which are its most profitable products.

Mr. Stephens, in an interview last week, said GM faced no shortage of fresh vehicles, pointing to the coming Chevrolet Sonic subcompact car, a convertible version of the Chevrolet Camaro and a new compact Buick called the Verano.

The executive changes come after more than two years of instability in the upper ranks of GM.

The auto maker has had four CEOs in the last two years, and all of its top executives have either left the company or been shuffled to other jobs in the same period.

Mr. Stephens, who has worked at GM for 42 years, is the only top executive remaining from the tenure of former CEO  Rick Wagoner, who was forced out in 2008 by the Obama administration as a condition of GM receiving federal aid.

Mr. Akerson's predecessor, former  AT&T Inc.
T


-0.85
%




 chief  Edward E. Whitacre Jr., cleared out much of GM's top ranks when he assumed the CEO role in December 2009, then left himself the following September.

Mr. Akerson, in his short tenure, has become known for his hard-charging, impatient style. He has griped openly about the length of time it takes to develop a new vehicle. He criticized OnStar for failing to capitalize on the desire by drivers for more entertainment and technology options in vehicles.

Next on Mr. Akerson's list of issues to tackle—along with negotiations this year with the United Auto Workers union—is the company's money-losing Opel division in Europe.

GM has put in place a restructuring plan for Opel and Opel CEO  Nick Reilly has said he is optimistic the operation will break even in 2011 after years of losses. But Mr. Akerson is growing impatient with progress in Europe, people familiar with the situation said.

 Write to  Sharon Terlep at sharon.terlep@wsj.com 