I am ushered through corridors and up the back stairs of London's Somerset House into a large, bare room. There is a sober carpet, a vast conference table surrounded by chairs, and, sitting waiting, a quiet, modest man in his early seventies. This is John Makepeace, perhaps one of the most significant figures in the British Craft Movement. 

He is known pre-eminently as a furniture designer-maker who, from the 1970s onward, transformed British furniture-making from a moribund and conservative craft, sidelined in the rush to embrace cheerful mass manufacture, to a significant strand in contemporary decorative arts. This spring, Somerset House is hosting the first solo retrospective of Mr. Makepeace's work, funded by England's Arts Council in recognition of Mr. Makepeace's role in championing furniture-making as an art form. 

The exhibition brings together 25 pieces from public and private collections, some of which have become icons in the narrative of contemporary design, while others have never before been seen in public. The famous "Mitre" chair, made to celebrate Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip's silver wedding anniversary in 1976, will be shown alongside the startling, sinuous "Trine" armchair (1994), made of yew, bog oak, stainless steel and epoxy. The monumental "Obelisk" (1987), a chest of drawers that, tapering toward the top, looks as natural a feature as the tree it came from, constructed from yew with scented cedar drawer linings, reveals the same sensibility at work as the later "Ripple" chest (1993), whose deeply carved oak comes from a tree planted in 1740 and harvested in 1980. 

Alongside these star pieces from the past 50 years, there will be new pieces from the past two, available for purchase. Together, these works have blazed a trail for a radically creative approach to the venerable English Arts and Crafts tradition of hand-made furniture, seizing rather than warring with the opportunities of new technologies whilst seeking to inculcate a passion for the sustainable use of indigenous woods. Without Mr. Makepeace's example, and the school he established at Parnham College, there probably would not be the fine tradition of distinctively English wooden furniture by designer-makers of today, such as Wales & Wales, David Linley, Sarah Kay or Konstantin Grcic.

Furniture-making, however, was not an obvious first choice of career. Mr. Makepeace's father was a successful businessman in the motor industry. The youngest of five children, whose childhood had been marked by war-time evacuation and boarding school, Mr. Makepeace had had thoughts of university and perhaps a career in the church. He had, however, taken an interest in carpentry and furniture from a young age: "I was very taken by some fine furniture I saw at 11," Mr. Makepeace recalls. "The family was thinking of commissioning some furniture from a craftsman, Hugh Birkett." "We also had around the house three pieces of furniture made by my grandfather," Mr. Makepeace adds, "I was impressed by their quality." 

When Mr. Makepeace's father died, he switched tack altogether. Over three years he visited the Netherlands, Sweden and Denmark, and was especially excited by the combination of innovative design with technical expertise of the Danish designers Arne Jacobsen, Hans Wegner and Finn Juhl. "I decided not to go to university but to find a workshop to learn the skills," he tells me, with the sense of the daring of that decision still visibly with him. He secured an apprenticeship with Keith Cooper, a Dorset-based furniture designer-maker: "He was very good at construction," Mr. Makepeace remarks. "He insisted that I have a second string to my bow, as I wouldn't be able to earn a living as a furniture maker, so I did a distance learning course to become a teacher of craft and design." 

A visit 1961 to America confirmed Mr. Makepeace's ambition: "I gained a confidence that anything was possible." Two years later, he converted a set of farm buildings near Oxford into home, workshop and gallery, and began to win a string of important private commissions. The commission to design 120 rooms at Keble College, Oxford, led to more commissions for whole interiors: "I would commission or make everything for the interior, I wanted to produce interiors where the furniture wasn't an apology." But it soon became clear to him that the furniture was his main passion: "One is privileged to make furniture without compromise, within a dynamic tradition, never accepting what exists." 

Mr. Makepeace also acknowledges that, for all the experimental bravura of some of his work, it is still deeply English: "It's in one's bones. There's something intuitive, a simplicity and an integrity." Ultimately, however, the most important value he sees embodied in his highly diverse oeuvre is the organic relationship of form to material: "As humans we are too often required to find machine-made shapes tolerable. This comes from the Bauhaus. But as a craftsman I don't have to accept a machine aesthetic, I can do what seems appropriate."

A founder trustee of the Crafts Council in 1972, Mr. Makepeace has always married a regard for creative excellence with a respect for entrepreneurship. In 1976 he bought the 80-roomed Tudor manor house Parnham House in Dorset, and set up a residential school for aspiring furniture-makers alongside his own studios. "I realized that craftsmen and women needed to understand business," he explains. "We tried to get students to be competent in three areas: entrepreneurial, practical and creative." Mr. Makepeace channelled any spare energy into his next project—the 1983 purchase of Hooke Park, a 350-acre forest near Parnham House, where he set out to reintegrate the growing of wood with its sustainable use. 

By 2001, Mr. Makepeace had begun to tire of his managerial burden. Parnham House was sold and Mr. Makepeace returned to designing furniture: "I have been getting the form much bolder,... responding to what I see as human needs, rather than the needs of machinery." 

"Flow," a series of four chests decorated with deeply indented waves, playing with and against the grain, each made from a single tree of either Ripple ash, oak, holly wood or Lebanon cedar, is one speculative consequence of this new creative period. Mr. Makepeace has also experimented for the first time with marquetry, using white holly and dark oak to produce a pair of "Zebra" cabinets. As he puts it, "Skills are lost because they have become uninteresting. They have to be used inventively if they are to be justified." 

Ultimately what inspires him is "the sculptural potential of wood," and his conviction that it is still a vital and sustainable material for contemporary design.