TRIPOLI—Col. Moammar Gadhafi's regime said Saturday it has ceded the eastern gateway city of Ajdabiya to rebels, in the first major turnaround in Libya's ground battle since the start of international airstrikes one week ago.

  More photos and interactive graphics  

The concession came as the North Atlantic Treaty Organization was expected to take control of all military operations in the country.

"The [coalition] attack is getting more intensive, and that's why they decided to pull back from Ajdabiya," deputy foreign minister Khalid Kaim said at a press conference Saturday, referring to government troops adding that this was "a tactical" move and not a retreat.

Mr. Kaim accused the West—especially the U.S., Britain and France—of "direct involvement" on the rebel side in what he said was fast becoming a civil war in Libya. Mr. Kaim said his government would ask the U.N. Security Council to convene an extraordinary session to discuss the matter.

"The aim is to push our armed forces city by city," he said. "This is the objective of the coalition now, not to protect civilians." 

Track the latest events in Libya.

See some key dates in Col. Gadhafi's nearly 42-year reign.

Track daily events in Middle Eastern countries.

Separately, Mr. Kaim was pressed to explain an incident in Tripoli early Saturday, in which security forces appeared to suppress an account by a woman who stormed into a hotel where foreign journalists are staying. The woman entered the hotel and told reporters she had been abused by Col. Gadhafi's forces at a checkpoint in the city for allegedly being a native of the rebel-controlled east. 

The woman, who identified herself as Iman al-Obeidi, was bruised and showed blood on her leg. She told some reporters who spoke with her briefly that she had been tied up, gang-raped and subjected to other abuse by forces loyal to Col. Gadhafi.

An undercover security officer pulled a gun and a member of the hotel staff brandished a knife in a bid to prevent the woman from speaking with reporters. Libyan officials minding journalists at the hotel closed off the dining room where she had been speaking, smashed cameras and confiscated memory cards. 

They violently escorted the woman out of the hotel. "They are going to throw me in jail," she shouted before she was bundled into a car outside.

It wasn't clear what happened to her. Her account couldn't be independently verified.

Ms. Obeidi's name identifies her as a member of the Obeidat, the same tribe as the former interior minister Abdel-Fatah Younes, who defected last month to join the rebels.

Mr. Kaim arrived at the hotel about four hours later to address reporters on the events of Ajdabiya. Col. Gadhafi's government has invited foreign journalists to Tripoli to report on events there but have largely prevented them from moving freely in the capital and taken them to events that are largely preorganized. 

Mr. Kaim said he was unaware of the incident. A government spokesman at the press conference described the woman as a "mental patient," while another official called her a "drunken prostitute." 

In Ajdabiya—more than 500 miles east of Tripoli off the coastal road to the rebel-stronghold of Benghazi—drivers honked in celebration and flew the tricolor rebel flag, according to the Associated Press. Others in the city fired their guns into the air and danced on burned-out tanks that littered the road. 

Saif Sadawi, a 20-year-old rebel fighter, said the city's eastern gate fell late Friday and the western gate fell at dawn Saturday after airstrikes on both those locations, according to the AP.

U.K. Defense Secretary Liam Fox said British Tornado aircraft fired guided missiles at armored vehicles that were threatening the civilian population of Ajdabiya, the strategic city south of the rebels' de facto capital of Benghazi.

NATO, which on Thursday agreed to assume responsibility for operating a no-fly zone over Libya, is expected to agree to expand that role to incorporate all military operations there soon. "We expect a decision to take over all operations in the next few days," said Oana Lungescu, a NATO spokeswoman. 

Once a decision is made, the transfer of power will take some time. Even after NATO takes over, the U.S. military would still carry out operations.

This would allow the command and control of operations, including attacks on government forces on the ground, to be brought under one umbrella, thereby reducing the risks to those carrying out the mission, diplomats said.

On Saturday, U.K. Prime Minister David Cameron called the Prime Minister of Qatar, Hamed bin Jassem, and Ban Ki Moon, the Secretary-General of the United Nations, to discuss next Tuesday's conference on Libya being held in London, a Downing Street spokesman said. 

Mr. Cameron hopes the conference will set "practical plans" on humanitarian aid in Libya and will bring more countries into the efforts currently being led by the U.S., France and the U.K., the spokesman said.

 Last week Mr. Cameron told Parliament that the need to move quickly on a no-fly zone had meant they were unable to bring as many other countries into the fold as they hoped for. 

Meanwhile, the U.S. was considering providing arms to Libyan rebels who are trying to topple Col. Gadhafi, but hasn't yet made a final decision, a senior American diplomat said Friday.

"The full gamut of potential assistance that we might offer, both on the nonlethal and the lethal side, is a subject of discussion within the U.S. government," Gene Cretz, the U.S. ambassador to Tripoli, told reporters in Washington.

Mr. Cretz said, however, that the administration has made "no final decisions…on any aspect of that."

Underscoring the limits of coalition strikes, Col. Gadhafi's forces continued their push on Saturday to regain more ground in Misrata, 125 miles east of Tripoli, firing heavy artillery on suspected rebel positions inside the city, according to a member of the rebel movement there.

He said clashes were also taking place between the two sides on the western and northwestern sides of the city and that government troops have taken over an unfinished housing project that was being built by a Chinese company.

Residents of Misrata, Libya's third-largest city and a key commercial hub, established an independent council last month, including rebel military officers and the local lawyers association, to manage defense and municipal services.

Foreign journalists have been prevented from going to Misrata. The Libyan government says it controls much of the city and that it is fighting a band of extremists who have wedged themselves among civilians.

Residents of Misrata continued to flee Friday to the northern tip of the city, near the coastline with some moving into schools and other public buildings. 

A doctor in the city said six people were killed Friday when two mortar or artillery shells hit a house in the area. On Thursday, a teenage boy was killed by sniper fire and a mall in the city center went up in flames, he said.

The doctor said government forces were still hunkered down on a main thoroughfare, Tripoli Street, and at the central hospital, which has been shut down for refurbishment since 2007. Medical personnel with the rebels were forced to relocate from a makeshift field hospital that had become unsafe because of shelling by government forces. Airstrikes hit several loyalist targets after the allied campaign began one week ago, but have failed to loosen Col. Gadhafi's forces' grip on part of the city. 

NATO officials said military planners were drawing up operational plans for incorporating the extra responsibilities into the alliance mission, which would be commanded out of Naples, Italy. NATO ambassadors could meet as early as Sunday to give the green light, they said.

No-fly zone operations are expected to be handed over from the coalition to NATO in a few days. After a period in which NATO polices the no-fly zone while the coalition, led by the U.S., France and Britain, organizes the attacks on ground forces, the two operations are expected to be joined, assuming diplomats sign off on the deal.

The first installment of operational command moved from the U.S. to NATO at noon, Libya time, on Friday, with the enforcement of a Naval blockade aimed at keeping arms and mercenaries out of Libya. British Maj. Gen. John Lorimer said Libyan air-defense systems had been all but put out of action. Still, Gen. Lorimer added a note of realism about the effects of allied operations.

The operation will be run out of NATO headquarters in Brussels and the organization's main naval base in Naples, Italy, with Italian commanders taking senior roles.

The battle against Col. Gadhafi's ground forces has emerged as the primary challenge to the international coalition's mandate to protect Libyan civilians. 

In Tripoli, the government used the coalition's bombing of several military installations over the past week to portray the coalition as Western aggressors, or "crusaders" out to destroy the Muslim nation.

The regime's security grip on the capital showed no signs of loosening as anti-Gadhafi protests planned after prayers on Friday never materialized.

Opposition groups had planned demonstrations in at least two neighborhoods, but amid a heavy government security presence there were no signs anything meaningful was staged, not even within the confines of mosques, as was the case over the past few weeks. 

Separately, an official with the health ministry said on Friday that a total of 114 people have been killed and 445 wounded in coalition bombardment through Wednesday. The official, Khalid Omar, declined to provide the civilian-military breakdown. 

Libyan authorities have continuously insisted that civilians have been targeted in the bombardment but have offered no credible proof so far.

—Stephen Fidler in Brussels, Alistair MacDonald in London and Keith Johnson in Washington contributed to this article.

 Write to  Sam Dagher at sam.dagher@wsj.com 