KABUL—Afghanistan President Hamid Karzai Wednesday inaugurated the country's newly elected parliament, ending a six-month power vacuum during which the he ruled by decree.

Mr. Karzai took a dig at the international community in his inauguration address, saying Afghans should "put an end to foreign interference and ambiguity about elections and democracy."

 The international community had roundly criticized Mr. Karzai's initial plans to delay the parliament's inauguration until late February to allow a special court he had created to finish its investigation of electoral fraud. 

Winning candidates and Afghan election authorities say the special court is unconstitutional.

"This period of vacuum was a confusing element for the Afghan people and Afghan democracy," said Staffan de Mistura, the chief U.N. representative for Afghanistan. 

Mr. de Mistura added that although the special court will continue its investigation, it "should be separated from the political side."

The court is investigating as many as 56 of the 249 parliament members, senior Western officials said. These officials say they've been promised that only a fraction of that number will actually be targeted by the court.

The aftermath of the Sept. 18 election was a low point in Afghanistan's relationship with Western allies and the United Nations. The U.N. and many Western countries had opposed holding elections last year, saying that the security situation wasn't right. 

The election was marked by widespread fraud, with nearly a quarter of all ballots cast, 1.3 million, thrown out due to voter intimidation and ballot stuffing.

Failed candidates have accused Mr. Karzai of cracking under international pressure to inaugurate parliament before the special court could finish its investigation. 

One solution to appease influential failed candidates, Afghan officials say, is to appoint them to the Afghan senate. Mr. Karzai has the right to personally appoint 34 senators, and hasn't yet filled these slots.

—Arif Afzalzada and Habib Khan Totakhil contributed to this article.