A judge suspended deliberations in the insider-trading trial of Galleon Group founder  Raj Rajaratnam for a day because of a juror's medical issue, and the defendant himself was absent from court because of emergency surgery. 

As jurors began their second week of deliberations, U.S. District Judge Richard J. Holwell received a note from a member of the panel, and, following extensive private discussions with prosecutors and defense lawyers, responded in the afternoon with one of his own. 

Citing "juror scheduling issues," his note instructed jurors to stay for the rest of the day Monday, take Tuesday off, then return Wednesday morning. A courtroom deputy said the issue was health-related. 

"No juror should feel any time pressure whatsoever," the judge wrote. "The jury will have all the time it needs to reach its verdict." 

  Vote: Has the insider trading trial of Raj Rajaratnam made you more cynical about investing in the stock market? If so, what are you doing to protect yourself? 

Mr. Rajaratnam, 53 years old, is charged with 14 counts of securities fraud and conspiracy. Prosecutors say he obtained confidential stock tips from public-company insiders and others, and traded on them to earn illicit profits and avoid losses totaling $63.8 million. Mr. Rajaratnam and his lawyers argue that he did nothing wrong and traded based on legitimate research and information that was already public.

Before the disclosures of the medical issues, observers on the 17th floor of the federal courthouse speculated first about Mr. Rajaratnam's whereabouts, then about whether the note jurors sent at 11:40 a.m. might mean they had reached a verdict. 

Initially, Mr. Rajaratnam's defense team declined to discuss why he was absent for the first day since the trial began in early March. Several hours later, they released a statement from defense lawyer  John Dowd saying Mr. Rajaratnam had undergone emergency surgery Sunday and had waived his constitutional right to be present in court. 

"Mr. Rajaratnam had developed a bacterial infection in his foot that required surgery," said the statement, which was posted on a website maintained by Mr. Rajaratnam's representatives, www.rajdefense.org. 

The statement continued, "It is hoped that he will be recovered sufficiently to return to the courthouse this week. We thank you in advance for your respect for Mr. Rajaratnam's privacy concerning this medical and personal matter."

If a verdict should be reached in Mr. Rajaratnam's absence, it would be read without him, his spokesman said. 

When the jurors sent their note, members of the media and others who have been awaiting a verdict filed into the courtroom expecting the judge and the jury to come out. But they didn't, and, eventually, the judge's deputy told those waiting in the gallery that the jurors hadn't reached a verdict. 

Juror notes are considered court exhibits and are routinely made public. But the judge's deputy said that, because this note "involved a name and a medical procedure," the judge wouldn't release it. 

The subsequent discussions between the judge and lawyers involved whether the juror in question should be dismissed or could return after a day, the deputy said. The judge didn't specify which juror had the problem. 

Mr. Rajaratnam's spokesman said his lawyers also wanted the judge's approval to release a statement about his medical situation, which they received. 

Judge Holwell sealed a transcript of his private discussions with the lawyers, so that a court reporter who was present couldn't release it. 

When he dismissed the jury, the judge addressed the fact that Mr. Rajaratnam wasn't there and told them not to let that affect deliberations. "He couldn't be here, and I excused him for a good reason," Judge Holwell said. Mr. Dowd said afterward that the judge had questioned Mr. Rajaratnam by phone to verify he was waiving his right to be present, and that doctors would determine when he would return. "He would be here if he could be, believe me," Mr. Dowd said. 

—Chad Bray  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Michael Rothfeld at michael.rothfeld@wsj.com 