As the Treasury Department nears a decision about how much the market for foreign-exchange swaps and forward contracts should be regulated, the argument it is hearing from market players is a simple one: They are like the good kids who face punishment even though they sat quietly in class while other students tore up the room when the teacher was away.

Read the full  Foreign Exchange report .

Market participants hope the Treasury buys that argument and exempts foreign-exchange swaps and forwards from the new rules the Commodity Futures Trading Commission is writing for derivatives markets. Treasury's decision will determine how nearly $2 trillion a day in currency transactions get done—transactions that are crucial to corporations doing business across borders and to big international investors.

A Treasury official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the department would likely decide whether to exempt certain foreign-exchange products from regulation before the CFTC issues the rules in July.

Foreign-exchange swaps and forwards are used to protect companies and investors from losing money due to currency volatility. (They are not to be confused with so-called currency swaps, which are longer-term instruments that entail greater risk.) A U.S. company that needs to pay a supplier in Italy might enter the market ahead of the payment to lock in a price for euros, to guard against a decline in the dollar before the payment is due. Or a pension fund might lock in a price for yen to pay for a purchase of Japanese shares.

The market is relatively informal and lightly regulated. Brokers—mostly big international banks—find parties whose needs match up and who can agree on a price, and those parties sign a contract. Terms of the transaction are kept private.

Much of that would change under the new CFTC rules, which are designed to help prevent renewed financial and economic turmoil by increasing transparency and decreasing risk in derivatives markets. Among other things, the new rules would require swaps to take place on trading platforms, where the terms would be public, and to be completed through clearinghouses that would guarantee the trades, to eliminate the risk of default by either party. 

Opponents of the rules say the foreign-exchange instruments aren't that risky and didn't contribute to the recent financial and economic crisis, so there's no need for more regulation. "The things that blew up on us were mortgage-backed securities…and the credit-derivative swaps," says  Scott Pardee, an economics professor at Middlebury College in Vermont and former senior vice president at the New York Federal Reserve. "The foreign-exchange market functioned throughout, and so if it ain't broke, don't fix it."

Others point to the differences between the foreign-exchange instruments and other kinds of swaps. For one thing, the foreign-exchange contracts involve an actual exchange of goods—one currency for another—unlike swaps that are more like bets on the direction of interest rates or of some other market. That means they are less speculative by nature.

They also are shorter-term contracts than other swaps, which leaves less time for the markets to move so sharply that either party would take a big loss on a transaction, and less time for either party to encounter troubles that would prevent it from completing the deal. "Forex swaps and forwards are not swaps in the traditional sense," a group of companies including  3M Co.
MMM


-0.03
%




, Cargill Inc. and Caterpillar Inc. wrote in a recent letter to Treasury.

One big concern of those fighting the rules is cost. The clearinghouses that would become part of the market would require each party to a transaction to post collateral, an expense that doesn't exist in most private deals. Some opponents say this cost would discourage swaps. And fewer swaps, they say, would mean more exchange-rate volatility, because companies and investors would be more inclined to buy or sell currencies en masse at extreme highs and lows to try to control their costs. Banks have also argued that higher costs and closer scrutiny could drive much currency trading out of the U.S.

Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner appeared sympathetic to some of these arguments before the Dodd-Frank financial-regulation bill was passed last year. Foreign-exchange markets "have actually worked quite well" and "don't present the same set of risks" as other markets, Mr. Geithner said in congressional testimony. "Our judgment is that…we'll have to have a slightly different approach" with foreign-exchange instruments.

But CFTC Chairman Gary Gensler said last year that he was concerned about allowing any loopholes in the new rules for derivatives. And that argument has caught the attention of some lawmakers and public-interest groups who are urging Treasury not to make an exception for the foreign-exchange instruments.

An exemption "would open the door to financially engineered foreign-exchange swaps and forwards that could be used to disguise other types of transactions and would be difficult to police," Sen. Carl Levin, a Michigan Democrat, wrote in a recent letter to Treasury.

Some also wonder if Treasury is willing to accept the risk of an exemption backfiring.  Heather Slavkin, a policy adviser at the AFL-CIO, which favors the inclusion of foreign-exchange instruments in new swap rules as part of its support for more-transparent financial markets, says that "if this market collapses, people are going to be pointing to this Department of Treasury."

 Ms. Lynch, a former reporter for Dow Jones Newswires and The Wall Street Journal in Washington, can be reached at reports@wsj.com. Mr. Davis, a reporter for Dow Jones Newswires and The Wall Street Journal in New York, can be reached at bradley.davis@dowjones.com. 