The outbreak of political violence in Cairo has imperiled America's 30-year grand bargain with Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, and now the question for U.S. policy is whether the goal of that bargain—to keep Egypt moderate and secular—can be preserved. 

From the day former President Anwar Sadat was assassinated by Islamic extremists 30 years ago, with then-Vice President Mubarak at his side, the U.S. has maintained an implicit understanding with the Egyptian leader: Mr. Mubarak would be America's most stalwart Arab friend in the region and keep Islamic forces at bay at home. In return, the U.S. would occasionally prod him to open up his political system, but ultimately defer to his ability to keep things stable on the home front.

That understanding disintegrated when Mr. Mubarak unleashed first his security forces and then his army on protesters, after cutting off their ability to communicate on the Internet—all despite explicit pleas from the Obama administration that he refrain from those steps. As a result, the administration was forced Friday to distance itself from its most important Arab ally, and threaten to reduce its aid. 

U.S. officials still held some hope that Mr. Mubarak would heed Washington's calls to embrace rather than confront political reformers—a hope kept alive by Mr. Mubarak's announcement last night that he is replacing his current set of government ministers. 

But Secretary of State Hillary Clinton pointedly said that the U.S. believed the protesters showed the existence of "deep grievances" within Egyptian society, and that "the Egyptian government needs to understand that violence will not make these grievances go away…Reform is absolutely critical to the well-being of Egypt."

Strikingly, she never mentioned Mr. Mubarak by name, and neither President Barack Obama or Vice President Joe Biden spoke with the Egyptian leader amid the Friday turmoil.

Later, White House spokesman Robert Gibbs suggested the administration is prepared to cut the $1.5 billion in aid the U.S. provides Egypt if security forces continue to be used to suppress dissent. One of the subjects U.S. officials is studying, Mr. Gibbs said, is whether Egypt's actions should affect "the level of our assistance."

Now the U.S. will be watching closely in the next few days to see whether the new government Mr. Mubarak forms beneath him will include some figures who seem open or have links to the reform movement. His speech left unclear how seriously he wants to accommodate the demands of protesters.

By day's end, the administration was still awkwardly allied with a leader with whom it seems to have a basic disagreement over what most threatens Egypt's stability: Mr. Mubarak appears to think it is the unrest in the streets, while the U.S. thinks it is his suppression of that unrest.

The Obama administration's strategy is to openly empathize with what has so far been a secular protest movement, calculating that embracing it reduces the chances it will be taken over by radical Islamic and anti-Western forces. 

Until Friday, U.S. strategists were hoping that they could coax Mr. Mubarak into joining in that strategy. Instead, Mr. Mubarak effectively spurned Washington's overtures and moved onto his own, different track. 

Now U.S. policy has reached a dangerous inflection point. U.S. officials are pleased that so far the protests have remained secular rather than Islamic in nature, with Egypt's Muslim Brotherhood organization relegated to its margins. Indeed, there's been a notable absence of vocal anti-American sentiment, long a staple of protests in the Arab world, either in the Egyptian protests or the preceding ones in Tunisia last week. "We don't want to be in opposition" to such a movement, one senior Obama administration aide said. 

But the Obama administration has limited ability to ensure the protests stay that way. While the administration has distanced itself from Mr. Mubarak's suppression of the protesters, it hasn't actually turned its back on him personally. That leaves the U.S. open to criticism both from those who will charge that it has sent a bad signal to other friends by undercutting a long-time American ally, and from those who criticize it for failing to more directly denounce that ally as a dictator and cut him loose.

Moreover, because Mr. Mubarak has long resisted grooming any potential replacements other than his own son Gamal—who has been at least as much a target of street anger as has the president himself—the U.S. has no obvious alternatives to turn to. The man who has tried to step in to become the de facto leader of the reform movement, Nobel Peace Prize laureate Mohammed ElBaradei, has no history of widespread popular support in the country and maintained an up-and-down relationship with the U.S. while he was running the United Nations nuclear watchdog agency.

Another alternative if Mr. Mubarak were to exit the scene might be Omar Suleiman, the Egyptian president's head of intelligence, a respected figure who might be able to bridge the current situation and new elections down the road. It's unclear, though, that opposition figures would accept a leader so central to the current government.

One obvious alternative power center is the Muslim Brotherhood, a party that Mr. Mubarak has banned officially but has unofficially allowed to function in the margins of Egyptian political life, electing its members to parliament without actually claiming to represent the party. As that suggests, the current version of the Brotherhood actually is a fairly tame Islamic force. The danger in any U.S. nod toward the Brotherhood is that it could help usher into power a force that would grow more radical once unshackled.

Another possibility is that the Egyptian army could seize power. The U.S. might like the stability and pro-Western bent army leaders would offer, and relations between the U.S. and Egyptian military are close. Indeed, senior Egyptian army officers were visiting the Pentagon when Friday's unrest broke out, and cut off their visit to head home.

But blessing any military move likely would be seen as Washington turning its back on the very pro-democracy forces it is seeking to foster. Moreover, since the day in 1981 when Egyptian soldiers murdered President Sadat, there has been persistent fear that the Egyptian military is vulnerable to infiltration by Islamic extremists.

Indeed, it isn't clear that even the efforts the administration has made to embrace the protest movement have convinced those in the streets that the U.S. is with them. Jon B. Alterman, director of the Middle East program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, said the protests aren't a response to any actions by this administration or the last one. 

But, he added: "The perception is the U.S. government is with the [Egyptian] government and against the street. I don't think there's anything the U.S. can say or do that would change that perception."

For its part, the administration argues that President Obama has been talking about democracy in the Middle East ever since his speech to the Muslim world in Cairo less than six months into his term. On Thursday, during an interview on YouTube, the president spoke of "legitimate grievances" in Egypt and said he has told Mr. Mubarak personally that he needs to open up the country's political system. He said "violence is not the answer."

Still, Shadi Hamid, an expert of Arab politics and democracy promotion at the Brookings Institution's Doha Center in Qatar, said some Arabs think Mr. Obama decreased the emphasis on democracy that President George W. Bush put on that subject, and argued that the U.S. needs to express outrage rather than concern at the Egyptian government's tactics.

Ultimately, the risk for American policy makers is that, whatever their ability to encourage a reform movement, it outstrips their ability to control it once it gets rolling. Secretary of State Clinton declared that "we want to partner with the Egyptian people and their government to realize their aspirations to live in a democratic society that respects basic human rights," while knowing the Egyptian government doesn't necessarily share those goals.

—Jonathan Weisman contributed to this article.