 LONDON— HSBC Holdings PLC's new chief executive,  Stuart Gulliver, will announce a strategic revamp next week aimed at unlocking the potential of a bank seen as a "sleeping giant "bogged down by high costs and fallout from its subprime-lending bet.

Mr. Gulliver took over last year after a tumultuous succession battle that left him at the top of an organization with problems to be sorted out in the U.S., the U.K. and Asia.

The bank weathered the financial crisis better than most, but it recently has been seen as an underperformer in some areas, plagued by inefficiency and distracted by managing the losses that followed its debacle in the U.S., where its ill-timed acquisition of Household International Inc. saddled it with $40 billion in losses. 

"They aren't fully leveraging their relative strength," Citigroup analyst  Ronit Ghose said. "If the business were executed more efficiently, they would be a very tough competitor."

In the past two years, a key cost-measuring metric at the bank rose from 52% in 2009 to 55.2% in 2010, a level that Mr. Gulliver has called "unacceptable" and vowed to bring down. 

Among the places where HSBC must tackle inefficiencies is its retail bank in the U.K., a source of 19% of its profit in the first half of 2010, but also a unit whose ratio of costs to income is significantly higher than competitors such as  Lloyds Banking Group PLC ,  Santander U.K. and  Barclays
BCS


0.81
%




 PLC , according to Mr. Ghose and another Citigroup analyst,  Leigh Goodwin. 

Trimming those costs could increase the bank's profit by as much as $1 billion, the analysts estimate. HSBC representatives have declined to comment on the bank's plans in advance of next week's announcement. 

The bank is also expected to talk about its future in Asia, where its strong loan growth, especially Hong Kong, has been HSBC's main engine in recent years. But some analysts point out that its investment-banking division, Global Banking and Markets, has lost out in revenue in Asia to more-aggressive peers, such as  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
GS


0.19
%




 and  Standard Chartered
STAN


-0.39
%




 PLC.

One of the biggest questions may involve deciding what kind of presence HSBC should have in the U.S., where the Household debacle unfolded.

HSBC is now winding Household down, but it still possesses a profitable credit-card business, which, with $33 billion in receivables, is the country's seventh-largest provider of Visa/Mastercards and the third-largest brand of private-label cards.

It also must decide what to do with its U.S. retail operations. The bank has a retail network of 470 branches in the U.S., 125 of which are in big cities such as Seattle, San Francisco and Washington and target upscale, international clients. The rest are in smaller cities and towns around New York state, which some see as an incongruous fit for the global bank.

"We see substantial opportunity in exiting [parts] of the U.S. retail business, where we see HSBC as having little competitive advantage," Barclays analyst  Rohith Chandra-Rajan said. Barclays analysts believe such a move could release up to $25 billion of capital for the bank.

The bank's thin presence in Latin America poses another issue, where it has a smaller footprint and higher costs in many countries relative to local and global competitors, such as in Mexico. Analysts and people close to the bank say it could benefit from focusing its activities on targeted markets, such as the international and affluent, and streamlining scattered operations.

Illustrating one way in which Mr. Gulliver will focus the bank's resources, HSBC plans to curb its push for new clients for its high-end Premier service, after netting 4.4 million new accounts at the end of 2010. Instead, it will try to make existing clients more profitable by pitching more of HSBC's wealth-management services to existing Premier customers, says a person familiar with the plans.

The bank is also expected to provide more details on Wednesday on how much new capital and liquidity rules could eat into profits, following estimates earlier this year that were more dire than peers. 

Ahead of the strategy day, on Monday, the bank will release its quarterly management statement, which will provide details on its finances, following the decision by HSBC and other U.K. banks to give more thorough quarterly updates in place of vague narratives.

—Christopher Bjork contributed to this article.