The new and selected stories in Charles Baxter's "Gryphon" (Pantheon, 400 pages, $27.95) have a frustrating resemblance to the composite creature his title invokes. They start out tough-minded, funny and unflinching in the excavation of their characters' fears and foibles. But by the time you reach the end, the tone has changed dramatically, dissolving into strained rhetorical flourishes and exasperating vagueness.

The stories are set in the suburbs of Michigan and Minnesota, and though those places may seem to lend themselves to a certain stoic passivity, Mr. Baxter's talent is in disclosing their substratum of disorder and rage. Some of the characters have been afflicted by dementia—"Horace and Margaret's Fifty-Second" is a harrowing immersion in a senile mind. Some characters have been shattered by love loss, others by death. In Mr. Baxter's best story, "Surprised by Joy," Jeremy and Harriet attempt to rejoin the world after their infant daughter's accidental death. But their heartache is so deep that the placid ordinariness of everyday existence seems demeaning and intolerable. At one point the usual disappointments of an airline meal strike them as almost existential mockery: "The flight to Albuquerque took four hours. Lunch was served halfway through: chicken in sauce. The stewardesses seemed proud of the meal and handed out the plastic trays with smug smiles."

"Surprised by Joy" takes its title from C.S. Lewis's memoir about his path from atheism to faith, and at the story's end Harriet has found a path that leads her away from grief, but also away from Jeremy, who has disavowed happiness and remains "hugging his darkness." Like Harriet, many of Mr. Baxter's characters cope with pain and uncertainty by embracing religion or the talismans of mysticism (tarot cards make frequent appearances in "Gryphon"). But just as often, like Jeremy, they respond with misanthropy.

There is a barely suppressed anger in these men and women; their normal actions are "salted with violence." In "The Next Building I Plan to Bomb," a milquetoast banker becomes obsessed with a fraudulent terrorist note that he finds in the street. In "Westland" a social worker discovers that his mood improves after he hides a gun in his car. Mr. Baxter makes an acute connection between meanness and the raw pleasure it can unloose. In "The Winner," a man indulging in a rant feels "a sudden lift-over into either joy or rage." Menace is latent in these stories, lending them a giddy feeling of suspense.

But maddeningly, not a single story in "Gryphon" moves beyond its latent stage. Instead, the stories simply end, with some overtaxed metaphor or gesture standing in for meaningful action. A truly unforgivable number conclude with images of light or clouds. ("The Eleventh Floor" ends: ". . . he gazed at the city skyline, half-consciously counting the few apartments in the high rise across the street that still had all their lights burning.") The social worker in "Westland" takes a few potshots at a nuclear reactor, throws the gun in the woods, and that's that. "The Next Building I Plan to Bomb" leaves the banker standing on a street, "while all about him the papers fly first toward him, and then away."

A few stories in "Gryphon" are about vanished people and their persistent power to haunt and antagonize. So it's surprising that Mr. Baxter isn't more aware of how grating it is for readers when the troubled characters he has made us care about just up and disappear—with no more payoff than a gauzy description of a sunset.

In the past, the Irish have been spurred to abandon their homeland by poverty, starvation, politics and creative censorship, but in Colm Tóibín's story collection "The Empty Family" (Scribner, 275 pages, $24) Irish emigration has more nebulous origins. Most of Mr. Tóibín's characters have fled because of unrequited love or simply the pain of family attachments.

Their exiles are, therefore, both geographical and emotional. The narrator of "One Minus One," who has holed up in Texas, speaks for many when he says: "I am in a place where so much is empty because it was never full, where things are forgotten and swept away, if there ever were things. I am in a place where there is nothing."

The stories "Two Women," "The Pearl Fishers" and "The New Spain" all center on varieties of homecomings. But in each case the characters are marked by their detachment, and though Mr. Tóibín writes gorgeously, the mood of urbane alienation buffers the stories' impact. Mr. Tóibín's novel "Brooklyn" (2009) covers similar ground, but in that work the nausea and horror of homesickness is sharper, and the ecstasy of newly discovered love is more vividly captured.

Only in "Silence" does Mr. Tóibín achieve the sensuous depth of feeling of his novels. It's about an evening party in which the poet Lady Gregory sits next to Henry James and unburdens to him the tale of her doomed love affair. As readers found in "The Master," a fictionalized account of the great man's life, Henry James brings out the best in Mr. Tóibín.

Author Ferdinand von Schirach is a high-profile Berlin defense attorney by day, so it's natural that the stories in his collection "Crime" (Knopf, 188 pages, $25; translated by Carol Brown Janeway) portray a world ruled by extenuating circumstances. The lawyer's "ally is chance," and his "task is to disrupt an overhasty reliance on what appears to be the truth," says the rather fiendish omniscient narrator in one story. To defense lawyers, the relativity of truth extends even to clocks: In "Summertime" a man is freed from murder charges by a technicality involving daylight savings time.

The 11 tales in "Crime" are extremely entertaining—if only for their criminal ghastliness. They are also tinged with the suggestion of mendacity: The reader feels like the member of a jury, trying to discern how much of what this practiced manipulator says is true. Mr. von Schirach knows how to win us over, to tempt us with the specter of a mysterious world dominated by accidents and contingency—to make us believe that a murderer is not actually a murderer if a court can be persuaded to say so.