WASHINGTON—President Barack Obama, responding to criticism that the White House hadn't answered critical questions about military action in Libya, met for an hour with congressional leaders to try to tamp disquiet about the U.S. strategy.

In an hourlong Situation Room meeting with a bipartisan group of congressional leaders, the president, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and other officials sought to respond to complaints the White House hadn't answered critical questions about the mission.

Mr. Obama said that U.S. involvement would fall as other nations step up and that allowing a humanitarian crisis to unfold would go "against everything we stand for," said a congressional aide briefed on the call.

Mr. Obama resisted suggestions the U.S. use ground troops to depose Col. Moammar Gadhafi, the aide said, adding it wasn't clear from the session how the U.S. would disengage given that there may be no way to oust the Libyan dictator.

The White House said the president emphasized the successful transfer of the operation to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and noted that Mr. Obama responded to "multiple questions" from 21 participating lawmakers. Some dialed into the meeting by phone. 

The White House is sending Mrs. Clinton and other top national security officials to the House to brief rank-and-file lawmakers Wednesday. At least three congressional hearings will address the matter, and White House spokesman  Jay Carney said Mr. Obama would speak to the nation about Libya soon.

Further, Mr. Obama is planning a major speech on the Middle East that lays out his vision of the road ahead, encompassing unrest in Libya, the winding down of the war in Iraq, and the beginning of a drawdown of U.S. forces in Afghanistan.

Until now, the White House has been markedly low-key in how it has addressed action in Libya and emphasized instead the limited role the U.S. is playing—an unusual position for the U.S. at a moment of international crisis. The president has taken questions about Libya twice and delivered a short statement, but has yet to address the nation directly.

Lawmakers of both parties have raised increasingly sharp questions about that stance and requested more precise answers about the purpose of the mission. There remains public disagreement between the U.S. and its allies over whether the goal is to topple Col. Gadhafi.

For the White House, addressing Libya head-on draws attention to a messy situation that has American troops involved in a third conflict, and distracts from its domestic economic agenda. Playing down the conflict risks leaving Americans confused about why the U.S. is involved, a risk that could grow if the campaign fares badly.

A Gallup poll released this week said a plurality of Americans approve of military action. But that 47% number is the lowest in 40 years of Gallup snapshots of public opinion at the onset of a conflict. Independent voters, who are critical of Mr. Obama's 2012 re-election campaign, registered the lowest rating of 38%.

Republicans have been divided about the Libya action. Many called for a military response—and are generally more supportive of the action—but others including House Speaker  John Boehner (R., Ohio) have raised questions about the mission. A Boehner spokesman,  Brendan Buck, said after the president's call Friday, "The speaker appreciated the update today, but still believes much more needs to be done by the administration to provide clarity, particularly to the American people, on the military objective in Libya, America's role, and how it is consistent with U.S. policy goals."

The Democratic Party's traditional allies are tentatively supportive of the president but seeking more details."I'm a strong Obama supporter but that doesn't mean I always understand what he's doing," said  Christine Laursen, 48, of Lakewood, Colo., a teacher and volunteer with the Jefferson County Democratic Party. "I'm trying to be supportive of him but I'm concerned that we're cutting teachers at the same time we're bombing people." 

  Keith Fitzgerald, former Florida House representative who is active in the state Democratic party, sees an emerging division over the Libya conflict in the Democratic base. "If it doesn't go well, he's going to alienate some people in the Democratic base," he said.

Sen.  Jay Rockefeller (D., W.Va.) became the latest Democrat on Capitol Hill Friday to voice disquiet. "I have very serious concerns about what this intervention means for our country in the coming weeks," Mr. Rockefeller said in a written statement Friday, citing a stretched military and a "conflict with unknown costs and consequences."

 Write to  Laura Meckler at laura.meckler@wsj.com 