LONDON—U.K. Prime Minister David Cameron and Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg on Sunday denied speculation that the referendum to change the country's voting system has exposed a rift between their two political parties that will cause lasting damage to the coalition government. 

With just four days to go until the referendum, campaigning has become increasingly bitter, leading to heated exchanges between Mr. Cameron's Conservative Party, which mostly wants to keep the current first-past-the-post voting system, and Mr. Clegg's Liberal Democrats, who want to move to the alternative vote system, known as AV, where voters rank constituency candidates in order of preference. 

Speaking to the British Broadcasting Corp., Mr. Cameron said the two parties—who together form the coalition government—continue to hold successful cabinet meetings and that the "business of government goes on" despite their different views on electoral reform. 

"We always knew this would be a moment of difficulty for the coalition because we always knew the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats would be on opposing sides in this campaign," Mr. Cameron said. "But I think it is perfectly possible, indeed we will demonstrate it is possible, to continue a strong and effective coalition government in the national interest for five years." 

Mr. Clegg said it is a timely reminder that the coalition is made up of two parties with different values and identities. 

Despite their reassurances that the coalition will survive the referendum, both leaders Sunday stepped up their rhetoric about electoral reform, with Mr. Clegg accusing the "No" campaign of spreading "misinformation" about AV, and Mr. Cameron calling AV confusing, expensive, and a "huge mistake." 

In an article in the Sunday Telegraph newspaper, Mr. Cameron also said "generations of campaigners fought and died" to secure the current voting system. 

In a blow to Mr. Clegg's "Yes" campaign, the latest poll suggests that U.K. voters on Thursday will opt to keep the current voting system rather than switch to AV.

The BPIX poll for the Mail on Sunday newspaper put the "No" camp 18 percentage points ahead on 51%, while the "Yes" vote was on 33%. And a YouGov poll for the Sunday Times newspaper found that 68% of people think Mr. Clegg is doing badly as leader of the Liberal Democrats, while 50% think his leadership will be weakened if the "No" campaign wins. 

During his interview on the BBC, Mr. Clegg denied that the "Yes" campaign's slump in the polls is a direct reflection of his unpopularity. 

Mr. Clegg said he believes most people will view the referendum as a "once in a generation opportunity to change the way we do politics." 

"It is far more important than any of us [politicians], it is far more important than this coalition government," he said. 

In addition to the referendum being held, May 5 has further significance because local government elections will take place in Scotland, Wales and across much of England, providing the first comprehensive indication of how the main political parties have fared since last year's general election. 

The results of those elections are likely to be particularly unwelcome to the Liberal Democrat party, which has broken a number of pre-election pledges since joining the coalition, including agreeing to a trebling of the cap on university tuition fees and increasing sales tax. 

 Write to  Ainsley Thomson at ainsley.thomson@dowjones.com 