A senior International Monetary Fund official said Thursday that debt restructuring would provide no miracle cure for Greece's debt crisis, as a delegation of European and IMF officials continued to pore over the Greek government's finances in Athens.

The delegation is in the Greek capital to examine whether the country's tough economic program is still on track and whether its financing plan is sustainable. Their agreement is needed before they release another slice of funds next month from a €110 billion ($157.8 billion) rescue package agreed upon a year ago. 

But public- and private-sector analysts agree that the €110 billion won't be enough, saying Greece will need to find a way to fill a finance shortfall of as much as €60 billion to tide it through 2013.

"Obviously, there is going to be new official money," said  Alessandro Leipold, a former senior IMF official who is now chief economist at the Lisbon Council, a Brussels think tank.

One way to ease Greece's troubles would be to change the terms of Greece's existing private debt—a so-called restructuring. However, Antonio Borges, director of the IMF's European department, speaking said in Frankfurt that he doesn't see a "miraculous restructuring solution" to Greece's debt travails. 

But that raises the question: What are Greece's options? The government has slashed spending. It has been told to increase taxes. A garage sale of government assets—a horse-racing concession, disused Olympic facilities, parcels of land—is opening soon. Mr. Borges said Greece's €50 billion privatization program potentially represents less than 20% of "an extraordinary portfolio of assets" that could be sold off to raise cash. 

But raising anywhere this amount through asset sales would encounter huge domestic political opposition and there is a growing consensus among EU officials that more bailout money will be needed. German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble said on Thursday that Germany could provide more aid to Greece—under strict conditions.

The route for further money from EU governments—as well as an expected €78 billion bailout for Portugal—appeared to have been eased by events in Finland Thursday. The pullout by the euro-skeptic True Finns party from talks to form a new government suggested, analysts said, that Finland would be less obstructive to EU bailouts. 

What to do with Greece will headline discussions at a regular meeting of European finance ministers early next week. There was widespread dissatisfaction in Europe's healthier countries—particularly Germany, the Netherlands and Finland—when the original Greece bailout was designed. 

Despite Thursday's developments in Finland and Mr. Schäuble's comments, asking people to shell out more bailout money is becoming more, not less, politically fraught.

The problem, at its base, is simply arithmetical: The three-year, €110 billion joint EU-IMF bailout was never enough to carry Greece through three full years. 

By design, the bailout covered all of Greece's needs—its long-term debt repayments, its bank-restructuring costs, its government deficits—for nearly two years, with the expectation that Greece would gradually begin to borrow again from private markets and the bailout tap would be gradually switched off.

Thus the original bailout math, from when the aid package was conceived in May 2010, showed Greece would need €151.5 billion over three years to cover deficits, repay existing long-term loans and prop up banks. 

The EU estimated Greece would need to borrow more than €40 billion on its own to plug the gap.

In the ensuing year, the numbers have gotten worse. Greece has missed deficit targets, and now the EU expects Greece will need to borrow €44.1 billion—of which €26.7 billion is expected in 2012.

Almost no one believes Greece will be able to raise that much money; currently, markets want more than 15% to lend to Greece, and rating agencies consider the country's debt junk.

What to do? There are at least four possible options, which could in some cases be combined.

First is to tweak the terms of the existing bailout in Greece's favor and hope privatization raises serious money fast. One common suggestion: Cut the interest rate Greece pays on the aid money. But in 2012, Greece will pay less than €3 billion in interest to the euro-zone lenders. Even eliminating interest payments makes only a small dent in the €26.7 billion gap. And significant cash from privatizations over the next several months is a very long shot. 

Second, the EU could give Greece more money. The European Financial Stability Facility is set up for this purpose, and it could quickly write a check, backed by the taxpayers of healthier countries. This would not be popular.

Moreover, some €35 billion in existing long-term debt is due to be paid back to private creditors in 2012. That means that the fresh funds would in large part go directly to repaying banks and other lenders in full, with taxpayers now bearing all the risk.

Third, Greece could be told to offer a "voluntary exchange" to its private creditors, whereby they turn in their maturing bonds for new ones that are repaid later. 

The risk: If not enough creditors go for the deal, it could quickly become a messier, involuntary exchange in which investors of maturing bonds are paid back with new Greek bonds, whether they want them or not. Indeed, telling creditors that there is no fresh official financing will make them less likely to accept a voluntary exchange. The benefit of delaying repayments: Since private creditors must wait to get their money, they continue to share the burden of risk. 

If a solid majority of the holders of debt maturing in 2012 are persuaded or forced to wait for repayment, Greece could scrape by that year without additional money. But it is a very tight squeeze.

None of these three options affects the absolute magnitude of Greece's debt, some €350 billion and heading up. Many economists believe Greece won't ever be able to repay it. That leaves the last option: "haircuts" to bondholders.

If Greece can't repay, many economists say, it is better to deal with that sooner, rather than throwing good money after bad, mounting the pressure on the Greek economy and raising the exposure of the public lenders. 

But, apart from cutting Greece off from private finance for a while, haircuts would be a major event that could trigger unknown consequences in the bond markets and banking systems across the euro zone. That could force Europe into bailing out other governments and their banking systems.

In the end, there is a risk that forcing bondholders to take their medicine in Greece could turn out, in the short run, to be the most expensive option of all for taxpayers in rich countries.

—William Launder and Paul Hannon contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Charles Forelle at charles.forelle@wsj.com 