SANTIAGO—Chile announced a $12-billion market operation this week designed to weaken its currency, joining other emerging economies that are trying to keep exports competitive and maintain high levels of growth. 

The Chilean economy is highly dependent on its exports of natural resources such as copper, fertilizers, wood pulp, fresh fruit and wines. For most of the final two quarters of 2010, the peso traded at almost three-year highs against the dollar, prompting calls for intervention as exporters lost competitiveness abroad. 

Yet the Central Bank of Chile has resisted far longer than peers in emerging markets from South Korea to Brazil in purchasing dollars, applying capital controls, or increasing local banks' reserve requirements in bids to cool red-hot local currencies. 

"We haven't fallen into the addiction of repetitive intervention," Central Bank President Jose De Gregorio told reporters. He predicted that the size of the intervention will make it effective "in softening the pressures on the peso." 

Investors evidently agreed, knocking the peso down nearly 5% against the U.S. dollar by the end of the first full trading session Tuesday following the program's announcement late Monday. Exporters greeted the move, noting that the strong peso reduced their incomes and made it difficult to cover their costs and invest. 

This is the fourth time Chile's central bank has intervened in the exchange market since eliminating the peso's trading bands in 1999 and letting the currency float freely, and the first time since 2008..

This bout of dollar buying won't affect Chile's long-term competitiveness, nor its long-term real exchange rate, Mr. De Gregorio said. 

Much, however, depends on the global backdrop. 

Record-high copper prices, the wide differentials between interest rates in Chile and those across the developed world, and a rapidly expanding Chilean economy suggest the central bank's intervention program can't guarantee the peso won't resume appreciation. 

Chile is the world's biggest copper exporter, so sustained high demand out of China and other high-growth emerging markets implies continued high prices for the red metal, and more pressure on Chile's peso. 

"If the terms of trade continue to improve, the U.S. dollar continues to weaken in global markets, and the Chilean economy's cyclical position remains markedly strong vis-a-vis the trading partners, we sense the central bank will not lean excessively against the wind of further moderate Chilean peso strength," Goldman Sachs economist Alberto Ramos said. 

But given the size of the intervention program, which involves an initial $50 million in daily "very predictable non-discretionary" dollar purchases, Ramos said it "stands a good chance of being effective." 

Moreover, the central bank can also continue with interest rate increases, reining in domestic demand and inflationary pressures. That, in turn, should help ease pressure on the peso. 

De Gregorio said the bank remains committed to a target of 3% inflation in a two-year policy horizon. January-November inflation for 2010 stood at 2.9%. 



-Carolina Pica contributed to this report. 

 Write to  Anthony Esposito at anthony.esposito@dowjones.com 