As fears mount over possible radiation leaks from Japan's troubled Fukushima nuclear plants, people who live close to the plant in Japan are swamping experts in search of advice, seeking radiation tests and donning facemasks.

Experts say that for now, based on radiation levels in areas outside the evacuation zone surrounding the plants, there appears to be little risk from exposure to radiation. Japanese media have reported that current radiation levels in areas 30 kilometers and more from the Fukushima plants won't immediately affect the human body.

Even so, local-government hotlines are constantly busy, as are those of Japan's National Institute of Radiological Sciences. Some people are calling an emergency number that is for medical workers only, prompting NIRS to post a note on its website begging the general public not to call.

Here are commonly used and recommended ways to monitor and prevent exposure in the general population. 

Nuclear power plants equip workers with personal monitors, called dosimeters, to measure radiation exposure. There are also Geiger counters, or the badges that physicians and nurses who work with radiation wear to make sure they aren't exposed to excess levels.

Such devices can be bought online, but there is little reason that those not working at a nuclear facility—such as ordinary Japanese, let alone those beyond the country— should wear them, say radiation experts. Most don't face exposure to dangerous levels of radioactive material right now, and the devices can be hard to interpret. 

The badges can't be read directly—they have a chip that must be taken out and put into a computer to read, says James Cox, a professor of radiation oncology at the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center. Geiger counters, which have a display and make sounds to connote radiation levels, can be easily misread, radiation experts say. 

"What needs to be done is monitor the radiation levels in the evacuation zone and spot-check individuals there," said Paul DeLuca, a medical physicist who is provost of the University of Wisconsin-Madison.

Many countries deploy area monitors to look out for airborne radioactivity. Radiation detectors in Sweden were responsible for alerting the West to the Chernobyl disaster, said Jonathan Links, director of the Center for Public Health Preparedness at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. Japan is monitoring radiation levels in its prefectures, as well.

The best prevention is evacuating the area likely to receive dangerous levels of nuclear material fallout, according to experts. Japan has ordered residents within an 18-mile radius around the damaged Fukushima Daiichi nuclear-power complex to leave. The U.S. specified a broader, 50-mile "no-go" zone. 

But experts say that in the case of a more serious event, in which unsafe levels of radioactive materials are already present, those at risk should avoid trying to escape. Under those circumstances, people should stay inside or "shelter in place," as it is called. The World Health Organization says that only authorities who have conducted a careful analysis of the emergency situation are in a position to recommend such actions."Trying to get the heck out of Dodge too late is worse than sheltering in place," Mr. Links said. The best refuges are weather-proofed houses, or those with windows, doors and other openings that have been sealed with plastic and duct tape. The Japanese government has said concrete buildings make better shelters than those built from wood, and that resident should turn off ventilation systems.

News images show Japanese wearing face-masks, but experts say these would provide only limited protection. Regular surgical masks don't create an airtight seal around the nose and mouth and could allow radioactive particles to enter the body. Fit-tested masks or N95 masks might prove more helpful, but generally masks provide limited benefit. "For this particular purpose, they are almost useless," said Dr. Cox.

Potassium iodide—which has been snapped up by buyers even in the U.S.—provides limited benefits, said Mr. DeLuca. Potassium iodide fills up a person's thyroid gland, preventing it from absorbing radioactive iodine that a damaged nuclear facility might spew. 

But the medicine works for only a limited time before the thyroid needs more iodine. It could cause side effects like a flushed feeling or hot flashes, and must be taken before or at the onset of a nuclear event. In addition, it protects only the thyroid gland. The limitations are sufficient that experts say those living outside the evacuation zone shouldn't bother.

"If I'm in Tokyo right now, I'm doing nothing. I'm not taking potassium iodide. I'm not wearing a mask," Mr. Links said.

For those who come into contact with radioactive fall-out, the most effective remedy is to throw out the clothes and take a shower. Showers are very effective at removing radioactive particles that fall onto the skin. The Japanese government recommends putting contaminated clothing in a vinyl bag, sealed tightly.

For those who accidentally ingest radioactive material, the risk is that these particles contaminate the body. In the rare event of a substantial internal exposure, the goal is getting the particles out of the body as quickly as possible, or at least blocking their absorption. There are so-called chelating agents available to promote the elimination of certain radioactive particles.

For example, Radiogardase, sometimes called Prussian blue, treats exposure to radioactive cesium. Another agent is DTPA, Diethylentriamene pentaacetate, which can treat plutonium and other radioactive particles that get into the body. These drugs can reduce the impact of internal contamination, but not wholly eliminate it, said Mr. DeLuca. In addition, these treatments have to be taken under the direction and close supervision of a doctor, since they carry the risk of serious side effects, because they could also result in the loss of minerals the body depends upon to function, such as zinc, requiring use of supplements.

People who received a large dose of radiation might develop problems producing blood cells. They might need a bone-marrow transplant or take medication, such as erythropoetin or filgrastim, to stimulate the bone marrow's production of blood cells. But "that takes a considerable exposure," says Mr. DeLuca.

 Write to  Jonathan D. Rockoff at jonathan.rockoff@wsj.com, Miho Inada at miho.inada@wsj.com and Ron Winslow at ron.winslow@wsj.com 