Imagine a real-estate business where your tenant finds it hard to move and you provide the barest of amenities. No, this isn't the world of the New York apartment landlord. It's the private prison business.

  Corrections Corp. of America
CXW


-0.15
%




 and the  GEO Group
GEO


-0.43
%




 are the two biggest private prison and jail operators in the U.S., accounting for 75% of "beds" under private management. Despite a small drop in 2009, the overall U.S. inmate population of 2.3 million was double the level in 1990.

Less than one in ten state and federal prisoners, some 1.7 million altogether, are in private facilities today—private operators don't operate much in local jails.

Despite the apparent growth opportunity, there's a problem: Public finances. Shares in CCA and GEO have been treading water since mid-2009 as investors fret that federal and state authorities will cancel or try to renegotiate contracts and delay new projects. Corrections are the fourth-largest item on state budgets after education, Medicaid and transportation, according to Moody's.

Such concerns, however, should be set against the solid underpinnings of the sector. CCA and GEO operate in an effectively oligopolistic industry, providing an essential service in a sector where demand for beds far outstrips supply.

America's prisons are overcrowded. Overall, state and federal prisons were operating at 109% of capacity on average, using midpoint estimates from a U.S. Department of Justice report published in December. That average masks wide variance, with the Federal system operating at 136%.

Private operators can help address this. Typically, they can site and build a facility within two years compared with between three and seven years for a publicly controlled one, according to  Manav Patnaik, an analyst at Barclays Capital. The private sector's construction cost per "bed" is as much as 50% cheaper, too. Running costs per inmate are also lower.

In the near-term, therefore, the desire to cut state budgets presents a risk. But private operators' greater efficiency should help win them market share over time, as budget officials seek structural savings in corrections that don't involve increasing overcrowding further or just releasing criminals onto the streets.

By 2020, the U.S. adult population should increase by roughly 22 million, according to the World Bank. At the current incarceration rate, there will be another 160,000 federal and state prisoners by 2020. Say average overcrowding is cut from 109% to 105%—by building more beds—and the private operators win 35% share of all new beds, in line with the average for 2005-09. The result would be 76,000 new private beds across the decade, or a healthy growth rate of 4.5% a year. Privatization of existing public facilities would add to this.

At 17 and 16 times forward earnings, respectively, CCA and Geo trade at a premium to the wider market already. But, given their structural strengths, they should. Moreover, their cash flow provides stability through business cycles. 

From 2001 to 2010, CCA generated $1.5 billion of free cash flow after maintenance capital expenditure and dividends, according to Capital IQ, a data provider. The company reinvested $1.3 billion of that in new facilities to expand its market share. But it can easily ratchet that extra spending up and down depending on conditions.

There is a chance America's appetite for imprisonment weakens, but this would require a major shift in attitudes. More importantly, as long as taxpayers are looking for ways to cut costs while still keeping their neighborhoods safe, the private prison operators should be able to lock in long-term growth.

 Write to  Liam Denning at liam.denning@wsj.com 