TOKYO—Japanese officials on Tuesday cautioned currency markets that the Group of Seven leading industrialized nations could cooperate in further yen sales, aiming to prevent it from strengthening and so damaging the already-weakened economy.

Meanwhile the Bank of Japan reassured the banking system that ample money would be available as the country starts rebuilding from the devastating triple punch of earthquake, tsunami and nuclear emergency. The BOJ flooded the banking system with a record amount of cash Tuesday to ensure financial institutions have the funds to meet a spike in demand.

The Bank of Japan's current-account balance—the funds that financial institutions in Japan keep at the central bank, to lend or for other needs—rose to a record ¥41.72 trillion ($515.37 billion) Tuesday as a result of its liquidity injections. The cash infusion calmed the domestic money market, helping bring the benchmark overnight call interest rate back down to within the Bank of Japan's target range near 0%.

The yen warning underlined the sense currency traders already had that if they push up the currency too sharply, Japanese authorities may try to knock it back down, possibly in concert with other G-7 countries. Friday the G-7 undertook its first joint currency-market intervention in a decade. 

"First we agreed on joint intervention on March 18, and based on that agreement, we put language in the statement saying, 'We will monitor exchange markets closely and will cooperate as appropriate,'" Finance Minister Yoshihiko Noda said of Friday's G-7 action and accompanying communiqué. "That tells you everything."

A Japanese official familiar with the nation's currency policy told Dow Jones Newswires earlier in the day that there hadn't been any decision to limit the group's concerted yen-selling just to last Friday.

That's an issue foreign-exchange traders have been debating. Friday's communiqué said the other G-7 nations "will join with Japan, on March 18, 2011, in concerted intervention in exchange markets," and the emphasis on a specific date left some market participants and even Japanese government officials with the impression that the group had not committed to any yen-selling beyond that date.

"It is hard to believe that a series of large-scale joint interventions are on the cards," said Masafumi Yamamoto, chief foreign-exchange strategist at Barclays Bank PLC. "It is probably reasonable to expect that Japanese authorities, having the G-7's backing, will conduct large-scale intervention if speculative, upward pressure on the yen increases again, making such measures necessary." Friday's intervention likely amounted to about ¥530 billion, according to BOJ data and market estimates of fund flows, a far smaller figure than the roughly ¥2 trillion some traders had previously estimated

Japan's finance ministry, which intervenes using the Bank of Japan as its agent, remains on high alert, with the foreign-exchange division staffed through the weekend and on the Monday national holiday.

The G-7 joined to intervene after the yen, counterintuitively surging after the earthquake and tsunami, hit an all-time high last Thursday of ¥76.25 to the dollar. Since the intervention, the dollar has stabilized around ¥81.

The Tokyo stock market, ever-sensitive to the value of the yen, responded favorably to the steady dollar, with the Nikkei Share Index jumping 4.4% to close at 9608.32. A strong yen harms large Japanese exporters by making its products costlier overseas and reducing the value of earnings from abroad.

Mr. Noda on Tuesday said the collaborative action by the G-7 was "very meaningful for the purpose of stabilizing the market."

Friday's selling contrast with Japan's previous intervention, last Sept. 15—the nation's first such action in six and a half years. The finance ministry didn't have the backing then of the U.S. or Europe but acted under pressure from the government of Prime Minister Naoto Kan, according to a person familiar with the matter.