KABUL—Newly elected Afghan lawmakers said they would convene parliament on Sunday in defiance of President Hamid Karzai's move to postpone their inauguration, a move that could shift power away from the president and force a constitutional crisis.

Representatives of the U.S., United Nations and allies, who huddled in Kabul for most of Thursday to forge a response to the plan, prepared to release a U.N. statement backing the parliament, setting the stage for a direct challenge to Mr. Karzai. 

"Enough is enough. What Karzai is doing is clearly illegal," a senior diplomat said.

Mr. Karzai decided Wednesday to postpone the inauguration by a month to give a special court, which he had created, more time to investigate election-fraud allegations. 

The newly elected lawmakers argue that the court is unconstitutional, a view shared by Afghan election authorities and diplomats in the U.S.-led coalition.

Mr. Karzai left the country Thursday on a trip to Russia, and his spokesman declined to comment on the developments.

The parliament has emerged over the past year as a check on Mr. Karzai's authority, and the new legislature's makeup is even more hostile to the Afghan leader.

The incoming lawmakers could be blocked by Afghan security forces from entering the parliament's chambers on Sunday; diplomats say the day may put the loyalties of the Afghan army and police to the test. Legislators said if they were prevented from entering parliament they planned to meet in a mosque or a hotel, or even in the street.

Several Western envoys, including U.S. Ambassador Karl Eikenberry and U.N. envoy Staffan de Mistura, have indicated they planned to attend the inauguration, diplomats involved in the meeting in Kabul Thursday said. Doing so would recognize the new parliament and be a blow to Mr. Karzai.

"This is a litmus test for the international community," one ambassador said. "Karzai believes he can freely do what he wants, but Sunday will be a wakeup call." 

Washington has backed Mr. Karzai from the time he was appointed acting president in 2001, through his election in 2004 and re-election in 2009. But the U.S. and allies have long been frustrated with his erratic policies and his failure to tackle widespread corruption. In the vacuum that has followed the Sept. 18 parliamentary election, Mr. Karzai has ruled by decree, without the checks and balances of a legislative branch.

The emergence of a powerful, independent parliament, while significantly weakening Mr. Karzai, could help improve governance and decrease support for the Taliban-led insurgency, some diplomats said.

The Western ambassadors who met Thursday drafted a U.N. statement that, if approved and issued on Friday by Mr. de Mistura as expected, would express disappointment at Mr. Karzai's decision to delay the inauguration. It would also say a timely opening of the legislature was essential to democracy, stress that courts shouldn't be used for political purposes and reject the possibility of the international community supporting a vote recount urged by the president.

Senior Afghan lawmakers said they may meet Mr. Karzai when he returns to Kabul on Saturday, to give him a chance to relent, though diplomats discounted chances of a last-minute deal. 

The inaugural session of parliament must be opened by the president, regulations say. 

Lawmakers said that since Mr. Karzai, who is from the Pashtun ethnic plurality, was unlikely to show up, they were negotiating with the two vice presidents, Mohammad Qasim Fahim, a Tajik, and Karim Khalili, a Hazara.

An inauguration presided by the two non-Pashtun vice-presidents could split the country along ethnic lines, some parliamentarians and diplomats warned. "If this were to happen, this would mean a breakup of the entire regime," a diplomat said.

Mr. Karzai has condemned the new legislature's makeup as unrepresentative because he says it doesn't allocate enough seats to the Pashtuns, Afghanistan's largest ethnic group. In a meeting with visiting Western lawmakers this week, he said he sought to replace some 30 lower-house members, through a recount that he expected the U.N. to fund, one diplomat said.

Many prominent Pashtuns, however, are among the lawmakers leading the dissent against Mr. Karzai. 

The inaugural joint session of the Afghan lower and upper house must be attended by at least 175 members, or half of the total number of lawmakers in both chambers, to have a quorum. The more lawmakers show up Sunday, the more substantial international recognition the new parliament is likely to get.

On Thursday, nearly 220 directly elected members of Afghanistan's 249-seat lower house attended preparations for Sunday's opening in Kabul's Intercontinental Hotel. Leading parliamentarians said they expected almost all of these 220, and possibly more, to gather on Sunday in defiance of Mr. Karzai.

It isn't clear how many members of the 102-seat upper house will be present on Sunday; one-third of the seats, which must be filled by Mr. Karzai's decree, remain empty.

For now, the political fight in Kabul provides a further boon to the Taliban-led insurgency, which tried to disrupt the elections and considers the president and the parliament to be unlawful puppets of foreign invaders.

U.S. defense officials played down the rift, expressing confidence it would be resolved and a constitutional crisis would be averted. 

The Sept. 18 parliamentary elections had the lowest turnout of any Afghan election since the Taliban regime's downfall in 2001, in part because of widespread insurgent intimidation. 

—Maria Abi-Habib, Arif Afzalzada and Habib Khan Totakhil in Kabul and Julian E. Barnes in Washington contributed to this article.