When Nick Swisher slid hard into second base last week and broke Minnesota Twins rookie Tsuyoshi Nishioka's leg, the pundits in baseball circles generally wrote it off as a gritty play. But considering the historical precedent of Japanese middle infielders suffering major injuries in similar fashion, Nishioka's situation suggests an alarming trend.

There have been four Japanese middle infielders to play in the major leagues. Three of them—Nishioka, Kazuo Matsui and Akinori Iwamura—spent significant time on the disabled list as a result of an opponent's aggressive slide. The fourth, Tadahito Iguchi, was upended by vicious take-out slides in 2006 and 2007 but escaped serious injury.

Bobby Valentine, the former big-league skipper who spent seven seasons managing in Japan's Pacific League, said Japanese infielders come to the U.S. somewhat unprepared for the often dangerous slides common around the bag. American players—and Latin players exposed to American-style baseball at a younger age—are schooled in what Valentine calls an "anything-goes" approach to breaking up double plays. In Japan, meanwhile, baserunners are taught to slide low, making contact with the infielder's instep or ankle, not wanting to injure their fellow competitors. Nishioka had barely been exposed to the type of slide that will cost him at least the next month.

Valentine recalled a story about Rich Miller, a roving minor-league instructor during Valentine's stint as manager of the New York Mets. Miller would bring a stack of T-shirts with the phrase "DP Buster" splashed across the front whenever he worked with a team, awarding one to players who broke up a double play with a take-out slide. Valentine, impressed by the method, brought 12 shirts to Japan when he took the job with the Chiba Lotte Marines in 2004.

"I still have 11 of them," he said.

—Jared Diamond

Here are three Japanese middle-infielders that were injured in the major-leagues while trying to turn a double-play at second base.

Source: WSJ research *currently on DL