Rival tribes in Sudan's disputed Abyei region signed a peace agreement, an official there confirmed Friday, putting at least a temporary halt to violence that killed about 30 people in the past week and threatened to undermine this week's peaceful independence vote in south Sudan. 

Earlier this week, clashes erupted between the rival tribes in Abyei, a pocket on the border of north and south Sudan. Once rich in oil, the area has been hotly contested between the northern government in Khartoum and the autonomous south and tribes allied with each.

A peace deal was reached Thursday after two days of talks between the Ngok Dinka tribal leaders of the region and nomadic Misseriya, who have fought mainly over land rights there.

Ring Deng Kuol, the secretary-general of the Abyei administration, confirmed Friday that a deal had been reached. "The most important thing is the restoration of peace and tranquility in the region," he said. 

The deal comes as south Sudan wraps up voting in a referendum on whether the region should secede from the north. The south is expected to choose independence overwhelmingly. Southern officials have said that turnout had reached the 60% threshold required to validate the results, all but guaranteeing a split. Official results of the vote, which ends Saturday, won't be available for the next few weeks. 

Abyei, too, was slated to have its own referendum this week, but the north and south failed to agree on who should be considered an Abyei resident. The south argued that only the Ngok Dinka, farmers who lived there year-round, should be counted. The north wanted to include the nomadic Misseriya, who move through the area to graze their cattle. 

The fate of Abyei is now expected to be resolved through a political agreement between the north and south.

Abyei has long been subject to clashes over land, but Mr. Kuol, the Abyei official, said that he expected this peace to hold because the Misseriya need to enter the region to find water and fresh grazing land for their cattle. Renewed clashes would prevent them from accessing the vital area, so it is seen as in their interest to keep the peace.

"This time, actually, they seem to be serious," Mr. Kuol said. "What we have learned from their behavior [is] they don't honor agreements unless there are other threats on them." 

In the deal, Mr. Kuol said the Misseriya agreed to guarantee safe passage for groups of Ngok Dinka who were moving from the north back to their home in Abyei, and to pay "blood money" for the Ngok Dinka they had killed in the past year—about $700 in total. 

In return, the Ngok Dinka would pay about $350 in all for those they had killed and allow the Misseriya to move through their area safely to graze their cattle, along the traditional routes that they have long used. It wasn't clear how many dead from each tribe the payments covered. 