ATHENS—Greece's Socialist government is considering creative means to close its budget gap as tax receipts slump—including steps ranging from seizing the unclaimed assets of the dead to slapping new taxes on carbonated drinks. 

Ahead of a visit by international creditors Monday, the government is scrambling to find €22 billion ($31 billion) in additional spending cuts and tax measures over the next three years, as required under a €110 billion bailout it received from the European Union and the International Monetary Fund in May. 

"Tax collection is not coming in as expected, so the government, beyond pushing on that front, will look for other ways to close the gap," said a senior government official. "Seeking funds from unclaimed inheritances and from [bank] accounts from people long deceased, are some things that are being considered," he said. "A tax on soft drinks is also being seriously considered." 

Seizing unclaimed assets of the dead—some such estates have been in legal limbo for decades—could net the state around €4 billion in revenue, the official said. 

Under terms of the international bailout, the government must present its package of spending cuts and tax measures by the end of this month, the cabinet must formally adopt it by mid-April, and Parliament must pass it into law by mid-May. 

The package could include other measures that would abolish all tax breaks for individuals earning more than €70,000 a year, eliminate the lower value-added tax rates on Greece's tourist-dependent islands, and raise road taxes for car owners, the official said. 

Also being considered are policies to lower the tax-free threshold for property owners, including first-time home owners, the official said, as well as calling on the owners of hundreds of thousands of illegally built homes to pay a fee or a fine in order to avoid further tax inspections. 

However, the government is facing increasing resistance to its austerity measures from some ministries and public-sector unions, as well as the business community and the wider public. 

A number of ministries have said further reductions in their budgets could seriously jeopardize social services. The education and public-order ministries strongly oppose any additional cuts, and the country's labor, health and farm ministers have asked for easier spending goals. 

The official said the government expects to raise about €15 billion from cost cutting and €7 billion from extra revenue over the next three years, but said the targets "are very difficult" to achieve. 

The government hopes the new measures will help it meet its obligations to creditors and lower the yield the government would have to pay if it issued debt. 

The spread between Greek 10-year bonds and their benchmark German counterparts on Monday was above nine percentage points. To issue debt, a second government official said, the government needs a spread of around 3.0 to 3.5 percentage points. 

 If the government isn't successful, it may have to tap Europe's temporary bailout mechanism—the European Financial Stability Facility— next year in order to raise the €27 billion in long-term issuance that it needs in 2012, a second official said. 