MONTCLAIR, N.J.—Things are different this year: the Red Bulls are the prohibitive Eastern Conference favorites. They're the trendy pick to become the last of Major League Soccer's original franchises to win a title and they'll wear, defender Tim Ream said, that figurative target on their jerseys.

"I like that," coach Hans Backe said. "That means we have done something good last season and (people) have some respect for us."

Then again, the veteran Swedish coach admitted, being a favorite is only worth so much. "No one," he said, "gets relegated in this league."

That much is beyond dispute. One of the most fun vestiges of Premiership play—relegation of the league's bottom performers, which the Red Bulls were just two seasons ago, to a lower rung—is not part of the MLS. But sixteen years in, the American league is starting to show a few other traits of Premier League play. 

Finding more of those traits is the Red Bulls' goal as they open this season at 7:30 p.m. Saturday against Seattle at Red Bull Arena.

"We're going to try to have an identity, which means trying to pass the ball and being recognized as a team that plays the game, for me, the right way," Thierry Henry said.

And "the right way," for the superstar French forward?

"Pass the ball around, kick it forward," he said after Friday's practice on Montclair State's fields. 

For years the MLS has been tagged as being more about physicality than finesse, more tackling than technique. Ream, fresh off his first two national team caps, agreed. "There's a lot of banging bodies in MLS. In international, they try to play a little bit more," said the defender.

But the league is changing as teams like Salt Lake and Dallas play a more possession style, getting touches and creating chances off of movement and passing. A year ago the Red Bulls largely snuck up on their opponents to capture the Eastern Conference title. This year's group has been built to rise, and to do so behind that more aesthetically pleasing style.

Henry, who led the Premier League in scoring every year from 2004-2006, joined the team after the World Cup last year, and played in only 11 games. This year, Backe named him captain. The coach says Henry's "much, much fitter," and his presence at every single day of pre-season training has set a more fiery tone.

Veteran Mexican star Rafa Marquez is back too, and at his more familiar spot at the center of the back line, alongside Ream. Moving the always composed Marquez from the midfield has not only increased his comfort, but, Backe said, also calmed Ream, a finalist for last year's Rookie of the Year.

Scandinavian vets Jan Gunnar Solli and Teemy Tainio have come in to anchor the midfield, and Backe says he really likes his roster and its mix of old and young, experienced and hungry. As for the buzz around this team, that's all good too, he said. 

It demands a better brand of soccer and, heck, considering the alternative of last year's largely-ignored start, Backe said, "I'm much happier with this."

 Write to  Aditi Kinkhabwala at aditi.kinkhabwala@wsj.com 