We hope it won't do too much harm to Kate Zernike's reputation at the office if we say a word in her defense.

Zernike is the New York Times reporter who covers the Tea Party beat, and some of her work has come under attack of late in conservative media outlets. In particular, The Weekly Standard's P.J. O'Rourke scathes a piece that appeared in the Times Jan. 9, the day after the Tucson massacre titled "Bloodshed Puts New Focus on Vitriol in Politics." Here's O'Rourke:

We do not dispute O'Rourke's opinion of this report, but we are prepared to defend reporter Zernike (Hulse we don't know from Adam), for we are familiar with her work outside the Times. She is the author of "Boiling Mad: Inside Tea Party America," a 2010 book that we happen to have reviewed for the January issue of Commentary. Our review began:

"Boiling Mad" wasn't perfect. We faulted it for weak analysis and occasional tendentious liberal asides. But it convinced us that Zernike, whatever her political leanings, is a fair and honest reporter. If yellow journalism appears under her byline in the Times, it is the fault of her editors and the paper's corrupt culture.

How corrupt? So corrupt that the Hulse-Zernike piece was, by the standards of the Times last week, a relatively minor case of journalistic malpractice. Even the editors who assigned it at least have the excuse of having been under deadline pressure at a time when the facts were not yet in about the suspect's motives. The same cannot be said for the Times editorial board and Paul Krugman, who on Jan. 10, as we noted last Tuesday, were still linking the shooting of Rep. Gabrielle Giffords to "uncivil rhetoric" from the right, even after the facts had disproved any connection. The Times has made no acknowledgment yet of this gross journalistic wrong. 

Pinch Sulzberger, the Times scion who became publisher in 1992, is said to be a fan of "putting the moose on the table," a management-consulting gimmick. Like the elephant in the living room and the hippopotamus at the water cooler, the moose is an ungainly animal that serves as a metaphor for an uncomfortable and unacknowledged truth. During the Jayson Blair scandal in 2003, it was reported that Sulzberger carries around a stuffed moose and literally puts it on tables to encourage honesty among his company's executives.

This past weekend, the metaphorical moose was very much off the table in the pages of the Times. Writer after writer weighed in on what had happened without mentioning their own newspaper's scurrilous conduct. Echoing our language of last Tuesday, Charles Blow, titled his Saturday Times column "The Tucson Witch Hunt":

In a way it's a brave piece for a Times man, and a liberal one at that, to have written. But Blow's narrative is a peculiar one: The news broke. The air became thick. There was an excitement. The prophecy had been fulfilled. The dots were close. The temptation was strong. There was a witch hunt.

There was all kinds of stuff that was happening, but did anyone other than the right's rhetorical chickens actually do anything? Deep in the column, Blow got around to this vague assignment of responsibility:

But it wasn't "the left" or "Democrats" that instigated the witch hunt. It was the New York Times.

Blow's colleague Frank Rich predictably clings to the "uncivil rhetoric" story, even while acknowledging repeatedly that it had nothing to do with the shooting of Gabrielle Giffords. In the midst of his Sunday column comes this bizarre passage:

Consider those last two sentences through the lens of our Tuesday analysis, according to which the Times's attacks on "uncivil" alternative media reflect a desperate attempt to revive its own moribund institutional authority. The final sentence, bemoaning "unmediated" free speech, implicitly mourns the Times's lost role as mediator in chief. But the penultimate sentence, by suggesting that things would work out more or less as they did after 1963 and 1995, tries to deny the Times has suffered any loss of authority. Rich goes from denial to acceptance in the space of a single paragraph.

Most telling is Sunday's column from Arthur S. Brisbane, the Times ombudsman, who finds two things to fault in the paper's handling of the massacre.

The first is that for a brief period on the day of the shooting, the Times website, relying on information from CNN and NPR, erroneously reported that Giffords was dead. Such errors, born of the intractable tension between timeliness and accuracy, are unfortunate but common. Brisbane quoted the paper's standards editor, Philip Corbett, who blamed the mistake on a supervisory lapse: "Everything should go through an editor. Ideally, it should go through two editors."

The second was that the paper "initially" focused its news coverage "on the political climate in Arizona and the nation":

The paper's rush to judgment was indeed a serious mistake. Brisbane tries to downplay it by employing the everybody-does-it excuse: "The Times had a lot of company, as news organizations, commentators and political figures shouldered into an unruly scrum battling over whether the political environment was to blame," he writes, adding that "journalism educators characterize this kind of framing as a storytelling habit."

People who aren't journalism educators or ombudsmen characterize it as political bias. And it's not necessarily the reporters who are biased, as we know from the case of Kate Zernike. Her book proves that she is more than capable of fair and solid reporting, provided her work doesn't go through the New York Times's editors.

Brisbane's account of what went wrong ignores completely the Times's most important lapse. He forthrightly admits the journalistic error of relaying exaggerated reports of Giffords's death. He acknowledges the journalistic sin of biased coverage, although he tries to obfuscate it with J-school jargon.

But he says not a word about the journalistic atrocity of attempting to advance the "uncivil rhetoric" narrative even after the facts of the case had proved it false. In so doing, the Times acted with reckless disregard for the truth, the legal standard for defamation of a public figure established in the landmark 1964 case of  New York Times v. Sullivan .  

To be sure, the paper's malicious falsehoods are not legally actionable as libel. But that is only because in its attempts at character assassination, the Times used the low-precision weapons of innuendo, insinuation and generalization, thereby making itself invulnerable to the courtroom counterattack it might have faced had it dared to publish explicitly false statements of fact.

The moral degeneration of the New York Times is a study in the corrupting effects of power. Over the years, the men who run the paper came to view the preservation of their authority as agenda-setter or gatekeeper or "mediator" as their primary mission. On Jan. 10, 2011, they made it clear that they are willing to go so far in the pursuit of that goal as to contravene the real purpose of journalism, which is to tell the truth.

  Hate Makes You Stupid   Speaking of degenerate journalistic institutions, Helen Thomas has one fewer award named after her. "The board of directors of the Society of Professional Journalists voted Friday to retire the Helen Thomas Lifetime Achievement Award," the SPJ announced in a press release Friday. 

SPJ declined to take this step last spring, after Thomas unburdened herself on video of the opinion that Israeli Jews should "go home," by which she meant just the opposite: that they should leave home and move to Europe or America. But the spiteful superannuated screwball exceeded the tolerance even of the SPJ with her assertion last month, in a speech to an Arab-American group, that "Congress, the White House, and Hollywood, Wall Street, are owned by the Zionists."

An interesting side note: The Working Press, the newsletter of SPJ's annual convention, featured a profile in October of the organization's new president:

That's right, Limor is an Israeli-American. She enrolled at Northwestern University, graduated in 1983, and went into broadcast journalism. She's now an award-winning reporter at Cincinnati's WCPO-TV.

If you were Helen Thomas, you might say that the SPJ's decision, under Limor's leadership, to nix the Thomas award proves her claim that Zionists control the media. But wait. How can Thomas fault Limor when Limor did exactly what Thomas wants all Israeli Jews to do--make like a tree of the Righteous and leave?

Even Thomas's anti-Semitic ravings are logically inconsistent. Which reminds us of an exchange on our "Fareed Zakaria GPS" panel over the weekend, in which we debated Bernard-Henri Levy ("France's leading public intellectual," or so says his publicity material) and Washington Post columnist Richard Cohen.

 NewsBusters.org has video and a transcript of the exchange, in which Levy took strong exception to Sarah Palin's use of the term "blood libel," while Cohen (and we) defended it:

Alas, the transcriber missed our rejoinder: "Keep it classy, Richard." But Cohen's comment was as disjointed as it was ungentlemanly. 

To begin with, Levy's question rested on a foolish premise. It is quite possible that Palin didn't know that the blood libel is the myth that Jews kill Christian babies and use their blood in the baking of matzoh for Passover. If so, she was not stupid but ignorant--and not grossly ignorant, for this is not common knowledge among non-Jewish Americans. We three panelists--two Jews and a semi-Semite--are far better versed in the history of European Jewry than most educated Americans are.

Cohen's initial defense of Palin was entirely reasonable and, in our view, correct. But he contradicted it with his loutish lapse. If she didn't know the precise meaning of "blood libel" but used the term correctly anyway, that is a sign of intelligence, not stupidity.

When Cohen succumbed to strong feelings about Sarah Palin, it momentarily rendered his mind as disordered as Helen Thomas's is when she thinks about Jews. This is news you can use: Stay away from hate, because it makes you stupid.

  Winning Isn't Anything   From a No Labels press release, the dumbest sports analogy ever:

If you think everyone in the Super Bowl is on the same team, you may be a Nolabelist.

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Michele Schiesser, Taylor Dinerman, Ray Hull, Joe Perez, Bill Uttenweiler. Evan Slatis, Allan Mann and Abraham Shacham. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)