MADRID—Spain's government is close to winning broad support from opposition parties and unions for a pension-system overhaul aimed at putting public finances on a more stable footing and shoring up investor confidence in the country's ailing economy. 

A spokesman for Prime Minister Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero said Mr. Zapatero has spoken with opposition leader Mariano Rajoy about the plan and that Mr. Rajoy has agreed to support at least some parts of it, though the spokesman didn't specify which ones. Mr. Zapatero's Socialist party doesn't have a parliamentary majority. 

In a statement earlier Thursday, Comisiones Obreras, the country's largest union, also said an agreement on the overhaul was close. 

The government this Friday at its weekly cabinet meeting will approve draft legislation that will raise the country's retirement age to 67 from the current 65, a change that was fiercely opposed by unions, which threatened to call the country's second general strike in less than six months. Workers walked off the job in September over a separate reform that loosened Spain's rigid labor laws. 

To win the unions' support, the government has agreed to allow workers to retire earlier than 67 in certain cases. For example, under the terms of the agreement between the government and unions, workers will be able to retire at 65 if they contribute to the state pensions system for 38.5 years. 

Spain has come under intense pressure in recent months from the European Union and financial markets to take decisive measures to slash a double-digit budget deficit and stimulate economic growth following the collapse of a decade-long housing boom. The measures, however, have been made more difficult by Mr. Zapatero's lack of a parliamentary majority. The prime minister pushed through a new package of austerity measures in May by a single vote. 

Though the country's pensions system is currently healthy, a rapidly aging population presents it with one of the European Union's biggest long-term challenges. Spain's parliamentary commission on pensions estimates the number of people collecting a pension in Spain could nearly double to 17 million in the year 2050. 

Once the government approves the legislation Friday, it will send it to parliament for debate. Earlier this week, Spain's parliament signed off on reform recommendations made by the pensions committee, which are broadly similar to those of the government.

—Santiago Perez contributed to this article. 