TOKYO—Japanese core-machinery orders rose a stronger-than-expected 4.2% in January from the previous month, the government said, as orders from manufacturers were robust on the back of fast-rising overseas demand. 

The figures released Wednesday by the Cabinet Office add to a recent run of data showing that Japan's economy is again growing after a contraction in the fourth quarter of 2010, when the country's gross domestic product fell 1.1% at an annual rate.

The core-machinery figure, fueled by a 7.2% gain in demand from manufacturers, was larger than the 3% increase expected by economists. Core orders had risen 1.7% in December. Overall orders, including more volatile data for big-ticket items such as orders for new ships or electric power equipment, jumped 19.4%, the data showed. 

Among all manufacturers, orders from the chemical and nonautomobile transport equipment sectors were particularly strong. 

"We see good demand from industries that are closely related to exports," said  Seiji Shiraishi, chief economist at HSBC Securities. 

Reflecting the importance of the export sector, orders from overseas surged a record 71.4%. 

"Today's report, along with other recent indicators, suggest business spending should continue increasing moderately in the January-March quarter, though it's still too early to say if it will accelerate," said  Norio Miyagawa, senior economist at Mizuho Research & Consulting. 

The Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry reported this month that industrial output rose a seasonally adjusted 2.4% in January as production of autos, semiconductor production devices and other machinery benefited from overseas demand. 

On the back of firmer data, both the government and the Bank of Japan have recently upgraded their forecasts for the economy, with expectations of a positive GDP figure for the first quarter of the year. 

But caution is tempering the optimism as domestic demand is sluggish, especially among nonmanufacturers, who appear to believe the current economic momentum is still fragile. Demand from nonmanufacturers fell 2.7% from the previous month. 

"While the data confirmed that the recovery among manufacturers is continuing, we must also point out that activity among nonmanufacturers is still weak," said a government official briefing reporters on the data. 

Such corporate sentiment is due in part to the recent gains in crude prices. Amid continued deflationary pressure, analysts say the crude movement could be a large factor weighing on their profits. 

"Even if oil prices rise further, firms won't be able to hike prices of products easily," HSBC's Mr. Shiraishi said. 

The government official added that the 71.4% surge in orders from overseas was partly due to large-scale, one-time orders from the chemical industry and telecommunications firms. 

"Still, the underlying trend of strong demand in Asia, particularly China and the U.S., will continue to underpin recovery in overall business investment," Mizuho's Mr. Miyagawa said. 

Machinery orders are widely regarded as a leading indicator of corporate capital investment, which accounts for 15% of Japan's gross domestic product. 

Without adjustment for seasonal factors, core orders were up 5.9% from a year earlier in January, the data showed. 

—Andrew Monahan contributed to this article.

 Write to  Takashi Mochizuki at takashi.mochizuki@dowjones.com 