FRANKFURT—Europe's economic divide showed signs of widening further, as German industry powered the region's largest economy toward strong growth, while Portugal struggled to sell €1 billion ($1.39 billion) in government bonds and Greek unemployment jumped. 

Higher borrowing costs and surging oil prices will likely put more distance between Europe's prosperous north and vulnerable periphery, economists said, complicating efforts by the European Central Bank to combat inflation by raising official interest rates. 

German industrial production jumped 1.8% in January, the economics ministry said, more than reversing December's weather-induced drop. Data released earlier in the week showed an even sharper rise in manufacturing orders. 

Together, the figures point to German GDP growth of 4% or higher in the first quarter at an annualized rate, economists said. Germany grew 3.5% in 2010, versus a slight contraction in Spain and a 4.5% plunge in Greece. 

"There will continue to be pretty big divergences" this year, said  Ben May, economist at consultancy Capital Economics. German growth isn't tapering off much from last year, while a nearly one-point jump in Greece's unemployment rate to 14.8% in December, reported Wednesday, suggests more pain ahead for Athens. Other countries in the periphery face added tax hikes and state spending cuts this year, which will weigh on consumption and investment.

"There are countries experiencing a rather severe spending slowdown, most notably Spain," said  Frank Schuhardt, chief financial officer at  Delticom AG
DEX


2.12
%




, an online tire retailer based in Hannover. Like many other German companies, Delticom saw a sharp rise in revenue last year, nearly 35%, and plans to add to its 100-person staff.

In contrast, households in the periphery "are much more careful in light of the additional burden that is put on them by their governments," said Mr. Schuhardt, whose company sells tires in 39 countries.

That pressure will mount, as those governments face escalating debt-service costs. Portugal sold €1 billion in two-year government bonds Wednesday, showing it is still able to tap the private sector for funds. But Lisbon paid dearly; 5.99% interest for only a two-year maturity. Germany pays just 1.75% for the same maturity. 

Portugal has for months insisted it will continue selling bonds even at high yields, ruling out a bailout, which Greece and Ireland took last year when they faced similar financing costs. Many analysts doubt that Lisbon can stomach such financing costs much longer, a burden made even harder by economic stagnation that weighs on tax revenues.

  Antonio de Sousa, a former central bank governor who heads Portugal's banking association, thinks more economic pain is on the way as belt-tightening measures announced last year start to grip the euro bloc's 10th-largest economy, which unlike others in the periphery posted modest growth last year. Portugal didn't suffer the same collapsed property bubbles as Spain and Ireland.

"In terms of growth, 2011 will be worse than 2010," he said. "You are going to have a decline in private and public consumption."

Despite such concerns, ECB officials are ready to press forward with interest-rate rises, starting as early as next month. That may hurt Spain, Greece, Ireland and Portugal, but they constitute less than one-fifth of the euro bloc's GDP. Germany, which makes up around 30%, can easily weather higher rates, especially with inflation at two-year highs. "Our responsibility is to the 331 million people of the euro area," ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet said last week when asked about the effect of higher rates on the periphery.

Spain's 45 million citizens could feel the pain first. Nine out of 10 mortgages there are linked to short-term interest rates, said  Fernando Fernandez, professor at IE Business School in Madrid, so 0.75 percentage point in ECB rate rises this year—which is what markets are pricing in—would add almost €1,000 per year to the average Spaniard's mortgage payment.

Higher interest rates "are coming at the worst time," for Spain, Mr. Fernandez said.

Add in the effects of higher oil prices, and Spanish households face a loss of as much as €2,000 in disposable income per year, Mr. Fernandez estimates, while the country still confronts 20%-plus unemployment.

"There is a serious probably Spain may fall into recession or near recession by the end of the year," Mr. Fernandez said.

 Write to  Brian Blackstone at brian.blackstone@dowjones.com 