CAIRO—Egyptian protests continued and reports of looting spread as demonstrations to oust longtime President Hosni Mubarak entered a sixth day despite the appointment of intelligence chief Omar Suleiman to the post of vice president.

Scenes of chaos ensued in Cairo and other cities, with the death toll sharply rising to 102, according to the Egyptian Organization for Human Rights, with 80 of those deaths coming since Friday. The U.S. Embassy Sunday advised Americans to leave Egypt as soon as possible, and recommended not traveling to the country. 

Meanwhile, security officials said hundreds of inmates escaped prisons across Egypt on Sunday, including at least one jail that housed Muslim militants northwest of Cairo, the Associated Press reported. 

The prisoners escaped overnight from four jails after starting fires and clashing with guards, AP said. The inmates were helped by gangs of armed men who attacked the prisons, firing at guards in gun battles that lasted hours and killed several inmates.

Residents and shopkeepers in affluent neighborhoods boarded up their houses and stores against looters, who roamed the streets with knives and sticks, stealing what they could and destroying cars, windows and street signs. Gunfire rang out in some neighborhoods.

Egypt's army, widely considered the ultimate arbiter of power in Egypt, took an increasingly public role in trying to establish order in the tense capital on Saturday. 

Tanks and armored personnel carriers fanned out across the city of 18 million, guarding key government buildings, and major tourist and archaeological sites. Among those singled out for special protection was the Egyptian Museum, home to some of the country's most treasured antiquities, and the Cabinet building. The military closed the pyramids on the outskirts of Cairo — Egypt's premier tourist site.

In a highly unusual live televised address to the nation, an army general warned looters that the military would use "all necessary force" to impose order and enforce a 6 p.m. curfew in the country, as protests continued to grow in size and intensity. 

Mr. Mubarak's naming of Mr. Suleiman is seen as a concession to his opponents, who have long criticized him for failing to name a successor in his 30-year rule.

Mr. Mubarak also tapped former Minister of Civil Aviation Ahmed Shafiq to be the country's new prime minister and tasked him to form a new cabinet, following through on a pledge made a day earlier to form a new government. Mr. Shafiq is a former commander of the air force, like Mr. Mubarak, who flew under the president's command during Egypt's 1973 war with Israel. 

A succession of rallies and demonstrations, in Egypt, Jordan, Yemen and Algeria have been inspired directly by the popular outpouring of anger that toppled Tunisian President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali. See how these uprising progressed.

Both announcements seemed unlikely to satisfy a growing mass of protestors whose insistent demand is the end of Mr. Mubarak's 30-year-reign. 

Mohammad al-Baradei, the former head of the International Atomic Energy Agency who has positioned himself at the helm of a loose-knit coalition of opposition forces, rejected Mr. Mubarak's latest concessions and issued his boldest call yet for the ouster of the 82-year-old Egyptian leader. 

"The presidency of Egypt is falling apart and the people will fall apart unless Mubarak leaves today," Mr. Baradei said. "Protests will continue until he leaves… I have respect for Suleiman and Shafiq, but replacing individuals is not enough." 

Analysts said the appointment of Mr. Suleiman could just be a precursor to Mr. Mubarak's resignation, allowing the government to maintain the appearance of constitutionality in any transition. 

Mr. Suleiman, however, has long been one of Mr. Mubarak's closest aides and in the eyes of many Egyptians is known mostly for his visible role helping to mediate the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. 

With little information being disseminated about the transition of power underway in Egypt, the army's role remains vital. It was unclear where the military command would throw its considerable influence—or even if it had the ability to restore the spiraling sense of disorder throughout the nation's capital. 

By evening, residents of Cairo were questioning why the army hadn't deployed in sufficient numbers to take control of streets that the police had vacated a day earlier.

Throughout the city, looting was a growing problem. As night fell, Cairo residents, armed with steel pipes and two-by-fours, organized neighborhood watch committees to fend off roving bands of looters. People in numerous districts reported seeing bands of young men riding around in pick-up trucks.



Reports of vandalism and looting in the capital were widespread, with witnesses saying supermarkets and banks had been broken into and robbed. 

The army general, identified only as a Ministry of Defense spokesman, who made the unusual live appearance on state television, also advised Egyptians to form neighborhood watch committees to help protect their property overnight.

The army's deployment remained confined to certain prominent landmarks around the city and even there soldiers avoided stepping in to stop unrest. In Tahrir Square, soldiers stood idly atop their tanks as protestors set a Hardees restaurant on fire. 

In Sixth of October city, a northeast suburb of Cairo, shop owners shut metal shutters on their store fronts and armed themselves with metal rods to stand sentinel through the night in front of their property.

Within apartment buildings, neighbors organized in overnight shifts to patrol their building and blocked off the streets with trash dumpsters. "The people who are protecting the streets right now are our doormen," says Abdulhalim Mardawi, a resident of the Sixth of October city.

Egyptians said they couldn't recall any similar live national address by a military general in recent memory. Analysts said it was a powerful indication that the army is assuming increasing day-to-day control over the running of the country. 

The general also warned Egyptians that the military would enforce a 6 p.m. curfew throughout the country, though there were no signs that the military was moving against demonstrators amassed in downtown Cairo. Instead, a column of tanks rolled through masses of protestors in the central Tahrir Square, with dozens of protestors riding jubilantly on top. 

On Saturday, Egypt's once ubiquitous state security forces were nowhere to be seen in Cairo, except for in the streets surrounding the Interior Ministry. Throughout the city, police stations stood empty. Many had been torched, others simply abandoned. 

In one of the most dramatic scenes to unfold so far in five days of protests, military armored personal carriers intervened Saturday afternoon to protect protesters confronting rows of security forces that were guarding their headquarters at the Ministry of Interior.

During a tense afternoon standoff with protesters, security forces fired barrages of non-lethal pellets at the crowds pushing out of Tahrir Square towards the security headquarters. The protestors took cover behind the armored personnel carriers as the vehicles charged forward to create a defensive perimeter between demonstrators and the opposing force. The crowds then swarmed back into the space between the two armed forces, escalating their taunts against the security police. 

A soldier emerged from the hatch of the lead vehicle and waved at the line of anti-riot troops, apparently in a bid for the security troops to retreat. But the police refused to budge, and soon opened fire on the protestors again with a maelstrom of tear gas and steel pellets, pushing them away from the Interior Ministry itself. 

As night fell, it appeared unclear what exactly the army's orders were for keeping law and order in the streets of Cairo.



—Summer Said contributed to this article.

  