R.E.M.'s latest album, "Collapse Into Now," draws on all the defining styles of the band's 30-year history, from churning alternative rock to melancholic balladry. Yet Tuesday's release comes at a watershed moment for the band. It is coming off a 15-year, estimated $80 million contract with its longtime record label, Warner Bros. Records—a deal it isn't likely to duplicate in the industry's current climate—and the group's future commercial direction is unclear. 

Bass player Mike Mills says the band has been happy with the label, including the way it has built buzz for "Collapse Into Now." But the band has not yet entered negotiations. "We're not talking to anybody about anything," he says, adding, "We don't know what the future holds." 

Moreover, the band has made the unusual decision not to tour after the release of the new CD. "This just didn't feel like the right time to do it," says Mr. Mills. "It's hard to be more specific than that." 

Staying off the road could affect the band's efforts to reverse its commercial fortunes. "Accelerate," in 2008, was a blaring return to R.E.M.'s rock roots and sold 353,000 U.S. copies, according to Nielsen SoundScan.

 That's a shadow of the millions of copies R.E.M. albums moved in the early '90s, yet still an improvement on 2004's "Around the Sun," which sold a mere 236,000 copies. So far, critics have praised "Collapse Into Now." National Public Radio called it "the band's most rewarding album in 15 years." 

The album opens with "Discoverer," driven by the crunching chords of guitarist Peter Buck. "Überlin" has a tempo and haunting mood reminiscent of the über-hit "Losing My Religion." 

During recording sessions in New Orleans and Germany, Michael Stipe's lyrics took on an overriding optimism reflected in the album title, a reference to the power of living in the moment. The stomping "All the Best" pivots on a defiant chorus from Mr. Stipe, who sings, "I'll show the kids how to do it." 

 Write to  John Jurgensen at john.jurgensen@wsj.com 