At the beginning of the season, new St. John's coach Steve Lavin stood in front of his players at the school's Taffner Field House and wrote a goal on the board: an NCAA Tournament bid.

It seemed, to be blunt, unlikely. St. John's hadn't made the NCAAs since 2002 and the team's fate would rest on a group of nine active seniors with undistinguished careers.

Thursday afternoon, St. John's walked off the court at Madison Square Garden with the bid all but assured. And in a measure of how far the program has come, the players didn't even walk off smiling. The Red Storm fell to Syracuse, 79-73, in a tightly contested Big East Tournament quarterfinal. 

While Syracuse (26-6) takes on UConn Friday in a 7 p.m. semifinal, St. John's (21-11) will wait to learn its fate and travel plans on Sunday night when tournament bids are announced.

"Our team has a maturity about them that has allowed us all year to persevere through tough stretches," Lavin said. "Their approach and their attitude is what we're going to need moving forward."

St. John's entered this game in the shadow of controversy. At least two blown calls in the final seconds of its second-round game against Rutgers had helped usher the Red Storm into the quarterfinals and prompted all three officials on the crew to withdraw from the rest of the tournament. St. John's seemed unabashed and eager to capitalize on its second chance. 

Syracuse bounded onto the court for its pre-game warmup brandishing its "New York's College Team" shirts to cheers from the orange-tinted Madison Square Garden crowd. With a double bye, Syracuse hadn't played a game since crushing DePaul by 48 points—the largest victory margin in Big East history—on March 5. The Orange had suited up for only two games in the past two weeks. 

If they were eager to play, it showed. The Orange led by as many as nine early in the first half as the famed Syracuse zone stifled Red Storm shots and yielded seven blocks. 

St. John's scrapped its way back, refusing to let an injury to senior D.J. Kennedy derail their game. Kennedy, the team's third-leading scorer (10.7 ppg) and top rebounder (5.7 rpg), tumbled to the ground after a drive to the basket with 14:25 remaining in the first half and motioned immediately and urgently for the trainer. He hobbled off the court with a right knee injury and wouldn't return. It was unclear whether he'd be able to return to play in the NCAA Tournament. A sober Lavin deemed the injury "serious."

"We lost one of our brothers," said an emotional Sean Evans, who contributed 11 points and 12 rebounds, both totals substantially above his season averages of 3.3 ppg and 2.3 rpg. "If he doesn't get to play, it's going to be hurtful, but I think that's going to be fuel to the fire."

After trailing early in the game, St. John's stormed back take a 37-32 lead at halftime. The teams traded leads through the start of the second half, but Syracuse made fewer mistakes in the game's final moments and sealed the deal by hitting foul shots in the final 30 seconds, notching a win that was tighter than the score suggested.

Lavin said he knows he should be proud—and he is. St. John's is going to the NCAA Tournament. But he's not satisfied. "I think when we get some distance down the line we'll be able to put in better perspective what a year it's been." 