BEIJING—China's central bank said Friday it will raise banks' reserve-requirement ratio by half a percentage point, following six such increases last year, in the government's latest move to curb inflation. 

Economists say official Chinese data due next week are likely to show the country's fourth-quarter economic growth slowed and inflation fell in December. But officials remain concerned about inflation risks they say are fueled by loose monetary policies in other countries and a high level of global liquidity. 

The ratio increase, which takes effect Jan. 20, comes after China's consumer price index rose 5.1% in November from a year earlier, the fastest increase in over two years. 

China's gross domestic product likely grew 9.2% in the fourth quarter from a year earlier, slowing from the third quarter's 9.6% expansion, according to the median forecast of 13 economists. China's GDP likely grew 10.1% in 2010, up from 2009's 9.2% rise, according to the survey. 

China's consumer price index likely rose 4.7% in December from a year earlier, down from November's 5.1% rise, as prices of vegetables and other food items have moderated in recent weeks, according to the survey. 

Senior Chinese central bankers, including People's Bank of China Gov.  Zhou Xiaochuan, have made remarks in recent weeks about plans to use a broader array of tools, including variable reserve requirements for individual lenders, to more effectively manage credit and liquidity growth as Beijing turns its attention to combating inflation from an all-out effort to boost economic growth. 

Friday's ratio announcement comes after the central bank raised benchmark lending and deposit rates Dec. 25, the second such move last year. 

The last central bank reserve-requirement ratio increase took effect Dec. 20. China's official reserve-requirement ratio for most banks will be 19% after the latest move takes effect, based on the central bank's announcements. 

However, state media have reported the central bank may have verbally ordered some banks to set aside more reserves after they had increased lending. The PBOC hasn't confirmed or denied the reports. 