By some accounts, work in the United Kingdom this week ground to a halt as thousands of employees bridged two four-day weekends to create extended vacations.

Employees who did work through the week say they faced fewer distractions but were hampered by the lack of staff and colleagues needed to get work done Instead, they're catching up on projects, organizing offices and using the time to plan ahead for the next business cycle.

"I am being super efficient while everyone is away, but I keep running into the fact that people I need to get a hold of are not here," said Hemione Hudson, a partner in the banking division of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP in London.

PWC's London offices would normally have more than 2,500 people passing through on a given day, says Ms. Hudson, but this week, there have been far fewer. Many employees took the opportunity to get away after a busy audit season, she says. That's meant quicker elevators and no lines for coffee, she says.

Among those remaining behind are her boss, PWC Senior Partner, United Kingdom  Ian Powell and "many of the executive board."

Still, "it's not so great for business' bottom lines," Ms. Hudson points out. April has felt like a very short month, even for those working throughout, she says.

Those who did take time off can thank Friday's wedding of Prince William and Kate Middleton, which Prime Minister David Cameron declared a public holiday. That follows last weekend, which was bookended by Good Friday and Easter Monday, both bank holidays, and precedes May Day next Monday, which is also a national holiday.

That means a U.K. employee could take just three days off this week and effectively have an 11-day vacation. ABTA-The Travel Association estimates that about 3.5 million Britons will head abroad at some point during the 11-day period.

  Gordon Whyte, a manager at London-based executive search firm Archer Mathieson Ltd., just started a new job and felt that it wouldn't be right to go on holiday with so much to do: He plans to spend the quiet period making sure the information in the company's client and candidate database is accurate and organizing the office. "These two weeks are a great time to focus," he says.

Mr. Whyte is not upset that he is stuck in the office this week. But he says it feels a little surreal. "The only time I can remember a similar period was when England [played] Germany in the World Cup and everything stopped as people watched the game on television."

  Pippa Collett, managing director of London-based Sponsorship Consulting, says she doesn't mind heading to work, even though half of the company's 12 employees took this week off, since her children went back to school this week.

The firm began preparing for the holiday period six months ago, to ensure they could remain open for business and be available to meet client needs. Employees who decided to work in the company's U.K. office can use the time to plan for the next business cycle, she says. It's a productive time for those in the office because there are fewer distractions such as emails, calls and meetings.

Not all firms are heading into a quiet period, however. Some, including child-care agency Like Minders, have seen an increase in business.

Managing director,  Bryony Churchill has noticed a "huge upsurge" in bookings heading into the royal wedding weekend as families are travelling to London. The extra holiday, but it could cause havoc on the economy in the short-term and economic projections, say economists.

The wedding holiday could reduce GDP by as much as 1.5% in the second quarter, since the number of work days in the same quarter will be reduced by 1.5%, according to a report by Capital Economics, an economics consultancy based in London. However, that might be offset by higher spending in the tourism and retail industries, the report said.

Much of the economic production might simply be put off until May, noted  Samuel Tombs, U.K. economist for Capital Economics.

"It could all be a wash in the end, but it will have quite a big impact on [economic] data for the next few months," said Mr. Tombs, who guessed that his office was missing about six of its 40-person staff this week.

On the upside, those having to come into work could see an easier commute.

On the London Underground, also known as the Tube, traffic appeared to be lighter than usual on Monday and Tuesday, said Transport for London spokeswoman  Candice Jones, who said there wouldn't be official usage statistics until later in the week. TfL officials expect public transport usage to spike again on Friday, the day of the wedding.

Meanwhile, IGF, a commercial finance company for small- and medium-sized businesses, warned that the vacations could cause cash flow problems for small businesses, since so many finance staff could be unavailable to sign checks.

A spokeswoman said that the IGF's managing director was unavailable for comment because she was on vacation.