A powerful health-care executive accused of bribing three elected officials was ousted by his board on Friday, according to the chairman of MediSys, a hospital network in Queens.

MediSys chief executive  David Rosen, who spent decades assembling a Medicaid-financed empire of hospitals, clinics, nursing homes and managed-care plans, has been put on an unpaid leave of absence. 

MediSys Chairman  Neil Foster Phillips, a funeral-home director, said the board has decided to turn over control of the health-care company to one of Mr. Rosen's right-hand men,  Bruce Flanz, the long-time chief operating officer of MediSys. 

The company controls Jamaica, Brookdale University and Flushing hospitals, a number of lucrative managed-care companies, and more than a dozen other health-care entities.

Mr. Rosen was among the eight defendants accused by Manhattan federal prosecutors Thursday of taking part in an elaborate, multipronged influence-peddling scheme with state Sen.  Carl Kruger, a Democrat from Brooklyn, at its center. 

A federal complaint alleges that Mr. Rosen, funneling money through shell companies, paid bribes to Mr. Kruger and  Assemblyman Anthony Seminerio, the latter of whom pleaded guilty to corruption charges and died in prison. Prosecutors say he also gave a no-show consulting job to another lawmaker, Assemblyman  William Boyland Jr., a Democrat from Brooklyn.

It was Mr. Kruger who took center stage in the federal complaint, which accused him of pocketing $1 million in bribes over five years. Mr. Kruger's attorney said Thursday that he expects to be "fully vindicated."

Prosecutors described Mr. Kruger's close relationship with gynecologist  Michael Turano, who lives with his twin brother and mother in a Brooklyn mansion where, according to the complaint, Mr. Kruger helped the family with everything from buying travel snacks to consulting on lighting fixtures. Mr. Turano was accused of setting up shell companies to accept bribes. People seen entering the Mill Basin home on Friday declined to comment. 

Also charged was New York lobbyist,  Richard Lipsky, who secreted money to Mr. Kruger to buy favors for clients, the complaint said. An attorney for Mr. Lipsky denied the allegations, the Associated Press reported.

Since 2006, Mr. Lipsky has donated nearly $60,000 to more than two dozen candidates in amounts ranging from $250 to $5,000, according to campaign-finance disclosure reports filed with the state Board of Elections.

Members of Mr. Lipsky's immediate family also donated to a slew of candidates—most notably, Mr. Lipsky's wife, Dorothy, gave $9,000 to Mr. Kruger between 2008 and 2010. A number of officials said Friday they plan to return the donations.

—Amber Benham  contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Jacob Gershman at jacob.gershman@wsj.com and Michael Howard Saul at michael.saul@wsj.com 