KABUL—President Hamid Karzai officially unveiled plans Tuesday for his security forces to begin taking control over modest sections of the country in July as the Afghan leader seeks to exert more power over a nation struggling to establish its independence after a decade of war.

Standing before a vast hall filled with Afghan officials and dignitaries from around the world, Mr. Karzai announced plans for Afghan forces to begin taking the lead this summer in protecting some of the safest parts of the country and the provincial capital of southern Afghanistan's volatile Helmand province.

"The Afghan nation doesn't want the defense of this country to be in the hands of others anymore," Mr. Karzai said.

The proposal, crafted in close consultation with the U.S.-led coalition, is designed to gradually establish Afghan control over the country so that nearly 150,000 American and allied forces can begin coming home this summer. U.S. officials are pushing to end major combat operations in Afghanistan by 2014.

At the same time, Mr. Karzai is increasingly challenging his international allies on everything from U.S. development projects to the scope of United Nations work in his country. He and the Afghan government in recent weeks have stepped up their efforts to curtail international influence in the country.

The first two of Afghanistan's 34 provinces to begin the security transition will be Panjshir, birthplace of the country's celebrated anti-Soviet leader, Ahmad Shah Massoud, and Bamiyan, a thinly populated area best known for being home to the towering Buddha statues destroyed by the Taliban a decade ago this month.

Afghan forces in charge of security in Kabul, the country's capital, also will expand their control to most of the surrounding province, aside from one turbulent district infused with insurgents.

Along with the three provinces, Mr. Karzai said Afghan forces would take control of four cities: Mazar-i-Sharif in the north; Herat in the west; Mehterlam in the east; and Lashkar Gah, the capital of Helmand.

While Lashkar Gah is in the heart of the Taliban stronghold, the U.S.-led military has dispatched tens of thousands of troops to the southern region to challenge insurgents in their longstanding sanctuaries.

"This represents the next stage in Afghanistan's journey, not the destination," Anders Fogh Rasmussen, secretary general of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, said in a prepared statement. "We are committed not to leave any security vacuum that could breed extremism."

Taliban leaders ridiculed the announcement as a symbolic fig leaf meant to mask the broader reach the U.S.-led coalition has over much of the country.

Success of the transfer, which could take up to 18 months in some areas, will depend largely on the $6 billion-a-year international program to establish an overhauled, professional new Afghan security force. While the project has succeeded in beefing up the Afghan military and police, there is still widespread concern that the security forces are too weak, corrupt and unprofessional to take on the job.

Mr. Karzai used his address at the National Military Academy in Kabul to take repeated jabs at the international community, represented in the audience by an array of military leaders and diplomats, including U.S. Ambassador Karl Eikenberry.

Mr. Karzai has pointedly called on the U.S.-led military to curtail operations that kill civilians, end controversial night raids on Afghan homes, and contain private security companies accused of acting with an air of impunity.

Afghan officials are allowing most of the security companies to keep operating for another year, until the government sets up its own state-run security force capable of protecting development projects, supply convoys and other Western-run programs.

With the U.N. mandate in Afghanistan up for renewal this month, the Afghan government also has called on the U.N. to scale back its operations. In a recent letter to the U.N., Afghanistan's foreign minister also called on the international body to drop its attempts to overhaul Afghanistan's troubled electoral system.

—Habib Khan Totakhil contributed to this article.