MOUNT KISCO, N.Y.—Weeknight cocktails at a new bistro, a cruise along the shopping drag in a sleek muscle car, errands at A&P and Target, a languid Sunday stroll in his front yard: Such is the suburban life of Gov.  Andrew Cuomo. 

When he was governor,  George Pataki retreated to a Victorian mansion in the woodlands of Garrison by the Hudson. Gov.  Eliot Spitzer returned to a yellow-brick high-rise on Fifth Avenue, while Gov. David Paterson went home to Harlem. When Mr. Cuomo punches out, he takes refuge in the hills of northern Westchester, where he lives with his daughters and his girlfriend, celebrity chef Sandra Lee.

It's a change for Mr. Cuomo, who is better known in Albany as a street-smart operator from Queens. But as the dust settles on his first few months in office, the governor and Ms. Lee have begun to establish a quiet routine in this tight-knit town.

On an occasional weeknight, Mr. Cuomo changes into a pair of jeans and grabs dinner with his youngest daughter, Michaela, at Village Social Kitchen & Bar, which bustles with upscale singles.

A plate of creamy burrata mozzarella is dispatched to Mr. Cuomo's table upon his arrival.

"It's become a routine," says  Sean Maloney, the restaurant's general manager. A few diners greet Mr. Cuomo, but most keep a respectful distance. "It's very casual and laid-back. There's no pomp and circumstance," Mr. Maloney says. "It's very refreshing."

Mr. Cuomo isn't a schmoozer like former President Bill Clinton, who lives nearby in Chappaqua. But village veterans credit the governor for a lack of airs. "He makes eye contact. He makes sure he says hello. He doesn't look the other way," says  Frank Georgiou, the owner of the Mt. Kisco Coach Diner.

The town, in turn, has tried to be accommodating. Restaurant hostesses, for example, are briefed on how to handle the interplay between Mr. Cuomo's girlfriend and the governor's ex-wife, fellow Mount Kisco resident Kerry Kennedy, who, according to a person familiar with the matter, recently lunched together at local Provençal-style restaurant Café of Love. (Ms. Kennedy didn't respond to initial inquiries. On Sunday evening, a spokesman for Ms. Kennedy said that she did not have lunch with Ms. Lee.)

Mr. Cuomo and Ms. Lee haven't mingled at the Little League parade, farmers' market or Rotary Club. No photographs of the couple adorn the walls of delis or favorite restaurants. Their presence, though, has started to make a mark on the Mount Kisco landscape.

In recent weeks, word that Ms. Lee's "Semi-Homemade" culinary empire has set up shop above a bank in a modest brick building on Main Street has rustled across town.

She has been seen snapping up trinkets across the street at Party City for the "tablescapes" she features on one of her Food Network shows.

Nearby store owners spoke admiringly of the furniture they spotted Ms. Lee moving into her new headquarters, including a small roll-top desk she purchased for Mr. Cuomo's 14-year-old, Michaela, who occasionally stops by to do her homework.

And Ms. Lee got nods of approval when she turned to Mount Kisco's storied flooring shop, JH Crane & Son, to install the carpet.

"She wanted white, white, white," said  Carol Ford, who owns the 125-year-old shop with her husband, Don. "I took my shoes off. I didn't want to get it dirty." They came to the rescue with extra cleaning products after one of Ms. Lee's assistants soiled the white Berber carpet with a cappuccino.

Mr. Cuomo's footprint on the community has been less conspicuous by design.

The New York State Police, who provide the governor's security detail, have quietly set up a command station in a former community center on nearby Maple Avenue, a street overlooking the Metro-North railroad tracks and mostly populated by lower-income residents. When the town's board leased the space to the state police for about $2,000 a month, it concealed the identity of the new tenants in its meeting minutes.

Although children still frolic on the worn playground outside the brown ranch-style building, blinds now cover the windows and a fleet of black Suburban SUVs fills the parking lot.

Some residents, meanwhile, don't even recognize the governor. Robin Levine, a personal trainer who lives across the street from the couple's white clapboard home, said she was unaware of the identity of her neighbors until a week ago.

On a recent clear-blue day, Mr. Cuomo was seen tending to the property's modest pond and enjoying a solitary stroll around the lawn, which unfurls around a white gazebo and a shed.

Town officials say couple's engagement in Mount Kisco's civic life is minimal, but they wouldn't expect special treatment or attention from the governor.

"I'm going to wait until he gets his feet on the ground before I come to him with my specialty problems," said Mayor  J. Michael Cindrich, sporting a blue Mount Kisco baseball cap at a recent Little League season kickoff.

Still, after failing to secure Mr. Cuomo's participation in its St. Patrick's Day Parade, the town harbors hope that they'll see him at a ceremony it's planning for the 10th anniversary of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.

The fire department has invited Mr. Cuomo to speak at the service. And if it looks like the governor will be a no-show, Mr. Cindrich says he'll lean on an acquaintance who has entree with the governor's "inner sanctum."

"We know the time constraints" of his schedule, the mayor said. "But he's the one that chose us."

 Write to  Erica Orden at erica.orden@wsj.com and Jacob Gershman at jacob.gershman@wsj.com 