 New York 

Viennese pianist Rudolf Buchbinder, who performs Mozart's D-minor Piano Concerto at Carnegie Hall on Saturday night with the conductorless Orpheus Chamber Orchestra, has a lot to say, and not just musically. Given the opportunity, Mr. Buchbinder will rail against the decline of individualism, the dehumanization of the recording studio or the incompetence of music editors. Ask him about historical "correctness" at your peril.

He is an impressive figure. Back in 1966, when Mr. Buchbinder entered the Van Cliburn competition in Fort Worth, Texas ("I was between two tours in Australia and the U.S. and had some time," the pianist explains), Mr. Cliburn reportedly lobbied hard for him to win, even buttonholing jurists in hotel elevators. In the end, Radu Lupu took first place, but, says Mr. Buchbinder, "Van gave me a private special prize because he was very upset." No matter. Mr. Buchbinder's numerous solo performances, guest appearances with the world's great orchestras, CDs, videos and the directorship of the Grafenegg Music Festival near Vienna are accomplishment enough. Indeed, the 64-year-old virtuoso has more than 100 recordings to his credit; this year will see the release of his complete Beethoven sonatas on disc, as well as the five Beethoven concertos with the Vienna Philharmonic on DVD—all recorded live. 

This weekend's concert with Orpheus is just his cup of tea. "I've played piano concertos without a conductor about 500 times in my life," he says. "I think all orchestras should try it from time to time. It forces the players to listen more—even the violin player on the last desk has a greater responsibility. It means working very hard in rehearsal, but it makes the performance very exciting."

The experience is beneficial in preparation for those times when a conductor is present, he maintains, because even then everyone must learn to "breathe together." The meaning of the term concerto is "to fight," he instructs, but "it's a positive fight. At the end, you give each other a kiss, like when you have an argument with your wife. However, if you can't somehow manage to fit together, even 20 rehearsals will not be enough."

But fitting together, in Mr. Buchbinder's view, never means compromising a personal vision. "When you grow up in Vienna," he explains, "you feel lucky, because you believe you are in the musical center of the world—the home of Haydn, Mozart and Beethoven. Yet the only reason this music is still alive after hundreds of years is that there is no such thing as 'an authentic' interpretation. If there were, the music would be dead. Take a sample of recordings of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony by 10 conductors, and they will all be different. You can't say there is one right way."

Little wonder he is contemptuous of musical editions in which attempts have been made to "correct" Beethoven, or to straighten out inconsistencies in the score. "It's important to know about a composer's life, his time, his compositions—only knowledge makes you free. If you don't have a solid foundation, you can't build on top of it. But the 'music-theory bureaucrats' kill everything. I hate the way they create monolithic categories." I ask what he thinks of the common division of Beethoven's work into three periods. "Stupid!" he replies.

He similarly laments the way a kind of ideological conformity has led to the disappearance of strong musical personalities. "When you look at the last century, what composers do you find? Richard Strauss, Mahler, Stravinsky, Rachmaninoff, and 10 or 20 more. You can't find one singular style. We are missing such individuals today; everything has been leveled."

Despite these strong stands, Mr. Buchbinder's persona is anything but severe. He is jovial and still radiates a boyish charm. His eyes sparkle. As we share some scotch at his New York hotel, he interrupts his musical pronouncements to wax enthusiastic about Billy Wilder movies. "I knew Wilder," he reveals. "He was unbelievably witty. On his deathbed, his wife asked him whether he wanted to be buried or cremated. 'Surprise me,' he told her."

"One phrase I absolutely cannot stand," he continues, "is 'Viennese classic.' Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven—these poor guys didn't know they were 'classic' composers." Mr. Buchbinder turns the usual view of these early Viennese composers on its head. "Beethoven for me is the most sensitive and lyrical composer in history," he says, "while the most dramatic composer is Mozart. He had a genius for entertainment. Beethoven is the only composer in history who writes first espressivo [with expression] and then a tempo [resume the tempo]—it's in his Piano Sonata, Opus 109. That means that his espressivo is not in tempo. This is one of the hallmarks of Romantic playing. And two of his last three sonatas end with pianissimo—extremely softly."

Mr. Buchbinder's recorded performances reflect that iconoclastic approach. The pianist's DVD of Mozart's D-minor Concerto with the Vienna Philharmonic, for example, alternates moments of tender sentimentality with emphatic rhythmic syncopations that invest the music with a jazzy spirit. "The kind of swing they had at that time was unbelievable," he insists, and provides illustrations. "In the five Beethoven concertos, there is always one section that absolutely swings. Take the last movement of the first concerto—it uses a South American rhythm. And look at the jazzy elements in his Piano Sonata, Opus 111—Stravinsky called it Beethoven's 'boogie woogie' sonata. These composers wrote the pop music of their day."

Perhaps that is one reason Mr. Buchbinder also likes to play music by George Gershwin, though he won't play the "Rhapsody in Blue" with orchestra, because the composer didn't write it for those forces. "Gershwin was influenced by American folk music, just as Brahms was influenced by Hungarian and Gypsy music. If Brahms had lived in the U.S., he would have written music influenced by American folk sources."

As for the issue of recording live—which bucks the modern trend, initiated by Glenn Gould, of retreating to the safety of the studio—it is a practice he embraced fully at least 12 or 13 years ago, he reports. "In the studio, you can't be spontaneous," he insists. "In a live concert (and thank God you don't hear a lot of wrong notes when I play), you get the kind of emotion you can't produce in an artificial setting. There is a chemistry that takes place, and I don't care if there is also coughing and rustling."

If all goes as planned, that sense of spontaneity should be palpable on Saturday night, as a unique orchestra and soloist meet on the field of battle.

 Mr. Isacoff is on the faculty of the Purchase College conservatories of music and dance (SUNY). 