Whose art are you buying now? The question is a constant in the art world, where collectors often swap details about their fresh favorites in the same whispered way investors might share a Warren Buffett stock tip.

This week, New York collector Agnes Gund, president emerita of the Museum of Modern Art, spoke about the latest additions to her personal collection of modern and contemporary art, which already includes sculptures by Louise Bourgeois, gunpowder drawings by Cai Guo-Qiang and Jasper Johns's 1963 masterpiece, "Map." 

"In the 1960s, most of the artists I initially collected were men. Few galleries would even take women artists back then. A lot of women were doing sculptures and installations and driving their own path, but they were not really getting the praise I thought they should. 

"Now, a lot of my attention is going to buying drawings or smaller works of art by artists like Lynda Benglis, Jennifer Bartlett or Pat Steir who are being reassessed now. Kara Walker and Lorna Simpson are somewhat newer on the block, but you can still get pieces by them. 

"I just bought six of these gouaches of women's heads by Lorna Simpson that are just beautiful. In this series, she's looking at how women's hair fits around their faces. Her handling of it is really minimal, but she makes a gorgeous statement about not only the silhouette of women, but the content embodied in a hairdo.

"When I was a little girl, it was popular for families to get these paper silhouette cutouts of their children, similar to those Civil War-era silhouettes you could hang on the wall. My family would go down to the Stewart's department store every year to get ours made. So I see Lorna's heads and I see that store in my mind, even though I also know she's telling a different story. 

"I also just bought a work by Roni Horn when I was in Iceland. She did this major piece for the Library of Water in Iceland, where she's filled these huge clear tubes with water collected from the country's glaciers. Each glacier has different stuff that settles into it, so the tubes are defined by the particles and stuff inside. It's marvelous. 

"After seeing that, I really wanted something by Roni, so I got one of her images of these eider duck nests that are really protected there because people want their feathers. Even an image of those feathers really shows you the colors and the breadth of the Icelandic landscape, which is so different than what I'm used to."

(Ms. Simpson's head drawings from her 2008 series, "Ink," sell for $8,500 apiece at Salon 94 Gallery; Ms. Horn's "Untitled (To Nest)" sells for $15,000 at Hauser & Wirth.)

—Kelly Crow