Investors are shunning emerging-market bonds issued in U.S. dollars. That could be a mistake. 

There are two kinds of foreign bonds: Those issued in U.S. dollars and those issued in local currencies. Investors have made their preference clear, having pulled $321 million this year from funds that buy emerging-market bonds issued in dollars and other developed-world currencies, while pouring $4.5 billion into funds that buy local currency bonds. 

The weak dollar is the main reason, says  Cameron Brandt, director of research at EPFR Global, a fund-data provider. The greenback has dropped 3.6% this year against Brazil's real, 3.9% against Singapore's dollar and 5.3% versus the South Korean won. 

Despite the limp dollar, however, dollar-denominated emerging-market bonds haven't underperformed their local-currency peers by much during the past 12 months. The JPMorgan GBI-EM Unhedged index, which tracks local-currency debt, rose 15% during the past 12 months. The JPMorgan Emerging Markets Bond Index—Global Diversified, which tracks government and corporate debt issued in U.S. dollars, gained 9.2%. 

Yet the dollar-denominated bonds are significantly less volatile than their local-currency peers: They experienced 4.5% price swings, on average, compared with 11% in the local-currency index, because, for U.S. investors, they aren't subject to currency fluctuations. 

"It's fashionable to hate the dollar," says  Luz Padilla, portfolio manager of the  DoubleLine Emerging Markets Fixed Income fund. "But local currencies can whip you around."

So why not just stick with dollar-based U.S. corporate bonds? Emerging-market dollar bonds carry fatter yields—and maybe even lower risk. 

The Barclays Capital U.S. Dollar Emerging Market corporate subindex is yielding about 0.45 percentage points more than a similarly rated index of U.S. bonds, according to  Aziz Sunderji, a credit strategist at Barclays Capital.

At the same time, these bonds can be less prone to default. One measure of the ability of a company to pay off its debt is the "leverage ratio," or the amount of debt the company carries divided by its earnings. The lower the ratio, the better.

According to BofA Merrill Lynch Global Research, A-rated U.S. corporate bonds have a leverage ratio of about two times. Emerging-market companies with the same rating have a ratio of 1.7 times. In high-yield or "junk" bonds, a B-rated U.S. company has a leverage ratio of 3.6 times, compared with 3.2 times for a B-rated emerging-market company. 

"When you talk about the same credit ratings, the quality is better in emerging markets than it is in the U.S.," says  Oleg Melentyev, a high-yield and emerging-market corporate-credit strategist at BofA Merrill Lynch Global Research.

Another bonus: Buying a basket of emerging-market bonds can add diversification to a U.S.-focused bond portfolio, while still maintaining exposure to big global players like Brazil's  Petrobras.

"It's good to be diversified," says  Jason Hsu, chief investment officer at Research Affiliates, a Newport Beach, Calif.-based money manager. "A lot of these companies are just as large or larger than issuers in the U.S."

Still, there are risks to emerging-market bonds. For starters, they trade less frequently than U.S. bonds, meaning they may be more at risk during a selloff. In the case of default, meanwhile, the legal environment in the U.S. is better for bondholders. "Creditors face greater legal risks in case of bankruptcy in these markets," Mr. Melentyev says. 

But the risks may not be as daunting as they once were. The emerging-market bond market is growing rapidly, and is expected to equal the size of the U.S. high-yield bond market by 2014, according to  J.P. Morgan Chase
JPM


-0.01
%




 &Co. The bonds are also a growing part of U.S. bond indices—for instance, they now make up 9% of the BofA Merrill Lynch High Yield Master II Index, up from 4% five years ago. Both are likely to improve liquidity. 

Despite the murky legal environment in some emerging-market nations, recovery rates in the case of default are little worse—and sometimes better—than they are in the U.S. In 2009, recovery on senior unsecured debt in the U.S. and Canada was about 36%, compared with 33% in Latin America, 42% in Europe and 44% in Asia. 

The extra yield in emerging-market bonds also would help cushion the blow if U.S. yields started to rise.

Investment researcher  Morningstar Inc.
MORN


-0.39
%




 recommends the Fidelity New Markets Income fund, which has 32% of its portfolio in corporate bonds, above the category average of 23%, and has returned 9.8% annually during the past three years. 

Says Morningstar analyst  Kevin McDevitt: "It's done well despite not investing in local currencies." 

 Write to  Ben Levisohn at ben.levisohn@wsj.com 