By putting a new face on an old show, CBS Corp. and  Time Warner Inc.
TWX


0.54
%




's Warner Bros. are taking a gamble that they can revive their hit sitcom, "Two and a Half Men."

Television's most popular comedy will return to air this fall with actor  Ashton Kutcher filling the void left by  Charlie Sheen, the companies said Friday, removing a big question mark that has hovered over the show since Mr. Sheen was fired in early March.

Replacing an actor on a popular series is a risky—though far from new—strategy in Hollywood. Notable new faces over the years include actor Dick Sargent, who replaced Dick York in 1969 on the comedy "Bewitched," and Sandy Duncan, who took on the lead role in the 1980's sitcom "Valerie's Family" after Valerie Harper's departure. Mr. Sheen himself took a new starring role on "Spin City" in 2000, following Michael J. Fox's departure. 

TV analysts and ad buyers were split on whether the same move would work for "Two and a Half Men." The show has averaged 13.3 million viewers this TV season through May 8, according to Nielsen Co., more than any other TV comedy.

Charlie Sheen is "going to be a tough act to follow," said  Brad Adgate, senior vice president for research at buying firm Horizon Media. "They're big shoes to fill."

  Lyle Schwartz, head of programming research and analysis at GroupM, a media-buying arm of WPP PLC, agreed: "Traditionally shows don't do well when the main star leaves—very infrequently do they regain their footing and move on."

But some buyers were more sanguine. "He's a younger, known entity with a big following," said  Andy Donchin, a broadcast buyer at Aegis Group PLC's Carat. "It will hopefully keep CBS's Monday night pretty strong." 

More than 80% of U.S. consumers like Mr. Kutcher to some degree, compared with about 40% for Mr. Sheen, said Davie-Brown Entertainment, an Omnicom Group Inc. company that tracks the appeal of celebrities. Mr. Kutcher also ranks as more trustworthy and trendsetting than Mr. Sheen, the company said. 

CBS could live with somewhat smaller ratings. As part of a renegotiated deal with Warner Bros. to carry "Men" without Mr. Sheen, CBS is paying a smaller license fee, people familiar with the terms said.

Mr. Sheen, in a prepared statement, offered advice for Mr. Kutcher on working with the show's co-creator, Chuck Lorre, and suggested that ratings for the program would fall. "Ashton Kutcher is a sweetheart and a brilliant comedic performer. Oh wait, so am I!!" Mr. Sheen said. 

Mr. Kutcher won't directly replace Mr. Sheen. Mr. Lorre has been working on plans that would add a new character to the show, rather than recasting the role that has been played by Mr. Sheen, people familiar with the matter said earlier this week. 

"I can't replace Charlie Sheen but I'm going to work my ass off to entertain the hell out of people," Mr. Kutcher said in a statement accompanying the companies' announcement Friday. 

Mr. Kutcher, who is married to actress Demi Moore, has a background in sitcoms, appearing on "That '70s Show," on  News Corp.'s Fox Broadcasting, until it ended in 2006. He also produced TV shows including MTV's prank program "Punk'd." An attempt to break into movies has had mixed success, including a string of romantic comedies. An avid user of Twitter, he was named one of Time magazine's most influential people in 2010.

News Corp. owns The Wall Street Journal.

Time had been running out to find an answer to the fate of "Men." CBS is slated Wednesday to unveil its fall schedule to advertisers at Carnegie Hall in Manhattan, as part of a weeklong series of glitzy presentations that kicks off the yearly "upfront" advance-sales market for TV commercials. 

"It's an important show to us," CBS Chief Executive  Leslie Moonves acknowledged in a call to discuss quarterly results last week. But he added that he believes his network isn't dependent on any one program. 

So far this TV season, CBS has averaged 11.7 million prime-time viewers, the most of any U.S. network, according to Nielsen Co. Its average is down 1.4% from the same period a year ago, a shallower decline than any of the four biggest English-language networks. 

But "Men" has been a big part of building that success. The network anchors its Monday-night lineup with the program, and has used it to launch two other successful comedies. One of those shows, Mr. Lorre's "The Big Bang Theory," became so popular that CBS has used it this season to open a new comedy block on Thursday nights. 

It is also a big revenue-generator. Last fall, CBS sold 30-second commercials in new "Men" episodes for over $200,000, according to estimates compiled by Nielsen Co., making it one of the priciest programs on television. 

For its part, Warner Bros. has brought in roughly $1 billion in license fees for the program since the show's debut in 2003, according to estimates from media research firm Screen Digest, and has lucrative deals in place to sell reruns for the coming TV season, both in the U.S. and internationally.

Mr. Kutcher's announcement comes after talks with several potential stars. Earlier this week, British actor  Hugh Grant had also been close to a deal for a role, but those talks fell apart, people familiar with the talks said at the time. 

Mr. Kutcher will be paid around $1 million per episode to appear on the show, some people briefed on the deal said, while another person briefed on the deal said the amount would be much lower. It is unclear whether those figures include any share in the back-end profits from reruns of the program. 

Mr. Sheen earned about $1.2 million in base salary for "Men," although his share of back-end receipts brought his take up closer to $2 million per episode, according to people familiar with the matter.

—Lauren A.E. Schuker and Emily Steel contributed to this article.

 Write to  Sam Schechner at sam.schechner@wsj.com 