Commercial aircraft builder Airbus said it received 40 orders in the first two months of this year, but it also booked 43 cancellations in the period, for a negative net order intake of three aircraft. The division of European Aeronautic Defense & Space delivered 40 aircraft in February, making a total of 73 for the first two months of this year. 

Singapore Airlines said it plans to inspect certain wiring on all of its Airbus A380 superjumbo jets "as a precaution," in the wake of an unusual electrical malfunction at the end of January. An airline spokesman said they were prompted by an electrical fault aboard an A380 on Jan. 31, headed from Singapore to Hong Kong. 

Bombardier Aerospace said it signed an $8 billion aircraft-leasing agreement with ICBC Financial Leasing and ICBC's major shareholder, Industrial Commercial Bank of China. 

Rabobank Group posted a 26% rise in full-year net profit for 2010 to €2.77 billion ($3.84 million), mainly due to a drop in bad loan charges and cost cuts, but warned that belt-tightening by governments and stricter banking rules will make 2011 another challenging year. 

Standard Bank Group, Africa's largest lender by assets, said it will pull back from international expansion and aggressively cut its cost base after soaring operating expenses last year led to a 15% fall in net profit from banking activities to 9.77 billion South African rand ($1.42 billion). 

Swiss commodities group Glencore International reported a strong full-year performance, as net income, including exceptional items, more than doubled to $3.75 billion from $1.63 billion, reflecting an improved pricing environment for metals and minerals. 

TUI sold part of its stake in container-shipping company Hapag-Lloyd and could reduce its holding further through an initial public offering. TUI sold an 11.33% stake in Hapag-Lloyd to the Albert Ballin GmbH & Co. KG consortium for €315 million ($436.8 million), reducing its shareholding to 38.4%.

Privately-held toy maker Lego says its net profits in 2010 rose 66% to 3.68 billion Danish kroner ($684 million), boosted by a global toy market recovery and vigorous sales growth in the U.S., Russia and eastern Europe.

Cobham, the defense and commercial aerospace equipment maker, reported a 4% rise in full-year pretax profit to £306 million ($499.6 million) and offered a cautious assessment of its prospects, but said it would use spare cash to fund a share buyback of up to £150 million. 

 Anheuser-Busch InBev said fourth-quarter net profit fell 24% to $968 million due to a higher tax bill and the absence of profits from asset sales recorded a year earlier.  

 French energy giant Total will pay $4 billion for a stake in Novatek, Russia's largest independent gas producer, and its massive Arctic gas project, in another sign that Russia is opening up its lucrative energy sector to foreign investors. 

 BP's board, criticized for its handling of the Gulf of Mexico oil-well disaster, denied bonuses to three top executives responsible for operations in the region and promised steps to keep better tabs on the oil giant's management. 

Tullow Oil said a successful appraisal well off the shore of Ghana proved that the recently discovered Owo field is a major resource of light oil. 

Aviva, the U.K. insurer, said full-year net profit rose 33% to £1.46 billion ($2.38 billion), helped by an increase in sales of life insurance and pension products. 

Hedge fund manager John Paulson, who made his name betting against subprime mortgages in 2007, received a license from Hong Kong's Securities and Futures Commission to deal in securities. 

H.J. Heinz's profit rose 20% to $273.8 million on growth in its North American segment.

The food-products maker also said it is expanding further into emerging markets with the acquisition of an 80% stake in Brazil's Coniexpress S.A. Industrias Alimenticias, a manufacturer of tomato-based sauces, tomato paste, ketchup, condiments and vegetables. 

Chi-X Global, partly owned by Nomura Holdings, could receive a full Australian exchange license in April and be fully operational in October, setting up the first potential competitor to the Australian Securities Exchange.

 The U.K. government gave provisional approval to News Corp.'s proposed takeover of British Sky Broadcasting Group after the media giant agreed to spin off BSkyB's 24-hour news channel, avoiding a prolonged investigation by the nation's competition regulator.  

A Japanese and South Korean consortium is buying a 15% stake in Brazilian miner Companhia Brasileira de Metalurgia e Mineracao, which specializes in scarce metals, for $1.95 billion, a move that highlights steelmakers' race to secure resources amid tightening supply. 

Delhaize Group said it will acquire Serbia's Delta Maxi Group for €632.5 million ($877.1 million) to boost profit and reduce the Belgian supermarket operator's dependence on the U.S. market. 

 Carrefour reported a 56% rise in annual net profit to €433 million ($600.4 million), as cost cuts helped offset the impact of one-off charges related to problems at its Brazilian subsidiary.  

Koninklijke Ahold reported a 42% decline in fourth-quarter net profit to €154 million ($213.6 million), mainly due to lower income from joint ventures, and said it planned a €1 billion ($1.39 billion) share-buyback program. 

Japanese trading house Itochu has agreed to buy U.K. tire retailer Kwik-Fit from a European private-equity firm in a deal valued at £637 million ($1.04 billion), as it strives to grow its sources of profit overseas. 

Staffing giant Adecco said it would buy back 2% of its shares as it reported a sharp increase in fourth-quarter net profit to €141 million ($195.5 million) from €42 million a year earlier and said it had enjoyed a strong start to 2011 due to growing demand for temporary workers. 

 Consumer demand for Apple's iPad and other tablet computers is sapping demand for traditional laptop computers, research firm Gartner said as it reduced its forecast for global computer shipments. 

Teradata, a business-data storage company, said it agreed to acquire the 89% of Aster Data it doesn't already own for $263 million, a move it said will increase its customers' ability to analyze large volumes of diverse data.

Ericsson, the world's largest network-gear vendor, plans to appoint Volvo Chief Executive Leif Johansson as its chairman.

GDF Suez raised its earnings forecast for 2011, following the merger of most of its international operations with International Power, as it reported net profit in 2010 rose 3% to €4.6 billion ($6.38 billion) due to higher sales and gas tariffs in France.