ZAP! The name of the organization, so at home in a comic-book speech bubble, is highly evocative of the wine that it promotes, ZAP being the official abbreviation for the Zinfandel Advocates and Producers, which is celebrating its 20th anniversary the week after next in San Francisco. Judging from my experience of previous festivals, I can assure you it won't be pretty. Teeth will be stained, voices will be loud, wine will be guzzled and spilled. Whereas most wine-tasting events involve spitting discreetly into silver buckets in order to maintain a modicum of sobriety and critical judgment among the tasters, a great deal of wine seems to get swallowed at the ZAP Grand Tasting events, although one maker who participated in 2009 claimed that the event was slightly more subdued that year. Similarly, some observers have detected a new wave of more sophisticated zins, but Zinfandel, like rock 'n' roll, is never going to be subtle.

Zin is generally a big, high-alcohol red, exploding with bold fruit flavors ranging from raspberry to blackberry. It's a wine that calls out for all-American fare such as barbecue and chili. "No wimpy wines" is the longstanding motto of Ravenswood, a winery that helped put red Zinfandel on the map, and it could be the rallying cry for ZAP, and zin in general.

Ravenswood founder Joel Peterson was a cancer immunologist at San Francisco's Mount Zion hospital before he lost funding for his research. He had developed a serious interest in wine thanks in part to his father Walter, a physical chemist and charter member of the San Francisco Wine Sampling Club. In 1972, Joel started working with Joseph Swan, one of the pioneers in the rediscovery of Zinfandel, which had been widely planted around California in the 19th century by Italian immigrants. (It was finally genetically identified a few years ago as being identical to Primitivo, a Southern Italian varietal.) Many of these vineyards survived, partly out of neglect, and partly because of the popularity of White Zinfandel, a cloyingly sweet "blush" wine created at Sutter Home Vineyard in 1975. To increase the concentration of his red Zinfandel, Sutter Home winemaker Bob Trinchero bled off some of the just pressed juice before fermentation. A thousand gallons of this pinkish wine was fermented separately but the fermentation stopped before the sugar was converted to alcohol, resulting in a sweet wine that soon became the most popular wine in America.

A lot of old-vine zin also went into Gallo's so-called Hearty Burgundy, the first dry red wine that many of us future enthusiasts ever tasted, but winemakers like Paul Draper of Ridge Vineyards and Mr. Peterson believed that Zinfandel had a higher calling and that great red wines could be crafted from the old Zinfandel vines. (As vines age they yield fewer grapes but deliver more flavor intensity.) In 1976 Mr. Peterson launched Ravenswood using Mr. Swan's winery and four tons of old-vine Zinfandel bought from local growers. Pictures of him at this time show him with elbow-length blond hair, looking like a lost member of the Eagles. Mr. Peterson didn't have the money to buy his own vineyard; instead he cultivated relationships with growers, particularly those with old vines, some of which dated back to the 19th century.

The Ravenswood slogan came about when his business partner of the time insisted that they would have to make a White Zinfandel in order to get profitable. Mr. Peterson refused. "I told him I'd never make a wimpy wine," he says. Instead, he came up with Vintners Blend, an inexpensive red Zinfandel crafted from dozens of vineyard sources, which has become an international best seller with an annual production of around 500,000 cases. It's a great value, and a great introduction to the easy pleasure of Zinfandel.

Incisive criticism and accessible advice on the world of wine.

When I was getting married four years ago, I wanted to pour a crowd-pleasing red complex enough to intrigue the oenophiles in the group: I went with a zin, the 2003 Ridge Geyserville. Until fairly recently, if you wanted a good Zinfandel, you simply had to look for one that started with the letter R. Kent Rosenblum, a veterinarian from Minnesota who'd fallen in love with Zinfandel after moving to Alameda, launched Rosenblum Cellars in 1978. Ridge, Ravenswood and Rosenblum are still the big three of zin, though they have helped to inspire several new waves of zinophilia.

Larry Turley was an emergency-room physician when he launched Turley Cellars in the early 1990s. (I have no useful hypothesis as to why so many zinfanatics have medical backgrounds.) A courtly, gentle giant who originally hails from Kentucky, Mr. Turley, with his winemaking sister Helen, rocked the wine world with their first vintages, which seemed to crank up the volume and power (and alcohol) in a category that was already known for being over the top. Mr. Turley later turned over the winemaking duties to Ehren Jordan, one of the few men in Napa tall enough to look him in the eye. Although the Turley style was once synonymous with excess—and helped spawn a zin arms race in which everyone seemed to be going for riper, fruitier, fatter wines—most zinophiles agree that Mr. Jordan has in recent years refined the style, which is not so surprising given the fact that he crafts some extremely elegant Pinot Noirs for his own Failla label. But make no mistake, these are still big, bad reds that almost require a spoon.

More recently, the mailing list that zin freaks have been oversubscribing is that of Carlisle, which launched its first commercial vintage in 1998, although founder Mike Officer had been making wine in his garage for many years before he launched a winery under his wife's maiden name (Officer sounded a bit forbidding). Mr. Officer was a software designer who first caught the wine bug at 18 when his older sister, a restaurateur in San Francisco, poured him some choice California classics from Trefethen, Chateau St. Jean and Freemark Abbey. Throughout his 20s, his hobby became more all-consuming, his garage more crowded with barrels until, he says, "it was time to fish or cut bait."

Like Mr. Peterson, Mr. Officer relied on the friendships he had developed as a home winemaker to secure access to fruit from old Zinfandel vineyards, most of them in Sonoma's Russian River Valley. Eventually, he was able to purchase a vineyard planted in 1927, which he renamed Carlisle Vineyard. 

Mr. Officer's friend Morgan Twain-Peterson is one of the newest stars on the Zinfandel scene. As Joel Peterson's son, he would seem to have zin in his veins—he first made a bit of name for himself with a Pinot Noir called Vino Bambino, which he first produced when he was 5 years old and continued to make until he went to college at Vassar. After graduate studies at Columbia he went back to Ravenswood, then refined his winemaking with stints at Australia's McLaren Vale and at Lynch Bages in Bordeaux. Returning to California, he founded Bedrock Wine Co. and, in partnership with his father, bought a vineyard planted in 1886 (which he informed me was owned at that time by my wife's great-grandfather, George Hearst). The ancient zin was interplanted with more than 20 other varietals; because only about 60% of the grapes are zin, he doesn't designate the wine as such. 

"I didn't make a straight zin my first two years at Bedrock," he says. "I have a more classically trained palate and I thought zin lacked the requisite balance." Zinfandel fans will be grateful that he overcame his scruples—and possibly Oedipal issues—and now makes two vineyard-designated Zinfandels as well as the sublime Heirloom, a blend of zin (about half) and more than 20 other varietals, that is, in my opinion, an instant California classic. "The Rock in a velvet smoking jacket," reads my tasting note on the 2009. Those who prefer their wrestlers-turned-actors shirtless—and this would include many hard-core zinophiles—will find plenty of zins out there that fit the bill.

Worthy examples of bold California zins; some are easiest to find online

2008 Turley Cellars  Dragon Vineyard Howell Mountain Zinfandel, $60

POW! As in Pretty Outrageous Wine. A real rock opera, packed with fruit, and spicy, earthy notes reminiscent of a great Châteauneuf-du-Pape.  Still tight, it will be best in a few years.   turleywinecellars.com  

2009 Bedrock Vineyard,  Sonoma Valley Stellwagen Vineyard Zinfandel, $40

A sophisticated hedonist, this deep-purple juice has classic Zinfandel raspberry and blackberry notes in a slightly restrained, balanced style.  Voluptuous, plush texture.   bedrockwineco.com  

2008 Carlisle Russian River Valley Carlisle Vineyard  Zinfandel, $45

From a vineyard planted in 1927, this inky nectar suggests a whole spectrum of fruits from raspberry to pomegranate, but it has a lively acidity that keeps it from being a floozy.  Try like hell to find it.   carlislewinery.com  

2009 Ridge California Sonoma County Three  Valleys, $25

A field blend of 70% zin and lesser amounts of Petite Sirah, Carignan, Grenache and Mataro, this is a hedonistic mouthful with tons of red raspberry fruit.  Drink over the next few years.

2007 Ravenswood  Sonoma County Old Vine Zinfandel, $17

Smells like a blackberry fight. A lash of acidity lifts the exuberant fruit of this classic zin.  Pull up a plate of ribs.