PARIS—The role of the new European Securities and Markets Authority isn't to find consensus between member states, but to act as a powerful independent agency, said its recently appointed chairman in an interview Wednesday. 

"The role of the regulator is not to get a consensus position. It's to give his [view] based on his expertise and based on his independent position,"  Steven Maijoor said. 

The ESMA was created last year to strengthen financial-market oversight at the European Union level. It will have to tread a fine line between still powerful national regulators and the need for a consistent application of market rules across the 27-nation member bloc.

The creation of the European securities regulator also comes amid efforts by the Group of 20 industrial and developing nations to draw up tougher regulations on the financial sector across all major economies. The E.U. has been a major proponent of tougher rules.

He said his priorities will be oversight of the credit-rating agencies, focusing on consumer protection, establishing a single rule book for financial markets, working with the EU's two other new oversight authorities, the European Banking Authority and the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority, as well as using its powers to ensure EU law is applied the same way in all the EU countries. 

Mr. Maijoor was officially appointed as chair of the ESMA in early February and previously served as director of the Netherlands Authority for the Financial Markets-AFM. 

The ESMA's predecessor, the Committee of European Securities Regulators, accomplished a lot, but it's clear the change from CESR to ESMA is a big step and not a gradual shift, said Mr. Maijoor. 

While national authorities will continue to have a role in day-to-day supervision, Mr. Maijoor said it would be unacceptable for certain countries to allow, for example, stock market listings that another EU state would not. 

"It is unfair to the investor. It is unfair to the financial industry because it is not a level playing field," he said. Mr. Maijoor said insufficient coordination across the EU helped contribute to the global financial crisis. 

In very specific cases, he expects to use the ESMA's authority of banning certain products, but said this would be the exception and not the rule. An example of a clearcut case would be if a large portion of an investment goes towards a product's administrative fees. 

"We need to have an eye, and it needs to improve, on serving the interest of the financial consumer and retail investor," said Mr. Maijoor. "Supervision is there because it will result in better functioning financial markets." For instance, he said, the ESMA should have the option to stop short selling "in emergency situations." 

ESMA will also tackle derivatives legislation and is likely to be charged with researching and recommending an EU position on which derivatives will be required to go through a clearing house. 

Mr. Maijoor wouldn't rule out any single product or give details on what derivatives should be required to go through clearance. However, he did say that an ESMA task force was already working on this issue and was considering whether there will still be room for tailored or nonstandardized derivatives contracts. It was also considering whether companies should be subject to the same rules as banks, he added. 

"I don't think I know any rule or regulation where there is not also parts of that regulation giving exemptions," said Mr. Maijoor. The focus, he said, is on the rules' objectives, but, "there are options for exemptions." Mr. Maijoor is scheduled to meet with the head of the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission this month to assist in coordinating objectives. 

"The systemic risks we had as a result of not having central clearing in the derivatives market, that needs to be solved," said Mr. Maijoor. "A substantial part of that market will be centrally cleared." However, he added, regulators do need to take a cost benefit analysis of the effects of derivatives intervention. 

The ESMA will also have a role in the EU's Markets in Financial Instruments Directive, now under revision. The directive sought to create more competition among market exchanges, but it also had the effect of reducing transparency. Many of these new exchanges are off-platform and dark pools where trades are conducted privately among banks rather through an institutional exchange. 

"It needs to be improved in terms of post-trade transparency. That is one of the proposals that I think indeed is a good way to improve on this transparency issue," said Mr. Maijoor. In pre-trade transparency, he said investors should have access to the best execution, which is complicated by having multiple trading venues. 

Mr. Maijoor said the potential merger between  NYSE Euronext and  Deutsche Boerse AG
DBOEF


0.53
%




 underlines the effects of these MiFID rules, as well as impending rules on derivatives, on how markets function. He didn't elaborate. The newly merged exchange would be based on Mr. Maijoor's home turf, in Amsterdam. 