It was supposed to be Wall Street's hottest tech deal in years: the private offering of as much as $1.5 billion in shares of Facebook Inc. And it was a coup for the company's adviser, Goldman Sachs Group Inc., the most envied firm on the Street.

Goldman bankers burned up the phone lines in the first week of January, pushing many of their best American clients to invest in the deal. And then, on Sunday and Monday, those same advisers were on the phone with those same clients with some bad news. They wouldn't be getting any Facebook shares after all.

Now, Goldman has a very different mission to execute: soothing a legion of irate investors.

"They pushed me hard to get here and invest, and then they pull the rug out from under me," said one wealthy Goldman client in the U.S. who was planning to invest $2 million in the social-networking site. His adviser at Goldman called Sunday night to explain that the Wall Street firm would offer Facebook shares only to non-U.S. clients. Goldman worried that the media spotlight surrounding the private offering might violate U.S. securities laws and expose the firm to legal action. "The whole thing has left a bad taste in my mouth," the Goldman client said.

Goldman also had to contend with angry Facebook executives who were miffed that the share offering—meant to quietly increase the Palo Alto, Calif., company's luster—turned out to be far more public than they expected, according to people familiar with the situation.

Several other Goldman investors also said that they were angry about the change, and a Goldman spokesman acknowledged that the firm is hearing complaints about its decision.

"We completely understand that clients are disappointed, and we are sorry about that," the Goldman spokesman said. "But our view was that it would not have been prudent for Facebook or for investors to have proceeded with the offer in the U.S."

U.S. law doesn't allow private placements to be advertised or solicited publicly. In other jurisdictions, the supercharged level of media coverage about the Facebook deal doesn't matter as long as the investors who buy shares in the company are considered professional. 

Not surprisingly, Goldman's rivals at other securities firms barely could contain their glee at the investment bank's flub. "It's embarrassing" for brokers at Goldman who sweet-talked their best clients into thinking that the firm had opened a back door into Facebook before it goes public, said one official at a Wall Street firm that competes against Goldman in the wealth-management business. 

Other Goldman clients said the firm is still the best place to go for a crack at the most sought-after deals. Facebook came and went, these clients said. But they still may get a shot at the consolation prize: Goldman appears to have the inside track on leading the IPO of Facebook if the social-networking site goes through with such plans as soon as April 2012. "You win some, you lose some," one Goldman client said.

How the Facebook deal fell apart in the U.S. is likely to be a hot topic when Goldman reports fourth-quarter results Wednesday. Earnings are expected to show a decline because of continued weakness in trading.

Many Goldman clients said they felt jilted by the firm but expressed reluctance to complain publicly. As part of the Facebook deal, clients signed confidentiality agreements prohibiting contact with the news media. 

Facebook officials are perturbed by Goldman's move to exclude U.S. investors from the deal, according to people familiar with the situation. But the fast-growing company also has a strong incentive to stick with Goldman.

Facebook attained a $50 billion valuation after a $500 million direct investment by Goldman and Russian investment firm Digital Sky Technologies in late December. That is up sharply from its $10 billion valuation in 2009. The fiasco could give Facebook more leverage to negotiate lower investment-banking fees with Goldman, these people said.

Facebook wasn't initially interested in raising the $2 billion, these people said, partly because the company generates enough cash to fund itself for more than a year. Hiring Goldman as an adviser tilted the odds in favor of a sky-high valuation when Facebook goes public.

DST founder Yuri Milner, who already had a stake in Facebook and a close relationship with Goldman, was the matchmaker between the companies, the people said. It wasn't hard to convince Goldman, which had been looking for an opportunity to get closer to Facebook.

Last fall, Goldman and DST sifted through financial information about Facebook, agreeing to the $500 million investment by the two companies, which was completed in late December. Goldman introduced the idea of a private placement as a way to raise more cash ahead of an IPO, according to other people familiar with the matter.

 Goldman has some fence mending to do with their image. They appear brash in their behavior, impulsive in action. It surprises me. 

—James Schaad

Facebook executives concluded that the extra cash wouldn't hurt. They left the work of assembling the so-called special-purpose vehicle to Goldman, offering little input on the deal. The two companies signed an agreement and made plans to launch the private offering in January 2011.

The deal was sailing along when Goldman executives began worrying last week that the private offering could be deemed improper by regulators. The Goldman client who agreed to invest $2 million said his broker told him: "We don't feel this is in your best interest with all the attention and issues around this." The client said he wasn't told during the conversation that Goldman had decided to block all U.S. investors from the deal.

The Goldman client said his attention to this deal made him concerned that Goldman's fees are on the high side. "Before this deal, if they told me to buy something, I'd buy it," he said. "Now I'm paying attention to the fees. And I'm going to tell all my friends who are Goldman clients to look at their fees. I can't see how that's good for them in the long term." 

Goldman informed U.S. clients that they can't invest in Facebook even if they have a residence or legal entity elsewhere in the world, according to another person familiar with the matter. U.S.-based institutional investors with foreign operations that are considered non-U.S. under securities rules still might be able to buy Facebook shares.

—Geoffrey A. Fowler contributed to this article.

 Write to  Anupreeta Das at anupreeta.das@wsj.com, Robert Frank at robert.frank@wsj.com and Liz Rappaport at liz.rappaport@wsj.com 