The trustee recovering money for  Bernard Madoff's victims went on the offensive Friday, alleging in more detail in an amended lawsuit that the two New York Mets baseball owners should have known for years that Mr. Madoff was a fraud and later hatched a plan to shield their assets from recovery after the decades-long Ponzi scheme was exposed in 2008.

The allegations, which come as settlement talks are at a standstill, were part of a 381-page complaint in which Irving Picard, the court-appointed trustee, outlined in more detail how dozens of businesses controlled by  Fred Wilpon and  Saul Katz, the Mets' main owners, allegedly collected fictitious profits through their business, Sterling Equities, even though they should have known that Mr. Madoff's business was a fraud.

"The amended complaint sheds more light on the deep dependency of the Sterling business organization on the continuation of the Madoff fraud and certain knowledge of indicia of fraud by the Sterling partners," said  David J. Sheehan, counsel to the trustee and a partner at Baker & Hostetler LLP.



Messrs. Wilpon and Katz called the allegations "a work of fiction," in a statement on Friday. "The amended complaint is the latest chapter in the work of fiction created by the Trustee. We will pursue a vigorous legal defense that will set the record straight and vindicate us," they said. 

Friday's amended complaint is the latest broadside in an acrimonious legal battle between Mr. Picard and the Mets owners and it signals that settlement discussions between the two parties aren't progressing. Former Gov. Mario Cuomo has been trying to work out a settlement between the parties for the past month.

The complaint, like the original filed in December, seeks more than $1 billion from the Mets owners, including nearly $300 million in false profits and about $700 million in principal they withdrew. The December lawsuit had been sealed at the request of the Mets owners and with the agreement of Mr. Picard. However, after settlement discussions stalled, Mr. Picard asked the judge to unseal the lawsuit last month. 

Friday's suit details transactions between Mr. Madoff and Sterling Equities that Mr. Picard alleges show that Sterling should have known Mr. Madoff's operation was fraudulent. 

In particular, the complaint details a multimillion-dollar interest-free loan in 2004 from Mr. Madoff to Sterling tied to its purchase of the broadcast rights for the New York Mets from Cablevision. Facing a tight deadline on a $54 million payment, Sterling turned to Mr. Madoff to finance the transaction. 

According to the complaint, Mr. Madoff told Messrs. Katz, Wilpon and Marvin Tepper, a Sterling general partner, that Sterling's accounts were invested "in the market" and so redeeming funds would lower Sterling's returns. Instead Mr. Madoff offered to send Sterling the $54 million it needed for the buyout rights. 

That transaction with Mr. Madoff, according to the suit, was documented by a single letter drafted in part by Mr. Tepper on Mets letterhead that falsely described the loan as an "investment" by  Ruth Madoff in the company that would become the SNY network. It was signed by Mr. Wilpon, Mr. Katz and by Ms. Madoff, though the suit says the men never spoke with her. 

Mr. Madoff wired to Sterling on about May 26, 2004, the $54 million, "which was comprised of other people's money," the complaint states.

The next day Sterling repaid the $54 million it had borrowed from Mr. Madoff and used money borrowed from banks to proceed with the buyout, the complaint states. 

The complaint says Messrs. Wilpon, Katz and Tepper "should have known that it was highly unusual for such a sizable transaction to be supported by only minimal documentation" and that it didn't "accurately reflect the true nature of the deal." 

David Cohen, general counsel for the New York Mets, said "This is more nonsense from the Trustee. The $54 million represented funds the Sterling partners had invested with Madoff, as the Trustee acknowledges."

An attorney for Ms. Madoff declined to comment. 

The complaint also claims that the design of Sterling's new credit facilities, set up in the wake of the Madoff scandal, give the lenders priority over other vicitims in collecting revenue if the company is forced to sell its assets. Mr. Picard alleges that arrangement shows the Mets owners knew the danger that their relationship with Mr. Madoff posed. 

The Mets owners have denied knowledge of any wrongdoing and said they, too, were victims of Mr. Madoff's schemes and lost about $150 million in cash that was deposited into accounts controlled by Mr. Madoff when his business collapsed on Dec. 8, 2008, as well as hundreds of millions more in paper assets they believed they had.

Losing access to money deposited with Mr. Madoff was a crucial loss for the Mets owners because, as Mr. Picard has alleged in his complaint, Messrs. Wilpon and Katz regularly withdrew money from their Madoff accounts to fund other businesses, particularly the baseball team. In addition, they had secured significant loans with major financial institutions using money from their Madoff accounts as collateral.

The Madoff scandal has, in part, forced Messrs. Wilpon and Katz to take out roughly $800 million in loans against the Mets and their 65% stake in regional sports network Sportsnet New York. 

Complicating matters for the Mets, The Wall Street Journal reported Friday that two media companies that are minority investors in the cable network are unlikely to allow the Mets owners to sell a portion of their stake in the channel to potential investors in the Mets. Bidders are not being shown any financial information about the network. 

Attaching a stake in the network to a minority investment with the team would have allowed the Mets to raise additional cash from the transaction, since the network is more valuable than the team and produces more than $100 million in cash flow annually.

The Mets can turn a profit if the team is successful, but a disappointing season last year drove attendance down nearly 20% and the team lost money, according to people familiar with its finances. Baseball analysts say prospects for a successful season this year are not good. 

In addition, the Mets owners are now trying to sell a noncontrolling stake in the baseball team in an effort to raise roughly $200 million to finance team operations and reduce its debt. The team is carrying about $450 million in debt, while the network is carrying $400 million, people familiar with the finances have said. 

A person familiar with the Mets owners' plans said money from the potential sale won't be used to pay off a settlement to Mr. Picard.

For Messrs. Wilpon and Katz, who are both in their 70s, the lawsuit has been particularly painful because it has stained their reputations as forthright businessmen and generous philanthropists that they spent a lifetime developing, people close to the men say. 

Mr. Picard, who has filed an avalanche of lawsuits against various parties in recent months, is attempting to recover a total of about $20 billion in lost assets on behalf of thousands of victims of Mr. Madoff's scheme. He and federal prosecutors have collected about $10 billion so far.

—Michael Rothfeld contributed to this article.

 Write to  Matthew Futterman at matthew.futterman@wsj.com, Dionne Searcey at dionne.searcey@wsj.com and Chad Bray at chad.bray@dowjones.com 