David Wojnarowicz's film "A Fire in My Belly" (1986-87) has been discussed at a macro level for months. Since November, when the National Portrait Gallery bowed to pressure and removed the work—or, more accurately, an excerpt with scenes depicting ants crawling over a crucifix—from its show "Hide/Seek: Difference and Desire in American Portraiture," the central issues have been censorship, the government's role in the arts and taxpayer funding.

By now, the work, which is regarded as an expression of the artist's outrage and grief over the AIDS epidemic, has been viewed widely: Soon after the secretary of the Smithsonian, G. Wayne Clough, pulled the film from "Hide/Seek," art institutions around the country requested loaner DVDs from New York's PPOW Gallery, which represents the artist, and displayed them in a show of solidarity. The Museum of Modern Art then acquired the work and put it on view earlier this month.

Amid the controversy, the people closest to the artist's estate say the film and its creator have been too narrowly interpreted. So it's time for the micro: Why did Mr. Wojnarowicz make the film—which has circulated in three different versions—and when? 

Mr. Wojnarowicz's papers are housed in the Downtown Collection of New York University's Fales Library. Head librarian Marvin Taylor acquired the artist's estate for the library in 1997, and he has overseen its preservation with media specialist Brent Phillips. In consultation with the executor of the estate, Tom Rauffenbart, they have created a fact sheet to address a series of alleged inaccuracies that have been "reported and reprinted/posted."

According to their research, "A Fire in My Belly"—which was made on Super8 mm film and is not, contrary to media reports, a "video"—predates Mr. Wojnarowicz's discovery that he was HIV positive, which Mr. Rauffenbart said occurred in March 1988. "The film was shot before David was diagnosed and before he got involved with the AIDS movement," said Mr. Rauffenbart, who was the artist's partner for seven years.

Considered in a broader context, the film's footage of street scenes in Mexico and of various forms of fighting reflects the artist addressing themes of violence, individuality and the effect of culture on a child. "There is a tendency to limit his work to the anger over AIDS," Mr. Taylor said. "David talked about the 'One-Tribe Nation' in his writing. Anyone who stands outside that is alienated. If you don't fit in, then there are problems. That theme runs through his works. It became intensified in the work that is about AIDS."

"Fire in My Belly" has two parts: The 13-minute reel and an additional seven-minute excerpt. The work as a whole came to be seen as solely reactive to the AIDS crisis, said Messrs. Taylor and Phillips, due to the later uses of the seven-minute excerpt in another film—Rosa von Praunheim's "Silence=Death" (1989)—as well as the truncated version shown at the National Portrait Gallery and a subsequent version posted on YouTube.

The version of the film shown at the Smithsonian was a four-minute edit of the seven-minute segment—with a soundtrack from a June 1989 audiocassette of an ACT-UP demonstration found in Mr. Wojnarowicz's papers. Smithsonian curators Jonathan Katz and Bart Everly made the changes with permission from Mr. Rauffenbart.

"In some ways, I'm OK with it. A great deal of it is his voice," said Mr. Rauffenbart, who was pleased that the National Portrait Gallery was putting up the show and that it included Mr. Wojnarowicz's work. 

This portion also includes the scenes of ants crawling on a crucifix that ultimately drew objections from the Catholic League and Rep. John Boehner, the speaker of the House.

Regarding the crucifix scenes, Mr. Rauffenbart said they should be viewed in terms of Mr. Wojnarowicz's extensive use of Catholic imagery: "He had a positive image of Christ and had his own version of what Christ represents. He was tied to saints, too, that suffered and were martyred."

Emphasizing the various ways the work can be interpreted, Mr. Taylor pointed out that these sections of film were listed (in a companion cutting script for the film) under the heading "Prostitution."

The version on YouTube—with added music from "Plague Mass" by Diamanda Galas—was taken from "Silence=Death," but the master footage with the music was not among the artist's papers. "People went on YouTube and listened to the version with the 'Plague Mass,' which makes it a very different work," said Mr. Taylor.

According to the library's fact sheet: "The most we can accurately say is that the footage [depicting the crucifix] was removed by Wojnarowicz from 'A Fire in My Belly' and given to [producer] Michael Lupetin for use in 'Silence=Death.'"

Further linking "A Fire in My Belly" to the AIDS crisis was the popular belief that the film was intended as an homage to artist Peter Hujar, who died from AIDS complications on Nov. 26, 1987. Although Mr. Wojnarowicz was planning a film tribute to Mr. Hujar, the timing of "Fire in My Belly" raises questions about the artist's intentions: "David took a lot of the footage in 1986 before Peter got sick," Mr. Rauffenbart said. According to the fact sheet, the film "was not created as an homage to Peter Hujar. In fact, it is questionable if it was created as a response to AIDS."

But at MoMA, the wall text that accompanies the film describes the history of AIDS and artists' responses, as well as the following: "Completed after the artist was diagnosed with HIV, the two-part project A Fire in My Belly is a meditation on mortality and suffering, referring, often in graphic detail, to death, social inequality, faith, and desire."

Sabine Breitwieser, chief curator of media and performance art (who was traveling, but responded via e-mail), said the text is based on previously published information about Mr. Wojnarowicz's life.

We may never know what the artist truly intended. What we do know is that this film has come a long way—from the fragile original 8 millimeter, to 16 millimeter, to DVD and archival master tape, to streaming video with additions and edited versions. Far from pigeonholing the artist, the protest has sparked widespread interest in his full body of work—early, late and repurposed.

 Write to  Pia Catton at Pia.Catton@wsj.com 