The phrase "brother-and-sister astro nomer team" sounds almost too precious to be true. It seems like the premise of a children's novel or a description of some offbeat cousins in Wes Anderson's "The Royal Tenenbaums." In fact, stargazing siblings William and Caroline Herschel were the late 18th century's most celebrated astronomers.

William Herschel is chiefly remembered for discovering the planet Uranus in 1781. Caroline, who began as his assistant, would become a formidable astronomer herself. Together they discovered not only Uranus (and two of its moons) but also two moons of Saturn, eight comets and 2,500 nebulae. Their work had important theoretical implications, helping transform the prevailing model of the universe from a rigid system of unchanging stars to a more organic one, in which stars are born, develop and die.

They began as outsiders, untrained immigrants from Hanover without connections in English scientific circles. William had come to the country to make a living as a musician but began dabbling in astronomy, eventually crafting homemade telescopes with far greater magnification and fidelity than any others produced at the time. He continuously refined his technology, ultimately constructing a monstrous 40-foot-long telescope.

William soon whisked his favorite sister away from a domineering mother, and a life of household drudgery, to aid him. He would observe the night sky, reading off notations to Caroline, who would enter them by candlelight. This separation of labor avoided the loss of vision—and time—that a single astro nomer typically suffered from alternating between dark sky and bright page.

 By Michael Hoskin  Princeton, 237 pages, $29.95

The sheer size and unwieldiness of William's homemade instruments made the Herschels' style of astronomy a danger ous business. William more than once was nearly crushed under his own instruments, and Caroline, while assisting with night observations, impaled her thigh on an iron hook. ("They could not lift me," her journal records, "without leaving nearly 2 oz. of my flesh behind.") 

Vivid scenes like these, which remind us how unladylike a pursuit science was for Caroline, capture one's interest in Michael Hoskin's appealing "Discoverers of the Universe." Mr. Hoskin, a fellow of Churchill College at Cambridge, has written scholarly books about the Herschels. This more popular account is only a limited success: The science portions are refreshingly clear, but the author does not fully animate the Herschels' colorful personalities.

William and Caroline made a queer pair. He was tall, handsome and commanding; she was shrunken and disfigured from childhood illness. William bullied Caroline and took her for granted. Caroline venerated William but perhaps also feared him, and she could be fiercely jealous. When William finally married, it doomed their scientific partnership. Caroline later destroyed the diaries that she had kept during the turbulent aftermath.

One pleasure of Mr. Hoskin's account is following Caroline's journey out of her brother's shadow, from meek assistant to renowned astronomer. An indefatigable comet-hunter, she discovered at least eight in her career. She also single- handedly overhauled the standard British Catalogue of Stars, correcting hundreds of errors and noting more than 500 previously overlooked stars. 

William had the classic quirks of the autodidact. Though his fresh perspective yielded new insights (he calculated the speed and direction in which our entire solar system is moving), he believed in moon men, and even inhabitants of the sun, to the exasperation of colleagues. "Were I to chuse between the Moon & earth," retorted William, "I should not hesitate a moment to fix upon the Moon for my Habitation." It is this blithe cussed ness, in part, that makes William's journey—from musician to fellow of the Royal Society to salaried astronomer to King George III—so entertaining.

"Discoverers of the Universe" is a true double biography, firmly establishing Caroline's role in the partner ship. Yet one cannot help comparing its depiction of the Herschels to that in Richard Holmes's recent book about Romantic-era science, "The Age of Wonder." Mr. Holmes accomplishes in a few chapters what "Discoverers" only fitfully manages through an entire book: evoking the visceral thrills of early astronomy and re-creating the Herschels' eccentricities, charms and emotional lives. That said, Mr. Hoskin adds enough rigor to make "Discoverers of the Universe" a perfect follow-up for fans of "The Age of Wonder." And for anyone interested in the history of astronomy, it should serve as a welcome introduction to two of its greatest stars.

—Mr. Kennedy is the author of the young adult novel "The Order of Odd-Fish."