New York University's Stern School of Business will no longer require applicants for its executive M.B.A. program to submit standardized test scores. Previously, students had to submit scores from either the Graduate Record Examination (GRE) or the Graduate Management Admission Test (GMAT).

The school is changing its policy because its average student is 38 years old with 14 years of experience, making the test unnecessary, explains  Heather Daly, director of executive M.B.A. recruitment and admissions. Some 40% of students also already have an advanced degree. "The GMAT and the GRE can be valid predictors of success, but they aren't the only ones," Ms. Daly says. "We require a 45-minute interview that focuses heavily on their professional achievements."

NYU had a long-standing policy to let some students waive the tests if they had enough quantitative experience. After an internal study, the school found that students who had waived taking the GMAT or GRE because of their professional experience tended to perform better in the program than those who hadn't. Applicants with non-quantitative backgrounds might be asked to take additional coursework to get them up to speed.

Cornell University's Johnson Graduate School of Management is overhauling its executive M.B.A. program to make room for more elective classes.

The school's 70 students will have an additional eight electives to choose from. Specific classes include Critical Thinking and Coaching for Executives. The degree will also become more flexible, with some classes lasting just five days, although the changes won't affect the overall hours of coursework, the school says.

Johnson is also ramping up its career services resources. Because more executive M.B.A. students are interested in changing careers, the school has hired a career counselor who will focus expressly on the executive students, says Douglas Stayman, associate dean for M.B.A. programs. "The minority of the students want to stay in their current companies, and that's why we're being more aggressive about career advice," Mr. Stayman says.

Babson College has added a new school to its international consortium—Bangkok University.

Babson, based in Wellesley, Mass., will help Bangkok develop an entrepreneurship center and train and mentor faculty members from Bangkok University, says  Shahid Ansari, provost of Babson. Babson professors will also help Bangkok administrators set up incubators for student-created products. "Since Babson College is small, we don't have the resources to be everywhere in the world, but these partnerships help us reach the rest of the world without establishing a presence entirely on our own," says Mr. Ansari.

The entrepreneurship center is slated to open this fall. In the past year, Babson has signed similar partnerships with schools in Pakistan, China and Chile.

HEC Paris, a French business school, is opening its doors in Qatar. Last month, it launched an international executive M.B.A. program aimed at managers in the immediate region. The launch is part of the school's efforts to broaden its international presence. (It currently has programs in Russia, North America and China, in addition to France.)

The program is offered in conjunction with the Qatar Foundation, an education and research organization. The program will be in Doha, although students will have the opportunity to take some core classes on other campuses, including in Paris. Students will also choose from six concentrations, ranging from entrepreneurship to energy management.

The new program is critical for HEC Paris's expanding into other markets, says  Bertrand Moingeon, deputy dean in charge of executive education and academic development.

The school originally expected a small class of roughly a dozen. Instead, 31 enrolled, including a handful of students from Australia and North America. The average student age is 36, with 13 years of experience, according to Mr. Moingeon.

—Diana Middleton