The recovery on Wall Street has swelled into Connecticut, boosting the state's tax revenues and igniting a battle over what to do with the added income. 

Revenue estimates increased by $465 million for fiscal year 2011, according to a report released Friday by the state's budget offices. The majority of the revenue jump was attributed to a $438 million increase in income and other taxes. 

About 40% of the state's income taxes originate in Fairfield County, home to a high concentration of hedge fund and financial-services employees, according to 2009 figures from the state Department of Revenue Services, the most recent year available. The recession that slammed those industries also hit Connecticut's public coffers.

Now, higher revenues are arriving just in time to play a role in a heated debate over how to close a $3.5 billion gap in the state's budget, which is a two-year spending plan. Republican lawmakers want to use the added cash to lower taxes, while unions say the money could be used to soften the $2 billion in givebacks the state is demanding.

Gov.  Dannel Malloy and his fellow state Democrats came to an agreement last week to close the gap through a mix of $1.4 billion in new taxes, $760 million in spending cuts and $1 billion a year in anticipated union concessions. A vote in the Democrat-controlled General Assembly could come as early as Tuesday, though an agreement with the unions is likely to take longer. 

The increased revenue has "no bearing on his views of the budget," a spokesman for the governor said. "He's been very clear that additional revenue should be used to stabilize the state's finances by doing things like paying down debt and adding to the rainy-day fund." 

State Republicans have pounced on the new revenue numbers as ammunition against the proposed new taxes. Last week, they proposed a budget with no tax increases that was largely ignored by majority Democrats.

"A rainy-day fund is a savings account. You don't put money in a savings account until you pay all your bills and take care of all your obligations," said House Republican Leader  Larry Cafero. "The governor has a moral obligation to incorporate these new revenues to reduce taxes or restore cuts."

A report from Moody's Investors Service issued this week showed that regardless of surplus revenues, Connecticut remains mired in debt, while its pension funding is among the lowest in the country. 

Connecticut's debt-per-capita ratio is the highest in the country, according to Moody's. During the most recent recession, as the state depleted its $1.4 billion rainy-day fund, it borrowed almost $1 billion to plug budget holes. It plans to borrow an additional $640 million to fill 2011 budget gaps. 

"It's like borrowing money to pay your grocery bill—it fills a current gap but doesn't solve the problem going forward," said Moody's analyst Nicole Johnson. 

 Write to  Shelly Banjo at shelly.banjo@wsj.com 