"I don't think about [my age]. I work," says Alexandre Carel, the baby-faced 27-year-old head of Christie's Post-War and Contemporary Art department in Paris. "The art market is expanding at a rapid rate, and this growth creates opportunities to seize."

Mr. Carel will help some of the world's most selective buyers do just that this week, as Christie's New York on Wednesday opens its annual sale of post-war and contemporary art, which is expected to exceed $230 million. Though his duties primarily keep him in Paris, the dapper French-born prodigy is in the city to assist with the auction, representing co-signers and keeping buyers appraised of the works on which they can bid. 

In an auction season that has so far been unkind to pieces not classified as masterpieces, he remains confident in the New York market and in Wednesday's sale, which will include privately collected works by such marquee names as Mark Rothko, Francis Bacon and Andy Warhol, whose "Self-Portrait" (1963-64) is expected to fetch up to $30 million. Reintroducing so many high-estimate post-war and contemporary pieces, Mr. Carel noted, should entice top collectors and reinforce the importance of both genres.

"The fact that great works of art are being offered is a very good sign," he said. "It draws a lot of top buyers to the market just because of the quality and rarity of the works that are offered. This is probably the most ambitious sale we've had."

Born and raised in Paris, Mr. Carel learned to love art during frequent visits with his grandfather to Drouot, a local auction house. He became "fascinated by the fact that one could acquire these works and live with them—making a museum of one's home." He even pursued connections with living artists such as Aurélie Nemours, whom he brazenly phoned after acquiring her geometric abstractions from a flea market. (Ms. Nemours died in 2005.) Although determined to work with art, he opted to study finance at the Sciences-Po school in Paris. His program required a year internship, so he "hounded" Christie's to accept him despite his lack of art education. As a intern in New York, his business acumen and awareness of art impressed Amy Cappellazzo, the company's international co-head of post-war and contemporary art, who called him a "renegade thinker."

In 2008, Mr. Carel returned to the city to head up the company's First Open sales, the outcomes of which prepare the team for the major seasonal auctions. The following year, during a volatile time for art sales, he solidified his New York bona fides by bringing in Jean-Michel Basquiat's "Mater" for $5.9 million in the Post-War and Contemporary evening sale and Tamara de Lempicka's "Portrait de Madame M" (1932) for $6.1 million, a world-record price for the artist, in the Impressionist and Modern evening sale. 

"It is easy for people to shine when business is booming, but to come through like that when older and more experienced people were finding business-getting very difficult, is to me a real accomplishment," said Robert Manley, who runs Christie's Post-War and Contemporary Art department in New York. "Before he was even legal drinking age, I felt that he understood the global market almost as well as I did, and I had been doing this for 20 years." 

Mr. Carel returned to Paris last year to assume his new position, but he concedes that New York is where the action is. "Probably the greatest collections of the last 50 years have been put together in America," he said. "This is where the greatest material is offered. In terms of quality, this is where the most exciting things happen."



