PORT ST. LUCIE, FLA.—Mets vice-president of media relations Jay Horwitz is, self admittedly, "a little bit of a schlump." He's wrinkled, he's baggy, he's disheveled. His glasses are slightly crooked. His head is a bit large for his shoulders. He talks with a thick New York accent. He's lost or broken at least 10 BlackBerries over the past couple of years, including two that plopped into the toilet.

 "There's no question that Jay is great at his job," says David Wright, the Mets third baseman. "But he definitely has some screws loose."

Wright is not suggesting that Horwitz is, literally, insane. No, he is insisting that Horwitz, now in his 32nd—yes, 32nd—season of guiding the Mets' media efforts, is merely sort of literally insane. Which, of course, makes perfect sense for a man who, since missing two games because of his mother's death in August of 1990, has endured the forehead-slamming-against-a-brick-wall task of witnessing every single inning of New York Mets baseball.

 In other words, when right-hander Anthony Young lost 27 straight decisions between May 6, 1992, and July 24, 1993, Horwitz saw each pitch; when Kenny Rogers walked Andruw Jones with the bases loaded in the bottom of the 11th inning of Game 6 of the 1999 NLCS, Horwitz charted the at-bat; when such unspeakably heinous busts as Vince Coleman and Kaz Matsui wore the blue, orange and white, Horwitz stood by their sides, believing—as he always does—that the Mets would be OK. "Jay is an optimist by nature," says Bobby Bonilla, the former Mets slugger who credits Horwitz with helping him survive a rocky (to be polite) Big Apple run. "He sees the good, even when there isn't much."

If the muscular, athletic Wright was created to be a ballplayer, an argument can be made that the analytical, intelligent Horwitz, who turns 66 in August, was created to be a media relations guy. Because his mother, Gertrude Horwitz, contracted the Rubella virus while pregnant, her only child was born on August 14, 1945, with a severe case of glaucoma, which manifested itself with a bulky right eye that provides Horwitz with only 10 percent visual capacity. Hence, while young Jay grew up in Clifton, N.J., loving all sports, he was, unambiguously, terrible at them.

 Always short and scrawny as a boy (During his senior year at Clifton High, Horwitz measured in at 5-foot-1 and 90 pounds), his athletic career can be summed up by a singular Little League at-bat, taken at age 8 or 9 for his team, Epstein's. "I used to only bunt because I could never swing away," he says. "One time my father [Milton Horwitz, who died of cancer in 1970] said to me, 'If you don't swing, I'm not gonna let you play anymore.'" In his ensuing at-bat, Jay roped a liner into centerfield. "It was great," he says. "Then I tripped coming out of the batter's box and they threw me out at first."

By the time he reached Clifton High, Horwitz knew his place. He served as the student manager of the track, cross country, baseball and basketball teams, then attended New York University, majored in journalism and worked as the manager of the men's basketball squad. Upon graduating in 1967 he took a job at Clifton's daily newspaper, the Herald-News, then spent four years as NYU's sports information director. When the school dropped Division I athletics, Horwitz accepted the same position at Fairleigh Dickinson University.

 For eight years, Horwitz struggled to draw attention to an athletic program nobody much cared about. When a one-armed athlete joined the soccer team, Horwitz pitched the idea to New York's dailies. The same went for the hockey-playing priest. "I knew the big papers wouldn't be covering FDU unless we gave them reason," he says. "So that was my goal."

One day in 1980, Horwitz received an unexpected call from Frank Cashen, the newly appointed general manager of the Mets. The team had endured three straight miserable seasons, and Cashen wanted to hire a media relations director to generate some positive buzz. The two met at a hotel in Florida, and while answering a question Horwitz accidentally dumped a glass of orange juice onto Cashen's beige suit pants. "I called my mom and told her I blew it," Horwitz says. "I was despondent."

Three weeks later, Cashen offered him the job. "Jay works holidays, he works weekends, he loves baseball and loves the Mets," says Cashen. "The last thing you need is a media relations person always thinking about his next vacation."

No worries here. In three decades on the job, Horwitz has never taken a vacation. Never, as in not once. He has yet to marry, and there are no Jay Jr.s roaming the earth. He owns three cats and a yorkshire terrier, Tiki, that was presented as a gift by Anna Benson, wife of ex-Met pitcher Kris Benson. He has two hobbies. One is following the New York Giants, his cherished football team. The other is working for the Mets. Which, because it's his job, probably shouldn't count as a hobby, per se. "Jay's love is the Mets," says Jeff Wilpon, the team's chief operating officer. "He's a lifer."

On most spring training days, Horwitz wakes up at 4:30 am, and arrives at Tradition Field 20 minutes later. During the season, he'll pull into the Citi Field parking lot at 6:30 a.m. for a 7 p.m. game.

 "I have two bridges to cross, so I need to beat the traffic," he says of the 29-mile trek from Clifton, where he lives in his boyhood home "Also, I like working out at the ballpark in the morning, because if I exercise when the players are there they'll see my fat, sweaty body and ride me."

Indeed, in baseball's lengthy history of riding people, Horwitz is Secretariat. On his first road trip in 1980, then-manager Joe Torre treated Horwitz to six new ties, on the condition that he wear them regularly. Upon arriving at Montreal's Olympic Stadium for that night's game, he was mercilessly ridiculed. "The ties were awful—ugly as can be," he says. "But I had no idea."

 John Franco, the team's longtime closer, took special pleasure in waiting for Horwitz to fall asleep on team flights, then painting his glasses with white out and cutting his ties. "But Johnny always bought me new ties later on," he says. "I realize that if they're not having fun with you, they don't care about you."

Horwitz has his flaws (some in the media gripe that he can be slow delivering information), but caring isn't one of them. He says his greatest professional misery has come in watching the Wilpons suffer through the Madoff coverage. "A lot of it has been really unfair," he says. "I don't know two more decent, honest people. And I'm not saying that as a media person or employee. I'm saying it as a human being."

Horwitz is, indeed, human. In an era of slick, fast-talking corporate-influenced publicists, Horwitz is raw and gritty and real. Which leads to the story of the ring—a tale very few in his position would willingly share.

In 2003, Horwitz decided to attend his 40th high school reunion. The person he was most excited to see was Sandy Penk, a cute majorette who had been his boyhood crush. In anticipation of the big evening, Horwitz broke out his 1986 World Series ring, which he rarely wore. "I wanted to impress her," he says. "To show off a little."

 One problem: Upon arriving at the site of the reunion, Horwitz was crestfallen to learn that he had the wrong date, and the event had already taken place. "As if that wasn't bad enough," he says, "my fingers had gotten so fat, I had to have the ring cut off my hand. It's sitting in my house somewhere, split in two."

Penk, now 66, retired and living in New Jersey, was unaware of Horwitz's feelings. "He was a very funny, very outgoing boy back in school," says Penk, who hasn't spoken with Horwitz since they graduated. "But I didn't know he thought of me that way.''

The thought is conveyed to Horwitz, who giggles. "Sandy Penk remembers me?" he says. "I can't believe it."

Indeed, she does. Jay Horwitz, after all, is hard to forget.