WASHINGTON—Supreme Court justices appeared skeptical of an attempt to sue former Attorney General John Ashcroft over allegations that he abused federal law by detaining dozens of people in the months after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. 

The court heard arguments Wednesday in the case of Abdullah al-Kidd, a U.S. citizen who was detained and subjected to travel restrictions after being deemed a potential witness in a terror investigation. Mr. al-Kidd is suing the U.S. government and federal officials, including Mr. Ashcroft, saying his detention was an abuse of federal law. 

The case centers on the roundup in 2001 and 2002 of hundreds of mostly Muslim men as U.S. law-enforcement officials scrambled to avert a possible follow-up attack. Prosecutors used a federal law allowing a person to be held as a "material witness" if needed to ensure their availability to testify.

Civil-liberties groups have charged that the Bush administration abused the material-witness law to preventively detain people whom the government otherwise didn't have probable cause to arrest.

The Ninth U.S. Court of Appeals upheld a lower-court ruling allowing Mr. al-Kidd's suit to proceed against Mr. Ashcroft, calling the post-9/11 detentions "repugnant to the Constitution."

The Justice Department, which is defending Mr. Ashcroft, says he is immune from such suits and can't be held liable for monetary damages for legal actions he took in office.

During arguments, justices appeared to doubt the idea of opening the door to such suits. "It does seem that you're imposing a very heavy burden on the officers in this area," Chief Justice John Roberts told Lee Gelernt, the American Civil Liberties Union attorney representing Mr. al-Kidd. 

Neal Katyal, acting U.S. solicitor general, spoke on behalf of the Obama administration and argued that "allowing such suits to proceed would result in burdensome litigation and interfere with the ability of prosecutors to do their jobs."

Mr. Gelernt said material-witness cases unrelated to immigration are relatively rare and that if prosecutors follow the law, there shouldn't much to worry about. "What we're talking about is a few hundred [cases] each year throughout the country, and again, when it's used properly, it's going to be virtually impossible to allege something like this," he said.

Most questions and interruptions by the justices came during Mr. Gelernt's turn to argue. However, some appeared bothered by circumstances of the case and Mr. al-Kidd's treatment. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg called the detention conditions "disturbing" and Justice Sonia Sotomayor suggested there was cause to check against prosecutors' power to detain "willy-nilly."

Justice Anthony Kennedy focused his questions on the immunity question and raised the possibility that prosecutors would be protected if they had dual reasons to hold Mr. al-Kidd, both as a material witness and to investigate him. 

Mr. al-Kidd was born in Kansas and played football at the University of Idaho, where he converted to Islam. Now 38 years old, he teaches English overseas, his attorney said. He was detained for 16 days in March 2003 after he attempted to board a flight to Saudi Arabia. The FBI alleged that Mr. al-Kidd had received money from a man the government was trying to prosecute for alleged terrorism ties. Investigators said that if Mr. al-Kidd was allowed to leave the U.S., they doubted he could be brought back to testify.

Mr. al-Kidd said he was wrongly detained because prosecutors never planned to use him as a witness, and instead used the detention to investigate him. In the end, the government didn't call him to testify and a jury rejected the government's allegations in the terror-related case.

Mr. al-Kidd's suit alleges he was subjected to harsh prison conditions. After he was released, a judge ordered restrictions on his travel, including having to live with his in-laws, checking in with a probation officer and allowing home visits by federal authorities. After months under those restrictions, Mr. al-Kidd says, he lost his job and his marriage fell apart.

 Write to  Evan Perez at evan.perez@wsj.com 