Major League Baseball has instituted restrictions on the resale of some team debt that protect the New York Mets from pressure by so-called vulture investors as the team tries to sell a minority stake. 

The loan-resale restrictions, adopted last year for new baseball team loans, bar banks that hold $375 million of Mets team debt from reselling the debt to hedge funds without league approval, according to people familiar with the baseball league. 

The restrictions could help protect the team from investors who buy distressed debt and then seek to profit, often by pushing for a restructuring or a bankruptcy filing. Some investors think the rules could limit the club's options as it struggles to right its finances and find a minority buyer. 

The Mets declined to comment on the hedge-fund rule.  Steve Greenberg, a Mets director and Allen & Co. banker who is handling the sale for the Mets, said there is "very strong demand to own a minority position in the team." 

The hedge-fund restrictions were included in a $375 million loan obtained by the Mets last June from a bank group led by  J.P. Morgan Chase
JPM


0.23
%




 & Co. They were included in the loan at the urging of Major League Baseball following the Chapter 11 bankruptcy filing of the Texas Rangers baseball team last May, according to people familiar with the league. 

An MLB spokesman said the league "continues to maintain strong relations" with its banks. A spokeswoman for J.P. Morgan, which was also lead bank for the Rangers, declined to comment. 

For the Mets, the rule could reduce the chances of the scenario that unfolded last year, when hedge funds that invest in debts of companies in financial distress complicated the sale of the Texas Rangers. 

When the Rangers owners found a buyer, debtholders opposed the deal, saying it was below market value. A bankruptcy-court judge ultimately staged an open auction, and the team sold for a higher price, $590 million. 

The loan-resale rule could also help protect the Mets from possible pressure from such investors as the team seeks to raise roughly $200 million from outside investors for a minority stake in an effort to stabilize the team's finances. 

The sale effort already is complicated by the team's heavy debt of roughly $400 million, operating losses and a $1 billion lawsuit against the team owners and their associates by a trustee for victims of the Madoff Ponzi scheme. The trustee maintains the team owners, who invested with  Bernard Madoff, knew or should have known of his fraud. They deny the allegations. A mediator has been appointed in the dispute.

Bidders for the Mets stake, who also must get league approval, are expected to start to get a look at the team's finances within the next week, according to people familiar with the auction. 

After the Rangers sale, Baseball Commissioner  Bud Selig is said to be anxious to avoid another high-profile team going through bankruptcy, according to people familiar with his views. 

Some investors say banks could be less eager to lend to teams if they know they may not be able to offset some of their exposure by selling to hedge funds. 

  Andrew Herenstein, a managing principal of Monarch Alternative Capital LP, one of the hedge funds that held Rangers debt during the bankruptcy proceedings, questioned the terms of a Mets loan limiting hedge funds as "short sighted." He said it "potentially impairs the value of the debt, and probably makes banks more reluctant to participate in future baseball financings." 

The Mets' financial picture has discouraged some bidders from pursuing a passive minority position in the club, they say. Some bidders have said they wouldn't consider a stake without an option to buy or gain control, in part because of the Madoff cloud over the owners.

 Write to  Randall Smith at randall.smith@wsj.com and Matthew Futterman at matthew.futterman@wsj.com 