 Global markets reacted positively to news that power had been restored to some Japanese nuclear facilities, but supply-chain problems continued to hit companies that source parts from Japan and uncertainty grew around insurers' liabilities. Moody's warned of risks to Japan's economy.  

 Tokyo Electric Power reported continued progress in restoring order at the Fukushima nuclear reactors, but the process is slow and painstaking.  

 Japan suspended shipments of certain agricultural products and some residents were told not to drink tap water after radiation was detected.  

 The DJIA climbed back above 12000, boosted by a major telecom deal and signs of confidence in financial firms. The Hang Seng Index led a broad rally in Asia.  

 AT&T reached a deal to acquire T-Mobile USA from Deutsche Telekom for $39 billion in cash and stock, a combination that would create the U.S.'s largest wireless carrier.  

 PCCW is exploring a separate listing of its telecom operations in the form of a business trust, a move that could see the chairman of Hong Kong's dominant fixed-line operator, Richard Li, cash out on a debt-laden investment.  

 Warren Buffett said his investment vehicle, Berkshire Hathaway, is seeking further acquisitions following a $9 billion deal to purchase Lubrizol last week.  

 Russia is offering to ease strains on global natural-gas markets after years of being criticized for using its energy reserves as a political weapon.  

 Novartis expects growth in China to recover after a business restructuring in the country slowed the Swiss drug giant's sales there last year.  

 Tiffany's profit climbed 29% in the fourth quarter as the jeweler's international expansion continued, but the catastrophe in Japan will weigh on future results.  

 Mizuho Financial Group said 3,500 of its ATMs at 440 branches in Japan will be functioning beginning Tuesday morning.  

 Citigroup said it will reinstate its dividend, the bank's first payout to shareholders since 2009, and execute a 1-for-10 reverse split of its stock.  

 Nomura Holdings plans to build an equity capital markets desk in Australia as it seeks to capitalize on growth in the resource-rich Pacific nation.  

 AIG wants to repurchase a large portfolio of subprime-mortgage bonds from the Fed, forcing the central bank to weigh the interests of the insurer against those of taxpayers.  

Bahrain's king blamed a foreign plot for his nation's unrest, using veiled language to accuse Iran of fomenting an uprising by the Shiite majority in the Sunni-ruled island kingdom.

Syrians chanting "No more fear!" held a defiant demonstration after a deadly government crackdown failed to quash three days of protests in the southern city of Deraa.

Rescuers worked to dig out victims buried by blasts in a coal mine in southwest Pakistan, but officials said they feared all 52 men underground at the time of the accident were dead. Twenty-seven bodies had been recovered.

Vietnam expects its economy to grow 5.5% in the first quarter on higher agricultural production and continued expansion in the industrial and service sectors.

 The U.S. held out the prospect of limited missile-defense cooperation with Russia in a bid to ease longstanding concerns in Moscow about a planned U.S.-led system to protect European allies. 