SEOUL—State-owned KDB Financial Group could sell new shares or issue convertible bonds if it decides to bid for  Woori Finance Holdings Co. Such a move would potentially dilute the government's stake in KDB to about 80% from 100% currently, a KDB official said Monday. 

The official, who declined to be identified, said last week the holding company is considering a bid for Seoul's 57% stake in Woori, the country's largest financial holding company by assets. KDB would need to raise capital to finance such a transaction, he said, which would present an opportunity to lower the government's ownership in the lender. Seoul's shares in Woori are valued at 6.29 trillion won ($5.75 billion), based on the firm's stock price of 13,700 won at 0217 GMT. 

Seoul is expected to set a new plan for selling its Woori shares on Tuesday, about five months after being forced to halt an auction in December due to a lack of enough bidders willing or able to buy a controlling stake in the company. Complex ownership restrictions and a high price have hindered its divestment efforts. 

Many analysts say a combination of KDB and Woori would be an admission of failure from the government, which has been pushing to sell its shares in both financial firms. The government is mandated to sell part of KDB before May 2014. 

Combining the two companies would create a mammoth state-controlled Korean bank that increases systemic risks and may be too difficult to sell, some analysts say, and such a transaction would simply mean the government is moving money from one pocket to another. 

Still, the government may not have any alternative. No other potential suitors have emerged—Woori's domestic rivals are unlikely to bid—and President Lee Myung-bak's administration has pushed for a tangible result on its campaign promise to push forward the privatization of KDB and Woori. 

A dilution of its KDB stake may provide the government with some political cover, as a KDB share sale would mean hitting the privatization goal for KDB ahead of schedule. 

Acquiring the government's Woori stake would be a major boost for KDB, which lacks a deposit base that can provide it a steady and relatively cheap source of funding. It would instantly emerge as the dominant financial holding company in the local market, dwarfing other market players like  KB Financial Group Inc.
KB


-4.15
%




 and  Shinhan Financial Group Co. It would also address the desire of local financial regulators to create a Korean banking heavyweight to compete on the global stage and assist local firms' financing needs for major overseas projects.

 Write to  Se Young Lee at vincent.lee@dowjones.com 