HONG KONG—Japan's disaster has hit deal-making across the globe, forcing some companies to put plans to raise capital on hold and casting doubt on some bumper share offerings in the pipeline.

Capital-raising plans for a French pay-television operator, a Singapore engineering concern and a Japanese real-estate firm already have fallen victim to volatile financial markets, which can make pricing deals difficult for companies trying to sell shares or debt.

Some mergers and acquisitions also may be running into trouble. Russia's JSC Atomredmetzoloto put on hold its plan to acquire uranium exploration company  Mantra Resources Ltd. for about A$1.16 billion on Wednesday.

On Thursday, Chinese oil-equipment maker Hilong Holdings pulled an initial public offering in Hong Kong aimed at raising as much as US$190 million, citing adverse market conditions. China property developer  Top Spring International Holdings Ltd.
3688


-2.57
%




 managed to push through a Hong Kong IPO to raise US$200 million—but only by pricing shares at the bottom of its price range, people familiar with the deal said.

"It's unlikely that you'll see much capital-raising activity in the next couple of weeks," said  Bruce Wu, head of capital-markets origination in Japan for  Citigroup Inc.
C


1.47
%




 He said Citigroup was offering to lend to clients who needed capital urgently.

Investors were scrambling to understand the implications of the disaster and have been absorbed in reshuffling their portfolios of stocks. Japan's benchmark Nikkei Stock Average index is down nearly 13% this week.

"The crisis in Japan has made attracting investors' attention more difficult," said  Kester Ng, co-head of Equity Capital Markets in the Asia Pacific region at J.P. Morgan.

Global financial markets already were roiled by protests in the Arab world and the impact of rising oil prices. Falling share prices cast doubt on whether planned multibillion dollar IPOs by such companies as Swiss commodities trader Glencore International AG and Italian fashion house Prada SpA will happen on schedule. Bankers advised companies in the early stages of deals to press on.

"The last 12 months have taught us that windows open and close very quickly and deals that don't work one month work the next and you have to be very nimble," said  Philip Lynch, chief executive of Nomura Asia ex-Japan and Middle East, said.

On the M&A front, bankers expect deals in the works to broadly continue as planned, though companies on the selling side have been calling advisers worried that the Japanese will try and renegotiate prices.

"The CEOs we are talking to in Japan are more focused right now on the immediate impact of this tragedy on their employees and their plants," said Farhan Faruqui, head of Global Banking for Asia Pacific at Citigroup Inc. "In the coming weeks we remain confident you will see a continued flow of outbound and inbound activity into Japan," he added.

Companies caught in the middle of marketing their shares decided to cut their losses. Hours after the quake, news hit that MMI Holdings, an engineering group backed by private-equity firm Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co., pulled its one billion Singapore dollar (US$779.7 million) initial public offer on the Singapore Exchange citing weak market conditions, a person familiar with the matter said at the time.

In the following days more deals in the making were pulled by the companies and their bankers as share prices dropped on Monday and Tuesday.

Real-estate investment trust Verde Realty on Monday withdrew plans for an initial public offering for as much as US$300 million. French media company Lagardere SCA on Wednesday said it will postpone the initial public offer of its 20% stake in French pay TV operator Canal Plus France, which was set to go ahead in the next two weeks.

When Japan's stock market plunged 10.6% on Tuesday, real-estate investment trust  United Urban Investment Corp.
8960


1.70
%




 canceled plans to raise about 65 billion yen (US$823 million) that day citing the quake and the Japanese market's dive. Japanese life-sciences company RaQualia Pharma Inc. pulled its plans to list on the Osaka Stock Exchange Jasdaq Growth Market.

Elsewhere, the stock market rout hit Perth, Australia, lithium compound miner  Galaxy Resources Ltd.
GXY


-2.70
%




, which postponed a US$260 million IPO in Hong Kong. Part of the IPO proceeds were going to be used to develop a plant in China to produce lithium ion batteries used in electric bikes.

Private-equity firm Apollo Global Management LLC had been expected to set its IPO terms on Tuesday in the U.S., but decided instead to wait.

Some deals did push ahead. Human resources software provider  Cornerstone OnDemand
CSOD


0.89
%




 sold 10.5 million shares on Nasdaq at $13 apiece Wednesday, above the expected range of US$9 to US$11.

In Hong Kong, companies looking to IPOs that already had sold a large chunk of the shares on offer to so-called cornerstone investors are faring better, said bankers. KKR-backed financial-leasing firm Far East Horizon Ltd. is pushing ahead with plans to raise as much as US$715 million in an initial public offering in Hong Kong on March 30, a person familiar with the deal said Wednesday. The company has secured US$257 million in investments from six cornerstone investors, big investors who purchase stakes at market prices and are required to hold them for a set period.

"If you're in the market you have to negotiate and navigate the best you can because you've done the work," said Nomura's Mr. Lynch, adding that he expects markets to regain their poise once the uncertainty over the scale of the disaster in Japan has been settled. Mr. Lynch also believes the long-term structural shift of capital toward Asia remains in tact.

—Prudence Ho and Dana Cimilluca contributed to this article.

 Write to  Alison Tudor at alison.tudor@wsj.com 