Timofey Mozgov, the one-time Knicks success story who ascended from enigma to starting center, is back to being a mystery. 

After emerging as the star of training camp and starting on opening night and the first seven games of the season, his playing time has dwindled, along with his confidence and numbers. Last week, Knicks coach Mike D'Antoni admitted that the team pushed Mr. Mozgov's development too fast and said that his current struggles are a matter of "too much, too soon."

Heading into Tuesday night's game with the San Antonio Spurs, Mr. Mozgov had played in just three of the last 11 games. The 24-year-old hasn't scored more than two points since Dec. 5th and is averaging 2.4 points and 2 rebounds a game.

 In training camp, Mr. D'Antoni said the 7-foot-1 Russian was "maybe our most athletic guy" who showed flashes of brilliance while dunking in transition and some needed physicality in the post. The question now, of course, is why those flashes have become so infrequent.

Mr. Mozgov acknowledged recently that the transition to the NBA has been difficult. For now, Mr. Mozgov said he has to learn to not worry so much. "I was scared a little bit because it's my first year. I'm a rookie. [I have to] be more confident," he said. 

The low point came last Thursday in Orlando when star Amar'e Stoudemire had early foul trouble and his backup, Ronny Turiaf, suffered the same fate. Instead of turning to Mr. Mozgov, the tallest player on the team, Mr. D'Antoni enlisted 6-foot-8 Shawne Williams to guard Orlando big man Dwight Howard.

 Mr. Williams said that Mr. D'Antoni informed him in shootaround that he would be the backup big man, and that 6-foot-7 Wilson Chandler was backing up Mr. Williams, meaning Mr. Mozgov was not even the fourth-string big man on the night. 

There have been plenty of other lowlights. He struggled with fouls, getting four in two of his first three games and four in three of six games in late November, despite not playing more than 14 minutes in any of those six appearances. Then, of course, came the dunk—when Clippers rookie Blake Griffin took to the air in Los Angeles with Mr. Mozgov standing near the basket and slammed the ball as if he wasn't there. Mr. Mozgov found himself on the wrong side of a YouTube clip. 

"Of course, nobody has dunked on me like that. Never," said Mr. Mozgov, who added he didn't think it was a major turning point in his confidence. 

There have been some bright spots: he's grabbed at least five rebounds in five games this season and had back-to-back three-block games in late November.

There are other more intangible improvements as well. Mr. Mozgov's grasp of the English language has vastly improved since the summer, when he could barely speak a word. He said that recent development has helped the learning process.

With forward Danilo Gallinari out for two to three weeks with a sprained left knee, Mr. Turiaf will be the starting center and Mr. Mozgov can only hope to see improved playing time. 

But Mr. D'Antoni admitted he does not yet have a plan for working Mr Mozgov back into the rotation.

"There's not a timetable," he said. "It's just he's a sprained ankle away from playing a lot of minutes and you just can't play everybody. I didn't know Wil [Chandler] was going to be so effective and Shawne Williams was going to come on. The team evolves into certain things."

This is nothing new for Mr. Mozgov. He said that two seasons ago, while playing for Moscow's BC Khimki, he struggled to find playing time.

 He said he took that year hard, often clashing with his coach and then trying to overcompensate when he did play his two or three minutes a night. 

"I sat all season, even the preseason. The coach wouldn't give me time. When all that happened, every time, I didn't like the decision,'' Mr Mozgov said. "I felt I was ready. I don't do this here. I don't have to [fight with] coach. I am learning." 

And trying his best to regain his confidence.

 Write to  Kevin Clark at kevin.clark@wsj.com 