MOSCOW—Russia's ability to balance its $375 billion budget has come under threat after a sharp drop in crude prices, especially since the Kremlin plans on boosting spending during a year of parliamentary elections and preparations for the 2012 presidential vote. 

Russia's annual budget is expected to lose $36 billion from Brent crude's $18 drop from a recent high of $127.02 a barrel, assuming prices don't rebound. The crude drop threatens to put the budget into deficit, since Finance Minister Kudrin has said the budget needs an average 2011 oil price of $115 to balance, although many economists say the crucial oil price is somewhat lower. 

The ruble weakened significantly against the dollar on Friday after oil slumped, but Russian Eurobond prices were relatively steady, taking their cues from international debt markets and Treasurys. 

"I am surprised the market reaction has not been more aggressive," said  Timothy Ash, emerging-markets analyst at Royal Bank of Scotland. "The question is whether this drop in oil and commodity prices is just a correction of the start of a new weaker trend. If it is the latter, you do not want to be long [on] Russia." 

Of course, the Russian economy could benefit to some degree from lower prices for oil products, agricultural items and other commodities, especially after annual inflation accelerated to 9.6% annually in April. Prime Minister Vladimir Putin has said he will raise pension payments in the second half of the year, ahead of the parliamentary elections, if consumer prices increase by more than 6% in the first half. Thus lower commodity prices and slowing inflation could directly reduce some budget expenditures. 

Also, lower oil prices are also seen as helping Russia's efforts to modernize its economy and push through reforms, since there is little incentive to rock the boat in times of oil-fueled windfalls. 

Yet Mr. Kudrin, who sees current oil prices as unnaturally high, is aggressively seeking new budget revenue, focusing this week on the natural-gas industry, where he hopes to pick up an extra 150 billion rubles ($5.4 billion) from OAO  Gazprom,
OGZPY


-3.89
%




 OAO Novatek and other producers. 

Not everyone is as concerned as Mr. Kudrin about Russia's ability to balance the budget, and some economists pointed out that a short-term drop in oil prices doesn't slice revenue too deeply if average prices remain relatively high. 

"I don't see it as a huge immediate danger," said  Natalia Orlova, chief economist at Alfa Bank in Moscow. "The immediate impact is coming through the exchange rate." 

Russia's currency sank to 27.72 rubles to the dollar by midafternoon in Europe, compared with 27.28 rubles to the dollar late Friday on the Micex exchange. 