 New York 

The great Washington Redskins quarterback Sonny Jurgensen once likened his job to "holding group therapy for 50,000 people a week." By that measure, NFL Commissioner Roger Goodell holds in his hands the mental health of tens of millions of Americans. Which is quite a burden—especially since he may soon have to deliver some very bad news.

The 51-year-old Mr. Goodell represents the owners of the most valuable sports league in the world, which today begins its playoffs. For the moment, fan attention is on the road to the Super Bowl—on the perennially favored New England Patriots, the defending champion New Orleans Saints, the resurgent Philadelphia Eagles and their quarterback, Michael Vick, of dog-fighting infamy. 

But the highest-stakes action isn't taking place on the gridiron. It's out of sight, in boardrooms and over telephones, as Mr. Goodell and league owners are trying to get the players union to agree to a new collective-bargaining agreement. Negotiations have gone on for two years and if they're not settled by March 3, the NFL will suffer a work stoppage. The roughly $9 billion-a-year enterprise, in other words, might take next season off.

It's come to this, Mr. Goodell says as we sit in his midtown Manhattan office, because the owners made the mistake of signing a bad collective-bargaining agreement in 2006. The deal, he says, raised players' pay more than was healthy for the league, and left owners with insufficient cash to invest in their product. From 2006 to 2008—when owners decided to opt out of the deal, setting up this showdown—player costs outpaced revenue growth and owners' cash flow declined by $200 million. 

On top of that, the commissioner says, new revenue sources are hard to find. The prime example he offers is the cost of building stadiums now that credit is hard to come by and high-tech amenities are increasingly needed to lure fans from their 60-inch, high-def home televisions. 

"We signed this new collective-bargaining agreement in 2006—we haven't had a stadium built since then," says Mr. Goodell. The new complexes in New York and Dallas, he notes, were already under construction before 2006. Since then, owners have considered new stadiums to be too much of a strain on their scarcer resources. "That's not good for the players, it's not good for the game, it's not good for the fans," he says. 

The difficulty of building new stadiums, Mr. Goodell argues, is why for 15 years there hasn't been an NFL franchise in Los Angeles—the country's second-largest market. "We need to get back to a system that allows us to make those investments to grow the game," he says.

Another impediment to growth, the commissioner says, is that the 2006 deal failed to address the exorbitant compensation of rookies. Too often, top draft picks get enormous sums of guaranteed money only to underperform at the professional level. "I don't like to name names," Mr. Goodell says with characteristic politesse, but readers may think of JaMarcus Russell, the quarterback drafted first overall by the Oakland Raiders in 2007. The Raiders guaranteed Mr. Russell $31 million, and after three disappointing years he was no longer playing in the NFL.

In an open letter to fans this week, Mr. Goodell cited a recently published list of the 50 highest-paid American athletes. Five were NFL rookies. "Every other athlete on the list was a proven veteran," he lamented. He also noted that "in 2009, NFL clubs contracted $1.2 billion to 256 drafted rookies with $585 million guaranteed before they had stepped on an NFL field."

"The money that we're paying to rookies in our current [salary] cap system should be going to proven veterans," he tells me.

Proposing to revise the collective-bargaining agreement in order to shift the pay scale toward veterans and away from rookies is, as far as labor negotiations go, relatively inoffensive. More controversial is Mr. Goodell's desire to extend the NFL season to 18 games from 16, by shortening the preseason to two games from four.

"The one clear message we get from our fans is they don't like four preseason games. . . . As they're challenged from their own financial standpoint, they don't want to pay for lesser-quality product—that's preseason games," Mr. Goodell says. The league estimates that going to an 18-game season could generate $500 million in additional revenue.

But it could also increase injuries to players, which is why the idea is generally unpopular in locker rooms. As is, the average NFL career lasts barely more than three years. "We're not automobiles; we're not machines; we're humans," said Baltimore Ravens linebacker Ray Lewis last year. "You've got to ask yourself how many people are truly healthy in 18 games." For players to accept a longer season, union officials have said, the league would have to offer concessions like reduced off-season workouts and increased health-care benefits.

As Mr. Goodell talks, it's not obvious that he is, as many consider him, the most powerful man in sports. He's an even-tempered technocrat—in command of information, deliberate, more confident than opinionated. 

The son of a Rockefeller Republican who represented New York in Congress and the Senate from 1959 to 1971, Mr. Goodell joined the NFL in 1982 as an intern in the public affairs department. He got the job a year after graduating from Washington & Jefferson College, near Pittsburgh—and after writing 40 letters inquiring for jobs with NFL teams and executives.

Once in the league he rose quickly, working in the 1980s with Commissioner Pete Rozelle, the NFL's visionary founding father, and later as the right-hand man of Rozelle's successor, Paul Tagliabue. Four years into his own tenure as commissioner, Mr. Goodell has the steadiness, if not the gray hair, of a veteran.

He recognizes that the economic fallout from an NFL work stoppage would be enormous. Specifics are hard to come by, especially since owners and players dispute the numbers. But according to an internal NFL report disclosed to this newspaper in October, losses could amount to $1 billion by August—even before a single regular-season game is cancelled. The report noted that March alone could see $400 million in lost season-ticket sales and concession contracts.

That assessment aligns with Mr. Goodell's. "What's the final moment? What we're trying to convince the players of is that it's March. Because [then] the damage starts to increase dramatically," he says. 

The NFL is a commercial juggernaut. Its annual revenue, at just under $9 billion, tops that of Major League Baseball ($7 billion), the National Basketball Association ($4 billion) and the National Hockey League (less than $3 billion). 

When Forbes magazine recently ranked the world's 50 most valuable sports franchises, all 32 NFL teams made the list, demonstrating that—despite any problems with the 2006 collective-bargaining deal—the franchises have built up tremendous value over time. The Dallas Cowboys were second overall, behind England's Manchester United soccer team and in front of the New York Yankees. The least valuable NFL franchise was the Oakland Raiders, which still beat out baseball's Los Angeles Dodgers and Chicago Cubs, and basketball's New York Knicks and Los Angeles Lakers.

On television NFL football is, as Mr. Goodell says, "the most valuable property our network partners have." NFL games accounted for the four most-watched TV programs of 2010, and 17 of the top 25. They also accounted for every one of the 15 most-watched cable TV programs. The fall's most popular prime-time show was the NFL's "Sunday Night Football," which even captured third place among women ages 14-49, trailing only "Dancing with the Stars" and "Grey's Anatomy." So much for the writer Roger Simon's quip that "If God wanted women to understand men, football would never have been created."

Last year's Super Bowl was watched by more Americans than any show ever, eclipsing even the 1983 series finale of "M*A*S*H." When the game is played again on Feb. 6, a 30-second TV spot will cost advertisers nearly $3 million, according to news reports. That's $100,000 a second. 

All this is why TV networks pay the NFL nearly $4 billion a year in licensing rights—the golden goose of sports deals. Crucially, the league distributes the billions evenly to its 32 teams. That revenue-sharing is "a fundamental principle . . . that makes us unique and has had a great deal to do with the success of the league over the years," says Mr. Goodell. 

The commissioner's "core responsibility," he says, is "making sure our game is competitive. That's what our fans want." To promote "competitive balance" (called "Pete's parity" in Rozelle's day), the NFL not only shares its national TV revenue but also grants its weaker teams an easier schedule of opponents, plus early picks in the annual college draft. The redistributionist policies work: This year, for the 15th consecutive season, at least five teams made the playoffs after having missed them the year before. 

"Every one of our fans comes into the season knowing that their team can go from last to first," says Mr. Goodell. "That creates a lot of excitement for our fans because they know there's that opportunity, there's that hope." Call it the metaphysics of pro football. "We're in the business of selling hope," NFL spokesman Brian McCarthy reiterates later.

That brings us to the NFL's peculiar challenge today: selling hope to its own players. Namely, owners have to convince players that accepting a pay cut immediately—of 18%, according to the union's calculations, or 9% according to the owners'—will make them better off in the long term.

The owners argue that the league will stagnate unless they get more cash to invest in it—which, in turn, will cause the players' 60% share of revenue to stagnate. Alternatively, if owners can invest more in the league, they can grow it so that players ultimately get, say, 55% of a considerably larger pie.

"What is true of the NFL is that it has been well-managed over the years," says Mr. Goodell. "And that has been beneficial to the fans, it's been beneficial to the game itself, it's been beneficial to the players, coaches and everyone involved." That's hard to dispute given the league's popularity and the fact that, as Mr. Goodell points out, the league's salary cap has exploded by nearly 300% over 15 years. 



Still, the union doesn't seem to be buying what the league is selling. Little has changed since last year, when union chief DeMaurice Smith said that, on a scale of one to 10, the chances of a work stoppage are a 14.

Mr. Goodell, for his part, says the league and the union can and will strike a deal. But he insists that owners were right to opt out of the collective-bargaining agreement, and that the threat of a work stoppage is real. "There are lots of businesses that are well in excess of $9 billion that have gone into bankruptcy, that have been mismanaged," he warns. "And that has not served anyone very well." 

So it's to avoid the fate of, say, General Motors—though Mr. Goodell demurs when I raise the comparison—that the NFL might torpedo its own 2011 season. 

Football Nation, enjoy your playoffs. And then be sure to put your shrinks on speed dial.

 Mr. Feith is an assistant editorial features editor at the Journal. 