TUCSON, Ariz.—U.S. Rep. Gabrielle Giffords (D., Ariz.) moved her lips in what may have been attempts to speak and could be walking in two months, her husband and doctors said at a news conference here Thursday.

Calling Ms. Giffords's progress in recovering from a gunshot wound to her brain "quite inspiring," her husband, Mark Kelly, said, "I imagine the next step here is she'll be walking and talking."

Doctors are preparing to move Ms. Giffords to a rehabilitation center in Houston for what could be several months of in-patient recovery. Ms. Giffords's relatives said they expect her to be moved to the TIRR Memorial Hermann center as early as Friday.

Ms. Giffords was shot in the head at close range Jan. 8 in a mass shooting that killed six and wounded 13, including the 40-year-old congresswoman.

On Wednesday, a federal grand jury indicted the suspected shooter, 22-year-old Jared Loughner, with attempting to assassinate Ms. Giffords and to murder two of her aides. Mr. Loughner is scheduled to appear in federal court in Phoenix on Monday.

Ms. Giffords's neurosurgeon at Tucson's University Medical Center, Dr. G. Michael Lemole, cautioned that Ms. Giffords has a long recovery ahead of her, but said it was possible that she could walk in two months and that she was showing new signs of progress every day.

In Houston, Ms. Giffords will continue aggressive therapy aimed at restoring her speech, her ability to walk and her use of her limbs.

On Wednesday, Ms. Giffords was able to stand with assistance and look out her window at the mountains, doctors said. 

Thursday afternoon, Ms. Giffords was taken outside in a wheelchair for her first taste of fresh air and sunshine since the Jan. 8 shooting. Doctors wheeled her to the hospital's rooftop so she could see the mountains one more time before leaving Tucson for Houston Friday, a hospital spokeswoman said. 

Doctors said she did well earlier Thursday during a vision exercise with colored blocks. "There's evidence that she can see the location and color of the object," said Dr. Peter Rhee, a trauma doctor at University Medical Center.

Doctors said Ms. Giffords has made some movements with her lips, but they weren't entirely certain it was an attempt to speak.

Ms. Giffords cannot vocalize because of a tracheotomy tube that was inserted into her windpipe to prevent buildup of saliva in her lungs and other complications, like infection. The doctors believe she can swallow, which they say would be another positive sign for her long-term prognosis.

Ms. Giffords's husband, Mr. Kelly, has been at her bedside daily and said he believed that she could recognize him and was becoming more aware of her surroundings.

Mr. Kelly said she had made some movements, like patting his cheek—something she has done in the past and a signal that she recognizes him.

"I feel she's made some attempts" to speak, Mr. Kelly said. He said he also believes his wife is aware she can't actually use her voice because of the tube inserted into her windpipe.

"I feel intellectually she knows that that's there," Mr. Kelly said.

Mr. Kelly didn't say what she might have attempted to say.

Dr. Lemole said he and others on her medical team were "very optimistic because her recovery here was so quick," but cautioned everyone not to have unrealistic expectations.

"It's not uncommon for people to initially improve, then plateau," Dr. Lemole said. 

 Write to  Tamara Audi at tammy.audi@wsj.com 