NEW DELHI— General Electric Co.
GE


0.24
%




 said it will invest an initial $50 million to build a factory in India as the company attempts to expand domestic production across a range of businesses.

The move is a sign of confidence in India's prospects when overall foreign direct investment has fallen sharply. 

GE's investment in the new facility could reach $200 million, depending on how business in the country develops, executives told reporters in New Delhi Monday. 

"We are going to invest in a multibusiness manufacturing capability in India," Chairman  Jeffrey Immelt said. "It is going to give us a lot more local capability."

He declined to elaborate. 

GE's investments in India form part of a growing focus on emerging markets, such as China, Russia and Brazil, where the Connecticut-based conglomerate expects to generate most of its growth during the coming years. GE plans to generate 60% of its revenue from outside the U.S. this year. 

Mr. Immelt said GE sees potential in India's infrastructure sector, including in such industries as energy, aviation and health care. 

Other foreign companies, meanwhile, have shown reluctance about doing business in the country as corruption scandals have tarnished India's image. Foreign direct investment into India fell 22% last year to $21 billion, according to India's Ministry of Commerce and Industry. 

Mr. Immelt said growth continues to expand in places such as Latin America, the Middle East, Canada and Australia. "We also see good growth in Russia, China and India," he said. 

GE in October received a contract from India's Reliance Power Ltd. to supply $750 million of turbine equipment for a 2,400-megawatt expansion of the Samalkot power plant in the southern state of Andhra Pradesh.

The U.S. company last year also formed a joint venture with India's Triveni Engineering & Industries Ltd. to make steam turbines. In October, GE received a contract to supply 99 F414 engines for India's lightweight Tejas fighter jet. GE also has a health-care joint venture with software company  Wipro Ltd. 

"India is a strategic region for us. We see lot of tailwinds for the products and services that GE offers," Mr. Immelt said.

  John Flannery, president and chief executive of GE India, said the location for the new facility is expected to be announced in 90 days. He said the size could begin at more than 400,000 square feet and expand to 700,000 square feet.

"It will be a multimodal, multibusiness facility," he said. "So several GE businesses will share that." 

 Write to  Santanu Choudhury at santanu.choudhury@dowjones.com 