MOSCOW—A powerful suicide-bomb blast in the packed international arrival hall at Russia's busiest airport killed at least 35 people, an attack the government said appeared linked to the Islamist insurgency rooted in the country's southern Caucasus region. 

The midafternoon explosion at Moscow's Domodedovo Airport left the lightly guarded area splattered with blood and engulfed in smoke as rescue workers with flashlights searched for bodies. The blast, which authorities said carried the force of five kilograms 11 pounds of TNT, occurred near a café in a zone that doesn't require security checks to enter. The bomber apparently mingled with taxi drivers and others who usually crowd the area just outside the restricted baggage-claim area to await arriving travelers.

"I heard a loud bang, saw plastic panels falling down from the ceiling and heard people screaming," Sergei Lavochkin, who was waiting in the hall for a friend traveling from Cuba, told Rossiya 24 television. A traveler who identified himself only as Alex said in a telephone interview: "Suddenly there was smoke all around and the area was cordoned off. I saw in front of me four [baggage] trolleys with bodies. There was blood everywhere."

 It was Russia's deadliest attack in nearly 10 months, new evidence of the resilience of a movement the Kremlin calls the biggest threat to the country's security. The blast also brought to reality a dire scenario that global aviation officials have long been concerned about but have seen little practical way to prevent: an attack on the public area of a major airport.

President Dmitry Medvedev termed the bombing a terrorist act. No group claimed responsibility, but security officials told Russian news agencies the bomber was almost certainly from the Caucasus, an assessment shared by independent specialists on the impoverished, overwhelmingly Muslim region.

Monday's bombing, more so than previous insurgent attacks, underscored the vulnerability of international travelers to Russia. Two Britons were among the dead, and citizens of Germany, France, Slovakia and Italy were among the more than 100 people wounded, Russian officials said.

The Caucasus insurgency grew from a separatist movement that began when the Muslim majority in the tiny republic of Chechnya agitated for independence from Russia during the breakup of the Soviet Union in 1991. Two wars followed as Russia tried to crush the movement with military force, alienating large sections of the population and driving many fighters to turn from nationalism to Islam as a motivating force. 

Military operations have subsided in Chechnya in recent years, but the insurgency has spread into neighboring Caucasus republics, embraced the goal of an Islamic state in the entire region and pressed their attacks into the Russian heartland.

See a timeline of terrorist acts in Russia since 1999.

In recent months, Mr. Medvedev has admitted making little headway against the rebels, whose persistence and violent reach pose a challenge as Russia prepares to hold the Winter Olympics in 2014 and the World Cup soccer championship in 2018. The insurgents have threatened to disrupt the 2014 Games in Sochi, on the western edge of the Caucasus region.

After Monday's blast, Russian authorities ordered 100% security screening of all passengers and visitors entering airports, as well as their baggage, at airports across the country. Security on trains and subways was also tightened.

Some airports world-wide limit access to public areas by checking identities or allowing only passengers with tickets to enter. In the U.S., law-enforcement officials have occasionally tried to take similar steps through measures such as setting up police checkpoints for cars entering an airport or dropping off passengers. These checks, however, tend to cause traffic jams, so have mainly been used during times of higher security alerts.

Aside from the complaints that checkpoints prompt, they also create a new potential threat. A line of cars or people outside the airport could itself become a target for attack.

Russia had pledged to tighten security after rebels from Chechnya bombed a train between Moscow and St. Petersburg in November 2009, killing 26, and after twin suicide bombings in the Moscow subway left 40 people dead last March.

Mr. Medvedev said Monday's attack showed security regulations instituted after those bombings had been breached. "What happened showed that nowhere near all the laws...are appropriately applied," he said in televised comments to an emergency session of top law-enforcement officials. "We need to figure this out." A spokesman for Russia's main anti-terror agency said late Monday that security was inadequate at the airport. Mr. Medvedev delayed his departure to the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, where he was going to promote Russia as a profitable investment haven. "We mourn the victims of the terrorist attack at Domodedovo," he wrote on Twitter. "The organizers will be tracked down and punished."

President Barack Obama called the attack "an outrageous act of terrorism against the Russian people," joining a chorus of international condemnation. The U.S. and other Western governments in the past have criticized Russia for what they call human-rights violations in its Caucasus crackdown. Monday's attack brought a measure of solidarity. "We are in this fight together," said Anders Fogh Rasmussen, secretary-general of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.

Vladimir Markin, spokesman for Russia's Investigative Committee, said the bomber was a man who appeared to have been wearing explosives in a belt.

 This is very sad. Acts of terror have innocent victims, including those who are indirectly affected with lingering awful memories and pain. May God give Russians the strength to overcome. 

—Hubbard Morris

Russian news agencies quoted law-enforcement officials as saying they had found the severed head of a man, age 30 to 35, suspected of being the bomber. Those reports couldn't be confirmed. Interfax news agency, also quoting unnamed officials, reported that officials were looking for three suspects thought to be linked to the bomber. 

Such networks of terror groups have become decentralized and have spread across the Caucasus and into Russian cities outside the region, making them hard to combat, specialists on the region say. Grigory Shvedov, editor of Caucasian Knot, an independent news agency, said the number of suicide bombings and other terrorist attacks in the region grew over the past year.

"The number of people willing to participate in the attacks is growing, so the situation is a dead end," he said.

  Lilit Gevorgyan, a Russia specialist at IHS Global Insight, a London-based think tank, said the government has become carried away by repressive measures and done little to improve the economic conditions of the region.

Responding to such criticism,Mr. Medvedev named a special envoy to the region last year with a mandate to address the root causes of violence. The envoy, Alexander Khloponin, submitted a plan to develop tourist facilities and industrial parks with the aim of creating 400,000 jobs over the next 15 years. 

And last week, Prime Minister Vladimir Putin pledged again to fight poverty in the Caucasus and "uproot everything that feeds terrorism and extremism."

But Mr. Shvedov said such efforts had yet to work because the Russian security services have continued to escalate their crackdown, which often sweeps up innocent civilians.

Mr. Medvedev acknowledged the stalemate during a November meeting with Russian officials in charge of the region. "We need to admit openly that…on the whole, the situation hasn't changed radically. The activeness of the [terrorist] underground isn't declining," he said. "The quantity of shootings, bombings, killings of civilians, religious leaders, law-enforcement officers isn't getting any smaller."

Although the militants have made occasional strikes against Russian trains and the Moscow subway, Monday's bombing was the first involving a Russian airport since 2004. Two female suicide bombers from Chechnya managed to board planes at Domodedovo that year by buying tickets illegally from airport personnel. The bombers blew themselves up in midair, killing all 90 people aboard the two flights.

Monday's attack underlined the vulnerability of Moscow's airports in a different way. Traffic jams on the roads to Domodedovo delayed the first responders; Russian television reports said some motorists failed to make way for some of the 57 ambulances dispatched to the airport. Authorities used a commuter train linking the city and the airport to ferry out some of the wounded.

The airport halted operations for about 20 minutes after the explosion, officials there said. Some flights were diverted to Moscow's two other airports.

Built in 1964, Domodedovo is located 26 miles (42 kilometers) south of the center of Moscow. Last year, 77 airlines and more than 22 million passengers used the airport, according to its website.

—Alexander Kolyandr  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Richard Boudreaux at richard.boudreaux@wsj.com and Gregory L. White at greg.white@wsj.com 