Chinese President Hu Jintao's arrival in Washington for a state visit next week provides insight into how the Obama administration's thinking on the U.S.-China relationship has evolved—especially on how Washington factors in human rights into this relationship. Recent action, as well as chatter around the visit, suggest President Obama is seeking to recalibrate relations with China after two disappointing years. That may, in turn, suggest that human rights will play a bigger role. If that's the case, the White House should stress freedom of expression as the leitmotif of the summit.

President Hu is being feted with his first full state visit to Washington: arrival ceremony with 21-gun salute; accommodations at Blair House, the official state guest house in Washington, DC; and a coveted state dinner. The last time a Chinese president received this honor, in 1997, Bill Clinton hosted Jiang Zemin. That visit was controversial, and came at a difficult time in U.S.-China relations. Mr. Jiang was greeted by large, noisy demonstrations everywhere he went, and Mr. Clinton archly noted during a freewheeling joint press conference that China's authoritarian government was on "the wrong side of history." 

Many of the issues that animated the 1997 state visit—trade, nuclear proliferation, the environment and Taiwan—remain at the top of the list for the upcoming summit. As does human rights: China's crackdown after dissident Liu Xiaobo won the Nobel Peace Prize last year ensures that.

But Beijing, as always, will do its best to impose its gloss on the bilateral agenda. That means managing its image so as to show Mr. Hu in a strictly positive light back home in China. Chinese diplomats have reportedly demanded that Mr. Hu be completely shielded from anti-China protesters, unfettered media and other aspects of America's free society.

If the past is any guide, Chinese negotiators are pressuring their American counterparts to present a tightly controlled environment for this visit, and intimating failure to do so will result in lack of progress on some substantive issue. They have tried this in past visits, with some success. 

After a Falun Gong member heckled Mr. Hu from the White House lawn during an official visit to Washington in 2006, the Chinese angrily blamed the State Department and White House for failing to manage press credentials carefully enough. As a result of that incident, as well as the more routine public protests that follow them throughout the democratic world, the Chinese have progressively upped demands for a cordon sanitaire around their leaders. 

The American side, which is less hung up on matters of protocol, has too often given in and provided even low-ranking Chinese officials with security levels far exceeding that required for their safety. Emboldened by their success in stage-managing state visits, the Chinese performed an inverse move when President Obama visited China in November 2009 by willfully depriving him of spontaneous contact with the Chinese people. From the tightly controlled "town hall" with handpicked Communist Youth League members in Shanghai, to the stilted joint nonpress conference in Beijing, Mr. Obama's Chinese hosts insisted on displaying their worst control-freak tendencies.

It would be a mistake for the administration to give in on this front. Beijing's Nobel overreaction last year should, more than anything else, color Washington's approach here. On a personal note, President Obama's history and achievement is now intertwined with Mr. Liu's: Both are recipients of the same award. When Mr. Liu was awarded the Peace Prize in absentia last month, President Obama cited the universality of the rights and values Mr. Liu sought for China. 

The best way for Mr. Obama to honor his connection to Mr. Liu would be to use every means at his disposal to show the Chinese people that freedom of expression is one of the crown jewels of American society. For example, Mr. Obama should meet with Chinese dissidents who have suffered for trying to exercise this right. His staff should forget interviews with China's censored state-owned propaganda organs, and instead host uncensored Chinese-language media like Radio Free Asia, leading Chinese bloggers and cutting edge media for presummit briefings. 

The joint press conference after the summit should be the real deal, where the media gets ample opportunity to ask no-holds-barred questions. The alternative Chinese media above should not only get the official press accreditation, they should be the ones first called on during the press conference. A cordon based solely on security precautions ought to be imposed, without any extraordinary restrictions on protests. 

The upcoming visit presents the White House a unique opportunity to contrast the weaknesses of the Chinese political system with the strengths of the American one. That's why aspects of the visit involving freedom of expression should be non-negotiable. If the Chinese side digs in on these issues, the White House should be willing to cancel the state arrival ceremony or other items of importance to Beijing's protocol-obsessed leaders.

 Ms. Currie is a senior fellow with the Project 2049 Institute. 