PORTLAND, ORE.—On a recent afternoon, runner Galen Rupp stood semi-naked inside the tall metal cylinder with only his head poking out, nitrogen mist enveloping his head.

This was the newest technology tried by Alberto Salazar, the latest in a list that over the years has included software developed in Russian that uses sensors to analyze a body's readiness to perform, vibrating platforms, anti-gravity treadmills, underwater treadmills, and tents that strap over beds to create conditions of altitude.

"I should have brought my Mad Scientist lab coat," Salazar said with a grin to a visitor on a recent overcast morning in Oregon as Rupp stretched to the side of the running track.

Rupp, 24, was preparing for his debut in the half-marathon in New York City on Sunday. He will be one of three athletes competing from Salazar's training group at the Nike facility in Oregon, along with 32-year-old Kara Goucher, who is making her return from pregnancy, and British runner Mo Farah.

They will be competing against a stiff field that includes three athletes from another prominent American running group, the Mammoth Track Club, led by Meb Keflezighi, and the 2010 New York City Marathon winners Edna Kiplagat and Gebre Gebremariam.

But perhaps most importantly it will be another test in Salazar's ongoing experiment about whether science can help offer Americans an answer to the dominance of foreign, primarily East African runners.

"The number one sort of spur or reason for embracing all of the science is probably because of my desire for our runners to be competitive at an international level," Salazar said, relaxing after Rupp's session in the machine at the Nike facility. "I believe that we are running against the most talented and gifted distance athletes that the world has ever seen in the great East African runners—the Kenyans and Ethiopians."

Against such odds, he said, "you do everything you possibly can legally, ethically, morally that gives you the chance to be better."

The cryosauna is the latest tool, even though Salazar admits, he is still testing to understand its most effective uses. "That's how all advances are made in science and life," he said. "It's by experimentation."

The knowledge will be gained through trial and error on his elite athletes, though all agree the machine is harmless and potentially a breakthrough. Theoretically, it makes sense: a container of liquid nitrogen turns to gas and is pumped into the cylinder where the athlete stands, plunging the temperature below negative 200 degrees Fahrenheit for a short burst of time. The body believes that it is dying and rushes blood to protect its vital organs. Two minutes later, when the athlete emerges from the container, the concentrated and enriched blood rushes back through the body, providing an instant cleanse and relief. 

Rupp, who has trained with Salazar since high school, views the experience practically. "An ice bath you can sit in for 20 minutes," he said. "This thing you go in for two minutes."

It remains to be seen whether the cryosauna will catch on in the United States. (There are only seven machines in use in America, according to the company.) But Salazar's open-minded approach has profoundly influenced American running, said Terry Crawford, the director of coaching for USA Track and Field.

"He set the bar high and inspired other coaches to be more scientific and all those things are starting to pay off for the U.S.," said Crawford, who noted that Salazar is one of three finalists for the United States Olympic Committee's "Doc" Counsilman Science Award. "You've seen in the last three years that we're starting to have some of the best performances not only with Alberto's athletes but also around the country. So I think his role in that is just being a great example to other coaches."

Salazar was himself a sensational runner, winning three consecutive New York City Marathons in the early 1980s, whose career ended prematurely when he ruptured a tendon. He retired from racing in 1994.

After a stint in restaurant management, then sports marketing at Nike, he yearned to return more directly to the sport and partnerd with Nike to fund a new training group called the Oregon Project in 2002.

"I think Alberto wants for these athletes what he had and more," said New York Road Runners CEO Mary Wittenberg. Like a parent, she said, "Alberto didn't have the help he could have used in training and recovery, so I think he's really driven to help these athletes have the opportunities he didn't have."

But with the exception of Dan Browne, who made the 2004 Olympic team, Salazar initially struggled to achieve the results he wanted.

"We did not have good success over the first three, four years," he said. In fact, by 2004, one could argue that his most prominent success involved another coach's athletes.

"At the Athens Olympic Games, we were looking for a way to quickly cool the body during or after the warm-up before they went to the starting line," said coach Bob Larsen, who was the U.S. Men's Olympic distance coach.

 With limited access to electrical outlets, Larsen needed a low-tech solution for the men's and women's runners. He heard about something called an ice vest, which was stuffed with frozen gel packets. "I got in touch with Alberto," Larsen said.

Salazar had some and worked with Nike to export the vests to Athens. They arrived the night before the women's marathon and Larsen convinced officials to let him store the gel packets in the food freezers at the Olympic Village.

 The next day Deena Kastor won a bronze medal, the first for an American woman in the marathon in 20 years. Keflezighi won the silver days later, the first for an American man in the marathon in 28 years.

Larsen has not used the latest freezing technology, the cryosauna, on his athletes, though they do use other machines popular within Salazar's group, like the underwater treadmill (which is exactly what it sounds like: a treadmill submerged in a pool with water jets applying pressure) and the AlterG machine, which reduces an athlete's weight while they run to reduce stress. Those are "pretty mainstream," now, Larsen said.

But they weren't always. Salazar tested out the very first prototype, housed in the garage of the company's co-founder's parents. Salazar strapped himself into the machine as co-founder Sean Whalen—who was still a college student—looked on. 

"Within 30 seconds, he turned saying he wanted to buy 20 of them," Whalen recalled, his voice still amazed.

Without Alberto's visit, "I think [the company] would have just kind of fizzled out," Whalen said. "I don't think it would have ended up going anywhere."

Today, 18 NBA teams, 10 NFL teams, 20 international soccer teams and more than 40 college programs—as well as rehabilitation centers—own machines, according to the company.

Not everyone, however, believes Salazar's methods are the answer. Jerry Schumacher works with his own group of athletes at Nike, including the 2010 NYC Marathon runner-up Shalane Flanagan.

He uses the AlterG machine "hardly ever" he said. He has never used the underwater treadmill or the cryosauna in training. When he wants his athletes to experience altitude, he sends them to the mountains. "I like that the best by far," he said.

Despite training at the same facility, the two groups are completely, amicably separate. "Alberto's obviously a very good coach," Schumacher said.

 Still, Schumacher said his training approach "is based on kind of how I've done things since I started. I'd say it's rather simple. It's straightforward, nothing real complicated. Certainly not trying to reinvent the wheel."

Goucher and her husband Adam joined Salazar's club in 2007. They had faced a slew of injuries, disrupting once-promising careers. Salazar, with his radical approach, offered something of a last chance—and, they say, delivered.

"He was just so smart, he had so much passion and he just had so many resources," she said, citing the massage therapists, sports psychologist and medical staff that athletes have access to as part of their training. "We felt like we had to try."

Still, she was taken aback when she arrived and spotted people running on the underwater treadmills. "I'm like this is crazy—these people are crazy," she said laughing. "But now of course, I use them all the time."

Still, she said, "at the heart of everything is the same hard work and running, but it's the little finetuning, tinkering. Alberto's not afraid to try anything."