A year after the worst oil spill to strike U.S. waters, oyster beds are struggling along the Gulf of Mexico, the dolphin population is experiencing what the federal government calls an "unusual mortality event," and red snapper with rotting fins are showing up on fishing lines.

But scientists say it's far too soon to make definitive conclusions about the scale and scope of the marine disturbances. This uncertainty, which may not be resolved for years, is paving the way for the next phase of the Deepwater Horizon disaster: an intense debate over the actual damage caused by the spill and who, if anyone, should pay.

In some instances, the cause of the damage is clear. Spots along the Gulf Coast still have oil from BP PLC's well lodged in tar-like "mats" under the water and buried in the sand on beaches, the federal government says.

The explosion last year of the Deepwater Horizon rig in the Gulf of Mexico triggered a major oil spill and closures of fishing areas and shoreline.

Other cases are less clear-cut, and show how tough it can be to understand the interplay of an environmental disaster—even one so vast—with a complex ecosystem. While some dead dolphins are washing up with oil on them, for instance, the rise in deaths began before the spill.

The scientific effort to understand the spill's impact is one of the largest research projects of its kind ever. It is tackling questions of liability that might not be answered for years.

The government has named several companies in addition to BP as potentially liable for paying environmental damages. They include Transocean Ltd., which owned the drilling rig, and two owners of minority stakes in the well—Anadarko Petroleum Corp. and an arm of Japan's Mitsui & Co., MOEX Offshore 2007 LLC.

Lingering environmental problems are often less obvious than the spill's initial fallout, which left pelicans, beaches and miles of open sea coated in crude. But historically, the scope of a spill's damage sometimes emerges only years later, as oil settles in hard-to-see parts of the ecosystem.

"Dead animals floating in the water are not the biggest predictor" of a spill's ecological toll, says Andrew Whitehead, a Louisiana State University biologist. The focus now, he says, is on identifying long-term problems that "have big-time impacts."

A peer-reviewed study that included scientists from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration found that fish embryos that survived oil exposure grew up as adults to swim slowly and have mild heart defects. Four decades after a 1969 spill in Buzzards Bay, Mass., scientists compared fiddler crabs in one marsh still tinged by oil to crabs in a nearby marsh that wasn't. They reported in a peer-reviewed paper that the crabs moved more slowly, and were present in only about half the density, in the oily marsh than in the untainted one.

The Deepwater Horizon spill began April 20, when the rig exploded above a BP well being drilled in mile-deep water. Over three months, 4.1 million barrels gushed into the sea. 

That's as much as 16 times the oil spilled by the Valdez. Yet the amount of shoreline hit by BP oil was a fraction of the area doused in Alaska. The reason, government investigators say: The BP spill occurred deep underwater and far offshore, and officials fought to keep it at sea to protect the shoreline. However, it can be tougher to see the aftereffects offshore. Scientists are also studying the potential impact of widespread use of "dispersants"—chemicals sprayed on the oil to break it up.

Evaluating the spill is further complicated by the already compromised environment of the northern Gulf, an ecology strained by decades of coastal development, farm runoff and small oil spills. Despite that history, it still teems with so much life that scientists sometimes call it the "Fertile Crescent." 

Federal law requires the U.S. government to document a spill's environmental damage—a process called a Natural Resource Damage Assessment—and requires companies found responsible to pay to fix the damage. If the government and the companies can't agree on a settlement, the fight can end up in court. 

Though much of the investigation remains shrouded in legal secrecy, scientists working for the government have publicly reported some data. BP representatives accompany government officials during field work, and the oil company is also funding research. University scientists, most funded by the government, are doing studies of their own.

Early results show the complexities involved. On some beaches in multiple states, BP oil is buried more than six inches below the sand that sits above the high-tide level; trying to clean it could do more harm than good, a federal study said in February. Tests show that more than 86% of certain oil components linked to cancer have dissipated, and computer models predict most of the rest will be gone within five years, it said. But in some places, those components "are predicted to persist substantially longer," the report said.

The buried oil is particularly dangerous for sea turtles, the report said. Five of the world's seven sea-turtle species nest along the Gulf Coast, and all five are deemed either endangered or threatened. One concern is that the oil could coat the turtles' eggs, which are buried in the sand, says the report, which called for more study.

In addition, in some shallow waters, mats of tar-like BP oil mixed with sand are trapped between sand bars, the February report said. It's unclear how many such mats exist because rough waters make it hard for divers to locate them.

Where they exist, the oil residue could harm organisms living beneath the trapped oil, the report said. The mats, which range in size from the size of a few dinner plates to roughly 800 square feet, are located in several spots from Louisiana to Florida, a Coast Guard official said.

A BP spokeswoman says it's not clear how much of the oil along beaches came from its well.

In a blow to the Gulf economy, much of Louisiana's iconic oyster crop has been wiped out and won't recover for at least two years, because oysters generally take that long to grow large enough to be harvested, independent scientists and oyster-industry leaders say. The main cause, they say, isn't spilled oil. Rather, it is because Louisiana officials diverted water from the Mississippi River into the coastal marshes to keep the oil at sea.

Marshes are an incubator for much of the life in the Gulf. But oysters need brackish water to live—not too salty, not too fresh. The flood of river water into the marshes reduced the salinity, killing oysters, state officials and independent scientists say.

The government closed vast swaths of Louisiana oyster beds as a precaution amid the spill. In 2010, only 6.6 million pounds of oysters were harvested in Louisiana. That's the smallest catch since 1966, according to NOAA figures, and less than half the state's 2009 catch. Earl Melancon, a biologist specializing in oysters at Nicholls State University, in Thibodaux, La., says that between 40% and 50% of the oysters died in two important areas of oyster beds.

Louisiana is likely to fall behind Washington state as the nation's top oyster producer, says Olivia Watkins of Louisiana's Department of Wildlife and Fisheries. Louisiana is part of the government attempt to build a legal case against BP. She says that if the state hadn't injected fresh water, and oil had gotten into more marshes, the impact on oysters "would have been far more lasting and severe."

Hejdi Feick, the BP spokeswoman, says BP is awaiting the conclusions of the government's legal investigation before commenting on whether it believes the oysters died from of the freshwater infusion.

Other impacts are proving tougher to gauge. Far out in the Gulf, BP oil has lodged in sediment on the sea floor in spots within about two miles of the blown-out well, another federal study found. That sediment contains enough BP oil to pose a danger to marine life, the study says.

The risk there is to coral and myriad organisms dwelling near the sea floor. Scientists don't fully understand the role deep-sea creatures play in the Gulf ecosystem, but they are likely a key link in the food chain, since research suggests that larger animals all the way up to whales forage on the Gulf floor, says Steve Murawski, a former top NOAA official and now a fisheries professor at the University of South Florida.

Scientists disagree about the scale of deep-sea damage. A peer-reviewed study earlier this year found that microbes in the Gulf had consumed the methane that came out of the BP well. The microbes used up oxygen in the water as they ate the methane, reducing oxygen levels, but the oxygen levels largely bounced back by last fall, says John Kessler, an oceanographer at Texas A&M University involved with the study.

Samantha Joye, a University of Georgia oceanographer, says she has found what she believes is collateral damage from that microbial munching. She has taken samples of Gulf sediment and found a slimy material that she believes resulted from the microbes eating methane. She says her research suggests the spill deposited such slime in patches as far as 40 miles from the BP wellhead, killing worms and other organisms on the sea floor. Though tests have confirmed BP oil in sediment samples she and colleagues took a few miles from the well, she says, tests on sediment farther out aren't finished yet.

In a paper to be presented at a scientific conference this month, BP-funded scientists plan to report test results indicating that oil in sediment beyond about two miles from the wellhead doesn't match oil from BP's well, said Laura Folse of BP's Gulf Coast restoration effort. 

Dead dolphins have been washing up along Gulf shores in abnormally high numbers in the past year, says NOAA, which has designated it an "unusual mortality event." The high numbers began in February 2010, NOAA figures show, about two months before the BP spill, and have continued this year.

Since late last April, when the spill started, some 300 dolphins, most of them dead, have washed up. Depending on the month, that's between two and nine times as high as the long-term average, NOAA says. 

Government tests showed that six of the dolphins had oil from the BP well on them, says Blair Mase, a NOAA marine-mammal specialist. Nine others washed up with a substance on them that NOAA officials suspect was oil, Ms. Mase says. Of the nine, one was found not to have BP oil, and the other eight are still being tested, she says.

A link between some deaths and the spill is "not something that we're ruling out," she says. Since January, a majority of dolphins washing up have been small and in some cases apparently stillborn, which is unusual so early in the year, Ms. Mase says.

Ms. Feick, the BP spokeswoman, notes the uptick in deaths began before the spill and says BP hasn't received data from the government's tests, "which is needed to identify the oil origin and to evaluate potential causes of the deaths."

Another sign of stress in the ecosystem without proven ties to the spill is appearing in the population of red snapper, a staple of Cajun cuisine. In recent weeks there has been a rising incidence of fish caught in Gulf waters between eastern Louisiana and western Florida with dark lesions and rotting fins, says James Cowan, an oceanographer at Louisiana State University. "I've never seen anything like it," he says.

The afflicted fish have been caught in "hot spots" along the Gulf Coast that range between 10 miles and 80 miles offshore, Mr. Cowan says. Among the spots, Mr. Cowan says, are areas off Pensacola, Fla.; Orange Beach, Ala.; and Mississippi—Gulf seas that were heavily oiled, he says.

Scientists consider this significant because snapper congregate along reefs and feed on shrimp and other organisms on the sea floor. Sheepshead, a Gulf fish that feeds on sediment organisms, have been caught with similar problems, says Mr. Cowan. 

He believes oil contamination in the Gulf sediment may be to blame, but says lab tests so far haven't identified a cause. The tests show that some of the snapper have parasites, a sign of a weakened immune system, a development that could threaten the long-term health of the fishery. So far, the problem shows up in only a small proportion of snapper caught in the hot spots.

Blue crabs, another Gulf delicacy, are also raising a red flag. Researchers have found droplets of an unidentified orange substance under the shells of baby crabs caught at seven coastal sites, from Galveston, Texas, to Apalachicola, Fla., says Caz Taylor, a Tulane University biologist involved in the research. 

No such orange droplets have been found in crabs sold as seafood, says Robert Dickey, a Food and Drug Administration official involved in government testing of whether Gulf crabs, oysters, shrimp and fish are safe for people to eat.

The FDA says seafood is fine if eaten in quantities it defines as normal. Some locals counter that those guidelines underestimate seafood consumption along the Gulf. But U.S. officials say the levels of oil-related contamination are so small that even Gulf residents who eat more seafood shouldn't be at risk.

The long-term human toll is perhaps the hardest to gauge. The U.S. has launched a study to monitor 55,000 former cleanup workers for up to a decade, looking at everything from skin rashes to increased cancer risk.

"The jury's still out" about whether the oil sickened people, says Donald Boesch, a University of Maryland oceanographer who served on a presidential commission that investigated the spill. The long-term study, he says, "should tell us an awful lot about whether there's any substance to those claims."