LONDON—Alan Johnson, the U.K. opposition Labour party's finance spokesman, Thursday stood down from the post after less than four months in the job, citing personal reasons in a move that will bring little comfort to the party's new leader. 





Mr. Johnson will be replaced by Ed Balls, an economist and a former Economic Secretary to the Treasury during the last Labour government, party leader  Ed Miliband said.

The reshuffle comes amid criticism of Mr. Miliband's leadership style by some Labour politicians and in the British press. Mr. Miliband has rarely gotten the better of Prime Minister David Cameron in Parliament and appears at times reluctant to spell out party policy on key issues. 

Mr. Miliband now finds himself putting Mr. Balls into a role that he had rejected him for just months ago. Mr. Balls was seen as being too aggressive on the issue of deficit reduction, people familiar with the matter say. 

 In a resignation letter to Mr. Miliband, Mr. Johnson said his decision was due to an issue connected with his family.

"I have found it difficult to cope with these issues in my private life whilst carrying out an important front bench role," he wrote.    

In reply, Mr. Miliband said Mr. Johnson had been an outstanding colleague and great friend for many years.

A former home secretary, Mr. Johnson's performance had been criticized as lackluster. Despite the country's still fragile economy being the biggest issue in British politics, Mr. Johnson has failed to level significant blows against Tory Treasury chief  George Osborne. After his surprise appointment in October the self-deprecating former postman said he would have to read a beginners guide to economics and in a recent interview appeared to not know what a key business tax was. 

Mr. Johnson established himself as popular figure in the government of Gordon Brown, effectively playing on his impoverished beginnings on a housing project in London. In the dying months of Mr. Brown's regime, he was frequently cited as an alternative to the unpopular Prime Minister. Mr. Johnson did not stand as a candidate for the leadership contest that followed Labour's election defeat saying he wanted a younger generation to compete. 

The 60-year-old, who has been a Labour lawmaker for over a decade. Earlier, he worked his way up via the trade unions, to become the youngest General Secretary in the history of what was then the Union of Communication Workers. 

Mr. Balls is seen as an aggressive communicator who can inflict blows on the opposition. Within the Labour Party though, Mr. Balls has proven a divisive figure whose partisan backing for Mr. Brown against former Prime Minister Tony Blair was widely criticized. Mr. Balls was also a key champion of the light-touch financial regulation and over leveraged banking system that helped Britain become one of the biggest casualties among major economies of the financial crisis. 

Mr. Balls will be replaced in his current role of shadow home secretary by his wife  Yvette Cooper.

 Write to  Alistair MacDonald at alistair.macdonald@wsj.com and Ainsley Thomson at ainsley.thomson@dowjones.com 