California Gov. Jerry Brown signed legislation Tuesday requiring the state to obtain a third of its electricity from renewable sources such as wind, solar and geothermal power by 2020, among the most ambitious such laws in the nation.

Mr. Brown, a Democrat, said the measure would stimulate clean-technology investment, create jobs, improve air quality, promote energy independence and reduce greenhouse-gas emissions. He also said he would like to see the state "pursue even more far-reaching targets."

California's three largest investor-owned utilities failed to achieve an earlier state target to garner 20% of their electricity from renewable sources by the end of 2010, hitting 18% instead, according to the California Public Utilities Commission.

The utilities avoided penalties because they had made a good faith effort. They entered into contracts to buy a sufficient quantity of green-generated electricity from independent suppliers but the suppliers couldn't generate enough power. 

Two of the three biggest utilities said they backed the new law. The third, Pacific Gas & Electric Co., opposed the measure over restrictions on where utilities can obtain power, among other concerns.

 Aaron Johnson, PG&E's director of renewable-energy policy, said the utility would "work within the rules" of the new law, despite concerns it could lead to higher energy prices.

Utilities won't be required to reach goals set by the new law no matter what the cost, said Democratic state Sen. Joe Simitian, who sponsored the measure. Utilities may be granted exemptions if renewable-energy prices, or the difficulty of moving it to the state's grid, make costs excessive.

Consumer advocates endorsed the bill in part because of those exemptions, but they worried about the cost of obtaining so much renewable energy, especially when natural gas, a rival power source, is so inexpensive. 

Under the old law, utilities signed power contracts that were $6 billion above market prices, according to an analysis by consumer advocates at the California Public Utilities Commission. About 59% of renewable-energy contracts exceeded market prices. 

Sen. Simitian said he expects the new targets to again boost the state's renewable-energy industry. "If we send a clear signal to the market," he said, "the market will send investment dollars to California." 

He expects the law to make it easier for utilities to meet their goals by making it simpler for them to build their own renewable-energy sources if "the market does not provide for it," he said.

The California bill is the latest attempt by the state to bolster its clean-technology industry and improve the environment. The Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006, signed by former Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger, a Republican, required a reduction of greenhouse-gas emissions to their 1990 levels by 2020.

The new goal for renewable power is "a very bold, ambitious target," said Barry Rabe of the University of Michigan, who studies states' environmental policies. But he said it was "much too soon to know" how effective the law would be.

 Write to  Vauhini Vara at vauhini.vara@wsj.com and Rebecca Smith at rebecca.smith@wsj.com 