Amid mounting losses and low expectations for 2011, the Mets can only cling to the hope of better days ahead. But their chances of a rapid resurgence took a significant hit Monday when Jenrry Mejia, their top pitching prospect, was diagnosed with a major elbow injury.

Mejia is likely done for the season after an MRI revealed a complete tear of the medial collateral ligament in his right elbow. The injury will likely require the reconstructive procedure known as Tommy John surgery, which would sideline Mejia for 12 to 15 months.

Based on how well Mejia had been pitching at Triple-A Buffalo, it was reasonable to expect him to join the Mets' major-league rotation at some point later this summer. He figured to be a key part of their rotation in 2012, a low-cost, homegrown hard thrower with boundless potential. But now, Mejia, 21, appears unlikely to pitch in the majors until late 2012 or 2013.

"He's disappointed," said Bill Rose, one of Mejia's agents. "I'm trying to cheer him up. I said, 'Hey, it's better than the shoulder.' Neither one is great, but this surgery has become more and more common. Half the guys come back throwing harder than they ever threw before."

Rose said Mejia was stunned by the diagnosis because he was not in severe pain. He left Friday's game in Rochester, N.Y., after four innings with what the Mets called "discomfort" in the elbow. But he didn't think it was anything serious.

"He just thought his forearm was tight and he was checking it out," Rose said. "I was in as much shock as he was today."

Mejia was examined at the Hospital for Special Surgery in Manhattan. Mets medical director Dr. David Altchek recommended surgery, which is typical for torn elbow ligaments. 

Rose said he had full confidence in Altchek and the Mets but wanted Mejia to seek a second opinion before undergoing surgery.

He will be examined by Dr. James Andrews in Birmingham, Ala., at some point in the next couple of days.

"I think we're not doing the correct service to our player if we don't explore every avenue," Rose said. "I'm not saying the Mets are wrong at all. Chances are they are absolutely correct."

Dr. Timothy Kremchek, the Cincinnati Reds medical director and a leading orthopedic surgeon, said the only potential alternative to Tommy John surgery would be platelet-rich plasma therapy.

The treatment would entail injections of platelet-enriched blood, which promotes healing.

But even then, Kremchek said Mejia would be out at least four months. And the so-called blood-spinning therapy would come with risks of its own.

"With most guys who are that high-level of a prospect, the last thing you want to be doing is injecting a guy with stuff," Kremchek said. "Then, if it doesn't work and you have to have surgery, he's out another year. The most conservative treatment would be Tommy John."

A Mets spokesman said general manager Sandy Alderson would have no comment until Tuesday. But clearly, the news of Mejia's injury was disheartening for the organization.

In five starts at Buffalo, Mejia had a 2.86 ERA, with 21 strikeouts and 14 walks in 28 1/3 innings. He was working to hone the command of his curveball and changeup to complement his cut fastball, his signature pitch. 

But now, all that will have to wait.

During spring training, Mets pitching coach Dan Warthen said Mejia needed to learn how to work the edges of the strike zone better.

"His mind is set for strikes right now," Warthen said, "and we're trying to get his mind set for strikes when you have to and balls when you want to."

Given the Mets' financial peril and the shaky state of their starting rotation, Mejia could have proven invaluable to them in 2012. 

There is no commodity in baseball more precious than a young pitcher with a live arm and a high ceiling.

The Mets haven't lost that commodity in Mejia, but they can no longer count on him to help them at the beginning of next season.