Treasury Chief George Osborne received two pieces of bad economic news ahead of the U.K. government's annual budget on Wednesday, with inflation and public-borrowing numbers both coming in worse than expected.

With the U.K. still wracked with high public debts, Mr. Osborne has said he would stick to an ambitious austerity program of £111 billion ($181 billion) of fiscal tightening by 2015. Mr. Osborne, though, is also unlikely to unveil any additional big squeezes on British households and will announce a range of small measures to help Britons facing surging inflation and stagnant wage growth on top of the tax rises and spending cuts, people familiar with the matter say.

On Tuesday, data showed inflation hit its highest level in more than two years, as record fuel prices helped push February consumer prices up by 4.4% from a year earlier.

Data also revealed the U.K. public sector borrowed £11.8 billion last month, more than it has done in any February on record. Tuesday's figures ended a series of positive borrowing numbers that had been among the few pieces of good news for an economy that revealed how fragile its recovery was with its 0.6% contraction in gross domestic product in the fourth quarter.

In his budget statement, Mr. Osborne will say that people's personal-tax allowance, or the level of income they earn before it gets taxed, will rise £600 to just over £8,000 a year, a person familiar with the matter said. That means that 25 million taxpayers will be taxed an average of £45 a year less, though the measure will entail the very highest earners paying a bit more in tax.

The move is perhaps as motivated by party politics as anything. Among the coalition agreements struck by Mr. Osborne's Conservative Party and the Liberal Democrats after last May's inconclusive election was a promise that the personal-tax allowance would be moved up to £10,000 a year. 

Among other measures to be announced in the budget, the government will offer interest-free mortgages for five years to first-time buyers who put 20% down payments on newly built houses, a person familiar with the matter said. Those applying need to have a combined income of less than £60,000 to apply for the loan. The government hopes to kick-start the moribund housing market as well as help the construction industry. The Treasury estimates that every 10,000 new homes built supports 40,000 construction jobs.

While Wednesday's budget statement is unlikely to change Britain's current economic picture or move financial markets, it could affect all important business and consumer sentiment.

"Psychology does matter because consumers and businesses have to look through a period of excruciating pressure," said  Peter Spencer, the chief economist at the Ernst & Young ITEM Club of economic forecasters.

Despite largely sticking to the path mapped out in last June's emergency budget and October's spending review, Mr. Osborne will try to cast the government's economic plans in a fresh light by labeling the new spending plan as a budget for growth and by emphasizing that he is moving the economy from rescue to recovery. 

The communications strategy is designed to counter criticism from the opposition Labour Party that the government has no coherent plan to help foster economic growth.

—Alex Brittain contributed to this article.

 Write to  Alistair MacDonald at alistair.macdonald@wsj.com and Ainsley Thomson at ainsley.thomson@dowjones.com 