South Korea accepted a proposal from North Korea to hold high-level military talks, a move that signals a possible breakthrough between the rivals following deadly clashes. 

But Seoul warned that the North also must promise not to stage any further provocative acts against the South. 

The plans for talks come after President Barack Obama and Chinese President Hu Jintao on Wednesday called for "sincere and constructive inter-Korean dialogue" to maintain peace and stability on the peninsula. 

The meeting may be held at ministerial level, which would be the first such high-level exchange since South Korean President Lee Myung-bak took office in early 2008. In addition to discussing the North's military provocations, Seoul maintains that Pyongyang must discuss denuclearization as part of the talks process. 

Even as South Korean media and officials voiced a cautious expectation at this development, some North Korea observers showed skepticism. In the past, North Korea has provoked the South, sought talks that lead to economic concessions, and then severed relations again—a pattern that has run several cycles. 



Obama administration officials welcomed the announcement on Thursday but cautioned that full resumption of six-party talks on Pyongyang's nuclear-weapons program—which includes the two Koreas as well as China, the U.S., Japan and Russia—will require more action from North Korea. 

"We still believe that North Korea has a ways to go before we can engage in meaningful six-party talks," said State Department spokesman Mark Toner.

Experts say the resumption of military-to-military talks is a key prerequisite for defusing tensions in the region and jump-starting six-party talks.

North Korea in recent weeks has repeatedly called for bilateral talks with South Korea but Seoul rejected them, labeling Pyongyang's overtures insincere. 

But on Thursday, the South's Unification Ministry said a meeting between the two sides must address North Korea's willingness to take "measures to show responsibility for a series of provocations, and promise not to repeat them." The ministry said it also will suggest a separate high-level meeting to check on Pyongyang's sincerity toward denuclearization.

Relations on the Korean peninsula have deteriorated sharply in recent months following the sinking of a South Korean patrol boat in March 2010, killing 46 sailors, and an attack on a South Korean island by the North in November that killed four people, including two civilians. 

North Korea has denied responsibility for the sinking of the patrol boat, the Cheonan, and says it was provoked into its attack on the South Korean island of Yeonpyeong by a South Korean firing drill it says targeted its territorial waters. 

The North, in a statement addressed to South Korean Defense Minister Kim Kwan-jin, cited the need to "resolve pending military issues" as a reason for its proposal Thursday, according to South Korea's Defense Ministry. 

"We have a firm standing on resolving all inter-Korean military issues in the upcoming talks," the statement said. "Agenda for talks will cover opinions on the Cheonan warship and the Yeonpyeong island incidents." 

The South Korean defense ministry said in a briefing Friday morning that it would send Pyongyang its agenda and other details for inter-Korean preparatory meetings sometime next week. And the ministry said it expects any preparatory meetings to be held mid-February. The last such high-level talks between the North and the South took place in 2007.

Kim Yong-hyun, a professor of North Korea studies at Dongguk University in Seoul, said he doesn't expect much from any meetings, saying Thursday's moves by the two Koreas are "symbolic" in that they need to demonstrate they care about the concerns expressed by President Obama and President Hu. "North Korea wanted to show that it is trying to dissolve military tension on the Korean peninsula, and the South also feels the need to show that it takes note of the discussions between the two leaders," he said.

White House press secretary Robert Gibbs said at a briefing that resumed talks would be "an important step forward" and said Seoul's acceptance of direct talks may have been prodded by the state visit by Mr. Hu.

"I think some of that comes as a result of yesterday's meeting here that for the first time there was an acknowledgment by the Chinese about the North Koreans' enrichment program," Mr. Gibbs said. "Clearly, conditions were created yesterday that showed the Republic of Korea that China and the United States were aligned in dealing with the aggressions of the North Koreans."

South Korea's announcement highlights what appears to be an important shift in China's stance toward North Korea. 

Presidents Obama and Hu stressed in their joint statement that "the United States and China expressed concern regarding [North Korea's] claimed uranium enrichment program," saying it conflicted with North Korea's "relevant international obligations and commitments." 

That was the first explicit Chinese condemnation of North Korea's second pathway to nuclear weapons.

"That very clearly states that China will be on the side of the U.S. in [six-party] talks," said Victor Cha, a former Bush national security council official and now a Korea scholar at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington, D.C. "That may be why North Korea is willing to have military talks, even if that means talking about the sinking of the Cheonan."

 Write to  Keith Johnson at keith.johnson@wsj.com 