For the friends and relatives of the hundreds who died in the tornadoes that pounded Alabama and other Southern states last week, there are funerals and wakes. For the families of the hundreds more still believed missing, there are only questions and fear.

Over the weekend, officials lowered the death toll in Alabama to 236 from 250. State officials said Monday they were verifying death tolls county by county. The number of injured and hospitalized is 2,219.

But the number of people whose whereabouts remain unknown is far higher. In Tuscaloosa, Ala., alone, the police say there are still 340 people unaccounted for, based on missing-person reports. That number is down from the 458 people on the list as of Sunday. 

Meanwhile, in Birmingham, Ala., at least 32 are missing, according to police. As with Tuscaloosa, it's difficult to know how many of those reported missing were killed by last week's siege of tornadoes.

An estimated 312 tornadoes touched down in a 24-hour period last Wednesday and Thursday, mostly in Southern states, leaving a total of about 340 people dead, according to the National Weather Service.

For the families of the missing, the what-ifs are difficult to keep at bay. The tornadoes blew down homes and carried tons of detritus halfway across the state. Families are afraid the bodies of missing relatives may be lying somewhere alone and unclaimed in a far-flung field, or buried beneath the rubble in one of the thousands of collapsed buildings across the South.

"I don't even want to think about it," said Jean Williams, a Birmingham retiree whose 33-year-old granddaughter and two great-grandchildren are missing. "How can anyone just disappear from the face of the Earth?" she said.

Tallying the number of missing is a difficult task, complicated by the vicissitudes of human relationships and behavior, police say. For example, reports have been filed by family or friends who, in some cases, haven't seen or spoken to the missing for months or even years.

It can be unclear whether someone is really gone, or simply hasn't remembered to call in the traumatic wake of survival—or just hasn't been able to call. An untold number of cellphones were lost in the storm, along with contact information for friends and family stored in the phones, said Birmingham Police Detective Tasha Thomas, one of several officers assigned to trace people reported missing.

In the hours after the tornadoes passed, reports of the missing began to trickle in to authorities. With the passage of several days, some of those cases have been resolved, as the dispossessed have filtered into shelters and made contact with their families.

But new cases continue to be reported. "For every one case we resolved, we get 15 more," said Tracy Croom, spokesman for the Tuscaloosa Police. 

The last time Ms. Williams saw her granddaughter, Sheniqua Hester, was when they bumped into each other a year ago in a Wal-Mart. The two had once been close, but Ms. Hester's husband had come between them, and the relations had grown strained, Ms. Williams said.

But when Ms. Williams hadn't heard from her granddaughter two days after the tornado, she began to worry. When she realized her granddaughter's house in Pratt City was completely flattened, she panicked and called the police.

"There is no way in a time of crisis like this she wouldn't get in touch with her grandma," Ms. Williams said after church on Sunday.

A mutual acquaintance said she saw Ms. Hester—who at 6 feet 3 inches tall is easy to recognize—walking on the side of the road after the tornado, crying. 

"But we're not sure it was her," Ms. Williams said. And there has been no sign of her or her two children or husband.

Fears arise each time a story is reported about an object found hundreds of miles away from where it used to be, police say. Families are so anxious that on a number of occasions when Detective Thomas has called to ask if they heard anything from a missing person, they started crying immediately after she introduced herself.

"They are terrified that I'm calling with bad news," Detective Thomas said.

Ms. Williams said she was walking on eggshells. "I am praying that she is all right," she said. "Oh Sheniqua, grandma loves you, please call me."

—Mike Esterl contributed to this article.

 Write to  Douglas Belkin at doug.belkin@wsj.com 