Japanese stocks gained Wednesday on a weaker yen and as supply-chain worries eased somewhat in response to news of an earlier-than-expected restart at one of Renesas Electronics' chip-making plants. 

Japan's Nikkei Stock Average rose 0.5% to 9864.26, Australia's S&P/ASX 200 index advanced 1.2% to 4780.25 and Korea's Kospi gained 1.3% to 2166.63. 

Shares slipped in Shanghai and Hong Kong as a batch of Chinese economic data suggested elevated inflation might lead to further tightening measures. The Shanghai Composite fell 0.2% to 2883.42, while Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index retreated 0.2% to 23291.80. 

In Tokyo, Renesas, a key auto-industry supplier, bolstered auto makers as it said it would reopen a quake-damaged chip plant in early June and plans to restore its chip supplies at the plant to pre-quake levels by late July. "The market is once again starting to recognize the faster-than-expected recovery of Japan's supply chain" following the March 11 earthquake and tsunami, said Cosmo Securities equity strategist  Toshikazu Horiuchi. 

Honda Motor rose 2.1% and Nissan Motor climbed 2%. But Renesas fell 3.8% after it projected a deeper-than-expected net loss for the fiscal year ended March 31. Toyota Motor rose 0.6% ahead of its earnings report. After the market closed, it posted a 77% drop in net profit for the January-March quarter. 

NEC gained 4.7% after projecting a net profit in the current fiscal year, compared with a loss for the prior year. 

In China, investors worried about further tightening measures after data showed that consumer-price inflation in April was 5.3% from a year earlier, a modest drop from 5.4% in March but slightly above analysts' expectations of 5.2%. Industrial output rose 13.4% year to year, lower than an expected 14.5% rise and slowing from a 14.8% increase in March. 

"Slowing activity that isn't accompanied by easing inflation raises the prospect that Chinese monetary policy will continue to tighten," said TD Securities senior strategist  Roland Randall in Singapore. 

Chinese power generators fell after having recorded bumper gains in recent sessions as some regions of the country are experiencing severe power shortages. Huadian Power International slid 2.3% after rising 4.8% in the past three days, and hydro-power generator Sichuan Guangan AAA Public dropped 2.9% after an 18% surge over three days. 

Cement makers rose as fixed-asset investment in nonrural areas, a closely watched indicator of construction activity, jumped a higher-than-expected 25.4% in the January-April period. Anhui Conch Cement rose 1.8%, Huaxin Cement gained 1.7% and Fujian Cement jumped 6.7%. 

In Hong Kong, concern about possible Chinese tightening weighed on sentiment. HSBC Holdings fell 1.4% after it unveiled plans to reduce costs over the next three years, and following disappointing first-quarter results Monday. 

In Sydney, the market posted its biggest gain in three weeks, led by mining and energy stocks. BHP Billiton rose 1.7%, Rio Tinto gained 2.3% and Newcrest Mining increased 1.8%. Some analysts attributed Wednesday's strength to investors' relief that Chinese data were close to expectations. Also mentioned as positives were a "boring" Australian federal budget and confirmation of earnings guidance from a range of companies.

In Seoul, strong gains in chemical stocks and heavy-industry firms offset losses in utilities. LG Chem added 3% and Honam Petrochemical rose 5.2%.

 Write to  Shri Navaratnam at shri.navaratnam@dowjones.com 