The number of incoming kindergartners who took the test to qualify for gifted programs in New York public schools shot up 13% this year over last, according to data released by the  Department of Education Thursday. 

There was also a 13% increase in the number of soon-to-be kindergartners who scored in the 90th percentile or above, which guarantees them a seat in a district gifted and talented program, though not necessarily in the school of their choice. 

Those scoring at the 97th percentile or above qualify for one of five citywide gifted programs, such as the Anderson School on the Upper West Side and TAG Young Scholars on the Upper East Side, though a spot is not guaranteed. 

There was only a slight uptick over last year in kindergartners eligible for those programs. 

The city didn't release the results by district, nor by ethnicity. The program is often criticized for not including a diverse group of children, in part because white and upper-class families often have the resources and wherewithal to prepare their children for the tests. 

An Education Department spokesman said the city believes it did a better job this year reaching out to more varied types of families.

The scores, released to individual parents this week, sent a ripple of anxiety among some families grappling with figuring out where their children will start school in the fall. 

"The amount of work and uncertainty to get into kindergarten has escalated dramatically in the last two years," said  Emily Glickman, president of Abacus Guide Educational Consulting, which guides parents through private-school admissions.

Students who don't get into a private school, charter school or a gifted program can't necessarily rely on a spot in the top neighborhood schools, either. Population growth has led to waiting lists at some of the most popular schools—even for children who live in the immediate area. 

"I used to say if private school doesn't work out, you can go to your neighborhood school," Ms. Glickman said. "Not any more." 

The increase in children scoring in the gifted category in public schools matches a similar increase in kids taking private school tests, according to Ms. Glickman. 

She said it's a clear sign of the "test-prep effect." 

The arrival of the test scores in inboxes and mailboxes also kicks off a scramble of tours and applications for those who qualify. 

"There's a real range of programs" across the city, said  Pamela Wheaton, managing editor of Insideshcools.org, an independent website about New York City public schools and part of the Center for New York City Affairs at the New School. 

"It's kind of hard for parents. There's a rush now to go look at the programs because not every program is the same," Ms. Wheaton said. 

Ms. Wheaton said some parents have their kids take the tests repeatedly, "just to see how their kids are doing on it." 

Children going into grades kindergarten through third grade can take the test. Overall, there was a 3% increase in all students taking the test, but the jump was driven primarily by incoming kindergartners. 

 Write to  Barbara Martinez at Barbara.Martinez@wsj.com 