Even as a lapsed Catholic, I can see why the faith came out against the skimpy two-piece. After all, aren't bikinis simply a tease, a gilding of the lily, so to speak? Do we really want to expose as much of ourselves to the sun as we can or as much of ourselves to other people?

Bikinis are the twitter of the fashion world, messaging fast and furious snippets of information about the wearer. Every and any celebrity magazine worth its salt has acres of pages of analysis and pictorial dedicated to the swimwear-wearing superstar and what their outfit (or the lack thereof) says about them and their body. The flip side of my socio-anthropological analysis is that the wearing of a bikini actually feels good—near naked, but not. It's as close as we get to the "Garden of Eden" experience—well, in public, anyway.

I'm a bikini fan and a long-time wearer (despite the fact that my 12-year old recently told me that I had "no business" wearing one). Ironically, it's not until one reaches a certain age that one becomes either a steadfast one- or two-piece wearer. In one's younger years, it doesn't matter what one throws on (or even, in certain parts of Europe, if one throws on anything at all). Those of us in the bikini camp aren't necessarily smaller in dress size either. I know many women—size 14 and above who look sensational in a bikini (think Helen Mirren); and to my mind, bikini wearing is to be encouraged for all body types. The issue is about confidence rather than cup or waist size. If you feel good in it, then why not? Neither Ursula Andress nor Marilyn Monroe (two women who sensationally popularized the early bikini) was on the slim side. On the other hand, for those of us who are ardently opposed to the bikini, I can understand the "pull it all together under one roof" benefits of a one-piece— though I have always thought that unless one has a washboard stomach, the one-piece is much less flattering than it is universally held to be.

Both the bikini and the one-piece should be supportive, flattering and reliable; the moment it becomes flabby, faded and retains too much water, it's time to get a new one. There's an analogy to be made between bikinis and men, but I'm going to let you draw it yourself. Unlike a man, though, it's generally best to stick to one tried-and-tested brand; mine is Melissa Odabash and has been for many years. Straying from the path will almost certainly lead to disappointment and potential wardrobe malfunction. 

A swimsuit is one of those items to which the maxim "you get what you pay for" applies. The more you spend, the better the cut, the fabric and the color. Again, when one is young, this isn't something one needs to bother with. But you will thank me (and yourself) when you stride out in your expensive one- or two-piece this summer while all about you are wearing High Street that doesn't quite fit and isn't quite the right color.

You no doubt know about the genesis of the bikini (Bikini Atoll, 1946, the two Frenchmen Heim and Reard, the splitting of the atome—the very first two-piece)? But were you aware (I was not) that modern swimwear was actually first introduced to the public when an Australian swimmer called Annette Kellerman was arrested in 1907 at Boston beach for wearing an "indecent" body-hugging one-piece? Pre-Kellerman, taking the sun or the waters had been a very cumbersome experience, complete with swirling layers of skirts and the swathing of the upper torso and arms. By the '60s and '70s, the swimsuit was the ultimate seduction tool, thanks in part to shows like "Charlie's Angels" (and later, "Baywatch") and the peerless Bond girls of that time. And then came tanning, waxing, non-tanning, self-tanning and now safe-tanning, spawning a multibillion-pound swimsuit, beach and poolside industry.

 Jets by Jessika Allen black-and-white gingham, "Romance" gathered bandeau halter top, £111, and deep-cut tie bottom, £67

 Seafolly black-and-white polka-dot Viva mini tube bikini, top, £41, bottoms, £31

 Heidi Klein (always guaranteed to be sexy) "Palm Springs" halter-neck bikini, with gold ring detailing, from £190

 Missoni"Mare" Bahia crochet-knit triangle bikini, £260

 Mara Hoffman Aztec-print halter-neck bikini, £155

 Heidi Klein "Capri" tankini in plum, with gold detailing, £175

 Lisa Marie Fernandez "Jane" bikini in black, £275

 Melissa Odabash "Pisa" in pink, £141

 La Perla's stitched padded bikini in emerald green, £295

 Gucci bamboo-beaded halter-neck bikini in taupe, £415

 Spanx "Sapphire" (high-cut and covers a multitude of sins) in cerise, £179

 Diane von Furstenberg "Rochelle" with tie back in sun tiger citronelle (sexy and girly at the same time), £205

 Norma Kamali "Vogue Mio" lace in nude with black lace overlay, £375

 Eres (queen of the one-piece) Ancre in rouge grenade £375

 Spanx "Bra-llelujah! Soft Chain" in black, £169

 Lisa Marie Fernandez (the American designer making scuba cool—her scuba dresses are a nightclubber's "most wanted") "Jasmine Mailloit" in khaki, £385

 Melissa Odabash "Tampa" in brown, £158

All of which brings me to the thorny question of what to wear this summer on holiday or even in the privacy of one's own garden. First, a couple of words of caution: Straw cowboy hats are over. Unless you are Elle Macpherson, who made the bikini-and-cowboy-hat vibe her very own, then steer clear (and bear in mind that Elle could wear her underwear on her head and look damn good). I know how tempting it is; I own a straw Stetson myself and it covers a multitude of hair ills and facial shortcomings. Options, though, are wide-ranging—a broad straw hat that shades your shoulders too or a panama will do the job. I'm not going to make any recommendations because it's such a personal thing. If you find one you like, seize the moment and buy it; they are hard to come by. But don't make the mistake of thinking you can pack it, unless you plan to use it as a shallow wastebasket at the other end.

Before you set out to purchase your summer swimmer, ask yourself: are you a girly or a streamline type? Both bikinis and one-pieces fall into this spectrum. Once you know, you can begin to sift through.

 There are other rules, too. Big breasts rule out a bandeau top; small breasts shouldn't be in padded uplifts (when you are near-naked, it's best that you don't try to compensate—people notice). I don't agree with the premise that itsy-bitsy, stringy bikinis are only for skinnies. In fact, the smaller the bikini, the better, in many cases, it looks on a more curvaceous body. I know I'm flying in the face of received wisdom here, but once you are slightly tanned, it's amazing what you can get away with and feel good in. 

Wide-strapped halter necks aren't good for the small breasted and low cut bottoms should be steered clear of by those with pear shapes. If you are less-than confident about your middle half and you want to wear a bikini, then buy high-waisted and high-cut. One-piece wearers should consider their best body part—if it's the shoulders and décolletage, then think about a halter with thick straps and a plunging neckline. For those with tummy issues, high-cut and front-draping work well. Barely anyone looks good in a strapless one-piece; let's just say there are inevitable scaffolding issues. 

As for what some might say is the most vital piece of swimwear—the cover-up, that's a whole column in and of itself, so watch this space. If you are desperate in the meantime, a crisp, white man's shirt will do the job very nicely.

 Corrections & Amplifications: 

Lisa Marie Fernandez is an American swimsuit designer. An earlier version of this article incorrectly said Ms. Fernandez was Australian.