Mount Kailash in Tibet is not very high, but no one has ever climbed it. Despite being colonized by China and invaded by adventure tourists, it is even now too holy. Buddhists, Hindus, Jains and Bon all come here to walk around it, and every one of them has the afterlife in view. A single circuit of its 32 miles negates the sins of this life; 108 tours confer nirvana; for Hindus, bathing in the waters of the nearby lake, Mansarovar, cleanses them of sin from their past lives too. Mount Kailash is the pinnacle of all catharses.

Colin Thubron, too, comes to Kailash thinking of death. "It will clarify your mind, give you power," the veteran travel writer is told by a Buddhist monk in Kathmandu. "You will dedicate your pilgrimage to those who have died." And the journey he makes in "To a Mountain in Tibet" is marked by reflections on his father, mother and sister: the lives they led and the deaths they had. Examining a map as he walks north through Nepal, Mr. Thubron realizes that he is "only a hand's breadth away" from Naini Tal, the Indian hill station where his soldier-father hunted big game during the Raj.

Crossing the Torea Pass near the Tibetan border, the author struggles for breath in the thin air and a "memory rises, a pang of sadness": his dying mother in a hospital ward calling out for air and his hooking an oxygen mask over her face. As he treks around the north face of Kailash, it is the "submerged memory" of the Swiss mountain where his sister died at 21 that is evoked. She was killed in an avalanche and for years his "stricken mother could not speak of her." But as he approaches the summit of the pass, Mr. Thubron hears his sibling's voice. 

These are somber moments on a solemn quest, and the book, with its repeated explorations of solitude, grief, remembrance and loss is elegiac—lachrymose, even. It does not try to be pleasant reading. Like the trek it describes, "To a Mountain in Tibet" is short, but tiring.

Yet the melancholy prose may be a product of the place itself. The month I spent near Kailash, walking north from the mountain to the source of the Indus River, was, in retrospect, almost comic in its sadness. I cried incessantly, at the slightest provocation: overcome by loneliness and fear, pity for the Tibetans, resentment at my drunken guide and grief for the exploited river. Mr. Thubron sees sorrow as intrinsic to Tibet: "The country was born in violence," he writes, and "is fearsomely alone." It is "a death-haunted culture." But Tibetans are not the only people haunted by death. The author has a lingering hope, though only partially realized, that the pilgrimage will exorcise his grief in ways his own irreligiosity has failed to do.

The religions that converge on Kailash, though, mitigate death through reincarnation. Pilgrimage is, in turn, a way of ameliorating that uncertain fate. Mr. Thubron admits that "some long-surrendered faith" in him recoils at such beliefs and rituals: "In my childhood, Anglicanism had offered no Mass for the dead, no intercession. The dead were beyond reach or comfort." Inevitably, however—and travel writing is predicated on this fact—there is something fascinating about the alien. Mr. Thubron describes a Tibetan sky burial in lavish detail: "The corpse's back is broken and it is folded into a foetal bundle. . . . They remove the organs, amputate the limbs and cut the flesh into small pieces. . . . Finally the skull too is smashed and becomes a morsel with its brains . . . the vultures crowd in." Seeing some human arm bones— "dried blood and flesh still on them"— he feels "a wrenching revulsion, and a shamed excitement at the forbidden."

Reading this description, I thought of the man I met 15 years ago in Nepal, whose photo album of a trip to England showed picture after picture of graveyards—those perverse places where Christians trap their dead. For a change our culture had been rendered exotic and outlandish by the gaze of a voyeuristic stranger.

 By Colin Thubron  HarperCollins, 227 pages, $24.99

Books from such a perspective— about the West, by people from elsewhere—do not often attract our attention. But there has been a surge in popular travel writing from within post colonial countries, by people with a genealogical link to the world they describe. V.S. Naipaul pioneered the form, and in recent years, travel memoirs such as Suketu Mehta's "Maximum City" (a personal biography of Bombay), have taken it in newly intimate, and successful, directions. It's a body of work that thrives on the tension between an author's insider-outsider status. Such writings are not automatically of a higher caliber—a stranger's gaze can bring new perceptions—but their perceived authenticity has made the traditional travel literature seem dubious and old-fashioned. 

They have also contributed to travel writing's inward-looking trend— some thing "To a Mountain in Tibet" picks up, with its memoir sections—and this is not surprising. Traveling the world is not what it was: Google maps and GPS have leached away the sense of adventure. Until recently, Mount Kailash was one of the few places that managed to maintain a mythical aura of remoteness. But today the Internet is full of accounts like the trek Mr. Thubron undertook. Unlike earlier European travelers, he brings home no news of unknown places.

Of course, not everyone who walks round Kailash is 70 years old—though pilgrims often die in the attempt, and Mr. Thubron wonders more than once if he too will meet his end on the mountain. Despite his feat, "To a Mountain in Tibet"—his 10th travel book— does not yield any startling cultural insights. But the family memories, brief though they are, illuminate the journey and, thanks to them, what the book lacks in humor and innovation it makes up for in compassion. Mr. Thubron has spent four decades writing in forceful and respectful ways of foreign lands, and "To a Mountain in Tibet" is no exception.

—Ms. Albinia is the author of "Empires of the Indus" (Norton).