When I was visiting England in the early 1980s, always accompanied by my English bride, the U.K. economy was a wreck, the Labor Party was reeling, and the Tories were being accused of capriciously gutting the social safety net. 

To take their minds off all this unpleasantness, everybody was talking about the impending marriage between the bland Prince of Wales and a charismatic young beauty who might conceivably add a bit of pizazz to the otherwise colorless royal family. 

I visited England this week, trundling about from London to Cheddar to Tunbridge Wells, and everything—economic ruin, heartless Tories, bland Prince, charismatic beauty—was exactly the same as three decades ago. It's not just that there will always be an England. It's that there will always be the same England.

There are two kinds of people in Britain today: those who are fascinated, and in many cases obsessed, by the imminent royal wedding, and those who wish the whole thing would go away. These are the spoilsports who question the appropriateness of holding a lavish wedding in the middle of the worst economic downturn since the Great Depression. Similar grumbling was heard when Prince William's parents tied the knot during the economic woes of 1981.

Such sentiments, then as now, are widely ignored. Weddings and funerals are the only time anyone takes the royals seriously. The rest of the time they bask in a kind of opulent irrelevance that has been a British tradition since James II got chucked out and replaced by the congenial but impotent William and Mary.

The royal wedding has certainly caught the attention of the media. Actually, not so much the wedding per se as the personality and fashion impulses of William's intended, Kate Middleton. When did Kate become a style icon? Or iconess? Should Kate wear quite so much Burberry? Should Kate wear pink or white high heels? Is Kate at heart a social climber? Has anyone actually ever heard Kate say anything interesting?


‘Should Kate Middleton wear so much Burberry? Has anyone ever heard her say anything interesting?’


The one certainty about Ms. Middleton is that she behaves with a great deal more class and tact than many members of the royal family. Prince Andrew is in big trouble because of his brazen fraternization with a known Yankee pedophile. Sarah Ferguson never fails to be a colossal embarrassment to the powers-that-be at Windsor. Mike Tindall, acting captain of the English national rugby team, says his future mother-in-law, Princess Anne, recently asked him if he was going to get his schnoz fixed before the wedding to her daughter, Zara. (In Princess Anne's defense, the nose, Jimmy Durante-like in proportion, does tilt ominously toward the left.) Most recently, word got out that Queen Victoria once spent a night in a remote highland cottage with a young Indian presented to her as a sort of "gift." Only the dour, unflappable Queen Elizabeth herself consistently manages to stay out of the line of fire. And out of highland cottages.

Everyone, but everyone, in Britain seems to have some unsolicited advice to give Ms. Middleton. Some comes from the rabble, but a great deal is bandied about the press, yipping lapdogs who go back and forth between being snarky and being daft. Kate should stop wearing boots. She should wear more jewelry. She should treat herself to an occasional glass of Champagne in the weeks leading up to the wedding. She should just forget about dieting; it will only make her look gaunt. She should emulate the queen and never fail to respond personally to touching letters that reach her desk.

This demonstrates a certain obliviousness to reality. In the fullness of time, if all goes well, Kate Middleton, 29, will become the queen of England. But long before that day—say, sometime late in April—she will become the most famous woman in the world and one of the richest, as the central figure in the planet's most beloved and enduring fairy tale.

The Tories might benefit from some good advice. Prince Andrew might benefit from some good advice. But Kate Middleton doesn't need anybody's advice. She seems to be doing just fine all by herself. 

 Corrections & Amplifications: 

Joe Queenan drove through Tunbridge Wells. A previous version of this column incorrectly called the town Great Tunbridge Wells.

