"She was a piece of work!" the critic Irving Sandler told me on learning of Patricia Albers's biography of the abstract painter Joan Mitchell (1925-92). This appraisal, from the first critical champion of her work, is among the most restrained comments you'll hear about this famously abrasive, famously foul-mouthed artist. Some people genuinely liked and admired Mitchell, but many, according to Ms. Albers, found her "grossly insensitive" and worse.

The artist's older sister blamed her sibling's "indescribable rudeness" for a near-permanent rift between them. A life-long friend described Mitchell as "meanspirited, grotesque, and humorless." A colleague recalled that battling was her "favorite form of entertainment," and one of her psychoanalysts described her as acting "like a baby who falls into a rage." Ms. Albers supports such observations with examples of appalling behavior and, occasionally, physical violence. New York neighbors, we are told, were once startled by the "fearsome sounds" of Mitchell and her lover of the time, the painter Michael Goldberg, "trying to kill each other," while friends were astonished "when she turned up . . . with bruises and black eyes half-concealed by sunglasses." 

 By Patricia Albers  Knopf, 514 pages, $40

Ms. Albers sees this aggressiveness as Mitchell's challenge to the sexism of the 1950s New York art world in which she, along with Helen Frankenthaler and Grace Hartigan, was striving to establish herself as an artist to be reckoned with. As "second-generation Abstract Expressionists," these three women arrived after a group of hard-drinking, argumentative, chest-beating male artists. The response of the fiercely intelligent, well-educated Mitchell, Ms. Albers suggests, was to be as argumentative, hard-drinking and promiscuous as the guys.

The biography's title, "Joan Mitchell: Lady Painter," reflects Mitchell's own ironic usage of that phrase. (Mitchell was not a notable supporter of other women artists, however; despite having a similarly affluent background, she was contemptuous of Frankenthaler as "a rich girl.") Ms. Albers suggests that painting was Mitchell's defense against her private demons (she once said that life went "along fine when I'm painting and then afterwards the bottom drops out of things"). Acting badly was her defense against everything else.

As a rapturous fan of Mitchell's landscape-informed, calligraphic, intensely colored abstractions, Ms. 8Albers is willing to forgive a lot. To illuminate her subject's psyche, she offers a vast amount of information about Mitchell's early life, as the younger daughter of a socially prominent Chicago family, and her education at the Frances Parker School, Smith College (briefly) and the Art Institute of Chicago. We meet Mitchell's parents, grandparents and great-grandparents. (Her wealthy engineer grandfather and poet/editor mother are the most interesting.) Ms. Albers suggests that Mitchell's father was never satisfied by anything his daughter did, starting with her failure to be a boy.

Ms. Albers traces the source of Mitchell's art not to her upbringing but to certain supposed gifts in which the author believes implicitly. Mitchell described experiencing synesthesia (the ability to "hear" colors) as well as eidetic memory (total visual recall), but just how these attributes affected her painting remains unclear. Consider the link between Mitchell's visual memory and her work: It's obvious that her paintings are in some way informed by particular places, flowers, trees, times of day, qualities of light and—according to Ms. Albers—recollections of Great Lakes storms from her childhood in Chicago. But that is not the end of the story.

Mitchell often said she needed to "feel" a painting to work, ideally in a state of obliviousness to self—a condition sought by many artists and heightened, in Mitchell's case, by consuming alcohol and playing music. Mr. Sandler described her as attempting "to recreate both the recalled landscape and the frame of mind she was in originally." She was not simply transcribing remembered images.

Ms. Albers's book is not the place to turn for an understanding of art. It is punctuated with extended, over-written and yet imprecise descriptions of paintings that fail to evoke particular images despite the self-consciously "vivid" prose and lists of colors. A discussion of "the gorgeous Canada paintings," made in 1974, is typical. "The diptych Canada V beguiles with its bosky masses, its incantatory lights and darks, its use of white around the cut between its two panels, and its oddly right colors (pale mint, white claret, and the color of night)."

Ms. Albers seems more fascinated by Mitchell's sex life than by her art, itemizing her turbulent relationships with Grove Press publisher Barney Rosset (whom she briefly married), the painters Michael Goldberg, Sam Francis and Jean-Paul Riopelle (for whom she permanently abandoned the U.S. for France), Samuel Beckett, and the composer David Amram, among others. We are presented with everything from one-night stands to Mitchell's 24-year liaison with Riopelle, along with the concomitant drunken screaming matches, black eyes and artistic competitiveness. Episodes of Sturm und Drang alternate with florid descriptions of paintings and accounts of Mitchell's relationships with people she didn't sleep with, such as Frank O'Hara and other poets of the New York School. Ms. Albers also tries to demonstrate Mitchell's "capacity for generous friendship," although the supporting examples would just be normal behavior for anyone else.

Ms. Albers explains attractions and aesthetic influences in terms of high-flown parallels. Mitchell's images are equated with O'Hara's and Beckett's use of language. Even her pain-racked but productive last years and death, at 66, from cancer, are compared with the last days of the 18th-century master Antoine Watteau, who painted one of his finest works, a crowded scene of an art dealer's shop, just before dying of tuberculosis.

That Mitchell was difficult, willful and frequently unpleasant to be around emerges all too clearly from Ms. Albers's chronicle. That she was a serious painter who, as she told Mr. Sandler, aimed at "achieving accuracy and intensity" in her work also comes through, despite the overwrought descriptions that substitute for analysis. As for accuracy, Ms. Albers is plainly a thorough researcher, yet assertions that Mitchell's grandfather had "a clotted cream" complexion or that Mitchell "visibly flinched" when a paintbrush dripped seem questionable. "Intensity" is largely embodied by the verbs assigned to Mitchell: She "adores," "worships," "is wild for." But Ms. Albers fails to capture the intensity of Mitchell's art. This tough-minded, gifted woman deserves a better book.

—Ms. Wilkin writes frequently about the visual arts for The Journal.