OTTAWA—Fresh off a historic electoral victory, Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper pledged Tuesday to move ahead with a Conservative party platform that anticipates returning to budget surplus by fiscal year 2015 and cutting corporate taxes further.

Analysts said the majority mandate Mr. Harper won Monday night would allow the Conservatives to tackle thorny economic policies the party was reluctant to address in a minority parliament—such as clarifying and liberalizing rules governing foreign investment. Mr. Harper also now has a window to negotiate a sweeping border security and trade deal with the U.S., without fear of opposition repercussions.

"We got the mandate because of the way we have governed, because of our record," the prime minister said at a news conference in Calgary Tuesday. "Canadians expect us to continue to move forward in the same way, to be true to the platform we have run on, to be true [to] the type of values and policies we have laid out before them."

The Conservatives won 167 seats in Canada's lower house of parliament, above the 155 required to secure a majority mandate and a 24-seat improvement from the last parliament. The prime minister framed the campaign as a chance for Canadians to solidify the country's nascent economic recovery with a majority Conservative government after five years of minority Tory rule.

With a majority mandate that keeps Tories in power until at least late 2015, Mr. Harper will enjoy wide latitude on policy. Previously, he needed the support of at least one opposition party to get legislation passed.

In a March budget the Conservative government tabled but never passed, it committed to eliminating Canada's relatively large deficit—which ballooned due to stimulus spending to mitigate the recession's impact—by 2015-16. But in its election platform, Mr. Harper pledged surplus would be achieved a year earlier than planned, as it looks to net 11 billion Canadian dollars (US$11.6 billion) in savings over four years. Mr. Harper said he plans to get a budget passed before the end of spring.

Also, a Conservative plan to cut Canada's corporate income-tax rate to 15% next year will now go ahead. Both the New Democrats, who finished a strong second, and the Liberals looked to raise the business levy to finance campaign promises.

One policy area Mr. Harper might look to settle is foreign ownership rules, especially in light of his minority government's move to reject a takeover of Potash Corp. of Saskatchewan by Australia's BHP Billiton in the face of heavy political opposition.

"I think that will be one of the priorities over the next couple years, to try to take some of the politics out of foreign investment approvals," said Jack Mintz, head of the University of Calgary's public policy school.

The government pledged to clarify rules regarding foreign investment by outlining what would be deemed acceptable or not. Such guidelines haven't yet emerged.

Analysts also said the majority Conservative government might consider liberalizing foreign-ownership rules as they apply to certain sectors, most notably telecommunications—something the minority Tory government promised to do in 2010.