Will Ferrell's latest character lives on his front lawn, where he sleeps in an easy chair, guzzles beer nonstop and munches frozen burritos from a rotisserie cooker plugged in by extension cord. What sounds like a sketch from the comedy star's "Saturday Night Live" days is in fact a drama. Mr. Ferrell, known for characters with oafish bluster, has been making some forays into quieter roles, including one in the 2006 feature "Stranger Than Fiction."

In the new film "Everything Must Go," Mr. Ferrell plays an alcoholic sorting through the wreckage of his domestic life in full view of his suburban neighborhood. There are physical gags and deadpan lines for Mr. Ferrell, but they're subdued. It's the first feature film from director Dan Rush, who also wrote the script, adapted from a Raymond Carver short story, "Why Don't You Dance?" 

Unlike Mr. Ferrell's big studio comedies, this project took an independent path. After shooting the movie in 23 days, the filmmakers hunted for a distribution deal at the 2010 Toronto Film Festival, and the film was picked up soon after. Recently Mr. Ferrell attended the film's premiere at the Tribeca Film Festival, where it screened ahead of a theatrical release May 13. Dressed for the premiere in a gray suit, dotted blue tie and a pair of brown-and-white wingtips (a gift from his father), Mr. Ferrell discussed the film and various roles, comedic and otherwise. 

  The Wall Street Journal: Did you audition for "Everything Must Go?"   

 Mr. Ferrell: No. I just met with Dan [Rush, the director]. The fear was in casting a more conventional actor the material might seem even darker than it is. He felt I would give it a lightness and at the same time pull off those emotional moments with integrity. My wife's reaction was, "This is a great script. Why do they want you?" And I agreed. 

  When you take a role like this, is it part of a long-term plan?  

It's not so much a plan that in 3.7 years we'll be able to do this or that. It's more about taking advantage of these opportunities to do different things. I did "Stranger Than Fiction" and it wasn't like the floodgates opened and I got sent a bunch of serious dramatic roles. I don't think I got sent any. So that may happen again after this.

  Did that disappoint you?  

I liked that movie a lot, and people recognized it as a nice piece of work. That having been said, what disappoints me is that there's still a stigma attached to the fact that a comedic actor did that role. If it was a dramatic actor, I think that movie would have been put on more of a pedestal. I say to Marc Forster, had you cast Russell Crowe you might have gotten more credit as a director. There's an absolute bias. 

  Have there been dramatic roles you pursued but didn't land?  

There's a few things. But I'm not picturing movies that have been made that I was like [shakes his fist at imaginary movie screen]. I'm pretty easygoing about it. I love doing comedy, and yet this is just something that popped up as a great change of pace. 

  When a flop like "Land of the Lost" happens, is there a direct impact on your career that you can measure?   

There's a bunch of different answers to that. There's the personal thing you feel that [opening] weekend when you're walking around the streets of Manhattan with your cap down low, thinking, "Everybody's looking at me!" And you realize, nobody cares. It's very much an inside-the-industry reaction. And that movie has just become kind of a blip, which is the good news. Except for the studio that made the movie [Universal Pictures], I'm not high on their list to do anything with them. So you just keep swimming upstream. 

  Did you make any adjustments to your acting style for "Everything Must Go." Dial things down?  

There's a reaction to watching me in a role like this where people think, "Oh, were your impulses to go crazy at some point?" It's really easy: You read the script and you see that it doesn't call for any of that. It was a pretty easy transition. 

  Is a drunk that pounds big cans of Pabst a more likable character than one who drinks liquor?  

We talked about that. A Scotch drinker is hard-core. This guy is a slow, drink-beer-throughout-the-day kind of guy. I see him at the end still as a hopeful kind of guy. Beer is less ominous. And Pabst Blue Ribbon, of the beers that were even willing to be in the movie, that was the most attractive. Imagine calling these beer companies up. "A movie about an alcoholic? Oh, no thanks." 

  Do you recall a moment from childhood when comedy really clicked for you?   

I remember figuring out in elementary school how to open a door and time it to [stands up and pretends to open a door into his forehead]—that was a big hit in fourth grade. That was a seminal moment of realizing that I can make strangers laugh.

  What about when you first got on stage, was it for something serious?   

I once wrote a play in sixth grade, I think, called "Beat the Clock." It was a game show. The big physical gag was that I was heavyset—I had a pillow in a big shirt. I went through a tube, and there was so much pressure in the game that when I came out, I wasn't fat anymore. And that got a huge laugh. In high school, my friend and I would perform in front of big crowds during assemblies. And I remember thinking, "Oh this thing that we wrote last night over the phone is actually translating. And it doesn't feel like work."

 You have a Spanish-language movie in the pipeline called "Casa De Mi Padre." Any dramatic acting in that one?  

No, no. That's our version of a telenovela on acid. It's Quentin Tarantino meets Robert Rodriguez meets a bad Mexican movie. But there's a speech I give to my dying father in Spanish. It's like, half hilarious and half this really real moment where you get disgusted with yourself for finding it touching. 

 Write to  John Jurgensen at john.jurgensen@wsj.com 