TOKYO—The Japanese government said Wednesday that damage from the devastating March 11 earthquake and tsunami could be more than double the cost of the Kobe earthquake, putting new fiscal pressure on an already debt-strapped government that will likely force the cabinet to abandon self-imposed borrowing limits. 

In its first forecast of the cost of the disaster, it said the total cost from damage to houses, factories and public infrastructure such as roads and bridges would likely range from ¥16 trillion ($198 billion) to ¥25 trillion over the next three years. That compares with about ¥10 trillion of damage, not adjusted for price changes, from the Kobe quake. At 1995 exchange rates, the Kobe quake cost about $100 billion.

Although many economists say extra spending and borrowing is necessary given the scale of the damage, more debt would further worsen Japan's precarious fiscal condition, which is considered the worst among industrialized nations, with public debt at roughly twice annual economic output. 

The government's estimate is in line with the World Bank's estimate of $122 billion to $235 billion in damages, citing outside estimates. 

The government had vowed in its budget-overhaul plan last June to hold new debt sales below ¥44.30 trillion for the 2011 fiscal year starting in April. Its ¥92.41 trillion budget calls for sales of ¥6.09 trillion in construction debt and ¥38.208 trillion in deficit-financing bonds. 

"There is a high possibility that construction bond issuance will increase" during fiscal 2011, a senior finance ministry official told Dow Jones Newswires. 

Holding to the ¥44.3 trillion ceiling will be "challenging," another ministry official said. 

Construction bonds are securities sold to raise funds to build infrastructure such as roads and bridges as opposed to bonds issued to cover the government's budget deficit. 

Any increase in debt issuance would mean that the government's 10-year plan to balance the budget has failed in its first year of implementation. 

According to National Policy Minister Koichiro Gemba, the government intends to compile multiple supplementary budgets to deal with the aftermath of the disaster, which killed thousands of people, ruined rural towns and crippled nuclear reactors.

The Japanese government monitors radiation levels around the country. Track these measurements over time.

"Depending on circumstances, it is possible that the government will have to spend as much as ¥10 trillion" over coming years for reconstruction, said Toshihiro Nagahama, chief economist at Dai-Ichi Life Research Institute. 

The amount and the timing of the first extra budget—thus the size of possible construction-debt issuance—isn't clear yet. More than a month will likely be needed to prepare the first extra budget as the government must further study the extent of the damage, finance-ministry officials said. 

Finance Minister Yoshihiko Noda said Tuesday he will seek to trim planned spending in the regular budget to make room for reconstruction outlays. Yet he offered little hint on the amount of possible cuts, leaving it unclear whether additional bond issuance could be avoided. 

Economists say that even if the government boosts bond issuance, credit ratings agencies may not respond immediately. Instead they expect any further steps to come after June, when the government is expected to unveil a plan to overhaul the tax and social-security systems. 

Major credit-ratings agencies recently cut their views on Japan's ability to repay its massive debt, citing the political obstacles that have hindered Prime Minister Naoto Kan's attempts to get tax-reform legislation passed. Standard & Poor's lowered its rating to AA- while Moody's assigned a negative outlook on its rating of Aa2. 

Some government officials also said that exceeding the ¥44.3 trillion in debt sales shouldn't be considered a policy reversal. They point to the fact that the fiscal reform plan says the fiscal overhaul would be suspended if meeting targets becomes "markedly difficult because of serious crises in the domestic or foreign economies." Prime Minister Kan has called the latest disaster the biggest national crisis to face the nation in the post-war period. 

The first finance ministry official, speaking on condition of anonymity, also said the bond cap applies to the regular budget, not to any supplemental budgets. The government's fiscal-reform plan is unclear on this issue. 

Another factor that could increase the need for more bond issuance is a possible fall in tax revenue due to damage from the disaster. The government said that production has stagnated after the quake as power shortages hit big manufacturers. 

"There is a possibility the economy may contract in the first half of fiscal 2011," said an official at the Cabinet office in reference to the April-September period. Before the quake, the government had expected the gross domestic product to increase 1.5% in real terms in fiscal 2011. Two quarters of an overall contraction is typically defined as a recession. 

"There are more downside risks than upside" to the government's current forecast for ¥40.927 trillion tax revenue in the next fiscal year, said Yoshimasa Maruyama, a senior economist at Itochu Corp. 

 Write to  Takashi Nakamichi at takashi.nakamichi@dowjones.com 