

LIMA--With the midnight Monday deadline to register for Peru's April presidential elections behind, 13 candidates had signed up to run. Though the field appears crowded, this time around the vote is expected to produce far fewer shocks to financial markets than previous elections. 

For the first time in recent elections, the three poll-leading candidates all favor the market-friendly policies that have driven Peru's economy to triple in size since 2000. 

Recent polls place former President  Alejandro Toledo with about 23% support, neck-and-neck with  Luis Castañeda, the former highly-popular centrist mayor of Lima. 

In third place with about 20% is Congresswoman  Keiko Fujimori, daughter of jailed ex-President  Alberto Fujimori. 

Ollanta Humala, the nationalist outsider who had a strong showing in the 2006 elections has only about 10% support in the polls this time. He has decided to run again, although analysts say Peru's robust economic growth has helped weaken support for an anti-system candidate. 

Political scientists expect a second-round runoff, as no candidate is seen gaining a majority of votes in April. 

Barclays Capital has been forecasting a runoff between two of the three poll-leading candidates, adding that none of these candidates would be expected to change the current orthodox economic policy mix and create market risk. 

"We still believe that it is practically neutral for the markets if the second round is among the three leading candidates," Barclays Capital senior economist  Alejandro Grisanti said in an e-mail Tuesday. 

Standard & Poor's Senior Director of Latin American Sovereign Ratings,  Joydeep Mukherji, said in a conference call Tuesday that in the past the ratings agency would cite elections and political factors as a negative factor. 

That has changed, however, for investment grade Peru. 

"This year we have a positive outlook on Peru's rating, which is a statement in itself. We are not deeply concerned about the outcome of the election," Mukherji said. 

In 2000, Alberto Fujimori won a rigged vote, but his term was cut short when Congress turned against him and he fled to Japan. He later ended up in prison in Peru. 

In the elections held in 2001, Alejandro Toledo, a former business school professor, defeated  Alan García in a heated second-round runoff. 

Garcia triumphed, however, in 2006 against Humala, who aimed to radically turn Peru's economy to the left, rattling financial markets in the process. García can't run again this year due to a ban on holding consecutive terms. 

A number of other candidates are running, although none of them appears neither ready nor able to kick over the proverbial apple cart. 

Former Finance Minister Mercedes Araoz is running as the candidate for Garcia's Apra party, although her levels of support tally around 5.0%. 

One-time investment banker  Pedro Pablo Kuczynski has also polled about 5.0%. 

At a rally on Monday, where supporters blew whistles, banged drums and waved flags, Kuczynksi, a former prime minister, said that if elected he would lead a transparent government. 

Among the other candidates are  Rafael Belaunde, son of former President  Fernando Belaunde, and former Foreign Affairs Minister  Manuel Rodriguez, who represents the left-leaning Social Force alliance. 



 Write to  Robert Kozak at robert.kozak@dowjones.com 