 New York 

Orchestras in North America are in a period of soul-searching. During the last six months, the elite Philadelphia Orchestra filed for bankruptcy, orchestras in Syracuse and Honolulu shut down, and the Detroit Symphony was temporarily silenced by a 26-week musicians' strike. The problems go deeper than the economic recession. Labor agreements, music-director salaries, administrative costs, concert presentation and the nature of orchestra involvement in each city must be reconsidered and geared to what their communities can realistically support.

"Spring for Music," an intriguing new festival that continues at Carnegie Hall through Saturday, offers no panaceas; indeed, the Atlanta Symphony, originally scheduled as festival opener, withdrew for financial reasons. But in its structure and concept, "Spring for Music" shows what can happen when industry insiders act creatively.

The festival is presenting seven North American orchestras chosen, from 25 applicants, for their imaginative programming habits. Participants range from the Albany Symphony Orchestra, with 76 mostly part-time members and an annual budget of about $2 million, to the 89-member Dallas Symphony Orchestra, which has annual expenditures of $28 million, an extensive discography and a world-class concert hall.

Most of the concert offerings assembled by the orchestras are truly inventive, forging intriguing thematic links or presenting works considered dicey at the box office. On Wednesday, the Dallas Symphony will give the New York premiere of "August 4, 1964" for chorus, soloists and orchestra, a 70-minute concert drama by Pulitzer Prize-winning composer Steven Stucky. The piece revisits two fateful events during the Lyndon Johnson presidency—one affecting the civil-rights movement, the other, the Vietnam War. On Thursday, the 76-member Oregon Symphony Orchestra will make its Carnegie debut with an intelligently conceived, war-themed program of John Adams, Benjamin Britten, Charles Ives and Ralph Vaughan Williams. Subsequent performances by the Saint Paul Chamber Orchestra and the 92-member Montreal Symphony Orchestra should prove equally stimulating. 

So far, the results have been instructive. The superbly played opening-night concert by Orpheus, the renowned conductorless chamber orchestra, demonstrated that low admission prices alone will not fill a hall. Despite egalitarian tickets for only $25 each throughout Carnegie's 2800-seat Stern auditorium (save for some cheaper partial-view seats), the hall was less than half full. The program, six commissioned "Brandenburg" concertos inspired by Bach's originals, may have seemed too daunting. Or perhaps ticket buyers were prescient. By the end of the evening, it felt like too much of a good thing.

Saturday's concert by the Toledo Symphony Orchestra fared better, attracting more than 2,000 listeners, including some 1,400 Ohioans who arrived by chartered bus or plane to cheer the Carnegie debut of their "home team." The program was ingenious. It coupled the sixth symphony of Dmitri Shostakovich—written after the composer was officially censured in Pravda articles—with "Every Good Boy Deserves Favour," a gripping collaboration for six actors and orchestra by playwright Tom Stoppard and conductor-composer André Previn that movingly depicts the plight of political dissidents in Soviet-era mental hospital-prisons, with the orchestra as part of the action. Rising maestro Stefan Sanderling conceived and insightfully conducted the program. Despite occasional ensemble glitches in both works, the performances were engaging.

"Spring for Music" was organized by three industry veterans: originator David Foster, president of Opus 3 Artists, a talent agency; Mary Lou Falcone, a public-relations executive; and Thomas W. Morris, artistic director of the Ojai Festival and a former executive director of the Cleveland Orchestra. They obtained funding of $3.5 million for three initial seasons from the Mellon Foundation and other sponsors. Mr. Morris, artistic director of "Spring for Music," evaluated each applicant's festival proposal and last three years of concerts. "We wanted to see if their hometown programming reflected their stated artistic philosophy," he said. Festival organizers rented Carnegie Hall, taking on the role of concert impresario. Carnegie contributed staff and promotional support. 

Self-produced symphonic concerts at Carnegie, a traditional rite of passage for regional orchestras, now cost an untenable $400,000 to $500,000. "Spring for Music" mitigates some of the risk involved in such outings. Each orchestra is responsible for trip expenses and production "extras." And each shares equally in the box office proceeds, with a guaranteed minimum of $50,000. Toledo Symphony president Kathleen Carroll said she expects to see a "positive benefit" from the festival appearance. Next year, festival organizers will showcase one less orchestra, enabling them to raise the guarantee to a more attractive $65,000. 

While many regional orchestras lack the distinctive musical identity, cohesiveness and rich string sound of their world-class counterparts, their performance standards have been rising for decades. Mr. Morris attributes this to several factors, including longer playing seasons introduced via union negotiations, higher expectations raised by widespread availability of note-perfect recorded music, and training in a broader swath of repertory in conservatories. Since openings in the most prestigious North American orchestras occur infrequently and attract fierce competition, there is a spillover of conservatory talent into regional orchestras. 

The orchestras in Albany, Toledo and Oregon exemplify what Jesse Rosen, head of the League of American Orchestras, calls "the uniqueness of the smaller-budget orchestras—they're not fixated on an international or even a national reputation. They're looking to be special in their communities." Those who do so adventurously now have an opportunity to make a broader impact through "Spring for Music." "By creating a showcase in this way," said Clive Gillinson, Carnegie's executive and artistic director, "the festival gives a sense of the quality of work going on . . . and it helps orchestras realize that what they're doing can be valued on a national stage."

 Ms. Jepson writes about classical music for the Journal. 