 Paul Gigot: The week on "The Journal Editorial Report," the war on terror after Osama bin Laden. The terrorist's death reignites the debate over interrogations. An architect of the Bush policies is here to explain. And how to handle the Pakistan problem. Can the U.S. turn a tense situation into a national-security opportunity, and as pressure builds to end the war in Afghanistan, will the administration use bin Laden's death as an excuse to head for the exits? All that and a Conservative landslide in Canada? What the U.S. can learn from our neighbors to the north. 

 Gigot: Welcome to "The Journal Editorial Report." I'm Paul Gigot. 

First up this week, the death of Osama bin Laden and the return of the interrogation debate. In an op-ed in The Wall Street Journal this week, former Bush Justice Department official John Yoo praised President Obama for authorizing the operation that took down the al Qaeda leader. But he says Sunday's success also vindicates the Bush administration and its intelligence and interrogation policies. 

I spoke with Yoo earlier and asked him how that was so. 

 Yoo: The way we found bin Laden was by the identity of a courier, and the only reason we know the identity of that courier was from the enhanced interrogation methods that were used against three al Qaeda leaders, when they were coordinated with intelligence that also was obtained by using electronic warrantless intercepts. You bring that all together in an intelligence mosaic, and it led us right to bin Laden's door. 

 Gigot: OK, but here's what the critics would say, is that you could have gotten that intelligence information from regular interrogations. You really didn't need enhanced interrogations or waterboarding. So why even go to those extremes? You could have gotten it with regular interrogation.

 Yoo: I think that's wrong, and it misunderstands what happens in these interrogations. First off, Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, No. 3 leader in al Qaeda when we captured him back in 2003, he was put under regular interrogation, and he refused to talk. If you remember, he said, "I want my lawyer, and I'm going to see you guys in New York City." He expected to get his Miranda warnings and wouldn't have to answer any questions. It was only under enhanced interrogation methods that Khalid Sheikh Mohammed coughed up the name of this courier at all, and I think the same goes for the other al Qaeda leaders, too. 

I think without the enhanced interrogation methods authorized by President Bush, combined with the warrantless surveillance, we never would have found where bin Laden was hiding because we never would have known the identity and location of the courier. 

 Gigot: OK, so what's the difference between interrogation that's practiced now and how it was practiced when Khalid Sheikh Mohammed was captured? What is the difference, and why does it matter? 

 Yoo: Well, first of all, President Obama has pretty much ended the CIA's participation in any interrogations at all. The interrogations are pretty much carried out by the FBI or the military, and they can't use any kind of pressure. They are basically limited to asking questions. They can't even, as far as I understand it, even provide benefits like better conditions or plea bargains in response for cooperation. So they are really limited, especially to someone like Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, or someone on the al Qaeda side who's really been trained to resist interrogation. 

 Gigot: So your argument would be that now if we capture somebody like that, they can just basically act like they would in a police precinct and claim their Miranda rights, more or less, and not have any real tough questions asked of them.

 Yoo: Yeah, it actually worries me what would have happened if Osama bin Laden had been captured, which I think the Obama administration didn't want to contemplate. If we had actually captured Osama bin Laden, think of the great intelligence trove that would have been. I think this administration, under its own policies, would have been left asking him polite questions, in something like a police station. 

 Gigot: So you are saying that you don't think President Obama wanted to capture Osama? The White House said that they, in fact, did if--if he could be captured, they wanted that to happen. You're saying you don't really believe that.

 Yoo: No, I have serious doubts about that. If you read closely what the Obama administration has been saying in public, it sounds like they would have been willing to capture him if he put his hands up and surrendered. But they didn't have, it sounds to me, any kind of contingency plans for capturing him if he put up some resistance, which seems to me a great lost opportunity, because now we know that Osama bin Laden was unarmed when our SEALs got to him, and I think that means they could have captured him. And think about the great intelligence trove that we lost there by not having him, being able to interrogate him. 

 Gigot: But it's very tough, don't you think, to second-guess what a Navy SEAL is doing in a nighttime raid, under pressure. They've been in a firefight, trying to get to the third floor or the second floor of that building. I mean, how can you second-guess what those guys were doing? 

 Yoo: You know, I'm not second-guessing the military commanders on the ground or even up the chain. I think that once they're there and they're faced with that circumstance, they have to make a split-second decision. I actually think this is a decision that's made, as it should be in our system, by the civilians. I think President Obama and his civilian advisers made a choice about what kind of force to send, and I think that force had orders, basically, only to capture Osama bin Laden if he surrendered and under no other conditions. They shot him. He was unarmed. And I think there were one or two women in the room and that was it. He didn't have any bodyguards with him. His body doesn't seem to have been booby-trapped. 

I'm not--in fact, I have a lot of faith in the military. And my view is that if the president ordered the military to go in and capture him, they might have sent in a different force. But they easily--not easily, but they would have done it and could have successfully done it. 

 Gigot: OK. Step back for a second from the interrogation issue and just sort of look at all of the antiterror policies in the Bush administration and in the Obama administration. The story I see is more continuity than change. What I mean by that is, if you look at President Obama's policies now, he's keeping Guantanamo open, he's endorsed military commissions, he's endorsed targeted assassinations of terrorists in places like Afghanistan, he's endorsed unlimited detentions. There's a real similarity here between what the president--the architecture that President Bush put into place and what the Obama administration is now practicing. Why is that wrong? 

 Yoo: I think you're right, except in regard to interrogation. And it's worth bearing in mind, though, on all of those points, that's not what Obama wanted to do when he took office. He's only come full circle around back to the Bush administration policies because of resistance by Congress, right? The only reason Guantanamo Bay is open is because Congress cut off funding--

 Gigot: Right. 

 Yoo: --for Obama to close it. The reason military commissions are being used is because of the failures to prosecute and convict in New York City. It's only because Obama and his administration have been pulled kicking and screaming into the real world that these policies now look similar to the Bush administration. 

 Gigot: So the single biggest remaining difference, in your view--policy difference--is interrogation. Is that the single biggest difference right now between now and then? 

 Yoo: That's what it looks like right now, and I think that is what this operation in Abbottabad really points out, is that the Obama administration is not interested in capturing al Qaeda leaders and interrogating them because their plan for interrogation is not going to look that much different than what goes on in a police station. The Bush administration obviously would have pursued a very different, much tougher program of interrogation. 

 Gigot: Still ahead, with bin Laden gone, some lawmakers say it's time to leave Afghanistan, and some want to freeze aid to Pakistan. How should the administration respond? Our panel weighs in, next. 

  Jay Carney: Our relationship with Pakistan, while complicated, is very important. And it is very important precisely because of our need to continue the fight against al Qaeda, to continue the fight against terrorists. The fight is not done, and we look forward to cooperating with Pakistan in the future.  

 Gigot: That was White House Press Secretary Jay Carney, responding this week to questions about Pakistan's involvement in harboring Osama bin Laden, whose compound was found just 75 miles north of the capital of Islamabad and about a hundred yards from an elite military academy. With some members of Congress now calling for a suspension of billions of dollars of U.S. aid to Pakistan, how should the administration respond? 

Joining the panel this week, Wall Street Journal columnist and deputy editor Dan Henninger, foreign-affairs columnist Bret Stephens and editorial board member Matt Kaminski. 

So, quickly, I want to ask you all: Pakistani officials say they had no knowledge of bin Laden's whereabouts. Do you believe them? 

 Kaminski: Maybe. 

 Gigot: Maybe. Dan? 

 Henninger: No, some of them had to have known. 

 Gigot: And Bret? 

 Stephens: Well, Matt's right, they might have known. It's not clear whether officials knew or which kind of officials. 

 Gigot: And it could have been some former officials who were helping them on the side. All right, so if it were discovered, Matt, that in fact senior officials of the intelligence service did know, how should the U.S. respond? 

 Kaminski: I think that it really depends how high it went. I mean, it would be a hostile act obviously. It would have been--

 Stephens: That's for sure. 

 Kaminski: We declared from the day of 9/11 that we will go get bin Laden anywhere he is. He is an enemy of the United States, he is responsible for thousands of American deaths. But it really depends how high it goes and whether it goes all the way up to people who actually run the country--you know, Gen. Kayani, who runs the military--

 Gigot: Runs the military. 

 Kaminski: --Gen. Pasha, who runs the intelligence services. 

 Gigot: You don't think that the civilian leadership would have known? 

 Kaminski: I don't think the civilian leadership knows very much of what happens in Pakistan, so--but the problem is, either--either--either they knew or they didn't know, and neither of those answers is actually that reassuring. 

 Gigot: All right, they claim--their response to us, the Pakistanis', is, "Look, no more violations of our sovereignty," which that raid was. But wasn't Osama bin Laden violating their sovereignty by being there for five, six years? 

 Henninger: I would say so, and if they knew, then they fall into basically an officially defined category called "state sponsor of terrorism," right? Which most nations, at least affiliated with the United States, don't want to be. 

The Pakistanis are very much on the defense now. They were completely humiliated by this attack--the fact that the United States didn't tell them, but the United States didn't tell them because Pakistan is now arguably the world's least trustworthy significant nation. Nobody trusts Pakistan. 

 Stephens: Well, in a sense, Paul, what matters isn't so much who knew what when, it's how they are responding now. You see the chief of the general--of the Pakistani army saying, "This was a violation of our sovereignty. There will be consequences--"

 Gigot: If you do it again. 

 Stephens: "--if you do it again." And I think the Pakistanis fundamentally misunderstand what sovereignty is. Sovereignty isn't merely a right, it's also a responsibility. For the last decade, the Pakistanis have not been fulfilling a responsibility to maintain control over their borders. They come to us again and again and they say, "Well, we can't really account for the North-West Frontier Provinces because they are a tribal hinterland. We have a complex historical relationship with that." That's already problematic. But here, we're talking about a town, Abbottabad, which was cheek to jowl with their West Point, their military academy. So they're not exercising a sovereignty which they claim then to defend. 

 Gigot: But their argument, Matt, would be--response would be, "Look, we've cooperated enormously with you on all kinds of al Qaeda leaders. We helped you get Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, we've helped you get other al Qaeda leaders. This is just one mistake. Don't hold it against us."

 Kaminski: Well, I think really the key thing will be not what they say but really what they do in the coming months and weeks. You know, they've frozen out the CIA in recent months. There's been--I mean, the relations were actually quite strained even before this mission. And this could be a real turning point--either where things could get much worse with Pakistan, and they can get much worse than they have been, or Pakistan realizes actually these terrorists present a threat to their sovereignty, a threat to their very existence, and they go after Mullah Omar, the Taliban leader, who is most definitely in Pakistan; they get Zawahiri for us, who's the No. 2 of al Qaeda; and they roll up these terrorist networks that are based across the--along the Afghan border, that are both killing American soldiers in Afghanistan and planning attacks on the U.S. right now. 

 Stephens: Well, the Pakistani problem is, they haven't been able to overcome a profoundly ambivalent relationship with terrorism. They've tried to make distinctions between groups like the LeT, which primarily was involved in anti-India operations--supporting them, but on the other hand opposing elements of the Taliban, elements of al Qaeda. Now a lot of these groups have mixed, have blended. The LeT is involved in attacks in Afghanistan. And the Pakistani military continues to support various of these elements. 

 Gigot: Dan, what would be our policy alternative if we did have a really serious rift with Pakistan, and then we were no long cooperating on intelligence and going after al Qaeda? Where would we turn? 

 Henninger: Well, we wouldn't turn anywhere that would be easy. One thing we could do, as we are suggesting here--what we really need to do is clean out these terrorist sanctuaries in the north. 

 Gigot: Right. 

 Henninger: The U.S. military believes that they can do that, and they can either do that with Pakistan's help or without it. It would be difficult to do it without it, but it is so much in our interest that we might well have to do it. 

 Gigot: But that would mean more cross-border strikes, more impositions on Pakistan's sovereignty, and perhaps some real conflict with the Pakistan military if we did it off--

 Henninger: And the second alternative, which would certainly isolate Pakistan, is if the United States more explicitly aligned itself with India, with whom, I must add, we have a strong military relationship at every level. 

 Gigot: Quickly, Bret, would leaving Afghanistan early, which some people in Congress are now proposing, would that help our relations with Pakistan or hurt it? 

 Stephens: No, it would hurt it, and the Pakistanis will tell you this privately, because if we were to leave Afghanistan and create another Taliban haven over there, they would turn on Islamabad as soon as they got into Kabul. 

 Gigot: OK, Bret, last world. 

When we come back, which North American country has the fastest-growing economy and just elected its most conservative government in a generation? Lessons for the U.S. from our neighbors to the north, next. 

 Gigot: Well, with most Americans glued to news about Osama bin Laden, few noticed our neighbors to the north made electoral history this week. Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper won a landslide victory on Monday, capturing the first Conservative majority in that country in 23 years. 

For more, I'm joined by Wall Street Journal columnist Mary Anastasia O'Grady and OpinionJournal.com columnist John Fund. 

So, some people would say we are committing a television mortal sin here, Mary, by talking about Canada, but tell us why this election is important. 

 O'Grady: Well, this was really a referendum on very clear policy ideas. On the one hand, you had the leader of the Conservative Party offering Canadians to balance the budget without raising taxes and to continue exploring for natural resources and exploiting those natural resources in Canada to grow the economy. And on the other hand, you had the left saying they wanted to raise taxes to balance the budget, and they're trying to pass a lot of things to protect the environment and stop the exploitation of natural resources in the country. 

 Gigot: So this was a reward for sound economic management? 

 O'Grady: Well, he had done a very good job in the minority position during the time of the meltdown--I mean, in 2008 and 2009. You know, Canada can't help but suffer a little bit when the U.S. economy catches a cold. But in the end, Canada had a 3.3% GDP growth in 2010, and they did not have the explosion of debt. They do have a fiscal deficit, but it's 2.5% of GDP, which is a lot different than what's happened in the U.S. So I think people were happy with the way he managed the crisis. And going forward, as I say, he is offering not to raise taxes, to balance the budget and to continue with the exploitation of natural resources. 

 Gigot: John, one of the interesting results in Canada is that the Conservative Party appealed to immigrants and appealed to middle-class, working-class voters to create this new majority in a way that they haven't historically. What happened? 

 Fund: Well, those kind of voters create stability because they want to put down real roots in the country and be able to educate their children and have a good life. Stephen Harper represented stability, and I think the lesson for Americans is this. You know, 15 years ago, Canada was an economic basket case. 

 Gigot: Right. 

 Fund: It had out-of-control spending, out-of-control debt that Mary mentions. And both the Liberal government at the time and also the Conservative government later brought that gradually down. In 1995, Canada had a debt-to-GDP ratio just about where we are today. 

 Gigot: Which is about 70% and rising. 

 Fund: And rising. 

 Gigot: That is where the U.S. is now. 

 Fund: They have dropped that dramatically. If we want to get out of our current--what I think is going to be stagflation, we would do well to look at Canada has done in the last 15 years. If we just imitated them, we'd be out of the woods. 

 Gigot: Well, and what was that? What did Canada do for the last 15 years, Mary? 

 O'Grady: Well, they got very serious about cutting government spending. But as I said, they also went after the natural resources that they have. I mean, look at our drilling programs in this country. We don't exploit oil or mining the way that Canada does. So in that sense, they stayed on track, going after their comparative advantage, and tried to make the country more internationally competitive by cutting corporate taxes. They now have the corporate tax rate down to--well, if you combine provincial and federal, it's about 25%. 

 Gigot: And ours, at the federal level only, is about 35%--

 O'Grady: Exactly. 

 Gigot: --almost 40%, if you combine the average tax rate. 

 O'Grady: Exactly. 

 Gigot: So John, what is the lesson for--you mentioned the lesson of economic management, but what's the political lesson, the political message that Republicans can replicate here, if they can? 

 Fund: Stick by your principles, but no really sharp elbows. Steven Harper also said: Look, we're going to make improvements in our public health-care system. We're perhaps going to give the provinces more sway in allowing some experiments, but we're going to keep the basic structure of the welfare state, but we're going to rationalize it and update it for the 21st century. So it will work for future generations rather than go bankrupt, which is what our programs are doing here. 

 Gigot: But does that mean more private health care than their fully nationalized system now? 

 Fund: I think they're going to--remember, health care in Canada is up to the provinces. I think you're going to see some provinces under Conservative leadership experiment. But Harper, at the federal level, will basically give them freedom but have hands off. 

 Gigot: OK, John. 

We have to take one more break. When we come back, "Hits and Misses" of the week. 

 Gigot: Time now for "Hits and Misses" of the week. Dan, first to you. 

 Henninger: Paul, there's been a lot of commentary on whether all the "U-S-A" chanting after bin Laden's death was too celebratory or maybe in bad taste. Well, let me celebrate one of the most wonderful of all. Monday night, David Ortiz hit a home run for the Boston Red Sox. And when he crossed home plate, he ran over and embraced Army Ranger Sgt. Lucas Carr, who had been leading the crowd in "U-S-A" chants. This was a genuine act by Ortiz of gratefulness and affection for a fellow who represented the military, who'd been trying to protect all of us since 9/11. And I would call it altogether tasteful. 

 Gigot: All right. Mary? 

 O'Grady: This is miss for California state legislators, who, as you know, Paul, like to call themselves public servants. This week, they refused a request to grant public access to their calendars, which show who they meet with and what they do all day. And as you know, the governor in California and other state officials have to show their calendars, but the legislators say that this would invade their privacy, even though they are public servants. 

 Gigot: All right. John? 

 Fund: Indiana's legislature and Gov. Mitch Daniels created the biggest education reform in the country this week: vouchers for half the students, an end to teacher tenure, and an end to the practice where the last teacher hired is the first teacher fired, which gets rid of a lot of young, eager teachers. This is a 10-strike for Indiana students and parents. 

 Gigot: And for Indiana Gov. Mitch Daniels--

 Fund: Absolutely. 

 Gigot: --as he contemplates a presidential run. 

All right, that's it for this week's edition of "The Journal Editorial Report." Thanks to my panel and to all of you for watching. I'm Paul Gigot. We hope to see you all right here next week. 