Four pairs of competitors will start shaking hands Friday night in Times Square—and they won't stop, if at all possible, until lunchtime on Saturday at the earliest. 

The handshaking rivals, who hail from Nepal, New Zealand and the U.S., are attemping to top a Guinness World Record set in 2009, when two people performed the friendly gesture without stopping for 15 hours and 30 minutes. 

Guinness rules allow no interruptions. Using the bathroom is permitted, but an uninterrupted handshake must continue throughout the process—and a Guinness official must observe everything.

The four-way duel presents other challenges. The competitors will be shaking hands outdoors at night in the frigid weather, though a space heater will help take the chill off. Each competitor can only use a single hand for the duration, according to a Guinness spokeswoman.

"You don't want to grip too hard or you'll fatigue too quickly," said U.S. contestant  Joe Luchsinger, a junior at Baldwin-Wallace College. His teammate  John-Clark Levin, a student at Claremont-McKenna College, is a prior holder of the record (with a different partner): 15 hours, 15 minutes and 15 seconds.

A second U.S. team, Kevin Whittaker and Chris Veatch from San Francisco, is also competing. The four teams are raising funds for different charities.

There is reason to believe the record will fall, given the pedigrees of the competitors.  Rohit Timilsina, one half of a Nepalese brother team, holds three Guinness titles: most kisses given in one minute (116), most golf balls held in one hand for 10 seconds (24, a tie), and most tennis balls held in one hand (21). He claims to have already surpassed the existing handshake record by more than three hours in July, although officials haven't yet verified the act. 

  Alastair Galpin, a self-described professional record breaker and member of the New Zealand team, boasts nine records for feats such as making the loudest clap (114 decibels), buttering 10 slices of bread the fastest (52.42 seconds) and holding the most lighted candles in the mouth at one time (five). 

Mr. Galpin met his hand-shaking teammate, Don Purdon, just two weeks ago. The duo avoided chatting on their flight to New York so they would have plenty to say during the competition.

Geoffrey Beattie, a professor of psychological sciences at the University of Manchester, who has researched handshaking, said the average person shakes hands nearly 15,000 times in a 60-year lifetime. The Times Square competitors are likely to amass a lifetime of handshakes in one day.