BEIJING— IMAX Corp.
IMAX


-0.67
%




 reached a deal with a Chinese company to open 75 new IMAX screens, a major step toward its goal of 300 screens in Greater China in the next five years as it tries to capitalize on the country's booming box-office.

IMAX said Thursday its deal with Wanda Cinema Line Corp., is its largest single international partnership to date, and its first full revenue-sharing agreement in China. IMAX Chief Executive  Richard Gelfond said the partners expect to roll out the 75 digital-projection theaters in by the end of 2014. 

"Ten years ago, I had a vision for IMAX in China and this is a major step to getting us there," said Mr. Gelfond said in a telephone interview.

The 75 new theaters will add to the 35 IMAX screens currently in operation in China as well as 55 in development. The company said last month increased its goal to 300 screens in Greater China, including Hong Kong and Taiwan, from about 100 as of January. Greater China is IMAX's second-largest market behind the U.S. 

The new IMAX screens will replace some of the 600 screens Wanda Cinema runs in its 70 facilities around China. Financial terms of the deal weren't disclosed. IMAX also said it is forming a subsidiary, IMAX China, to oversee its expansion in the country.

Mr. Gelfond said IMAX sees particular opportunities in the popularity of 3-D films with Chinese moviegoers. The 3-D blockbuster Avatar was China's top-grossing film last year, with 1.4 billion yuan, or about $213 million, in ticket sales. This year, seven domestically produced 3-D films are set for release, up from two last year, according to Beijing-based media-research firm EntGroup.

IMAX's new deal comes as China's government is encouraging the expansion of the entertainment industry, aiming to build 20,000 screens nationwide by 2015, from about 6,300 now, according to EntGroup. By 2040, the government aims to have 40,000 screens. The U.S. has more than 39,500 movie screens, according to the Motion Picture Association of America.

The Chinese government hopes that a growing box-office will help to fund homegrown film production and distribution companies, so that they will one day be big enough to compete with foreign giants like Warner Bros. and  Sony Pictures. China ultimately wants to create a film industry capable of competing with Hollywood, says Michael Berry, a Chinese film expert and professor of Chinese cultural studies at University of California, Santa Barbara.

IMAX also is helping Chinese films find global audiences, striking deals with Chinese film companies to show their movies on IMAX screens in overseas markets. Later this year, it will show China Film Group's "Flying Tigers," directed by John Woo, in IMAX theaters. Last year, IMAX theaters carried "Aftershock," a production of China's Huayi Bros. studio, in the U.S., Canada, Australia, and other countries.

China's domestic film industry is expanding quickly. Last year, box-office revenue, including international and domestic movies, climbed more than 60% to 10.2 billion yuan, according to the State Administration of Radio, Film and Television. The number of domestic productions rose to 526 from 456.

IMAX screens pulled in an estimated 300.5 million yuan, or about 3% of the total box office revenue last year, according to EntGroup. Wanda's theaters accounted for about 15% of the total box office.

World-wide, ticket sales at IMAX theaters rose to $546 million last year from $271 million a year earlier.