FLORHAM PARK, N.J.—Chad Pennington could sense from watching Mark Sanchez operate against the Indianapolis Colts on Saturday that Mr. Sanchez was in control of his emotions. This, Mr. Pennington said, is the key for any young quarterback in the postseason.

 Sure, his wide receivers might have needed stepladders to reach some of his errant throws. But Mr. Sanchez always looked calm to Mr. Pennington.

"I could just see it with his demeanor," said Mr. Pennington, a quarterback with the Miami Dolphins. "There was never any panic, none."

Mr. Pennington was once in Mr. Sanchez's position, leading the Jets in the playoffs. And in a telephone interview, he sounded almost wistful. He knows how fleeting the experience can be. There are no guarantees in the NFL, not with the Jets, not in the playoffs.

"After 11 years, you see how difficult it is—not only to get there, but to win," Mr. Pennington said. "It's extremely difficult. There are so many different things that can happen, so many things that are out of your control."

Mr. Sanchez made some history during the Jets' 17-16 victory over the Colts. He became the first Jets quarterback to win three playoff games. But if this is a credit to Mr. Sanchez, whose Jets will face the New England Patriots in Sunday's divisional round, then it also seems like an ignominious distinction.

 In 51 seasons as a professional organization, the Jets have won a total of 11 playoff games—with just six quarterbacks under center.

"It's definitely a small group," said Pat Ryan, who helped the Jets to a playoff win in 1986.

The group is both small and eclectic, ranging from Mr. Ryan, a career backup, to Joe Namath, the franchise's iconic star. Richard Todd won two games for the Jets in 1982; Vinny Testaverde won one game in 1998. And Mr. Pennington, as a first-year NFL starter, led the team to its most lopsided postseason victory, a 41-0 rout of the Indianapolis Colts on Jan. 4, 2003. Mr. Pennington said he was "numb" throughout.

"We were riding such a momentum high, it almost seemed like we didn't have to do much," said Mr. Pennington, who threw for 222 yards and three touchdowns. "Plays were there to be made, and we made them. I remember looking at the scoreboard and thinking, 'How did we do that?'"

Though the Jets lost the following week to the Oakland Raiders, they returned to the playoffs two seasons later and beat the San Diego Chargers. It was the Jets' first road playoff win since 1982. "We wanted to prove we weren't the so-called 'same old Jets,'" he said.

At the same time, Mr. Pennington said, all that early success created a false sense of what reaching the playoffs truly entailed. As a college quarterback at Marshall, he had grown accustomed to bowl games and conference titles. And now, with the Jets, he figured his career would feature more of the same—more postseason appearances, more championships. It all seemed so easy, too easy. 

"You just expect that to be the norm," said Mr. Pennington, who since has played in just two playoff games, one with the Jets and one with the Dolphins, both losses.

Mr. Pennington underwent surgery five weeks ago on his throwing shoulder, and this week was able to brush his teeth for the first time. He is planning a comeback, he said, because he wants to be part of a team again, because he wants another shot at a championship. 

Mr. Namath can relate to that sort of longing, though he said he kept his career in perspective. After he famously led the Jets to their first and only title in Super Bowl III, he appeared in just one more playoff game—a loss to the Kansas City Chiefs in 1969—before he retired in 1977.

"A lot of people say, 'You would've been something if you didn't hurt your knees,'" Mr. Namath said. "I say, 'Hey, at the time, I'd have been where a lot of guys were, and that's Vietnam. And there's no telling what would've happened there.' I never felt unlucky about getting hurt."

The back story: After Mr. Namath tore up his right knee as a senior at the University of Alabama, he failed his physical for the military draft. Four years later, he visited Vietnam as part of a USO Tour. It was horrifying, he said. "I saw guys younger than me that—oh, it was awful," he said.

As for Mr. Ryan, he had no problems understanding his role within the football hierarchy. He started 21 games over 13 seasons. In 1986, he was 31 years old, content with his job as Ken O'Brien's backup and relishing the team's 10-1 start.

Then the unthinkable: The Jets got clobbered by the Dolphins on "Monday Night Football." It was the first of five straight losses to close out the regular season, though the Jets still managed to stumble into the playoffs. Coach Joe Walton was desperate and opted for a quarterback change before the Jets' first-round contest against the Chiefs, starting Mr. Ryan over Mr. O'Brien.

"It was a hard deal for Kenny because it made it look like it was his fault," said Mr. Ryan, who now works as a contractor in Knoxville, Tenn. "And it really wasn't. Everyone had a hand in it, and Kenny and I were good friends. I don't know. Maybe Joe felt like I could give the team a spark."

Mr. Ryan was particularly efficient in the Jets' 35-15 victory at Giants Stadium on Dec. 28, 1986, completing 16 of 23 passes for 153 passes and three touchdowns without an interception. He got plenty of help from Freeman McNeil, who rushed for 135 yards on a brisk, windswept day.

And the Jets, with Mr. Ryan under center, appeared to keep the good vibes flowing early in their divisional playoff game against the Cleveland Browns the following weekend. A 42-yard flea flicker to Wesley Walker gave the Jets a first-quarter lead before Mr. Ryan injured his groin in the second quarter.

 Mr. O'Brien climbed his way out of sideline purgatory and played well. But the Browns' Bernie Kosar was at his most prolific, throwing for 489 yards. He also capitalized on a late roughing-the-passer call against the Jets' Mark Gastineau—a sequence that still bothers Mr. Ryan. The Browns went on to win in two overtimes, 23-20—the third-longest game in NFL history.

"I never really looked at it like, 'This is our last shot, this will be our only shot,'" said Mr. Ryan, who spent four more seasons in the NFL without appearing in another postseason game. "I was just focused on playing the best I could and getting the most out of the experience."

Mr. Ryan said he would offer similar advice to Mr. Sanchez: "He's successful, he's in New York, he's rich, he's having the time of his life. I'd just tell him to enjoy it and prepare for games as best you can."

Mr. Sanchez already has set the Jets' standard for postseason success, short of a Super Bowl. But there is room for improvement. Patriots quarterback Tom Brady has started 18 playoff games, winning 14 of them—all while engendering a certain amount of animosity from the Jets. On Wednesday, Jets cornerback Antonio Cromartie reiterated how much he dislikes Mr. Brady. "I hate him," Mr. Cromartie said.

If this is the price of excellence, Mr. Sanchez gladly would exit Gillette Stadium on Sunday to a torrent of boos—another playoff victory on his résumé, another rare postseason win for Jets quarterbacks, past and present.

 Write to  Scott Cacciola at scott.cacciola@wsj.com 