The Swiss National Bank said Thursday it posted a book loss of 19.2 billion Swiss francs ($20.5 billion) last year as the franc's appreciation eroded the value of its foreign-currency holdings. 

The consolidated loss, which compares with a profit of 9.96 billion francs in 2009, was overwhelmingly dominated by currency movement, "not least the substantial appreciation of the franc towards the end of 2010," the SNB said Thursday. 

The Swiss central bank said its currency interventions to help stem the franc's relentless rise against the euro, U.S. dollar and the U.K. pound resulted in exchange-rate losses of 32.7 billion francs in 2010. 

These were partly offset by gains of 5.8 billion francs from an increase in the value of its gold holdings, as well as interest earnings on foreign-currency positions amounting to 5.1 billion francs. 

The central bank, which intervened between March 2009 and June last year to check the franc's appreciation, has drawn public criticism as a result of the losses, including calls for President  Philipp Hildebrand to quit. 

Still, the SNB said it will distribute 2.5 billion francs in payments to the Swiss government and cantons, by drawing on its reserves, though it has warned it can't guarantee such payments in coming years due to the volatile financial markets. 

During 2010, the franc strengthened about 16% against the euro, despite the SNB's attempts to curb "excessive" appreciation through currency-market intervention. 

The SNB's Stability Fund, which contains former illiquid assets from  UBS AG, returned a profit of 2.6 billion francs, it said.

SNB directorate member Thomas Jordan said Thursday that the need for currency market intervention to stem the Swiss franc's gains has diminished as the danger of deflation has eased.

"The currency market interventions [between March 2009 and June 2010] were conducted at a time when there were deflationary risks to the Swiss economy, and those risks have now eased," Mr. Jordan said after a briefing on the central bank's results in Bern, Switzerland. 

Mr. Jordan said the SNB could live with the currency market volatility, and that it will continue to diversify the currency reserves in order to spread its risks more effectively, though he declined to be more specific. 

Mr. Jordan declined to comment on the current state of the Swiss economy, or the outlook for interest rates, though he said the Swiss money market had excess liquidity, which the SNB needs to reduce over the medium to long term. 

