TOKYO—Toyota Motor Corp. said Wednesday it will recall more than 1.7 million vehicles world-wide because of faulty parts including defective fuel devices, giving the company's once-prestigious reputation for quality another black eye. 

The Japanese auto maker said that 1.28 million vehicles in Japan and a combined 421,000 vehicles in North America, Europe and other markets—including nearly 245,000 Lexus sedans sold in the U.S.—are subject to recall. 

This is the third straight instance of Toyota starting a year with a safety warning affecting more than one million of its cars, minivans and sport-utility vehicles. The company announced recalls of 3.4 million vehicles in January 2010 and nearly 1.4 million vehicles in January 2009, both among its biggest to date. The latest recalls came just days after the company claimed the title as the world's largest car maker by vehicles sold for the third year in a row. 

"Toyota has been using more common parts in its vehicles" in order to cut costs, said  Koji Endo, an auto analyst at Advanced Research Japan, a Tokyo-based independent research firm. "But the flip side is that it makes it a lot easier to have a million-plus recall." 

The latest recalls are likely to eat away somewhat at the goodwill won by Toyota President  Akio Toyoda last year, when he went on a charm offensive after the auto maker's name was increasingly tied to quality problems. The executive's efforts included a trek to the U.S. last year to apologize and lay to rest concerns about the safety of Toyota vehicles, as well as a public apology.

The company blamed defective fuel pipes and pumps affecting a number of Toyota vehicles, along with a separate issue involving loose fuel-pressure sensors that affects certain Lexus models. 

Both problems could lead to fuel leaks, Toyota said. 

Shares in Toyota fell 1.9% to close at 3,400 yen ($41.34) on the Tokyo Stock Exchange on Wednesday. 

"With questions still lingering over whether Toyota can recover consumer confidence, this kind of a large-scale recall will be a drag on shares," said  Yoshihiro Okumura, general manager at Chibagin Asset Management. 

Over the past year the company has taken steps to deal with the problems at the root of the recalls, such as setting up a new global reporting line for safety issues, assigning 1,000 engineers to focus on quality issues and delaying the launch of new vehicles by four weeks to spot-check them for potential glitches. 

Toyota stressed that most of the models affected by the latest recalls were produced prior to 2010 and that there have been no injuries or accidents reported that are related to the faulty parts. 

A Toyota spokeswoman explained the timing of Wednesday's announcements as coincidental and described the pair of recalls as separate issues. 

The Toyota-badged vehicles subject to the recalls included a total of 1.28 million units in Japan spread across 21 different models and dating back as far as 2000. 

 The fuel-sensor recall issue affects some 355,000 luxury sedans world-wide—mostly 245,000 Lexus-brand vehicles sold in the U.S. The company described the problem as stemming from loose fuel-pressure sensors attached to fuel pipes coated with nickel phosphorus plating, which may be susceptible to leaks. 

The U.S. models targeted are Lexus GS 300/350 sedans and Lexus IS 250/350 sedans produced from 2006 through 2007 and 2006 through 2009, respectively. 

One Toyota dealer in Osaka, which has sold about 300 units of the Japan-market Noah minivan subject to the recall, spent the day reaching out to customers by phone and mail. 

"This is a result of our continuous checks that Toyota conducts even after cars are sold," said  Atsuhiko Okazaki, an engineer at dealer. "But it's better if we don't give this kind of trouble to our customers at all." 

Mr. Okazaki said that since the recall is related to the fuel system, it could potentially be dangerous. He added that the possibility of a fire can't be ruled out in the event of fuel leaks. 

He declined to estimate how much the repairs will cost for each car but said it would require about 1.5 hours of work. 

Toyota's largest-ever recall in the U.S. came on Sept. 29, 2009, when it issued a safety advisory for owners of 3.8 million Lexus and Toyota vehicles sold in the U.S. to replace floor mats that may have contributed to cases of unintended acceleration. 

The recalls over the past two years prompted the U.S. government to investigate Toyota's disclosure practices, which eventually led to fines totaling about $49 million, including a $32 million civil penalty levied by U.S. authorities on the company last month. 

—Kana Inagaki and Miho Inada contributed to this article.

 Write to  Yoshio Takahashi at yoshio.takahashi@dowjones.com 