WASHINGTON—The U.S. has been able to interview the wives of Osama bin Laden who were taken into Pakistani custody after they were left behind by the American assault team that raided the al Qaeda leader's compound. 

Officials declined to say what, if any, information has been gleaned from the interviews. One official said that American officials have been able to speak directly to the three wives, rather than simply observing Pakistani interrogations. 

"The U.S. government has had access to Osama bin Laden's wives," said Jay Carney, the White House press secretary. "I can't characterize the interaction." 

The raid has provided a large amount of intelligence on al Qaeda, including planned operations. 

The assault team that raided bin Laden's compound also found "a stash" of pornographic material, according to a U.S. official. Officials declined to describe the material in detail.

The survivors of the raid could potentially provide an additional source of information. However, it is unclear how much the wives knew about al Qaeda's future plans or even of their husband's role in directing the terror network. 

They are also likely to be extremely hostile witnesses. Another U.S. official said the wives, angry over the death of bin Laden and the raid on their home, were confrontational in the interview.

Marine Col. David Lapan, a Pentagon spokesman, said U.S. and Pakistani officials are continuing to discuss the raid and how to share information arising from it. "What is continuing is our discussions with the Pakistanis on information sharing, beyond just talking to these individuals," Col. Lapan said. 

During the raid on bin Laden's compound in Abbottabad, the assault force collected a large trove of intelligence material, scooping up hard drives, computers and various papers. They also took bin Laden's body. But the SEAL team chose not to take any of the women or children at the house. After the raid, Pakistani officials responding to the firefight at the compound detained the survivors, including the three wives of bin Laden.

In addition to bin Laden, three other men and one woman were killed in the assault. A U.S. official said those killed at the compound were bin Laden; his son Khalid; the two courier brothers; and one of the courier's wives. The U.S. official didn't know which courier's wife was killed. One of bin Laden's wives was shot in the leg when she lunged at members of the assault team as they entered the room where she and bin Laden were found. 

—Siobhan Gorman and Carole E. Lee contributed to this article.

 Write to  Julian Barnes at julian.barnes@wsj.com 