The Robin Hood Foundation gala took on a patriotic tone Monday night as Wall Streeters raised more than $47.4 million to support veteran and poverty programs in New York City. 



The evening's emotional crescendo was the appearance of about 400 service men and women who filled the aisles of the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center. Navy SEALs and five Congressional Medal of Honor winners also attended.

During an on-stage interview with Tom Brokaw, Adm. Michael Mullen, Chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, pointed out that the total number of homeless veterans from the Iraq and Afghanistan wars is greater than that from the Vietnam War.

More than $11.8 million of the total raised will go to local veterans service organizations, the foundation said. The evening's programming focused on poverty, mental-health issues, homelessness and unemployment issues among veterans. The night included a performance for musician Kid Rock, who sang "Care."

As in past years, the evening infused humor and live performance to encourage giving. 

Singer Tony Bennett opened the evening, comedian Seth Meyers of "Saturday Night Live" performed and Black Eyed Peas band-mates Fergie and apl.de.ap presented an auction package to compose a song with band-mate will.i.am. The package went for $400,000.

As always, there were plenty of celebrities in attendance, among them Sarah Jessica Parker, Gisele Bündchen, Tom Brady, Michael J. Fox and Liev Schreiber. 

The evening's theme was comic book-inspired, with Robin Hood portrayed as New York's hero and champion. Tables were decorated with comic-book images, but not flowers.

News anchor and Robin Hood board member Brian Williams, was the evening's comic straight man and host, earning chuckles every time he mentioned the evening's star performer, Lady Gaga, in his dry, serious tone.

At the end of the night, Gaga was carried through the dining room in an egg vessel and then performed a 40-minute set, urging the guests to celebrate the amount raised. 

Though few in the crowd made a monster claw for Gaga—a hand gesture popular among diehard fans—and they had to be coached by the musician on how to wave their arms to the beat, the concert audience was lively. Some danced and some knew the lyrics to Gaga's songs. She said to the guests that she wasn't sure if they would be "sitting, finishing their tea sandwiches," during the concert and just gawking at her with a pained face. "This is a pleasant and lovely surprise," she said. 