DAVOS, Switzerland—Finland won't accept any increase in the overall size of the European Financial Stabilization Facility, Prime Minister Mari Kiviniemi said Thursday.

In an interview on the sidelines of the World Economic Forum, Ms. Kiviniemi said: "I'm not ready to open a discussion on eurobonds or increasing the size of the EFSF."

The "eurobonds" rejected by the prime minister refer to bonds that would be issued jointly by the members of the euro zone, an idea that has been rejected by the European Central Bank as well as the euro zone's richer countries.

"We are not ready to carry other countries' debt burdens in a new way," she said.

Much of the debate in recent days has focused on the willingness of Germany, which has put up the largest share of the €440 billion in loan guarantees behind the EFSF, to expand it.

Ms. Kiviniemi's comments highlight the breadth of opposition to any hurried change in policy that would increase the implicit transfers of wealth from one euro-zone member to another. The Netherlands, Slovakia and Austria have also expressed reluctance on the issue.

"There are a lot suggestions now … and many of them are totally unacceptable from the Finnish side," Ms. Kiviniemi said.

"What is most urgently needed is that the countries in the biggest trouble, such as Portugal and Spain, take the measures needed: They need to balance their budgets and make structural changes," Ms. Kiviniemi said.

She also dismissed any notion of reopening the financial rescue deals for Greece and Ireland. In both countries, domestic political pressure is growing to renegotiate the deals on more advantageous terms.

One of the more persistent rumors of recent days is that the euro zone is prepared to allow the EFSF to lend to Greece at an advantageous rate, so that it can buy back some of its debt. Ms. Kiviniemi declined to comment.

However, she did say that Finland, the biggest contributor to the euro zone's hastily constructed bailout vehicle on a per-capita basis, might agree to increase the effective lending capacity of the fund.

"There are ways. They are not easy ones, but they are there," Ms. Kiviniemi said.

The EFSF's current lending capacity is effectively limited to a little over €250 billion. Anything over that limit would jeopardize its AAA debt rating.

EU finance ministers last week were unable to agree on how, or by how much, to increase the EFSF's resources.

 Write to  Geoffrey T. Smith at geoffrey.smith@dowjones.com 