OTTAWA—Canadians go to the polls Monday in an election that Prime Minister Stephen Harper has framed as a chance to further solidify the country's nascent economic recovery with a majority Conservative government after five years of minority Tory rule.

Just a few weeks back, polls showed Mr. Harper poised—though not quite clinching—that long-elusive majority. But a sudden surge in popularity in the past week by the left-leaning New Democratic Party has upended that calculus.

Going into Monday's vote, the NDP is now solidly in second place, trailing the Conservatives by just a few percentage points in some surveys. The party's leader, Jack Layton, has capitalized on a platform pledging higher health-care spending, richer benefits for seniors and a boost to corporate-tax rates. He's also wooed French-speaking Quebec, drawing votes from the separatist federal party, the Bloc Quebecois.

But his surge has attracted fresh scrutiny. On Friday, his campaign acknowledged he visited a Toronto massage business in the mid-1990s, after a right-wing media outlet reported the visit and allegations that the police suspected the business was being used for illicit purposes. Mr. Layton has said he did nothing wrong and said he's the victim of a "smear" campaign just days before the crucial vote.

Mr. Harper's Conservatives are still ahead, and could still even win a majority. But if he falls short, Mr. Layton could emerge as a kingmaker, with the power to throw his weight behind the Conservatives or form an alliance with the opposition Liberal party. Some analysts say he could even lead that coalition as the next prime minister.

"It is really hard to say how this is going to turn out," said  Darrell Bricker, chief executive of Ipsos Reid Public Affairs, a prominent Canadian polling firm.

The prospect of Mr. Layton as prime minister, or even as an influential power broker in the next government, has rattled Canada's financial community, which until about a week ago was largely shrugging off the election.

Canada has earned praise for its stable financial system. It's been the first Group of Seven economy to move from recovery to self-sustaining expansion following the financial crisis. Mr. Harper pushed through a number of pricey stimulus measures to help the country navigate the crisis, but has more recently mostly ended those, winning praise from the International Monetary Fund for Canada's deficit-reduction plan. Higher oil and commodities prices have also buoyed markets, underpinning a recently rising Canadian dollar.

Mr. Layton has promised to balance the budget, but has also pledged to boost spending—worrying some observers that government outlays could grow if he sustains support through the polls. The NDP has called for 70 billion Canadian dollars ($73.6 billion) in spending over the next four years on improved health-care services, carbon-reduction strategies and enriched benefits for seniors.

The party says it will finance this spending with higher corporate taxes and a cap-and-trade emissions credit system, both of which have been criticized by opponents and some economists. The NDP has defended its economic platform as sound and responsible.

Based on some projections, the NDP—which held just 36 parliamentary seats in the last parliament, fewer than any of the country's four parties—could capture up to 100 seats, or almost a third of the 308 seats in the lower house. The Conservative party held 143 seats, and requires 155 to secure a majority. 

The NDP's rise has come at the expense of the centrist Liberal party, which has held power in 32 of the last 50 years and is now led by former Harvard professor Michael Ignatieff. The Liberals are in danger of finishing third, which has never happened before. The separatist Bloc Quebecois is also in danger of posting its worst showing since its first election in 1993. It trails the NDP in Quebec by as many as 16 percentage points in some polls. 