India's privatization drive has never been a study in earnestness. In the coming months, it risks becoming a lost cause. 

New Delhi has set a target of raising about $9 billion by selling stakes in several companies -- flagship firms like Steel Authority of India and Hindustan Copper are among them -- in the fiscal year starting in April. This is as much as it aimed to earn in the current year, only to rake in just over half of it. 

That's not unusual. Since undertaking major reforms in the early 1990s when New Delhi first began liberalizing its economy, it has often missed its annual target for privatization revenue. 

But challenges are mounting: Capital markets aren't gaining as they were in 2010, with the Bombay Stock Exchange's Sensex having fallen 11% so far this year. On top of that, New Delhi has taken some serious blows to its reputation following a series of scandals involving government officials and ministries, which would make investors wary of putting their money in state-controlled companies. 

More worrying is the absence of long-term, structural reform agenda for India's public sector companies. New Delhi will sell only 5%-10% stakes in its companies and continue to retain majority ownership, making the latest effort a purely fund-raising exercise. 

India has always been hostage to the powerful labor unions of its companies. Lawmakers are reluctant to embark on a meaningful privatization that could lead to layoffs and other cost-cutting measures and, in turn, cost them votes. A study by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Indiana University shows no government-owned firm located in the home province of the minister in charge has ever been privatized. 

The government's piecemeal approach means little will change in terms of governance and performance at the firms being privatized - a major red flag for investors. 

To lure them, New Delhi could end up underpricing the offerings and gain less than what the stakes are worth, says Nandini Gupta, associate professor at the Kelley School of Business at Indiana University, who co-authored the MIT study. 

Once again, New Delhi is likely to fall short on its targets. 

 Write to  Harsh Joshi at harsh.joshi@dowjones.com 