Gov.  Andrew Cuomo's alliance with the state's health-care union and hospital lobby is drawing fire from some patient advocates, who question the governor's decision to give the powerful industry figures a front-and-center role in the process of overhauling Medicaid.

Mr. Cuomo has put union leaders and hospital lobbyists in charge of a "Medicaid redesign team" and asked them to propose ways to cut spending by a target amount. He wants them to draw up a plan in weeks, to meet the April 1 budget deadline.

Cuomo administration officials say they're more likely to get concessions and win over lawmakers by partnering with the industry's biggest players and giving them more responsibility for fixing a Medicaid program that's driving the state's debt crisis. But health-care consumer groups say Mr. Cuomo is playing favorites with the same industry heavyweights that lobbied for the old system.

"The governor was very clear in talking about not allowing special interests to dominate. But then he appointed a task force for Medicaid with the top special interests controlling it." said  Judy Wessler, director of the Commission on the Public's Health System, a patient-advocacy group based in Manhattan. "This is why we're in this crisis, and he's just repeating it."

Mr. Cuomo unveiled the Medicaid panel in his State of the State speech Wednesday, saying it would be composed of health-care stakeholders. The only participants he mentioned were union leaders, hospital lobbyists and the chief executive of North Shore-Long Island Jewish Health System, Michael Dowling, a health-care adviser in the administration of Gov. Mario Cuomo.

The governor's speech touched off complaints from other health-care advocates, who feared they were being left out. On Friday, Cuomo officials released an expanded list of about two-dozen members, including Medicaid Matters, a coalition of patient groups, and several city and local health officials. 

A spokesman for Mr. Cuomo said the team "represents a diverse group of key stakeholders who know the system, can fix it, and save taxpayers money."

  Elizabeth Swain, head of the Community Health Care Association of New York State and a member of Mr. Cuomo's Medicaid team, said she was taking a wait-and-see approach. In an interview Thursday, she said she understood the governor's logic of putting "key decision-makers in the same place as those who must change the way they see the world." 

But she added: "I certainly understand why consumer and advocate organizations are offended. There wasn't even a tip of the hat to the ultimate recipient of these services."

Mr. Cuomo's dealings with 1199 SEIU, a local union with hundreds of thousands of workers, and hospital lobbyists is a stark turnaround from Gov. Eliot Spitzer's administration, which tangled with those groups over Medicaid rates and cost-cutting. 

In 2007, the union and the Greater New York Hospital Association, which lobbies and operates a for-profit group-purchasing company, waged a public-relations war against Mr. Spitzer's first budget. 

"Their goal is to block any attempt to reform the system," Mr. Spitzer said at the time. He said the state was spending too much money on hospitals and nursing homes and not enough on preventive care. He aimed to steer Medicaid dollars toward clinics and primary physicians.Lawmakers blocked most of Mr. Spitzer's cuts to Medicaid. He raised outpatient rates, but his effort to shake up funding formulas for nursing homes and other long-term care, whose costs have skyrocketed, stalled under the Paterson administration.

The union and the hospital association praised Mr. Cuomo this week, saying they welcomed the chance to lower costs and offer ideas. They said the state can shrink the program without relying on the types of cuts sought by Mr. Spitzer and other governors, who sought to slash revenue streams to hospitals.

"The money is not being used in the most effective way," said 1199 president  George Gresham on Tuesday. "Looking for savings doesn't necessarily set me off."

 Write to  Jacob Gershman at jacob.gershman@wsj.com 