As Manchester United and FC Barcelona attempt to secure a berth in the Champions League final this week, the spoils of victory have never been greater. Among them: the iconic silver trophy, a victory parade, and prize money in excess of $100 million.

But there's another group of people who have almost as much to gain as these two superclubs: The sponsors.



A Champions League final between Manchester United and Barcelona would guarantee a huge global television audience. The 2009 final between these two powerhouses of European football was watched by 103 million people across the planet, more than viewed that year's Super Bowl, according to London-based media agency Future Sport and Entertainment.

Those numbers have allowed UEFA, European football's governing body, to market the tournament as a truly global property—with a price tag to match. Five companies pay up to £15 million ($25 million) per year for category-exclusive sponsorship of the Champions League, including beer, payment card, mobile telephone and automobile sponsorships.

"The global audience is huge," says  David Taylor, UEFA's head of events. "Wherever you are in the world you can watch it. Research from partners, which we see when discussing renewals, shows that its value for money, although these are large sums involved."

For big advertisers, the regularity, exposure and global footprint of Champions League matches—the tournament attracts roughly 150 million TV viewers a week in 70 countries—has long made sponsoring the tournament an effective strategy for marketing to large groups of consumers.

"Our research tells us that 80% of Champions League viewers drink beer, so we're in conversation with the right audience," says  Hans Erik Tuijt, brand activation manager at Heineken, the Amsterdam-based brewing giant and the Champions League's official beer. "Heineken is a leading premium international beer brand but still has only 1% of the world's beer market. To increase that figure we need to build qualified awareness, which is what the Champions League gives us."

But these days, sponsors are starting to view European football's biggest club tournament as a gateway to another tantalizing area for growth: Asia.

"We're European—it's our heartland—but we use our competition to expand out," says Taylor. "The Champions League is a major broadcast product in Asian markets."

In addition to a standard sponsorship package, Heineken has held the rights to football's Champions Trophy tour since 2006, in which the sponsor parades the European Cup across Asia. The company says that 17,500 fans attended events in Kuala Lumpur and Penang, Malaysia, in February.

"The trophy tour offers a unique opportunity because most Asians don't get out of Asia but they all know about the Champions League," says Tuijt.

All this comes as major European football teams are stepping up their efforts to draw Asian fans in the belief that the world's developing football markets offer growth potential both in terms of broadcast and other commercial rights.

Standard Chartered, the Asian-facing bank and lead sponsor of Liverpool FC, reinforced this point last month. "The market is saturated in Europe with so many clubs, how many more merchandise sales are they going to create over the next 10 years?" said Gavin Laws, the bank's sponsorship executive. "If the clubs want to do merchandise sales at an exponential rate you've got to be in China, you've got to be in Korea, getting all the people excited about the game."

Yet the biggest challenge for top clubs is how to turn fans in the world's most populous continent into profits.  Tom Fox, the commercial director of 2006 Champions League finalist Arsenal, says the international profile of leading English Premier League clubs is out of proportion to their size, which should temper expectations of building a major marketing platform in overseas markets.

"Arsenal is a £230 million club in terms of revenue. Then there's Chelsea—slightly smaller—and Man United, which is bigger," says Fox. "They are all trying to build a brand independently around the world on multiple fronts, in North America, Asia and the European continent. But there are billion-dollar brands around the world trying to compete in China and failing."

There is also a structural issue. While the leading European clubs are competing against each other for new fans, the task of building professional basketball in Asia has been undertaken centrally by the National Basketball Association, rather than individual franchises. 

In other words, the NBA operates as a coordinating body that ensures that each of its teams benefits from the commercial opportunities available in China. "There is no duplication and there is a collaborative strategy ensuring that all franchises benefit," says Prof.  Simon Chadwick, a professor of sports-business strategy and marketing at Coventry University in the U.K.

Without a central coordinating body for European football, he says clubs are left to fight among themselves in what is arguably "a zero-sum game that demands a different strategic approach." 

It would be much easier to develop individual club brands in international markets if Arsenal, Chelsea and Liverpool worked together, says Fox. "Do I think that all of the NBA clubs marketing all of their brands together is an advantage?" he says. "My answer simply, is yes."

A more cost-effective way of reaching the Asian market is offered by social media platforms, such as Facebook and Twitter. Recently Barcelona, Manchester United and Real Madrid boasted of reaching 10 million Facebook fans, posing the question: what is a Facebook fan worth?

"The value of the people finding the club and pulling you into their world represents a different way of thinking about the model," says Fox. "Rather than us putting our product in front of someone and trying to be intrusive, we have people pulling us into their world."

Such large social-media followings are beginning to play into sponsorship negotiations, helping clubs boost the value of their respective shirts. But Chadwick says clubs should be wary of banking on the longevity of Facebook fans.

"Any claims that football clubs have large social-media followings in Asia, particularly in China, are effectively worthless," he says. "Many European clubs do not understand social media, meaning that sites like Facebook are nothing more than electronic lists of fans. No real attempt has been made by clubs to monetize their Asian fan base."