WASHINGTON—The Senate ethics committee concluded Thursday that former Sen. John Ensign may have violated federal laws and Senate rules in his handling of an affair with a former aide.

The panel referred the matter to the Justice Department and the Federal Election Commission —a move that could give new life to a federal probe that had never been officially closed.

The Senate committee had been investigating the Nevada Republican for almost two years after he admitted having an extramarital relationship with Cindy Hampton, his former campaign treasurer and the wife of Doug Hampton, a former Ensign aide, both of whom were good friends. Mr. Ensign resigned from the Senate effective May 3, the day before he was to be deposed by the committee.

"In the course of its inquiry, the committee discovered information giving it reason to believe that Sen. Ensign and others violated laws that fall within the Department of Justice's jurisdiction," Chairman Barbara Boxer (D., Calif.) and Vice Chairman Johnny Isakson (R., Ga.) wrote in a letter to the Justice Department. The committee voted unanimously on the report.

The Justice Department said it would review the referral.

Mr. Ensign's attorneys said the former senator didn't violate the law or Senate rules. "I am confident the Department of Justice will conclude that Senator Ensign fully complied with the law," Paul Coggins, his attorney, said in an email.

Earlier this year, Mr. Hampton was indicted by the Justice Department for violating a rule that prohibits former congressional aides from lobbying their colleagues within one year of leaving Capitol Hill. Mr. Hampton's lawyer couldn't immediately be reached for comment.

The report released Thursday accused Mr. Ensign of obstructing the Senate's investigation into that issue and others by deleting important documents and his personal email account. The report said Mr. Ensign also instituted office polices to make Mr. Hampton's contacts with the office "harder to detect."

The report said that a $96,000 payment made from Mr. Ensign's parents to Mr. Hampton may have violated several federal and congressional rules.

Former Ensign Chief of Staff John Lopez told Senate investigators that he was ordered to call one person who had blocked Mr. Hampton from being hired as a lobbyist and "tell him that he is cut off from the office" and from contacting Mr. Ensign. "I remember really feeling like that was abusing the office," Mr. Lopez told the panel.

Rob Kelner, an attorney for Mr. Lopez, declined to comment. 

 Mr. Ensign said he was simply making a job recommendation when he helped his former aide get a lobbying job, the lawyers said. Mr. Ensign also said that he "did not delete any evidence in this matter, nor did he ask or suggest that anyone else do so," the lawyers said.

 Earlier this year, Mr. Ensign said the Justice Department advised that he was no longer a target of investigation.

The Justice Department didn't close its probe and always reserved the option of restarting the investigation if prosecutors received new information, according to law enforcement officials familiar with the matter. 

The ethics panel's letter also alleges Mr. Ensign obstructed the committee's probe—information that wasn't part of the previous Justice Department probe.

—Evan Perez contributed to this article.

 Write to  Siobhan Hughes at siobhan.hughes@dowjones.com and Brody Mullins at brody.mullins@wsj.com 