Bangalore -- Private equity exits in Indian real estate are expected to surge this year as several funds hit the typical three-five year end-of-investment horizons. The first wave of foreign direct investments in the sector was in 2005-06.

So far this year, there have been six exits worth a combined $124 million, according to research firm VCCEdge. In 2010, there were eight exits from realty investments worth $1.2 billion (54.24 billion rupees) mostly through share buybacks, mergers and acquisitions, and one initial public offering (Nitesh Estates Ltd). This year's sales took the share buyback and the mergers and acquisitions route. 

The spurt in exits is expected to boost investor confidence in the Indian real-estate story as funds start returning money to their investors, or limited partners. Many of the exits this year are expected to be by early investors selling their stakes to late-stage investors.

"We [could start seeing] late-stage investors stepping into matured projects with lower risk, from where on there is only capital appreciation," said  Ajit Krishnan, partner in the real estate practice at consultancy firm Ernst and Young. 

"More exits would happen this year because lot of projects would have completed their lock-ins and reached closure, thereby opening up sale opportunities," he added. 

Among the 2010 exits, the largest was DLF Assets Ltd's $694.3 million stake buy-back from Symphony Capital Partners Ltd; and  Och-Ziff Capital Management Group
OZM


-0.96
%




 Llc sale of 17 million shares in Nitesh Estates, a 24.3% stake, for $40.61 million through an initial share sale.

Returns on realty investments have ranged between 1.5 times and 4 times this year. 

Indiareit Fund Advisors Pvt. Ltd exited an office project in Kurla, in suburban Mumbai, with returns of $100 million on an investment of approximately $32 million made in 2006; Milestone Capital Advisors Ltd saw a return of 1.5 to 2.5 times from two of its exits. 

Kotak India Real Estate Fund-I sold its stake in Peepul Tree Properties Pvt. Ltd to Tata Realty Initiatives Fund-I for 3.85 billion rupees, four years after it invested 950 million rupees. 

Now, several private-equity firms including Kotak Realty Fund and HDFC Property Ventures Pvt. Ltd are eyeing multiple exits. 

Kotak Realty has sold investments worth about $175 million since 2009, and has another $50 million of exits lined up for 2011-12, said  V. Hari Krishna, a director at the firm, including investments in hospitality chains Lemon Tree Hotels and Pride Hotels, and a commercial property in Noida, a suburb of New Delhi. 

Indiareit Fund Advisors Pvt. Ltd plans to sell its holdings in a special-economic zone in Pune for 10 billion rupees, and two other investments, said CEO  Ramesh Jogani. 

Meanwhile, HDFC Property has put multiple office projects on the block to sell its investments to another fund or individual investors, said a person familiar with the development, asking not to be identified. 

  Vikram Utamsingh, executive director at advisory firm KPMG India Pvt. Ltd, said exits would be easy in properties that generate steady rental income and have quality blue-chip anchor tenants. 

"While commercial assets will generate more interest, retail assets that haven't started churning out profits may not see the same," he said. 