By Tim Parks (2010)

With emotional and medical candor, Tim Parks's memoir about agonizing prostate pain describes a battery of grueling tests as Western medicine systematically eliminates every explanation for what could be causing it. Is the pain actually in the author's mind? If so, does his suffering not exist? Even with the final possibility knocked out—Parks doesn't have cancer—his doctor, incredibly, still wants to remove his prostate. Leery of side effects like incontinence or impotence, Parks sensibly decides against having an operation simply for the sake of seeming to do something. He's not the wheatgrass-juice type, but he finds relief—to his astonishment—through relaxation therapy and meditation. Prostate pain, it turns out, might be caused by tension in the pelvic floor. (Rationalists can take heart; anyone who has had a back spasm is familiar with the intimacy between musculature and nerves.) Parks writes: "Illness, I realized then, like love or hate, draws everything to itself, turns everything into itself. Whatever I thought about came back to that: my condition."

By Helen Garner (2009)

In Helen Garner's novel "The Spare Room," an old friend, Nicola, comes to stay with the narrator and her family in Melbourne, Australia, while receiving an alternative treatment for cancer. Though in denial, Nicola is clearly dying, and the treatment she is receiving is portrayed as sheer quackery. The narrator—a writer named Helen—grows infuriated by Nicola's credulous embrace of the wacky cures. The book is not sentimental about the mortally ill. Instead, it ponders the sacrifices demanded by friendship. Where to draw the line when someone is dying? Garner shows us how illness confers power and how it can tyrannize an otherwise healthy household. Whether or not Nicola is destined to die, by the end you're ready to kill her.

By Sarah Manguso (2008)

At 21, Sarah Manguso was stricken with a rare autoimmune disease that causes paralysis. As she relates in this harrowing memoir, treatment entailed the extraction, separation and replacement of all her blood—an ordeal she underwent more than 50 times. "Two Kinds of Decay" describes her surreal life as it is consumed for several years by ghastly medical procedures. Manguso is a poet, but she spurns gauzy metaphors for sharp, vivid, sometimes funny storytelling. Infirmity did not make her a better person: "In general the disease made me furious, jealous, resentful, impatient, temperamental, spiteful." Even when her health improves, she is prone to trump other people's sorry little tales of suffering with her own, as if to say, "Beat that!" They never can. 

By Margaret Forster (1989)

A novel about a live-in grandmother's deterioration from dementia. The family grows exasperated—by her monotonous repetitions, by the mealtime spectacles, since Grandma can no longer feed herself properly. Yet this is a woman who has always lived for others and would be horrified to realize that she's become a burden. At the heart of the story lies the question: How much do we owe the ill? As in life, the plot is taken up with logistics—trying to find help that isn't useless, trying to decide whether to put Grandma into a nursing home. The dialogue is wonderful: 



 "It's sour! 

 "Mum, it's not."  

 "Put some sugar in it for her."  

 "It's drowned in sugar."  

 "Just give her straight sugar."  

 "Adrian!" 

 "It's sour!" 



Margaret Forster, a compassionate, clear-eyed author, embraces a subject that most writers would cross the street to avoid—but it's one bullying its way into countless lives. 

By Philip Roth (2006)

A novel about an elderly man within spitting distance of his grave inevitably has to address mortality, but in "Everyman" death is a reflecting pool. This elegant novel shimmers with the mysteries and regrets of a whole life. Philip Roth's unnamed protagonist has the usual broken marriage and difficulties with his kids, but his central failed relationship is the one with his own body. He has had six cardiac surgeries in as many years; a seventh would probably kill him. Meanwhile, friends drop like flies: "Old age isn't a battle; old age is a massacre." Prolonged illness's "deadliest trap," Roth writes, is "the contortion of one's character." Thus the protagonist loathes his once adored older brother simply because the schmuck is so enragingly healthy. Unexpectedly moving, "Everyman" is about a treachery that awaits us all. Spouses may stay true, but bodies are universally faithless.

—Ms. Shriver's "So Much for That," a novel about medicine, cancer and family, is now available in paperback.