After years of shelving projects and doing only improvements deemed absolutely necessary, more homeowners are dusting off their remodeling plans this year as they grow more hopeful about the economy.

And given that many contractors are still willing to slash their prices to get new business, it could be a good time to get projects done for a low price.

For remodeling, it's a buyer's market, says  Paul Zuch, president of Capital Improvements, a remodeling firm in Dallas, and president of the National Association of the Remodeling Industry.

During the downturn, Mr. Zuch's company lowered profit margins in order to stay competitive with not only other established remodelers but also home builders who began to dabble in remodeling when demand almost completely dried up for new homes.

In fact, 80% of the 554 home-improvement contractors who participated in a recent Angie's List survey said they would slash prices to win a bid -- with some saying they'd drop their price by as much as 20%. Angie's List is a website that collects consumer reviews of local contractors.

Today, people feel that perhaps the housing market has hit bottom or is getting close to it, and projects they've put off are getting another look, says Abbe Will, research assistant at Harvard University's Joint Center for Housing Studies.

And as the housing market gets on firmer ground, that will also spur more remodeling: Previous research has shown that a large amount of remodeling spending happens when homes are being prepared for sale and right after homes are purchased, Ms. Will says.

But as demand for remodeling increases, expect those contractor discounts to start disappearing.

Remodeling expenditures are forecast to rise at an inflation-adjusted annual average of 3.5% between 2010 and 2015, according to a recent report from Harvard's Joint Center.

The estimate includes home-improvement spending, but not money spent on home maintenance and repairs. The report predicts a long-term recovery for an industry that experienced a double-digit decline from its peak in 2007.

Most investment in home improvements over the past couple of years has focused on the necessities, Mr. Zuch says. People replaced an air-conditioning unit if it went out, for example, but put off other more discretionary jobs including painting, he says.

That's beginning to change, though homeowners remain more cautious about overspending than they once were, he says.

"Clients who we were talking to two years ago have called up and said 'We're ready to put this back on the front burner and move forward,'" Mr. Zuch says. Some homeowners are now forging ahead with improvements that include kitchen and bath upgrades, he adds.

Homeowners who are taking on more discretionary projects, including whole-house renovations and the creation of outdoor living spaces that include kitchens and entertaining areas, plan on living in their homes for a long period of time, he says.

When the housing market was stronger, people were more likely to move when their home no longer suited their needs, says  Angie Hicks, founder of Angie's List. But these days, many people are improving the homes they're in so they don't have to move.

All that said, remodeling demand will vary significantly depending on the market you're in. Ms. Will says hard-hit areas where many homeowners are underwater on their mortgages, such as Las Vegas and markets in Florida, won't likely see much of an increase in remodeling for a while.

If you're thinking of remodeling in the months ahead, start by prioritizing your projects.

"We really encourage consumers to do an inventory of their houses every year," taking note of the improvements that are needed, Ms. Hicks says.

From there, it's a good idea to tackle projects in order of importance. For example, "don't add a deck when you need to replace the water heater," she says.

Projects that make a home more energy efficient, such as new windows and doors, will likely end up high on the lists of homeowners, Ms. Will says.

If you are planning on selling your home in the foreseeable future, focus on projects that will make a difference to buyers and will bring a good return on investment, Ms. Hicks says.

Upgrades that improve curb appeal, including new doors and landscaping, could help sell your home, she says. It's also important that everything in the home is in good repair, so fix leaky faucets or replace a furnace that's at the end of its life before tackling cosmetic improvements, she adds.

Also, keep your home's features in line with other homes on your block. That will help at resale, when comparable sales in your neighborhood will help set the price of your home. If every home on the block has two bathrooms, adding a third bathroom in your home likely won't offer a good return on your investment, Ms. Hicks says.

 Write to  Amy Hoak at amy.hoak@dowjones.com 

—Read more at marketwatch.com.