 Upstairs for business class: If you fancy feeling part of an exclusive club next time you fly to Asia check out Korean Air, which plans to use the entire upper deck of its Airbus A380s for business-class passengers flying between Seoul and major European cities including London, Frankfurt, Madrid and Paris. A spokesman for the airline, which expects to start the service in the summer, says the plan will allow business flyers to feel as though they are "traveling in their own private jet." The new planes will have 94 of the "Prestige Class" business seats, as well as 12 first-class and 301 economy seats.

 Fast track: There's cause for celebration if you have to travel frequently between Bangkok's international airport and the often-congested city. There are now two fast train services linking the airport: a nonstop express service from Makkasan terminal in Bangkok's downtown business district, which takes 15 minutes; and the City Line, which stops at eight stations en route and takes 30 minutes. Passengers traveling with Thai International and Bangkok Airways are able to check-in their baggage at Makkasan terminal up to 13 hours before their flights are due to depart. Other airlines are expected to follow suit. 

 Lounging around in Helsinki: If you are traveling with  Finnair
FNNNF


-0.66
%




 through Helsinki-Vantaa airport, look out for the airline's refurbished Silver Wings Lounge, strategically located near gates 26 and 27, handy if you are connecting between European flights and those to and from the 10 cities in Asia the airline will be serving in the summer.

 New route to China: It will be possible to fly direct from Amsterdam to the Chinese city of Xiamen for the first time when Dutch airline KLM starts three-times-a-week services on March 27. Xiamen, which lies about 640 kilometers north of Hong Kong, is undergoing rapid economic growth and attracting a number of international corporations. 

 Top London hotel to reopen: The Four Seasons London on Park Lane, originally due to reopen late last year, is now expected to be ready for business at the end of January. The 192-room hotel, conveniently located for London's Mayfair area, a favorite with hedge funds, has undergone a major refurbishment program, which includes the addition of an all-glass top floor, housing a state-of-the-art spa. 

 New Europe-Bahrain link: There's good news if business takes you between either Milan or Geneva and Bahrain. Gulf Air is starting flights from March using Boeing 737-700 planes leased from Swiss aviation groupPrivatair. The Bahrain-Milan flights will be on Mondays, Wednesdays, Fridays and Sundays; flights to and from Geneva will be on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays.