New Year's resolutions aren't always about self-improvement. For entrepreneurs, they're also about enhancing a business or taking it to the next level. New product lines may have flopped in 2010 or sales may have slipped, but those are problems of the past. This year, entrepreneurs say, things will be different. 

It's a nice thought. But the problem is that business resolutions, like the personal kind, are often as easy to break as they are to make. Studies have shown that close to 90% of resolutions result in failure. 

Kelly Delaney found that out last year when she resolved to keep her small dessert business, Cakes for Occasions Inc., on a budget for the first time in its 15-year history. It was a valiant effort, as the Danvers, Mass., company was on track for the first six months of 2010. 

"You can change your mind about how much you want to spend, but then you have to change other things along the way," says Ms. Delaney. "I didn't think to edit anything else."

The pastry chef's resolution for 2011 is to learn from her mistakes in 2010 and balance the budget throughout the year to offset added expenses. (Please scroll through the gallery below to read other entrepreneurs' resolutions.) 

  Jimmy Hendricks, co-founder and chief executive of Deal Current Inc., wants to raise between $5 million and $10 million in venture capital in 2011—a range that he feels is feasible given the preliminary interest he's seen from some venture-capital firms. His San Diego software company launched in January 2008 and currently has contracts for 60 projects. He hopes to secure between 250 and 350 assignments by year's end. 

Some research suggests that setting "fuzzy" or flexible goals may make the resolution more practical.  Arul Mishra, one of the authors of a University of Utah study on this type of goal-setting, says people tend to give up when they can't reach an exact target. "On the other hand, what we found is if you give a range in which to operate, and you stay within that range, you can stay motivated to keep trying," Ms. Mishra says. 

Mr. Hendricks is planning to hit his goals by setting up a back-up plan. "We have strong partnerships, so if we don't raise traditional venture capital, some clients have said they will help fund our growth," he says. 

 Write to  Emily Maltby at emily.maltby@wsj.com 