The Mets were down by three when Jason Bay came to the plate with the bases loaded. For more than six innings, they had failed to hit anything better than a single and positioned themselves for yet another barrage of criticism for their situational hitting. Here was a chance for him to show that he could deliver important hits for this team and that the Mets aren't always so wasteful.

Bay took a crisp swing with his pink bat, made decent contact and drove the ball into left field. Straight into the left fielder's glove.

That was the cue for 26,312 sagging fans to start funneling through the Citi Field exits, confident that they had seen their team's best opportunity come and go. They didn't miss much, as the Mets went through the final motions of their 4-2 loss to the Los Angeles Dodgers. 

It has been a familiar feeling for Mets fans, who have watched their team strand an average of more than seven runners per game. On Sunday, the Mets finished with 10 runners left on base, bringing their total for the three-game series against the Dodgers to 27. Not to mention their 1-for-9 performance with runners in scoring position.

The lone bright spot for the Mets was the continuing resurgence of Jose Reyes. Comfortable at the plate and running as well as ever, he went 2-for-5 with a triple and remained the only everyday player on the team with a batting average over .300. 

"He seems healthy, and all it takes is a little bit for him to get hot," third baseman David Wright said after the game.

For Bay and Wright, it seems to be taking much more. Bay, who struck out twice, said he was still not feeling settled at the plate since returning from a nine-month layoff. And Wright went 0-for-3 on Sunday and 3-for-19 during the six-game home stand. Collins said he was happy to wait for him to regain his form—although he does not have much of a choice. "When he gets hot, he carries you," Collins said.

But neither Wright nor his teammates could provide any real answers for the Dodgers' starter, Clayton Kershaw. After a rocky first inning, he recovered with superb poise to finish the day with eight strikeouts, while allowing six hits—all singles—and one run, over the course of 6 2/3 innings. 

"You know he's got that curveball and, even though he wasn't really throwing it for strikes, he could throw it enough to keep you off balance," Wright said. 

Kershaw did not need much help from the Dodgers' offense, but it provided enough to keep the pressure off him. In the third inning, a pair of mistakes by the Mets even saved them some trouble. First, R.A. Dickey hit Kershaw with a knuckleball. "It was going right down the middle for about halfway and then it took a left turn," Dickey said.

Then, catcher Ronny Paulino lost track of another crazy pitch to gift Kershaw second base—it was the first time in his career that Paulino had caught a knuckleballer. A groundout and a single later, Kershaw was home and the score was tied 1-1.

Los Angeles added another in the fourth before Andre Ethier, no longer bearing the weight of his 30-game hitting streak, looped a two-run home run just inside the right field foul pole.

Ten pitches later, Dickey was out of the game and heading for a loss, having allowed 10 hits and four runs in his seven innings of work. It meant that only one Mets starter—Mike Pelfrey—had recorded a win in the team's past 12 games.

"We're a team of streaks," Wright said. "Both good and bad."