Syfy's new series "Being Human" is about two attractive men and a pretty woman who room together in a Boston apartment. Or try to. Because, technically speaking, none of them is human and one is dead. But they all—let's get this out of the way: "they" are a vampire, a werewolf and a ghost—long to be normal. What they seek, and how much it hurts not to have it, is the subject of this oddly affecting drama, and often a reproach to those of us who forget to treasure our own humanity. 

The most compelling figure is Aidan (Sam Witwer) a former Revolutionary War soldier who was bitten by a vampire and lived as a debauched predator for untold decades before deciding to go straight. His struggle now against his fate, to be good when his bloody instincts tell him to kick back and kill, is at the center of the show.

A sadder figure, because he seems more helpless, is Josh (Sam Huntington). Not so long ago, he was a medical student—until a brutal assault one night left him prone to uncontrollable werewolf transformations. When we first see Josh on "Being Human," he is lying naked next to an eviscerated deer, looking almost as pathetic as his prey and far more vulnerable. 

 Being Human  Monday, 9 p.m. ET, Syfy

 Big Love   Sunday, 9 p.m. ET, HBO

Finally, there is Sally (Meaghan Rath) who was happily engaged until she took a fatal tumble down the stairs of her apartment. When Aidan and Josh come to rent that apartment a few months later, the three can see each other. Although Sally, lonely in limbo as she is, is a bit nervous about the prospect of roommates: "You gonna go all 'Twilight' on me?" she asks the vampire-werewolf duo.

Jokes like that and the wisecracking Sally occasionally threaten to turn "Being Human" into a mild, campy thing. As we get to know the characters, however, and begin to identify with their sense of loss and isolation, humor helps make what is preposterous about their situation seem real. "What's the point of...drinking beers and joining Costco if you're just going to kill all your friends?" one laments in a moment of dejection. Exactly.

Nutty afflictions aside, this is a story about friendship and compassion. The two men, for instance, who have little in common except their afflictions, learn to keep each other safe from their own worst instincts. Then there is Bishop (Mark Pellegrino), the vampire who turned Aidan into what he is. Exaggerated as Bishop's powers may be, what makes him cruel and evil is uncomfortably human as well.

And so is the temptation to take the easy way out, which for our self- described monsters would involve leaving behind the pain and messiness of longing, guilt and suffering. Yet these are sensations that underpin our capacity for joy, too. 

So bite your lip and don't automatically scoff at lessons taught by a vampire and the like. "Being Human," which is based on a BBC Three series of the same name, draws us out of our own realm only so we can see more clearly into it. 

How do you wind up a series about a God-fearing businessman in Utah with a successful big-box store who's just been elected to the state Senate—and announced that he has three wives? As the fifth and final season of HBO's glorious "Big Love" begins, Bill Henrickson (Bill Paxton) and his family are camping in the wilderness, ostensibly to avoid the media storm that immediately followed Bill's polygamy revelation (at the end of season four). 

"We are witnessing the tragedy of a good man's fall from grace," a shocked Mormon says early on. But for Bill (and at least some viewers) he has not fallen at all, but boldly stepped into the light of honesty. In a series always rich with symbols, the desert is a reminder that the Henricksons believe they are on track to find the promised land. 

No wonder Bill is stunned when the rest of the world regards them as what he calls "alien monsters." His neighbors are angry and his employees are mutinous. His new state Senate colleagues want to get rid of him. 

More to the point, can his family hold together under the strain of being outed? Wife three, Margene (Ginnifer Goodwin) has been booted off the QVC-type network where she sells jewelry, and is now in meltdown mode. The son of second wife Nicki (Chloë Sevigny) has been physically branded at school, and first wife Barb (Jeanne Tripplehorn) has begun cooking with wine (glug, glug) and hinting darkly about reinventing herself. 

Also part of the turmoil are Bill's pregnant ex-fourth wife Ana (the radiant Branka Katic); and Nicki's estranged brother and polygamy cult leader Alby (Matt Ross)—who has killed all the dogs in his fundamentalist compound as a prelude to purifying the cult in what, we shrivel to think, will be a horrific way. 

One welcome aspect of all this is that some of the plot threads which became so distracting last season, threatening to tip "Big Love" into crazy-flatulent "L.A. Law" territory, seem to be gone. There is more than enough left, along with consistently brilliant acting all over, to keep the show as mesmerizing as it ever was.

Take the scene at Christmas where the Henrickson family forms a living nativity scene on their front lawn as the city's residents slowly drive by in their cars. There's Bill as Joseph, Barb as a wise man, and another wife's baby gurgling in the manger. In a few seconds, that tableau makes us feel more hopes and fears than most other TV shows could convey in a thousand years.