TOKYO—Workers hope to bring vital control and cooling systems online at the power plant at the center of Japan's nuclear crisis in the next few days, even as black smoke at one of its most damaged reactors caused jitters and led to an evacuation there.

The smoke seen coming out of what is known as the No. 3 reactor prompted the evacuation of workers from the building and the immediate area, in a reminder that the situation at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear complex remains dangerous. 

It was the second time in three days that a fire had broken out there, and the source of the blaze was unclear. Officials said the smoke wasn't accompanied by higher levels of radiation. It wasn't clear when workers would return.

Radiation levels also were recorded as too high for worker safety near a pump at reactor No. 2 that had to be fixed before the cooling system could be resarted.

Meanwhile, firefighters again mobilized a "hyper-rescue unit" to hose the spent-fuel pool of Reactor No. 3 on Wednesday afternoon for cooling, but had to stop because of the smoke conditions.

Progress made in recent days has raised hopes in Japan that the situation at the troubled plant can be stabilized, as contamination from earlier radiation leaks spread to food and water. Tokyo authorities on Wednesday pointed to emissions from the site as the likely cause of higher-than-permitted radiation levels found in Tokyo's tap water.

The No. 3 reactor suffered an explosion on March 14, three days after the magnitude-9 earthquake and subsequent tsunami hit the nuclear complex. The explosion destroyed most of the exterior of the reactor building. A plume of smoke has been seen rising from the reactor intermittently ever since. 

Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency spokesman Hidehiko Nishiyama said earlier in the day that electrical equipment inside the reactor building "was found to be in a relatively good condition." Based on this assessment, the regulator and the plant operator—Tokyo Electric Power Co., or Tepco—believe power will be supplied to the cooling system as early as Thursday. 

The Japanese government monitors radiation levels around the country. Track these measurements over time.

Restoration of power supply may enable operators at the plant to use of the main systems to cool the reactor core and to stabilize its nuclear fuel. As an emergency measure, the reactor currently is being cooled by seawater pumped in from outside. Once the cooling system comes online, Tepco intends to switch to fresh water, an agency spokesman said at a briefing. 

The agency also said the cooling system at the No. 1 reactor would get power on Friday for cooling its waste-storage pool, which holds spent nuclear fuel. The cooling system for reactor No. 4 also is expected to come online soon, according to agency officials. Reactor Nos. 5 and 6 are operating normally. 

The progress means that within a matter of days reactor No. 2 is likely to be the only unit with no working cooling system. Agency officials said that high radiation levels and the partial submersion of some of the reactor's equipment have made it difficult to revive its cooling system so far. 

Mr. Nishiyama, however, emphasized the commitment of the government and Tepco to bring reactor No. 2 under control. 

"This battle has always been a battle against radiation," he said, signaling a determination to fix the cooling system even at the risk of radiation exposure. 