Thanks to tenure, many believe that teachers' jobs are basically guaranteed, no matter how students do.



New Jersey Gov.  Chris Christie wants to change that: He is seeking to end tenure and on Wednesday said he would support switching to a system that gives individual teachers five-year contracts, which districts could renew based on merit. He said he believes that if the worst 5% of teachers were churned, there would be a "quantum effect" on performance.

"I don't know what the justification is for it any longer, I really don't," Mr. Christie said of tenure during a meeting with The Wall Street Journal's editorial board. "At the end of the five-year period we evaluate. If we want to keep you, great. If we don't, we won't, based on merit."

A spokeswoman later said the concept of moving to five-year contracts was "only one idea of many" that was being explored.

Teachers unions and their advocates say the governor is focusing the attention in the wrong place: that tenure is no more than a word for due process. They argue that there's already a way to fire bad teachers, and have put forward a proposal to reform the process.

The state's largest teachers union, the New Jersey Education Association, "believes the dismissal process should be made less time-consuming and costly, while ensuring that all teachers have due-process rights," spokesman Steve Wollmer said. "Gov. Christie apparently wants to make every teacher's job subject to the whims of building principals. That's not reform. That's patronage."

Mr. Christie's push to end tenure is part of his overall agenda to change education policy in New Jersey. His agenda lines up with that of a new U.S. school-reform movement that generally supports charter schools, tying teacher pay and layoffs to evaluations and giving parents private- and parochial-school options.

  Michelle Rhee, one of the most outspoken leaders of the movement, was a special guest at Mr. Christie's State of the State address on Tuesday. Her new group, StudentsFirst, supports getting rid of tenure.

To do so, Mr. Christie would need the support of the Democratic-controlled Legislature, which appears to be a possibility. A Senate education committee is working on tenure legislation, and Senate President  Stephen Sweeney, a Democrat, said he believes there is a problem but worries about returning political discretion to the process.

The question then becomes how to evaluate teachers. Mr. Christie has assigned a group to come up with a system; its report is due in March.

  Diane Ravitch, an education-history professor at New York University, said formal tenure was established early in the 20th century to attract people to the profession, but informal tenure was in place long before that.

Ms. Ravitch, a critic of some of the reform proposals, said the push to tie tenure to evaluations would mean more focus on preparing students for "bad tests." She said the states with the best tenure protections are those with the best education systems, such as New Jersey. "This so-called reform movement wants to take the focus away from the most significant cause of low performance, which is poverty," she said. "So instead of talking about poverty, we're going to talk about bad teachers."