WELLINGTON—New Zealand narrowly avoided a fresh recession in the fourth quarter, and many economists are guardedly optimistic about the economy's prospects in the second half of this year. 

Real, seasonally adjusted GDP expanded 0.2% on the quarter in the three months ended Dec. 31, after contracting 0.2% in the third quarter, Statistics New Zealand said Thursday. The statistics bureau said fourth-quarter gross domestic product expanded 0.8% year-to-year, while annual average GDP in the 12 months ended Dec. 31 expanded 1.5%. The results matched expectations. 

"Looking forward to 2011, the early part of the year will obviously again be hampered by an external shock. We estimate that the February earthquake [in Christchurch] will knock first-quarter growth by around 0.7 percentage points," said Goldman Sachs economist  Philip Borkin. However, "later in the year we expect growth to improve due to loose financial conditions, a low base of activity, eventual reconstruction activity, and businesses putting their balance sheets to work more effectively." 

The Reserve Bank of New Zealand this month cut its official cash rate 0.5 percentage point to 2.5% to offset the impact from the earthquake, but underscored there will be rate increases down the track once reconstruction gets under way. 

A 6.3-magnitude earthquake in the country's second-largest city of Christchurch in February left more than 160 people dead and caused extensive damage to infrastructure, buildings and residences. Government officials have said about a quarter of the buildings in the central city will probably have to be demolished, while thousands of homes may need to be rebuilt. 

Finance Minister Bill English was also slightly upbeat. "Statistics issued today confirm the economy was subdued in the second half of 2010, although there are reasons to be optimistic about the outlook for the coming year," he said in a statement. 

"New Zealand's commodity export prices remain around record levels, interest rates and inflation are relatively low, the rebuilding of Christchurch will provide a boost to the regional and national economy, and the Rugby World Cup will attract tens of thousands of visitors," he added.

The Rugby World Cup, which will begin in September, is expected to boost the nation's economy by 700 million New Zealand dollars (US$519.3 million). 

ASB Economist  Jane Turner said the data confirmed the economy was largely flat over the second half of last year and that the starting position for 2011, before the February earthquake, was weak. She expects GDP to contract slightly in three months to March. 

However, "the rebuilding of Christchurch, along with the Rugby World Cup, will see strong growth rates appearing in the second half of this year," she said. Moreover, "the export environment remains very supportive." 

Statistics New Zealand said the September 2010 earthquake in the Canterbury region was estimated to have caused around NZ$4 billion of damage and "the estimated damage from the February 2011 Christchurch earthquake is much larger and could be more than NZ$10 billion," it said. 

The International Monetary Fund this week lowered its 2011 growth forecast for New Zealand due to the impact of the earthquake to 1% from 3%.

 Write to  Rebecca Howard at rebecca.howard@dowjones.com 