QUITO—The Ecuadorian Provincial Court of Sucumbios has accepted appeals, by both  Chevron Corp.
CVX


-0.93
%




 and the Ecuadorian plaintiffs, to the multibillion-dollar judgment against the U.S. company, a court official said. 

The 18-year old lawsuit against Chevron claims the company was responsible for oil contamination in Ecuador's Amazon region. Chevron, which has no exploration or production operations in Ecuador, inherited thel suit in 2001 when it acquired Texaco Inc., which worked in Ecuador from 1964 until 1992. 

"Both appeals have been accepted and will be processed according with the law," the court official said. 

The appeals will be handled by three other judges, who will be appointed by the court. According to the person, the judges could take a few months before delivering a second ruling on the case. The second ruling may then be appealed by either party before the National Court of Justice. 

Plaintiffs say a second ruling could take at least six months. 

On Feb. 14 Judge  Nicolas Zambrano ordered Chevron to pay $9.46 billion in damages, including $860 million for the Amazon Defense Front, a coalition formed by the plaintiffs. 

On Feb. 17 the plaintiffs suing Chevron appealed the ruling, asking for the awarded amount to be increased on the grounds it will not cover the damages identified by the court, as well as other damages not identified in the ruling. 

Chevron, which has denied the accusations against it and said it is victim of a massive fraud and extortion scheme, also appealed the Zambrano ruling last week. 

Chevron says its appeal contains evidence that the plaintiffs' lawyers falsified data and pressured scientific experts to "find contamination" where none existed. 

Plaintiffs have denied any fraud and said that all processes against Chevron were legal under Ecuadorian law. 

In addition the company says the Sucumbios Court ignored "valid scientific evidence," which concludes that the areas remediated by Texaco Petroleum Company pose no significant risk of harm to human health or the environment. 

As well as its appeal in Ecuador, Chevron spokesman  James Craig said the company will continue other related legal proceedings outside of the Andean country. 

Recently a U.S. federal judge in Manhattan,  Lewis A. Kaplan, issued a preliminary injunction blocking the plaintiffs and their lawyers from trying to enforce the Ecuadorian court's ruling anywhere in the world outside of Ecuador. 

In his ruling Judge Kaplan said the U.S. company had presented strong evidence that the trial in Ecuador was tainted by fraud and corruption. 

Ecuadorian plaintiffs are preparing to appeal Judge Kaplan's ruling in New York. 

"We (the plaintiffs) will appeal the ruling during this month," said the lead attorney for the Ecuadorian plaintiffs,  Pablo Fajardo. He alleged that the judge didn't take into account all evidence. 

 Write to  Mercedes Alvaro at mercedes.alvaro@dowjones.com 