Madrid: A foodie's guide to Spain might start in San Sebastian, the small Basque city said to have the planet's greatest per capita number of Michelin stars, and move to Barcelona, where celebrity chef Ferran Adrià uses the city's Boqueria market as an open-air laboratory. Then it's time to head south to Valencia, home of the best paellas, and Andalusia, home of tapas, before heading north to Galicia, said to have the Iberian peninsula's best seafood. In fact, the guide could lead you just about anywhere in Spain—except Madrid.

Over the past decade Spain has emerged as the world's culinary superpower, but Spain's capital remains something of a backwater. However, Madrid goes to the top of the food-lover's must-visit list this winter, thanks to an outstanding exhibition about the history of Spanish food called "La Cocina en su Tinta," (The Kitchen in Ink) at Spain's national library, the Biblioteca Nacional de España. 

Co-curated by Mr. Adrià, the exhibition features a huge range of cooking paraphernalia, starting with late-Gothic cookbooks and archaic cooking utensils, and brings us all the way up to recipes from the wizard-chefs of the present day. 

Some of the most compelling images are mid-20th century photographs, which capture the almost medieval quality of culinary life in the period leading up to Spain's current high-tech food revolution. A 1950s snapshot shows a Madrid market stand selling turkeys, with a towering curtain of dead birds and a gaggle of live ones staring back at the crowd. Another '50s shot shows women at a fish market, elegantly, if almost primordially, wearing their shopping baskets on their heads.

The role of women in Spanish life turns out to be a subtext here. The first half of the 1930s was a time of emancipation in Spain, and the exhibition show-stopper is an Art Deco ad for Spanish fruit, starring what could be called an Andalusian flapper, sporting a Manila shawl, a sensual fruit platter and a crucifix. She seems decades ahead of the women in those '50s photographs. The final section, dealing with the success of Mr. Adrià and the all-star team of Spain's new food wave, is made up almost exclusively of men.

 Until March 13   www.bne.es 