SINGAPORE—Moody's Investors Service Inc. lowered Greece's credit rating by three notches Monday and signaled it could cut the rating even further, dragging the country's debt deeper into junk-grade territory. 

The move prompted outrage from the Greek government, while the head of the International Monetary Fund's European department said the IMF is confident its emergency bailout program for Greece will succeed despite the downgrade.

The ratings agency downgraded Greece to B1 from Ba1, and kept its outlook negative. Standard & Poor's and Fitch Ratings both rate the country slightly higher at double-B-plus, with a negative outlook. 

Moody's acknowledged progress that Greece has made in fiscal consolidation and structural reforms but warned that the changes needed to stabilize Greece's debts remain "very ambitious" and face "significant implementation risks."

It also cited a risk that Greece would be unable to satisfy the conditions required for continued support from official sources after 2013, which could lead to a restructuring of existing debt. 

"Moreover, the risk of a post-2013 restructuring might lead the Greek authorities and investors to participate in a voluntary distressed exchange before that time," the ratings agency cautioned. The country additionally faces significant difficulties with revenue collection, it said. "The negative outlook on the B1 rating reflects Moody's view that the country's very large debt burden and the significant implementation risks in its structural-reform package both skew risks to the downside."

Greece's Finance Ministry lashed out at Moody's, calling its decision to cut the country's rating "completely unjustified." 

"The rating downgrade announced by Moody's today is completely unjustified as it does not reflect an objective and balanced assessment of the conditions Greece is presently facing," the ministry said, calling for better regulation on the way international ratings agencies operate. "Furthermore, its timing and the multinotch nature of the downgrade are incomprehensible and raise a number of questions."

Greek financial markets were closed Monday because of a national holiday.

In Washington, the head of the IMF's European Department, Antonio Borges, said on the side of a conference, "we are confident that Greece will succeed, that the Greek debt is sustainable, and that our program will be successful," adding of the downgrade, "This is not the first one, and probably not the last one." 

Given that the Greek program is still in its early stages, "miracles" shouldn't be immediately expected, particularly given the political difficulties of enacting all of the program's considerable economic restructuring conditions, he said. 

"We are probably at the moment when economic consequences are more difficult to accept and people become more skeptical," he added. "But this is a long-term program; we'll have to be a little patient and wait." 

He said even with significant progress in the financial system, the IMF needs to ensure that the Greek banking system remains strong, "so that it continues providing finance to the economy." 

European Union leaders are due to meet at the end of March to decide on a future permanent bailout mechanism for the euro zone, to replace a temporary fund that was cobbled together last year after Greece's debt crisis threatened the stability of the euro zone. 

In May 2010, Greece narrowly avoided default with the help of a €110 billion ($153.85 billion) bailout from the EU and the International Monetary Fund in exchange for measures to cut its deficit and liberalize its economy. 

In criticizing Moody's decision, Greece said the ratings agency was both premature in its assessment and failed to take into account fresh data on the country's public finances. "The arguments made can in no way be justified by the additional information available since Moody's last downgrade in June 2010 and the progress achieved since," the Finance Ministry said.

"Instead, the announcement also anticipates the failure of specific policies—while a large number of reforms have already been implemented—including those relating to decisions at the European Union level that have not yet been taken and while critical discussions are ongoing before the March European Council meeting." 

The Finance Ministry attacked ratings agencies for being slow in identifying the credit risks that built up ahead of the 2008 global financial crisis and for now competing to identify the risks of "the next crisis." 

"At a time when the global economy is fragile and market sentiment is sensitive, unbalanced and unjustified rating decisions such as Moody's today can initiate damaging self-fulfilling prophecies and certainly strengthen the arguments for tighter regulation of the rating agencies themselves," it said. 

—Ian Talley in Washington contributed this article.

 Write to  Natasha Brereton at natasha.brereton@dowjones.com and Alkman Granitsas at alkman.granitsas@dowjones.com 