TRIPOLI, Libya—Libyan government forces drove rebels from a border outpost Thursday, the Tunisian state news agency reported, shutting off one of their vital supply lines, pursuing them across the mountainous frontier into Tunisia and provoking a sharp protest from that country.

Track the latest events in Libya.

Track events day by day in the region.

See the level of unrest, plus the economic and politic status of some countries across North Africa and the Middle East.

Popular demonstrations in Tunisia toppled a president and spread to countries across the region. See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

After a day of fierce combat, the rebels were trying to regain the outpost near the Libyan town of Wazen. The two sides exchanged artillery fire into the evening, causing panic among Libyan civilians trying to flee to Tunisia, according to reports from the area. 

Tunisia voiced "extreme indignation" to Col. Moammar Gadhafi's regime over what it called an incursion by Libyan forces, the Foreign Ministry said. The Tunisian news agency said some Libyan soldiers had briefly entered Tunisia in pursuit of the rebels while others had fired multiple-launch Grad rockets across the border.

Libyan state television said some rebels had been killed and others captured in Thursday's fighting. The Tunisian news agency said there had been an unspecified number of casualties, some of whom were evacuated from Libya by Tunisian ambulances.

Rebels fighting to oust Col. Gadhafi had captured the border post a week ago, a significant advance beyond their eastern Libyan strongholds that enabled them to bring in supplies by road through the Tunisian border town of Dhuheiba. Loss of the crossing would sever the rebels' only paved road to the outside world.

Thursday's fighting was part of a shifting pattern of clashes and skirmishes as the Gadhafi regime, facing a 10-week-old uprising that began in the east, tries to stamp out resistance in western Libya to solidify his control there. 

Government forces had massed in the mountainous border area after crushing rebel challenges in Zawiyah and Zawarah, western towns on the Mediterranean coast between Tripoli and Tunisia, and withdrawing from the center of Misrata last weekend. 

The government says it is also arming civilian volunteers across western Libya, determined to buffer the capital, Tripoli, from any rebel advance.

The border area is populated by Berbers, a non-Arabic ethnic group whose towns had joined the rebellion and been under siege for weeks before the recent fighting. Government forces have occupied the desert plains below the mountains since mid-March; residents say Col. Gadhafi's forces have restricted supplies of food, gasoline and medicine, an accusation the government denies. 

About 30,000 Libyans have fled the area into Tunisia, according to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. The Tunisian news agency said 5,000 had crossed the border in the past two days.

 Write to  Richard Boudreaux at richard.boudreaux@wsj.com 