OTTAWA—As the government of Prime Minister Stephen Harper prepares to unveil its annual budget next week, opposition officials are weighing whether to force federal elections—a possible rebuke to a series of alleged ethical lapses by Mr. Harper's minority government but a risky move amid recent polls that show his Conservative party within reach of a majority.

A parliamentary committee convenes Wednesday to consider a ruling by the speaker of the House of Commons, the elected lower house of parliament, which found evidence Mr. Harper's government breached parliamentary privilege. The current speaker is a member of the opposition, but his role mandates he act as an independent referee in the body. If confirmed, the rebuke would be a first for a Canadian government.

The government stands accused of two offenses: The opposition says it has inappropriately withheld information about the cost of crime legislation and corporate-tax reductions. Meanwhile, a government minister is accused of misleading parliament by obscuring her denial of a grant to a church-based human-rights group.

Mr. Harper has promised to provide more information to the committee about the tax and crime legislation.  Bev Oda, Canada's international cooperation minister, has denied misleading parliament and has said she will defend herself before the committee, which is set to take up her issue late in the week. Ms. Oda has said she "will fully cooperate to provide needed clarity."

But as committee members take up the crime and tax costs as early as Wednesday, speculation that the opposition could force a vote of no-confidence and an election over both issues has ratcheted up. Another possible election trigger could be next week's budget, which Finance Minister  Jim Flaherty will unveil next Tuesday. Mr. Harper needs support for the budget from at least one of the three big opposition parties to avoid new polls.

Mr. Harper has publicly said he isn't seeking an election now. But both sides appear to be gearing up for a fight. The government has been running ads touting its economic stewardship. The opposition Liberal party deputy leader  Ralph Goodale, meanwhile, says that the party's election platform is ready to go. On Monday, Liberal party leader  Michael Ignatieff traveled to the province of Quebec, saying he'd support federal funding for a new hockey stadium there, after Mr. Harper said no to the funding.

But forcing an election would be a risky move for Mr. Ignatieff as head of the largest of Canada's three major opposition parties. Recent polls suggest Mr. Harper's Conservatives have just enough support to put them within grasp of a majority in an election. Mr. Harper has only managed a minority government for the past five years, through two federal elections. 

In data released Tuesday evening, polling firm  Ipsos Reid found that among decided voters, 40% would vote for the Tories, compared to 27% for the Liberals. That's down three points from earlier this month, but it still indicates the Conservatives could capture a majority.

"They're knocking on the door," said  Darrell Bricker, Ipsos Reid's chief executive for its public-affairs division, which includes polling.