The Social Security Administration's inspector general is sending a team of fraud investigators to Puerto Rico, following a Wall Street Journal article Tuesday that revealed unevenness in the way disability benefits are awarded around the U.S. 

Puerto Rico, a U.S. territory, is one of the easiest places to secure payments from the Social Security Disability Insurance program. In 2010, 63% of applicants there won approval, four percentage points higher than New Jersey and Wyoming, the most generous states.

Puerto Rico's 00725 ZIP Code includes more people who receive SSDI benefits than any other. Indeed, nine of the top 10 U.S. ZIP Codes for beneficiaries are in Puerto Rico. 

Before the front-page Journal article ran, there were already "several major investigations" in progress in Puerto Rico, an assistant inspector general said. Now, the inspector general is assembling a "special projects team of investigators to send to Puerto Rico to support our agents on the ground," he said.

SSDI, created to assist people who have stopped working because of physical or mental-health problems, has become one of the largest federal entitlement plans, paying $124 billion of benefits in 2010. The number of beneficiaries jumped to 10.2 million in 2010 from 6.6 million in 2000. 

The program's spending has grown so rapidly that it is projected to run out of money in four to seven years unless Congress intervenes.

SSDI applicants must go through a lengthy process to be granted benefits, and states and U.S. territories have wide discretion to determine who qualifies. The Social Security Administration tries to enforce consistency, but several experts, doctors and lawyers said there can be different interpretations on who meets the standards.

People have poured into the system in recent years, and the percentage of successful initial applicants has skyrocketed in Puerto Rico.

The inspector general's office operates as the Social Security Administration's chief watchdog and takes a lead role in law-enforcement cases. Social Security Administration spokesman Mark Lassiter said his agency requested the probe.

"We have worked with the inspector general on a number of investigations in Puerto Rico in the past few years which have not revealed unique problems," he said in an email. "However, we have looked at recent statistical trends and asked the IG to work with us to make sure that these trends do not reflect an increase in fraud."

Beatrice Disman, a top Social Security Administration official in New York who oversees the agency's operations in Puerto Rico, said prior to the Journal article's publication that applicants were approved at a higher rate in Puerto Rico because of high unemployment on the island and because the agency had recently added more examiners to help process claims.

Officials in Puerto Rico said they planned to cooperate with any probe.

"We welcome any investigation by the Social Security Administration on this issue," said Marcos Rodriguez-Ema, chief of staff to Puerto Rico Gov. Luis Fortuno. "The state government offices that deal with disability will fully cooperate with the administration."

 Write to  Damian Paletta at damian.paletta@wsj.com 