Our Tuesday column on President Obama, Congress and Libya prompts reader Hillel Cohen to ask us about a tangentially related subject:

Just to clarify, we stopped well short of arguing that Obama has exceeded his constitutional authority in the Libya action. As for the Defense of Marriage Act, here is Stein's argument, which he put forward a month ago on The American Spectator's website:

We think Stein's concerns are unwarranted, and a thought experiment will explain why:

It's October 2012. The U.S. Supreme Court opens its term by granting certiorari in the case of Department of Health and Human Services v. Florida, on appeal from the 11th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals. The circuit had sustained Judge Roger Vinson's holding that ObamaCare is unconstitutional but stayed the ruling pending action by the high court. The justices schedule oral arguments for late January.

On Nov. 6, President Obama loses his re-election bid to former governor Tim Pawlenty of Minnesota. Republicans maintain their majority in the House and pick up six Senate seats, giving them a 53-47 majority. President-elect Pawlenty had argued during the campaign that ObamaCare was unconstitutional and promised to sign repeal legislation. 

Every Republican in Congress is prepared to vote for such a bill, but it soon emerges that there is a solid bloc of 42 Senate Democrats determined to filibuster against repeal. It looks like stalemate on Capitol Hill at least until 2014, by which time ObamaCare will have taken full effect and thousands will have died.

Unless, of course, the Supreme Court holds that ObamaCare is unconstitutional. President Pawlenty believes that it is. Does the Constitution oblige him to order his solicitor general to defend an unconstitutional law? It seems absurd to answer in the affirmative.

One could differentiate the two cases on the ground that the Defense of Marriage Act is constitutional while ObamaCare is not. But that begs the question. Until the Supreme Court has ruled, the constitutionality of both laws is a matter of dispute. Either the president is obliged to defend the constitutionality of all federal laws under challenge, or he has discretion to beg off on a defense. Assuming he has that discretion, it may be less than absolute, but it will not do to assert a subjective "standard" that amounts to "The constitution obliges the president to defend all laws, unless I think they're unconstitutional."

Another objection to the president's action vis-à-vis the DOMA is that it is underhanded. Obama campaigned as an opponent of same-sex marriage but is governing as a supporter, and is doing so in a passive-aggressive way. Rather than argue forthrightly for changing the definition of marriage, he lets the courts take the lead. By contrast, our hypothetical President Pawlenty, in declining to defend ObamaCare, would be keeping his word to the voters.

It's a perfectly reasonable criticism--but it is a political, not constitutional, one. If breaking campaign promises or failing to display political courage were unconstitutional, what president would not have been impeached?

The danger of presidential discretion over constitutional cases is that laws will be struck down by default, for want of a courtroom defense. The solution is for judges to allow other interested parties to intervene on behalf of a disputed law when the executive branch declines to do so. The Hill reported March 9 that House leaders voted (along party lines) to give the House general counsel the authority to hire an outside lawyer to defend the DOMA. If our ObamaCare scenario comes true, maybe the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee could pick up the bill for the defense.

  The Telltale Fin   The Capital Times of Madison, Wis., has one of the funniest "editor's notes" ever:

The April 5 election is officially nonpartisan, but liberals, Democrats and union thugs "see it as their first chance to give voters a statewide referendum on the Walker administration," as Elbow reports. The incumbent, Justice David Prosser, was appointed by Wisconsin's last Republican governor, Tommy Thompson, in 1998.

Editor's note or not, Elbow's story, to our eye, does have the "appearance of bias." Here are some sample passages:

It's about what you'd expect from a newspaper that proclaims itself--as the Capital Times does atop every page of its website--"Your Progressive Voice." Which makes the paper's fastidiousness about Elbow's fin all the more hilarious.

The editor's note says Elbow asked for his money back "to avoid the appearance of bias." That is preposterous. To the extent that the donation created the appearance of bias, it was the act of donating, rather than the money itself, that did so. Elbow can't change the past. He gave the money. He can take it back, but he can't "ungive" it.

To be sure, the trivial sum involved mitigates Elbow's journalistic misdemeanor, as does the timing (before Walker's inauguration Jan. 3). If the reporter had given $500 last week, it would have been a much more serious offense. It's even possible--though damn unlikely, to be sure--that Elbow was merely trying to get rid of a pestiferous solicitor and had no particular sympathy for the cause.

Further, the note itself, far from avoiding the appearance of bias, calls attention to it. We had never heard of Elbow until we got an email from a reader--a Democrat who disagrees with Gov. Walker's efforts to end so-called collective bargaining, by the way--asking: "Are you as amused as I am by the editor's note at the beginning?" Now the whole world knows that he financially supported the Kloppenburg campaign. Oh well, at least nobody can accuse the Capital Times of a coverup.

  Effete on the Ground   If you're a liberal policy wonk who wants to be on television, MediaMutters.org thinks it can help. A MediaMutters project called the Progressive Talent Initiative "has trained nearly 100 pundits who have appeared 800 times on television and radio" since its founding in August 2009, reports the Washington Post.

"Media Matters [sic] uses that metric to pitch donors for more contributions," the Post adds--though when you think about it, it's a dismal result. A hundred pundits doing 800 appearances amounts to eight appearances per pundit in 20 months--or one every 2½ months.

What's hilarious about the Post piece, though, is all the martial rhetoric it uses:

At least we're done with all the prissy "civility" talk that was faddish for a few weeks in January. But here are some other selected excerpts form the story:

With the possible exception of the actual combat veteran, these guys sound like incredible wimps. And we never get the vet's name; apparently he is one of the participants who are afraid to be identified. You get the feeling that the swagger is completely contrived and the true spirit of the venture is captured in Lee Brenner's prattle cry: "Hydrate. Pee. Call my mom."

 Out on a Limb 

  And Kerry Has the Hat to This Day   "Obama Is Keeping His Peace Prize"--headline, Politico.com, March 24

  Have They Checked the Golf Course?   "Cal State East Bay Loses President"--headline, Oakland Tribune, March 23

  'You Have to Hire Me So You Can Find Out What's in Me'   "Refereeing a Career Opportunity: Pelosi"--headline, Manawatu (New Zealand) Standard, March 23

  'Crito, We Owe a Rooster to Asclepius'   "Portugal Moves Closer to Bailout as Socrates Quits on Summit Eve"--headline, Bloomberg, March 24

 Someone Hired a 'Hit' Man 

  The Lonely Lives of Scientists   "Scientists Grow Sperm in Laboratory"--headline, Slate.com, March 24

  First, Into the Void   "Claremont Students Flush With Knowledge of Space"--headline, San Francisco Chronicle, March 23

  If You Try to Sit, Sit, I'll Tax Your Seat   "Suttle Unrolls Toilet Paper Tax"--headline, Omaha World-Herald, March 23

  'No Honey, My Shirt Doesn't Smell of Perfume. It's Mulch.'   "Mulch, the Great Cover Story"--headline, Daily Telegraph (London), March 23

 Questions Nobody Is Asking 

 Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  Answers to Questions Nobod--Oh, Look! A Squirrel!   "Beth Ditto Loves Squirrel Dumplings"--headline, Eater.com, March 23

  Cheats Find Studiers Overinflate Academic Ability--Now That Would Be News   "Studies Find Cheaters Overinflate Academic Ability"--headline, EducationWeek.com, March 24

  Everything Seemingly Is Spinning Out of Control   "OMG! Oxford English Dictionary Grows a Heart: Graphic Symbol for Love (and That Exclamation) Are Added as WORDS"--headline, Daily Mail (London), March 24

  News of the Tautological   " 'Men May Be Jerks . . . but Women Are Insane' "--headline, RealClearPolitics.com, March 23

  Breaking News From 2013   "President Barack Obama Gets Locked Out of White House"--headline, WEWS-TV website (Cleveland), March 24

 News You Can Use 

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  The Best Defense Is a Good Offense   Are you having trouble finding work? Maybe you shouldn't have knocked over that liquor store. This advice is courtesy of Mary Ann Milbourn, Handling Hard Times columnist for the Orange County (Calif.) Register:

Can it really be true that 1 in 4 Americans has a criminal record? If so, our friends are more boring than we realized.

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Jerry Skurnik, Hillel Markowitz, Dan Goldstein, Cliff Jenks, Dave Nemzek, Tom Mayer, T. Young, Dan Tracy, John Sanders, Joseph Heschmeyer, Peter Ahlin, Rod Pennington, Bob Sauerteig, Todd Crampton, Mike Glasgow, Bob McGrath, Michele Schiesser, Ethel Fenig, Zack Russ, Bruce Goldman, David Hallstrom, Leonard Peirce, Taylor Dinerman, E. Peterson, Jack Archer, Ed Grinberg, John Moran, Chet Hosch, Ed Lasky, William Golden and Deryl Petrick. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)