LONDON—Two of the Bank of England's nine policy makers voted in favor of a rise in the bank's key interest rate in January, while for the remainder the decision not to raise rates was "finely balanced," according to minutes of the bank's Monetary Policy Committee's January meeting published Wednesday. 

  Martin Weale and fellow Monetary Policy Committee member  Andrew Sentance, who has called for a gradual rise in rates since June 2010, both voted for an increase in the key bank rate to 0.75% from a record low of 0.5%. 

For those two members, "the continued elevated rate of inflation, which was forecast to persist, posed a significant risk to inflation expectations and hence to the medium term outlook for inflation," the minutes said. 

The other seven members of the committee voted to leave the interest rate unchanged. However, the minutes suggested that many of those are becoming more concerned about the possibility that the inflation rate will remain above the bank's 2% target over the medium-term. 

"For most members, recent developments implied that the risks to inflation in the medium term had probably shifted upwards," the minutes said. "For some of those members, the decision this month was finely balanced." Sterling rose after the release of the minutes. The pound rose to $1.5871 from around $1.5830 but now trades at $1.5828. 

The minutes said policy makers feared a rise in rates now might be construed by markets as a signal that a swift monetary tightening was planned. "Some members also noted that an increase in Bank Rate at this meeting might be misinterpreted as a signal that the committee would attempt to bring inflation back to the target excessively rapidly, which would case expectations of a relatively sharp tightening of monetary policy that could have a detrimental impact on confidence and activity," the minutes said. 

Some members were concerned about the impact that the euro zone's fiscal problems might have on the U.K. economy. "Euro-area sovereign-debt problems remained capable of delivering a significant jolt to U.K. export demand, as well as to the international banking system and confidence more generally," the minutes said. 

  Adam Posen once again voted for an increase in the size of the bank's bond-buying program by £50 billion ($79.1 billion), to £250 billion. The MPC has kept its key interest rate unchanged at a 0.5% since March 2009 and its stock of bond purchases unchanged at £200 billion since Feb. 2010. 

 Write to  Jason Douglas at jason.douglas@dowjones.com and Paul Hannon at paul.hannon@dowjones.com 