The successful restructuring of Detroit's auto makers, a group whose survival was in question just two years ago, and the March 11 earthquake in Japan are combining to reverse the fortunes of the U.S. and Japanese auto industries. 

On Monday, Chrysler Group LLC swung to a profit on sharply higher vehicle sales for its first quarter, its first profitable period since mid-2006, when it was part of Germany's then-named DaimlerChrysler AG. 

Meanwhile, Japan's big three— Toyota Motor Corp.,  Honda Motor Co.
HMC


0.72
%




 and  Nissan Motor Co.
NSANY


-0.90
%




—that once seemed poised to dominate the global industry and have benefited most from Detroit's decades-long decline, are slipping into a crisis of their own as a result of that country's natural disaster. 

 Track the performances of 150 companies as they report and compare their results with analyst estimates. Sort by date and industry.

Severe production losses from the quake are expected to lead all three companies to significant losses in the current quarter, and risk taking their focus off China, where they lag GM and others. Analyst estimates compiled by Thomson Reuters project Toyota will lose about $2 billion in the quarter ending June 30. Nissan is expected to lose about $1 billion.

Toyota and Honda expect to run most of their plants in Japan and North America at reduced levels for much of this year, which will deliver a serious blow to their revenue and market shares. On Monday, Honda warned its U.S. dealers that the number of vehicles available in June will be "severely limited" and that production of the redesigned Civic compact, a key model, will be "significantly" reduced through the summer.

"Five to 10 years ago, people thought there was a new order" in the world-wide auto industry, with the Japanese companies on top, said  Jim Press, a former senior executive at Toyota and Chrysler. Now, "the pendulum is swinging back."

That  Ford Motor Co.
F


-0.54
%




,  General Motors Co.
GM


-1.20
%




 and Chrysler are making money while gasoline costs Americans nearly $4 a gallon underscores how dramatically the landscape has shifted. In 2008, they ran up billions of dollars in losses when gas prices spiked, while sales soared for the Japanese car companies.

Since then, Ford has slimmed down on its own, and GM and Chrysler were ushered in and out of bankruptcy. All three emerged stronger just as the U.S. economy began its recovery. Ford and GM also beefed up their offerings of small cars and now are less vulnerable to higher gas prices. Ford, for instance, credited sales of its year-old Fiesta subcompact with helping to drive earnings in the first quarter.

The Detroit three are not the only auto makers gaining at the expense of Japan's top three. Korea's  Hyundai Motor Co. and  Volkswagen AG also are positioned to take U.S. market share and gain an edge in China and other emerging markets while the Japan's auto makers scramble to get back on their feet. Both Hyundai and VW reported robust earnings last week.

U.S. car makers still face many challenges. Over time high gas prices could cut into sales of pickup trucks, which the U.S. makers still rely on for a large chunk of their profits. And their Japanese rivals, who have large cash reserves and plenty of new models in their pipelines, remain formidable competitors.

But right now, the Detroit auto makers are looking stronger than they have in decades. In the first quarter, Chrysler generated a profit of $116 million, compared with a loss of $197 million in the first quarter of 2010. Revenue rose 35% to $13.1 billion, as global sales of its new cars and trucks increased 18% to 394,000 vehicles. 

Chrysler sales could see a continued boost as its partner, Italy's  Fiat SpA, helps it gain distribution in South American markets, where Fiat has an extensive dealer network. Last week, Ford said it made $2.6 billion in the first quarter. GM reports its earnings on Thursday but earned $4.7 billion for all of 2010, its best performance since 1999.

In previous quarters, Chrysler reported operating profits but continued to lose money on the bottom line, in large part because of heavy interest payments on the $7.5 billion it borrowed from the U.S. and Canadian governments. First-quarter interest payments totaled $348 million, Chrysler said.

But in a reflection of Wall Street's increasing confidence in Detroit, Chrysler was able to arrange bank loans and a debt offering as part of a plan to pay off the government loans by the end of June. Part of the money it will use is coming through Fiat's exercise of an option to acquire an additional 16% of Chrysler, bringing its stake to 46%.

"We are not far from seeing this thing crystallize," said  Sergio Marchionne, who serves as chief executive of Chrysler and Fiat, during a conference call Monday.

Mr. Marchionne warned that Chrysler will likely produce 50,000 to 100,000 fewer vehicles this year than it had planned due to interruptions in component supplies due to the Japan quake. 

Still, he said there will be "some opportunity" for Chrysler to boost sales at the expense of the Japanese auto makers because of their vehicles shortages. "It's fair to say there will be some opportunity," he said.

Industry analysts expect Ford, GM and Chrysler to gain share in the U.S. market in the months ahead while the Japanese auto makers are hobbled by limited supplies of vehicles. The first glimpse of any share movements could come on Tuesday, when the auto makers report April vehicle sales.

The situation has also opened a window for Detroit to protect its margins by increasing vehicle prices. GM said last month it is lifting prices by about $123 on average to cover higher materials costs. Chrysler said higher prices and increased sales of larger vehicles boosted first-quarter operating profit by $283 million. 

  Jeremy Anwyl, chief executive of Edmunds.com, a market researcher and auto-shopping website, said Ford, GM and Chrysler got into financial trouble in the past decade because they had too much production capacity and were forced to slash prices to sell their vehicles. 

But after restructuring, and with their Japanese rivals unable to produce enough cars, "they've never had a better chance to get off that path," he said.

—Mike Ramsey contributed to this article.

 Write to  Jeff Bennett at jeff.bennett@dowjones.com and Neal E. Boudette at neal.boudette@wsj.com 