Six people, including two imams at mosques in Florida, have been indicted on charges that include providing support to Pakistani Taliban terror plots, federal prosecutors said Saturday.

Miami U.S. Attorney Wilfredo Ferrer announced the charges following the arrests of Hafiz Muhammed Sher Ali Khan, 76-year-old imam of the Miami Mosque; his son Izhar Khan, 24 years old, an imam at Jamaat al-Mu'mineen Mosque in Margate, Fla., a nearby suburb; and another son, Irfan Khan, 37 years old.

All three are U.S. citizens of Pakistani origin and residents of south Florida. Federal Bureau of Investigation agents arrested Hafiz Khan after early morning services outside his Miami mosque and Izhar Khan was arrested in the parking lot of his mosque around the same time early Saturday, said John Gillies, special agent in charge of the FBI's Miami office. Irfan Khan was arrested at a hotel in Los Angeles, he said.

Also charged are Amina Khan, her son Alam Zeb, and Ali Rehman, all residents of Pakistan. They haven't been arrested. Ms. Khan is a daughter of Hafiz Khan, and Mr. Zeb a grandson.

The six are charged with conspiracy and providing material support to murder, maim and kidnap persons overseas and conspiring to provide material support to the Pakistani Taliban, designated by the U.S. as a terror group. The indictment was approved by a grand jury on Thursday, but not made public until after the Saturday arrests. It doesn't allege the defendants were involved in any plots in the U.S.

Prosecutors allege that Hafiz Khan and others helped send money through bank accounts and wire transfers to help the Pakistani Taliban sustain its fighters and buy weapons. The indictment lists transactions totaling $50,000 sent to the Pakistani group, but a U.S. official said investigators know of other money transfers.

Mr. Ferrer said: "Despite being an imam, or spiritual leader, Hafiz Khan was by no means a man of peace. Instead, as today's charges show, he acted with others to support terrorists to further acts of murder, kidnapping and maiming."

In a conference call Saturday, Mr. Gillies said the arrests came as a result of a three-year-old investigation begun when the regional FBI-led terrorism task force began looking into suspicious financial transactions. Investigators used wiretaps to monitor conversations that prosecutors allege indicated a broad effort to gather money in the U.S. and finance the Pakistani Taliban.

The financing continued even after the group last year was designated by the U.S. as a terror group and banned from receiving funds from the U.S., Mr. Ferrer said in the conference call.

The Pakistani Taliban, also known as Tehrik-e Taliban Pakistan, is responsible for several major terror attacks in Pakistan, Afghanistan and the 2010 Times Square bombing attempt. This week the group claimed responsibility for an attack that killed 80 people in Pakistan in revenge for the recent U.S. operation that killed Osama bin Laden.

Officials said the arrests aren't related to intelligence the U.S. gained from the bin Laden operation.

The charges against local Muslim religious leaders come as Justice Department officials try gain the trust of Muslim communities around the country, while guarding against possible reprisal attacks following the killing of bin Laden.

Mr. Gillies said: "The Muslim and Arab-American members of our community should never be judged by the illegal activities of a few."

Messrs. Gillies and Ferrer said they have met the two imams arrested as part of ongoing Justice Department nationwide outreach efforts in local Muslim communities. After the arrests, the officials reached out to other Muslim leaders to explain the charges and to coordinate increased local police protection for mosques in the region and ward against any potential backlash, Mr. Ferrer said.

The indictment alleges that Mr. Khan ran an Islamic school, known as a madrassa, in the Swat region of Pakistan. The school, known by several names including Madrassa Arabiya Ahya-al-Aloom, trained children to join the Pakistani Taliban and to kill Americans in Afghanistan, the indictment alleges.

The indictment includes a list of financial transactions, including $10,000 withdrawals from Mr. Khan's bank account in Pakistan by the terror group sympathizers, who allegedly then provided the money to Pakistani Taliban commanders. The indictment quotes conversations allegedly between Mr. Khan and others describing their methods for moving money without arousing suspicion, and strategies for attacking officials from the Pakistani government and military.

Prosecutors cited wiretapped conversations in which Mr. Khan allegedly called for attacks in Pakistan, including one on the country's national assembly that would resemble a 2008 suicide bombing on a Marriott Hotel in Islamabad.

"This is based on the defendants' words and actions," Mr. Ferrer said.

Those arrested are scheduled to appear before a judge Monday. Attorneys representing them couldn't immediately be located.

 Write to  Evan Perez at evan.perez@wsj.com 