NEW DELHI -- The cabinet committee on economic affairs approved foreign-direct investment in limited liability partnerships, but with some riders. 

Limited liability is a business structure that is between a partnership firm and a corporate body, combining the limited liability benefits of a company with the flexibility of a partnership. 

The concept was notified by the government in 2009 through an Act of Parliament. The Act allows both partnership firms and companies to convert to limited liability partnership. As of May 2, there are 4,679 such entities, according to government data. 

The government said foreign direct investment in these entities will be implemented in a calibrated manner, beginning with the sectors that were open and didn't require monitoring, subject to certain conditions, in a press statement.

Accordingly, these investments in limited partnerships can be in sectors where 100% foreign-direct investments are allowed. However, the statement said investments will not be allowed in agriculture, plantation, media and real estate. 

"This will allow several limited liability partnerships in manufacturing, IT, hospitality, consultancy, tourism etc to raise foreign direct investment," said Akash Gupt, executive director at audit firm PricewaterhouseCoopers. 

He added that the cabinet announcement has provided another window: "It not only allows foreign investors to set up new [limted liability partnerships], but also allows the restructuring of the existing investments in joint ventures and wholly owned subsidiaries to convert to [limited liability partnerships]," he said.

This announcement will facilitate limited liabilities to raise foreign funds, said  Pavan Kumar Vijay, managing director, Corporate Professionals group, which helps professionals and companies form and convert to limited liabilities.

However, professionals such as chartered accountants, company secretaries and lawyers will have to wait a while to reap the benefits. Laws such as the chartered accountants Act or company secretaries Act have to be amended before firms can convert to limited liability partnerships. These are pending before Parliament for passage. 