SEOUL–South Korean lawmakers ratified a free-trade agreement with the European Union, the first major step in bringing to force a several-year-old strategy to pull the country's economy out of its outdated ways of protecting local industries.

South Korea is also on the verge of sealing a similar agreement with the U.S., a step that's likely to occur in coming months if the pact wins approval in the U.S. Congress.

Since 2005, South Korea's government has been pursuing more liberalized trade agreements with its major partners in hopes of winning more business for its exporters in other markets and lowering the costs of products and services at home.

The National Assembly passed the measure late Wednesday on a 163-0 party-line vote that wasn't attended by members of opposition parties who wanted to delay it to closer to a July 1 deadline.

Though the free-trade strategy was started by previous President  Roh Moo-hyun, a Democrat, it has been driven since 2008 by his successor President Lee Myung-bak and his conservative Grand National Party. The Democratic Party abstained from Wednesday's vote.

In addition to the EU and U.S., South Korea is also negotiating trade pacts with Peru, Australia, New Zealand and Canada. In a vestige of its days as a poor, rapidly developing country, South Korea still has high tariffs on many imported products, particularly cars and food and service industries, that helped nurture local businesses but are now widely seen as creating unnecessary costs.

South Korea's trade relationship with the EU amounted to $92 billion last year. Analysts estimate the trade pact will boost the value of the relationship by 10% within two to three years of enactment.

In the U.S., Obama administration officials have seen South Korea's steps to close the EU deal as a reason to press Congress to move forward on ratification of the U.S.-Korea free-trade pact.

Three U.S. congressional delegations visited South Korea last month to study the potential effects that opening up trade would bring to the U.S.

The U.S. trade relationship with Korea amounted to about $70 billion last year, with Korea holding a surplus of about $10 billion. Analysts estimate two-way trade will grow between the two countries at a similar rate as between South Korea and the EU and that South Korea's surplus with the U.S. will narrow.

In recent months, officials in China have pressed South Korea to consider negotiating a free-trade pact with it. China is South Korea's largest trading partner.

 Write to  Evan Ramstad at evan.ramstad@wsj.com 