UNIONDALE, N.Y.—From a dais inside Nassau County Veterans Memorial Coliseum, a decaying building long past its prime as a venue for NHL hockey, Islanders owner Charles Wang and local officials made the residents of Long Island an offer Wednesday. If you back a revenue-sharing plan that would fund the construction of a new arena, you can keep your team.

In making the announcement with Wang and Hempstead Town Supervisor Kate Murray, Nassau County Executive Edward Mangano said the proposal asks taxpayers to let the county finance the project for up to $400 million. Of that sum, $350 million would go toward the Islanders' new arena; part of the remainder would fund a new minor-league baseball stadium in the region. The Islanders would pay the county a share of each dollar generated at the arena. Construction would begin next year.

"Our intention here is to not have it cost the taxpayer a single dime," said Mangano, who also announced that he and New York State Senators Dean Skelos and Jack Martins will pursue construction of an Indian casino at Belmont Park. "The revenue from these facilities will be dedicated back to the community."

The news conference was less about disseminating information than trying to generate excitement for the plan ahead of a county-wide public referendum on Aug. 1. There's no assurance the new arena will be built, of course, let alone by the proposed target date of 2015. 

In a statement released on Wednesday afternoon, the Nassau County Interim Finance Authority said it is "deeply concerned about the…proposal and its fiscal implications for the county. There was no consultation with NIFA regarding this."

Mangano said the revenue models for the arena and ballpark "will be advanced as the contracts are negotiated and move forward." Wang said there have been no preliminary talks with local businesses about executive or club seating. In fact, a person familiar with the plan said there are no schematics for the new arena yet.

Wang and Islanders general manager Garth Snow said that the condition of the Coliseum and its surroundings—77 acres of weed patches; cracked, pot-holed concrete; and one hotel, the Long Island Marriott—have hampered the franchise's efforts to draw free agents and construct a competitive team. The team finished next-to-last in the NHL's Eastern Division.

 Write to  Mike Sielski at mike.sielski@wsj.com 