ROME—European luxury-goods companies are bracing for higher hide prices as a rebound in high-end consumption and a swelling middle class in China drive up demand for leather as well as more-exotic skins.

U.S. federal data show cattle-hide prices are at their highest level in nearly a decade, jumping 24% in the last year to $82 apiece. Further increases are likely this year as U.S. supplies begin to shrink and consumer demand for leather continues to recover, said  John Reddington, president of the U.S. Hide, Skin and Leather Association, an industry trade group. The U.S. ranks third in global annual hide production, behind China and Brazil.

Unusually harsh weather, including flooding in Australia, has also put pressure on supplies of raw materials.

 French luxury-goods company  Hermès International SCA, maker of Kelly and Birkin bags, said it's worried about the price of exotic skins.

"What worries us the most are increases in primary materials to come, notably for exotic skins, with high increases expected for crocodile, around 25%," Hermès Chief Executive  Patrick Thomas said Friday, noting that the price of leather rose last year, but not too sharply.

Mr. Thomas said Hermès, which generates half of its annual sales from leather goods, will spread price increases over time. "We're in a period when we're trying not to raise prices," he said. "Any price increases this year would be modest."

Tanners here said they are struggling to keep prices down and are looking further afield geographically for new sources.

"It's a problem," said  Graziano Balducci, president of Italy's tannery association UNIC and co-founder of Tuscany-based Antiba, a tannery that serves the luxury sector. "Our clients don't want to pay the increase of the prices. It's logical that the industry will have to raise prices."

Italian tanners make up about 20% of the world's total production and 65% of European production.

Helping to fuel the jump in prices has been a growing middle class in China, Vietnam and other Asian countries where consumers are buying leather goods as incomes rise. In addition, as economies around the world recover from deep recessions, consumers are again shelling out for luxury leather goods. 

And leather isn't the only material seeing a sharp rise in price. Cotton futures on the Intercontinental Exchange are up 139% over the last six months. On Monday, they hit a new high of $2.1970 a pound.

Lineapelle, the organizers of Italy's premier international exhibition of leather and accessories, said the number of slaughtered sheep and goats has fallen 20% to 25% over the last four years. Prices of hides from these animals rose around 60% and 35%, respectively, in the final quarter last year. Goats are used for goat and kid skins, but they are primarily killed for food and their hides used as secondary products. 

To be sure, for a luxury-goods product like a $2,000 handbag, raw materials are a relatively small part of the costs, which also involve craftsmanship and advertising—and the markup that comes with being a status symbol. 

That said, luxury goods are disproportionately made of leather.  Luca Solca, a senior research analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein specializing in European retail and luxury goods, estimates that 22% to 23% of the luxury-goods market is represented by leather goods and shoes.

"I believe brands will make the most of strong demand and increase prices—as they have done already," Mr. Solca said.

Hides come from a range of animals, from tiny critters such as some snakes to rougher skins like buffalo. Italy imports unfinished hides from places including New Zealand, Brazil and South Africa.

Dino De Maio, export manager of Conceria Derma Srl, a tannery based in the town of Solofra, near Naples, said that tanneries are struggling to supply China's growing wealthy class. "This would normally be a good thing for Italy, but there hasn't been enough leather to go around," Mr. De Maio said.

With no end in sight for the surge in raw-material prices, Mr. De Maio said he will search for untapped territories.

  Michele Norsa, chief executive of Italian fashion house Salvatore Ferragamo SpA, said the family-owned company isn't that worried about the uptick, adding that some bags in its latest collection are made with fabrics as well as leather.

Italian luxury leather house Tod's SpA said the phenomenon hasn't gone unnoticed. "There is a rise in the costs of primary materials such as leather, wool, leather and silk among the global commodities boom and financial crisis," said Tod's brand manager,  Claudio Castiglioni. 

 Tod's wouldn't say if it is going to be increasing prices in response to the global supply squeeze.

—Mimosa Spencer in Paris, Sabrina Cohen in Milan, Lester Aldrich in Overland Park, Kansas, and Leslie Josephs in New York contributed to this article.

 Write to  Sofia Celeste at sofia.celeste@dowjones.com 