JERUSALEM—Outgoing Israeli spy chief Meir Dagan said Iran isn't able to develop a nuclear warhead before 2015 at the earliest, the latest indication that Israel's security establishment believes international efforts to stop Iran's nuclear program are succeeding.

Meir Dagan ended his eight-year reign as chief of Israel's Mossad spy agency on Thursday by giving a rare briefing to a group of Israeli journalists, in which he shared his agency's latest assessment of Iran's nuclear capabilities.

The revised appraisal was splashed across the front pages of Israeli newspapers on Friday. 

Iran says its nuclear program is for peaceful purposes, while the U.S., Israel and others say it is aimed at weapons development.

"If the world stands by and does nothing, the soonest Iran will have a nuclear device is 2015, if that," Mr. Dagan said, according to a person who was at the briefing. 

Mr. Dagan attributed Iran's nuclear troubles to the "measures that have been deployed against them," including unspecified covert efforts by his agency and international sanctions, this person said.

Some analysts downplayed Mr. Dagan's upbeat assessment as an attempt by the outgoing spy chief to cement his legacy by playing up the effectiveness of his agency's efforts under his leadership.

But Mr. Dagan doesn't appear to be alone. Other senior Israeli officials have also scaled back their estimations of Iran's nuclear program in recent days. Last week, Israel's Deputy Prime Minister Moshe Yaalon said Iran was now three years away from developing a nuclear warhead due to recent technological difficulties. The relaxed estimate came as a surprise since Mr. Yaalon is a member of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's Likud Party and considered a hawk on security matters.

The technologically difficulties Mr. Yaalon referred to may be a powerful computer worm, known as Stuxnet, which was discovered last year and appeared aimed at slowing Iran's nuclear efforts. Israel is widely suspected of developing and deploying the virus, though hasn't given any official confirmation.

A senior official in Mr. Netanyahu's office wouldn't say whether Mr. Netanyahu agreed with the recent appraisals of Messrs. Dagan and Yaalon. The official, however, appeared to agree that new intelligence has prompted a reevaluation of Israel's assessment on Iran.

A senior aide to a top ranking minister from Mr. Netanyahu's Likud party said they believed sanctions had affected Iran's ability to develop the centrifuges necessary for enrichment, and that covert actions had further thwarted Iran's enrichment efforts. 

Such statements contrast sharply with assessments given by other officials as recently as a few months ago.

In June, a top ranking military intelligence official said in an interview with The Wall Street Journal that the general consensus was that Iran could have a nuclear device within 12 months if it chose to. In 2009, Defense Minister Ehud Barak predicted Iran would have a nuclear weapon this year.

For Mr. Netanyahu, who pledged during his campaign for prime minister that stopping Iran's nuclear program would be his No. 1 priority, the perception that covert Israeli actions under his watch have successfully stymied Tehran's nuclear hopes could bolster his political standing. 

It could also remove pressure from Israeli hawks to launch a risky military strike that many within Israel and the international community oppose.

Israel has a history of pushing back its estimates of when it expects Iran to develop a nuclear weapon, beginning with a 2003 appraisal by Israel's military intelligence that Iran would have a bomb in 2007, Mr. Dagan said in his briefing on Thursday, according to those present.

Israeli officials said the estimates have been revised not because Israel's initial assessments have been consistently wrong, but because Israel and other countries have consistently succeeded over the years in delaying Iran's nuclear program.

Mr. Dagan, 65 years old, concluded his service on Thursday amid broad praise by officials and Israeli media for restoring the Mossad's image as a spy agency willing to take the fight to the enemy with bold and successful missions.

Mr. Dagan was chosen to head the agency in 2002, by then-Prime Minister Ariel Sharon. Among the successes attributed to the Mossad under Mr. Dagan's stewardship, though never officially confirmed, were the assassination of Hezbollah's militant mastermind Imad Mugniyeh in Damascus in 2008, and the identification and subsequent bombing of an alleged Syrian nuclear reactor in 2007.

His successor is a 30-year Mossad veteran named Tamir Pardo. Mr. Pardo, 57, was Mr. Dagan's deputy until he stepped down in 2009. He came out of retirement to assume command of the agency.

 Write to  Charles Levinson at charles.levinson@wsj.com 