WASHINGTON—Republican leaders in Congress said Sunday the U.S. should consider providing arms, intelligence and training to opposition forces fighting to overthrow Libya's Col. Moammar Gadhafi, a move that would mark a sharp escalation in Washington's involvement in the conflict.

Administration officials say President Barack Obama is considering a wide range of options to aid opposition forces but wants any action to be closely coordinated with international allies.

 Sen. John McCain of Arizona, the top Republican on the Armed Services Committee, has been outspoken in his support for more forceful action against Col. Gadhafi. Speaking on ABC's "This Week," Mr. McCain said the U.S. can help now by pumping in humanitarian assistance and by providing the rebels with technical assistance, intelligence and training.

To further isolate Col. Gadhafi, Mr. McCain said, the U.S. also could declare its support of a provisional government.

Senate Republican Leader Mitch McConnell of Kentucky said "arming the insurgents" could be an option, citing as a possible model U.S. efforts against the Soviets during the Cold War. But Mr. McConnell, speaking on CBS's "Face the Nation," said it was important for Washington to determine "who we're dealing with" first before providing any Libyan fighters with weapons.

U.S. officials say they are still trying to understand the myriad groups that appear to comprise the opposition. 

White House Chief of Staff Bill Daley, speaking on NBC's "Meet the Press," played down the chance the U.S. would act alone. "As the president said, all options are all on the table. But this has to be an international effort," Mr. Daley said.

Senior Obama administration officials said it would be difficult for the U.S. to mount a no-fly zone without the direct participation of key NATO allies with major air bases near Libya, particularly Italy.

Officials said North Atlantic Treaty Organization planners were meeting daily to prepare options for defense ministers who will huddle to discuss Libya on Thursday. 

"The U.S. has urged that full-scope contingency planning be done by NATO's military authorities," an Obama administration official said.

Officials said U.S. spy agencies have ramped up the collection of intelligence in Libya, monitoring for any possible human-rights abuses, as well as gathering information about individuals close to Col. Gadhafi. Such information could be used by the U.S. to try to pressure Col. Gadhafi loyalists to join the opposition.  

Mr. Obama's initial reaction to the violence in Libya was muted, but he later called for Col. Gadhafi to step aside. Critics say the response has been too slow and that military action is needed. Administration officials say the response was deliberately quiet at first to buy time to evacuate Americans trapped in Libya.

Sen. John Kerry, a Massachusetts Democrat who heads the Foreign Relations Committee, told "Face the Nation" the U.S. can do more to "bolster the opposition," but offered no details.

Asked if the U.S. should provide military assistance to opposition forces, Mr. Kerry said: "That's trickier. But I assume that a lot of weapons are going to find their way there."

Mr. Kerry said the U.S. and its allies should plan for a no-fly zone but not implement it right away, allowing for time to see whether opposition forces can make gains, and to garner international agreement. Aside from Mr. Kerry, most Democrats in Washington have been relatively reluctant to add their voices to the Libya debate, deferring to the White House.

Stephen Hadley, former national security adviser for President George W. Bush, said on CNN's "State of the Union" that it would be "helpful" if the Obama administration provided opposition forces with antiaircraft weapons. Such weapons could be used against Col. Gadhafi's helicopters and fighters, possibly as part of a no-fly zone.

Obama administration officials are discussing the possibility of imposing a no-fly zone over all or part of Libya. U.S. military officials have warned of the complications of doing so, especially given the reluctance of some key allies in NATO to participate.

Short of enforcing a no-fly zone, Mr. Kerry said the country's runways could be bombed to make it harder for Col. Gadhafi to use aircraft to attack the opposition. 

Mr. Kerry and Mr. McCain both said it would be counterproductive at this time to send in U.S. ground forces. "We don't want troops on the ground. They don't want troops on the ground. That would be counterproductive," Mr. Kerry said.