Are you buying a new car for business? Uncle Sam has tax deals for you.

This year, there's an even bigger break than in the past for buying a behemoth gas-guzzler. If you're buying a smaller car, there's a new reason to buy one costing more than $31,000 instead of less. There's also a new nudge for leasing over buying.

That's the upshot of recent guidance from the Internal Revenue Service concerning two changes in the law Congress made last year. The rules apply to cars bought after Sept. 8, 2010, and before Jan. 1, 2012. Experts say the adage "Don't let the tax tail wag the dog" especially applies to buying cars for business use. 

"Many factors go into this decision, and you always have to crunch the numbers," says  Daniel Moore, a CPA practicing in Salem, Ohio. 

Still, car expenses are often the biggest deduction for smaller businesses, so tax breaks matter. Here's a quick review of rules old and new.



• What's deductible. Unless a car is used 100% for business, expenses aren't fully deductible. Taxpayers must figure the percentage of business versus personal use and apply the business percentage to total expenses to arrive at the deduction.

Commuting from home to work counts as personal use, but driving between two places of business doesn't. The IRS is quick to question claims of 100% business use of a car, says Mr. Moore. "They'll ask, 'Do you leave it at the company overnight?'" 

If you plan to use this deduction, also plan on keeping good records.



• Other deductions. Unreimbursed tolls and parking fees are deductible as a miscellaneous expense (by employees) or on Schedule C (by the self-employed), as long as they aren't for commuting. 



• How to figure the deduction. Taxpayers usually have a choice: Either deduct a flat 51 cents per business mile (in 2011), or write off IRS-approved depreciation plus actual costs for gas, maintenance and insurance, among other things. 

This decision requires analysis. Using the flat allowance might make sense for a hybrid owner who uses little gas, while actual costs often work best for those with less-efficient cars.



• Depreciation deductions. In theory, this is an annual write-off that adds up to an asset's cost over its useful life. In practice, lawmakers often speed up depreciation to juice certain activities—like car buying—in ways that make big differences. 

The bottom line: This year Congress is running a large "bonus depreciation" special on cars weighing more than 6,000 pounds, such as the Cadillac Escalade and Nissan Armada. Taxpayers may deduct 100% of the car's cost in the first year—subject to the personal use disallowance, of course.

Even better: If this deduction creates a loss, it may be used against other wages or carried back to generate a refund.  BMW,
BMW


-1.18
%




 General Motors, Ford, Jeep, Mercedes Benz, Porsche, Honda, Nissan, Toyota and  Volkswagen
VLKAY


-2.47
%




 all have vehicles qualifying for this break. 

Depreciation is far less generous for cars weighing less than 6,000 pounds. Cars costing more than $15,300 get first-year depreciation of $11,060 this year, but those costing more than $30,625 get more in years two through six than those costing less. 

Take, for example, two cars bought in December 2010 for business use, one costing $20,000 and one costing $31,000. Each gets $11,060 of depreciation for 2010, but the more expensive one gets a $4,900 deduction for 2011, while the $20,000 car gets only $3,200, says one expert.

"Congress is clearly biased against smaller cars," says  Joe Kristan, a CPA with Roth & Co. in Des Moines. 



• Buy or lease? The decision of whether to lease or buy requires careful consideration and often depends on the lease terms. 

In general, however, experts say to look hard at leasing if you want an expensive car weighing less than 6,000 pounds and plan to replace it every two years or so. The allowed deduction is for the business-use percentage of the lease price plus regular expenses (gas and so on) minus a small adjustment (the lease inclusion amount) that is smaller this year than in the past. 

Are there special tax breaks for business use of fuel-efficient cars? All taxpayers are eligible for a dollar-for-dollar tax credit up to $7,500 on "plug-in electric motor vehicles" like the Chevy Volt. 

Buyers who plan to use one in a business would first take the credit, says Mr. Kristan, and then figure depreciation based on the remaining purchase price.

 Write to  Laura Saunders at laura.saunders@wsj.com 