 Japanese banks are considering lending Tepco up to $25 billion to repair its Daiichi nuclear plant and other power stations damaged after the March 11 earthquake. But questions remain on how much liability the utility, rather than the government, might face in compensation claims down the road.  

 Japan said quake and tsunami damage to houses, factories and infrastructure could cost at least $198 billion, more than double the cost of the 1995 Kobe quake.  

 A top Japanese nuclear-safety official sees no slowing in the nation's campaign to expand atomic power, saying in an interview that the alternative is "blackouts." 

 Auto makers have had production disrupted after the quake forced auto and parts plants in Japan to shut down while, in other parts of the world, auto makers have cut output because of growing concerns about a shortage of critical parts made in Japan. 20 

 Japan's central bank refrained from pumping extra overnight funds into the banking system Wednesday, a sign that immediate cash needs are stabilizing.  

 U.S. stocks moved between gains and losses as investors balanced disappointing news about Bank of America and rising estimates of Japan's reconstruction costs. Japanese shares fell late on news of radioactive contamination in Tokyo tap water.  

 The U.S. Fed rejected a plan by Bank of America to "modestly" increase its dividend this year, a potential setback for the bank's attempts to regain its footing.  

 A number of companies moved ahead with plans for Hong Kong IPOs, undeterred by market turbulence following events in Japan.  

 Cnooc's full-year net profit jumped 85% on higher international crude-oil prices and increased production.  

 Cosco's profit doubled from a year earlier as the Chinese ports investor benefited from a rise in container-handling volume.  

 Japan's chip makers are gradually starting to resume operations at their factories in the northeastern part of the country.  

 Chinese car maker Geely said profit rose 16% last year despite rising domestic competition, and it plans to boost capital expenditure this year to meet increasing demand for autos in China.  

 Hong Kong firm Wharf, posting a 1.2% rise in underlying profit for 2010, said it may need to cut its sales target as Beijing tries to cool the property sector.  

 Virgin Blue warned of a full-year loss as higher jet-fuel prices, pushed up by turmoil in the Mideast, and an earthquake in New Zealand hit demand for travel.  

 Conoco will sell an additional $5 billion to $10 billion in noncore assets over the next two years as the oil producer and refiner continues efforts to improve its balance sheet.  

 Yemen's Parliament passed sweeping new emergency laws that suspend the constitution and enable President Saleh's loyal security forces to arrest and detain his opponents.  

 A bomb in Jerusalem killed one Israeli, and at least two Kat-yusha rockets from Gaza slammed into the Israeli city of Beersheva, marking the most serious flare up of violence between Israel and Palestinian militants in years.  

Syrian police launched an assault on a neighborhood in Deraa sheltering antigovernment protesters, fatally shooting at least 15, witnesses said.

 Saudi Arabia said it would hold municipal elections, as it rolls out spending intended to help keep public revolt at bay.  

 Portugal's government could collapse after opposition parties withdrew support for another round of austerity policies aimed at averting a financial bailout.  

Malaysia's High Court said it would let prosecutors use DNA evidence in their bid to link opposition leader Anwar to a man who has accused him of sodomy. 

An Indian court agreed to a new request for the extradition of the former chief of a U.S. chemical company in connection with the 1984 Bhopal gas-leak tragedy which killed more than 15,000.

Died: Elizabeth Taylor, 79, U.S. movie-screen legend, from congestive heart failure, in Los Angeles.