LONDON—U.K. business confidence rebounded strongly in the weeks following the government's March 23 budget, while small businesses reported their fastest growth in orders in 16 years, according to surveys published Tuesday.

That news will come as a relief to the government, which hopes that a pickup in private-sector investment and hiring will compensate for its own cuts in spending and jobs.

But a survey by the Confederation of British Industry also contained worrying news for the Bank of England, as it found that small businesses are raising their prices rapidly in response to rising production costs.

Lloyds Bank said Tuesday that its measure of business confidence surged to 30 in April from 1 in March. The measure is a balance that subtracts the proportion of businesses feeling pessimistic about the economic outlook from the proportion feeling optimistic.

Continental Research surveyed 200 businesses with revenue of £1 million ($1.7 million) or more between April 11 and April 15. It found that 54% of companies reported being more optimistic about the economic outlook than three months ago, while 24% said they were less optimistic. 

The CBI quizzed 414 small and midsize manufacturers for its survey, which found that a net 16% reported a rise in domestic orders in the three months to April and a net 23% reported a rise in export orders. Exporters have benefited from a big depreciation of sterling against the U.K.'s major trading partners' currencies between 2007 and 2009. 

But the CBI said small companies' profit margins are being squeezed by surging commodity prices and the high cost of imports, which have risen because of sterling's fall. 

The CBI said a net 53% of companies surveyed reported a rise in their average unit costs, leading to sharp rises in domestic prices and the prices charged for goods overseas. 

A net 26% said they raised domestic prices and a net 31% raised export prices. Domestic prices increased at their fastest rate since 1995 and export prices at their fastest rate since 1988, the CBI said.

"Inflationary pressures remain a dark cloud, with rising oil and commodity prices pushing up the cost of production and eating into profit margins. Manufacturers have raised output prices rapidly to cope, and expect to continue doing so over the next quarter," said  Lucy Armstrong, chairwoman of the CBI's small and midsize enterprise council. 

The Bank of England's Monetary Policy Committee meets Wednesday and Thursday, and its expected to leave its key interest rate unchanged at a record low of 0.5% in response to concerns about the weakness of consumer spending. The U.K. economy grew by 0.5% in the first quarter, but contracted by 0.5% in the final three months of last year.