You'd think that match officials getting decisions right would be just about the most fundamental thing for a sport—and that any attempt to improve decision-making accuracy would be a non-negotiable, open-and-shut, black-and-white case. Cricket has attempted to improve its umpires' decision-making recently, but in an inconsistent way that has thrown up all kinds of issues. The game urgently needs to clarify its relationship with technology, or it risks worsening some of the very problems it's trying to solve.

The introduction in 2009 of the Umpire Decision Review System, commonly abbreviated to UDRS or just DRS, marked a sea change for cricket. It is an instant-replay system combining slow-motion cameras, infra-red cameras that can determine whether the ball has hit the bat, microphones, and technology that can predict the flight of a ball. It allows umpires to review decisions, but also allows players to challenge decisions an on-field umpire has made, with a third umpire off the field, sitting in a booth tooled up with all the new tech, making the final call. It covers a range of possible dismissals, including run-outs, catches, stumpings and leg-before-wickets.

Broadly speaking, the system has been cautiously welcomed by players and officials. "There's no doubt that it's raised the correct-decision percentage," says Haroon Lorgat, chief executive of the International Cricket Council, cricket's global governing body, who visited Hong Kong for the ICC World Cricket League Division 3 competition last week. "Umpires say they can go to bed at night feeling they've made the right decisions."

One of the game's most experienced and respected international umpires is Australian Daryl Harper, who was officiating at the Hong Kong event. Any improvement in decision-making accuracy has to be a good thing, he says. "It gives the game a chance to be resolved between the two teams without outside interference."

Of course, that's only true when it's used—and the fact that it's only fitfully used at the moment is the system's biggest problem, according to Mr. Harper, the most experienced umpire currently standing in Test matches, having officiated in 94 of them since 1998. The International Cricket Council, cricket's global governing body, doesn't insist on the system being used in all Test series. That's largely because it's not prepared to underwrite the cost of implementing it, forcing host countries to pick up the considerable tab. If either team in a bilateral series objects to the DRS, it isn't used—and India, in particular, keep objecting.

"I think we will get to some stage in the future when we make it mandatory," says Mr. Lorgat. "More of the equipment will be available and the price will come down. And we've got to get India on side."

In the meantime, Mr. Harper says, he's "concerned about the plethora of games that don't have it. There's an erosion of respect at these other levels; players are saying, 'If we'd had the review system, that decision would have been overturned.' It's almost like we've legalized dissent."

And that's the great irony of the system: something that ensures decisions are more accurate ought to reduce players' reasons and opportunities to call decisions into question. Instead, because of the inconsistent way in which the system has been introduced, it could have the opposite effect.

Even with the DRS in place, dissent is still alive and well. Australian captain Ricky Ponting and fast bowler Peter Siddle, for example, got in a fearful lather with umpire Aleem Dar in a Test match against England at Melbourne recently, based on their misinterpretation of a mark on the bat shown up by the Hot Spot infra-red technology. They were adamant that the ball had caused the mark, rather than batsman Kevin Pietersen's pad. They were wrong, but that didn't prevent a prolonged bout of undignified finger-wagging that represented everything umpires, in particular, would like to remove from the game.

Mr. Harper more than anyone has been on the sharp end of the DRS's teething troubles. A year ago he was third umpire for a Test between South Africa and England in Johannesburg, during which England thought they had South African captain Graeme Smith caught by the wicket-keeper. On-field umpire Tony Hill disagreed and England captain Andrew Strauss referred the decision to Mr. Harper. No deflection was visible on the replays, but the sound of an edge was clearly audible via the stump microphone. Unfortunately the sound on Mr. Harper's feed wasn't set at a high enough level to pick it up, and he ruled it not-out. It took six and a half months for the umpire, who'd been told that the volume on his replay monitor was set at the right level and warned not to adjust it himself, to be exonerated from blame for the incident. Mr. Harper says that despite the unjustified criticism he received from some quarters, the incident was worth it, as it resulted in improvements to the technology.

There are other issues with the system, however. When it comes to balls that have hit the bat and then been caught by a fielder close to the ground, for example, the DRS still frequently can't definitively confirm whether it has hit the ground or not.

And allowing the players to refer decisions was also an interesting call. The system was designed to eliminate so-called howlers—those times when the umpire has obviously made an error—but each team is allowed up to two unsuccessful challenges per team innings. So what it's done in reality is introduce a new tactical element, with fielding sides' reviews more likely to be employed against leading batsmen, for example, and teams using reviews in lost causes late in innings, just because they have them left over, further slowing the game unnecessarily. "Personally I would love the umpires to have control of it," says Mr. Harper. "It was introduced for the 90-10 decisions, the ones that are clearly wrong, but the problem is that now it's been used to resolve the 51-49 decisions."

Mr. Lorgat says that the ICC considered putting the decision solely in the hands of the umpires, but feared the system might end up being used as a crutch. "We felt the umpires would get to a position where they'd check all their decisions; we could unintentionally deskill umpires over time."

Mr. Harper says that technology has also had a beneficial impact, helping him improve as an umpire. Studying replay footage has helped him realize, for example, that a lot of leg-before-wicket appeals he had previously turned down, believing them to be missing the leg stump (the one nearest the batsman when he's standing to receive the ball), were actually hitting it—and he's adjusted his parameters accordingly.

Indeed, the DRS is full of potential benefits for the game: improving decision-making, removing the reasons for player dissent and taking the pressure off umpires. But only if it's actually being used. If it continues to be used only intermittently, then as Mr. Harper says, it will erode players' respect in the umpires. Cricket's officials already have one of the hardest jobs in sports; there's no need to make it harder.