  Bob Diamond insisted at the start of his appearance before the U.K. Treasury Select Committee on Tuesday that there was no question of Barclays ever quitting Britain. Halfway through his evidence, he didn't seem quite so sure. That's hardly surprising. This proved a thoroughly dispiriting affair. Billed as a session to discuss competition, it barely touched on the subject, instead degenerating into a platform for grandstanding committee members to display their confected anger over bonuses. Chairman  Andrew Tyrie rather sheepishly tried to excuse his committee's boorishness at the end by explaining they were only reflecting the concerns of their constituents. 

Leaving aside whether this is really true—the committee seemed to me to be simply parroting the same crude, populist line of questioning that much of the media has been pushing, incessantly, for the past three years and getting very much the same answers—there is something absurd about a bunch of lawmakers berating the boss of a private business for the way he pays his staff. 

If they feel so strongly about it, they have the power as lawmakers to do something about it. Yet no one on the committee showed any signs of having any new proposals for laws to limit investment banking industry bonuses. If they did, Mr. Diamond would have been a fine person to test their ideas out on.

Instead, the committee squandered a rare opportunity to enhance the reputation of the U.K.'s dangerously discredited parliament by doing what it actually exists to do—to ask thoughtful, penetrating questions of one of the leading figures in global finance to enable them to produce insightful scrutiny of government policy and come up with worthwhile policy recommendations of its own. Mr. Diamond was never going to be able to give them what they wanted on bonuses—as he repeatedly pointed out, the bank operates in a competitive market; it does not set the rules, but it does have to play by them. But he did make plenty of provocative remarks that a more focused committee on top of its brief could have challenged. Instead, they lamely let him off the hook. 

For example, Mr. Diamond made the jaw-dropping assertion that Barclays isn't too big to fail—and then went on to claim Barclays' low funding costs relative to peers reflects the inherent safety of its universal bank model rather than any implicit government subsidy. But if Barclays isn't too big to fail, which bank in the world is? Is the European Union wrong to be insisting that Ireland stand behind its bank bondholders? What would it do to Barclays' borrowing costs if governments did start forcing bondholders to take losses? And if Barclays' borrowing costs are lower than those of Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs, doesn't that just confirm that the bank is using its retail deposits to subsidize its investment banking business, as its critics have said all along? 

On the other hand, if Mr. Diamond is right that Barclays' low funding costs simply reflect its superior business model and the bank poses no systemic risk, then the committee could have asked him what he makes of the Bank of England's aggressive campaign—fronted by Governor  Mervyn King—to break up the banks and impose far higher capital requirements and the Basel Committee's plans for capital surcharges for systemically important banks. After all, if the committee is genuinely concerned about the competition then one might think it would want to explore—in the interests of balance—any possible risk posed to a key U.K. industry by over-zealous regulators. 

All these important issues will clearly have to wait for another day—and another committee. It is the Independent Commission on Banking, hand-picked by the Chancellor of the Exchequer and due to report in the autumn, that is asking the really hard questions, doing the detailed analysis and whose policy recommendations will ultimately set the agenda. The Treasury Select Committee's ludicrous pantomime performance on Tuesday merely underlined its own irrelevance. 

Still, there was one moment of drama towards the end of the session when Conservative MP  Andrea Leadsom launched into a spirited attack on Mr. Diamond, harking back to her own experiences as a banker at BZW, the forerunner of Barclays Capital, to lambast his view that there was little wrong in the world of banking and likening him to the emperor with no clothes. 

A clearly riled Mr. Diamond hit back, reminding her that BZW was a small, failed operation, exclusively focused on the U.K. that had never made any money and didn't even do business with many of the U.K.'s biggest companies. But under his leadership, Barclays Capital had entered into new markets such as foreign exchange, traditionally entirely dominated by foreign banks, investing heavily in systems and—yes—people. As a result, Barclays is now the number 3 player in this huge global market. 

It was a timely reminder that, regardless of the debate over the structure of the banking industry and its bonus practices, Mr. Diamond is a genuine entrepreneur who has built—  largely through skill and judgment rather than financial risk-taking—  world-class businesses across a range of asset classes and markets that have made billions of profits for the U.K. and created thousands of jobs. After Mr. Diamond's reply, it was noticeable that the committee members started to show him more respect. Alas, by that stage, it was far too late for the committee to salvage any respect for itself—as Mr. Tyrie's embarrassed attempt at an apology appeared to acknowledge.

 Write to  Simon Nixon at simon.nixon@wsj.com 