 Boston 

Great archaeological finds accrue history and tell fresh stories long after they're snugly ensconced in museums, not least because, as times change, the world asks new questions about ancient cultures and archaeology itself. Were the excavators heroes or looters? Did they, on balance, preserve or harm the site? Do we now approve of the site's original inhabitants—how did they treat their women or minorities? Can we garner any tips on how we might live today? The splendidly informative "Dura-Europos" show at the Boston College McMullen Museum touches on many such matters with dexterity—but it also lets us enjoy the old-fashioned delights of peering across the millennia in wonder.

In its day, the excavation of Dura-Europos between 1928 and 1937 caused a huge splash, comparable in headline coverage with the likes of Machu Picchu and King Tut's tomb. Dura-Europos, too, was situated in a far-flung, desolately picturesque spot: at the edge of the Syrian desert near Iraq on a long-abandoned plateau abutting the Euphrates. Celebrities like Agatha Christie made the daunting trek to be photographed at the site. Originally founded by the Seleucid branch of Alexander's empire about 300 B.C., the city hosted successive cultures, including the Romans, until it was sacked in A.D. 256 by Perso-Sassanians. It remained apparently undiscovered until, in 1920, British troops left over from World War I stumbled across fragments of murals while bivouacking in the area. 

McMullen Museum, Boston College

Through June 5

The excavation did not yield the kind of glowing loot that was found, say, in Troy or in Egypt's Valley of the Kings. Much of that had disappeared with the Sassanian sack. Rather, the treasures of Dura-Europos lay in the remnants of the city's dwellings and décor. Some 130 buildings were uncovered, astonishingly well-preserved due to dry desert conditions. The site revealed the first glimpse of a lavishly decorated synagogue, contradicting all assumptions about ancient Jewish life being strictly bound by Old Testament rules warning against the worship of graven images and the like. Excavators also found and preserved murals from a colorful, very early Christian house-church and various pagan temples with gorgeous mosaics and votive objects. 

The exhibited items at the McMullen Museum, some 75 of the site's most significant treasures, are on loan from Yale University and being shown coherently together for the first time in 25 years, a historic event in itself. Lisa Brody, a Yale University Art Gallery curator, and Gail Hoffman of Boston College jointly curated the show. It was Yale that, along with the then-French government of Syria, carried out the original decade-long dig, yielding many thousands of objects that were formally distributed among Yale, Syria and France under a sharing system called Partage. The Partage ethos disappeared as archaeology became increasingly politicized and host countries refused to share ownership of material found on their soil. Yet, through the first half of the 20th century, the system saved a great many sites and treasures for posterity in a region still given to bouts of instability. 

The show depends on reproductions for some of its larger displays of interiors. Therein lies a tale or two. Yale commissioned Herbert Gute, a well-known American artist of the 1920s and '30s, to make copies of the frescoes being unearthed. One might call the paintings original copies. Their roseate pastels, pleasantly faded after decades of hanging in Yale corridors, chime happily with the actual frescoes on display from the house-church in which early Syriac Christians worshiped and lived. As for the synagogue's décor, it too is perforce a reproduction: Most of the actual structure ended up in a museum in Damascus—where it remains to this day, largely ignored. Nevertheless, one gets a powerful impression of the original with blazing bursts of painted tiles hemmed inside rows of wooden ceiling rafters, color blessing the eyes from every angle. Here, one realizes, the Hellenic visual legacy had a happy softening effect on the tough old puritan codes of the Hebrews.

Though it features, among other things, the best example of a Roman armor-suit ever found, this is not a show about rare objects of great value. Rather, it illustrates moments of consciousness in history, including the moment of the excavations to illustrate how the world then chose to digest its own ancient history. Between the World Wars, the revelations of Dura-Europos were valued largely as contributions to the history of art, illuminating the bridge between Classical and Renaissance aesthetics. The show's present-day curators invite us to consider how their preoccupations (and ours) have changed. They focus on the successful cross-pollination of cultures at Dura-Europos, how Greek, Jewish, Parthian, Roman and Christian cultures synthesized and abided in harmony. A Sassanian helmet with a nose guard demonstrates how Romans learned from other cultures: They added a nose guard to their own helmets. The Palmyran temple frieze shows how a Roman general worshiped with local pagans. The curators prod us to view the ancients through our contemporary concerns: in a word, multiculturalism or diversity. In the study of archaeology, they seem to say, we see what we look for. It never goes out of fashion. 

 Mr. Kaylan writes about culture and the arts for the Journal.  