We inevitably encounter interesting and different culinary experiences when not in our natural habitat. This is especially true when you come, as I do, from a dusty Australian country town with not one decent restaurant for 100 kilometers in any direction. My defining food memory is eating a black olive for the first time while picnicking in the abandoned gold fields of central Victoria with the family of an artist who had lived in Europe. That was 45 years ago, but the texture and unique earthy flavor, and the sheer exoticism of the experience is still vivid. 

With no routine to be shackled by, traveling also means you inevitably eat with new people in new restaurants or kitchen tables, experiences that help shift you out of your comfort zone. It wasn't until I moved to Melbourne that I had my first authentic rectangular-shaped pizza, plus a spaghetti marinara that still remains a benchmark experience. And a huge number of later encounters came through my time as a foreign correspondent. In Indochina in the early 1970s, the sizeable population of Corsicans running the drug trade and other more legitimate trading pursuits meant that it was possible to eat superb, simple French cuisine in Saigon, Phnom Penh and even Vientiane. A subsequent African posting didn't broaden my culinary horizons—I still recall a 10-course meal at a hotel in Bulawayo which included savory fish croquettes, spaghetti Italien, Scotch eggs, roast beef and steamed syrup pudding with custard, all for the equivalent of less than $3. But when I moved to London in 1973, I made my first connection with Michelin-starred establishments, especially in France, thanks to a lasting friendship with a Le Monde foreign correspondent. And with practice, it really was possible to comprehend why a particular place had one, two or three stars. 

The key experiences for me, though, were two back-to-back assignments I had in the late '80s to cover the food scene in Melbourne and Sydney, and then do the same thing in California's Santa Barbara/Venice and the Bay Area/Napa Valley areas. After a considerable absence from both places, it was fascinating to return and experience the culinary revolutions then happening on both sides of the Pacific.

When I left Australia in the early '70s, the only Asian cuisine was cheap Cantonese and one or two Indian places, while French restaurants were of the simple bistro variety or pastiches of grand hotel dining. What a difference two decades made! The first revelation was the ingredients and the second that Asia was now making its presence felt in a new concept called Pacific Rim cuisine. Suddenly, prawns could appear in a European restaurant with Asian spices or cooking techniques. And lunch at Berowra Waters Inn, then Australia's most sublime restaurant, precariously perched on the side of a river gorge an hour or more north of Sydney, drew moneyed people by water plane direct from Sydney Harbour (I love the story about four people who once skimmed in, only to have a massive row with the boatmen before flying off again—they didn't have a reservation). But it isn't only personal travel that enhances one's food memory bank: The house Champagne was Bollinger, which must have flown halfway around the globe and even the profound Moss Wood Cabernet had to travel more than 2,000 miles from Western Australia to make it there.

Modern air travel (and the International Date Line) meant that I had a farewell New Year's Eve lunch overlooking Bondi Beach and New Year's Eve dinner at Chez Panisse in Berkeley, Calif., less than 24 hours later. As part of the festivities, a waiter, wearing a propeller on his baseball cap, bobbed around tables pouring out free Château L'Evangile '82 Bordeaux from an Imperiale (six-liter bottle). It may have been costly infanticide, but it indicated the whacky sort of fun that Chez Panisse provided.

This was an entirely different approach to food than in eastern Australia. There, it was experimentation on a wide level done with gusto and abandon; California was far more precise and academic. Chez Panisse allowed me to sit in on one of their weekly assessment sessions. They had a handful of brilliant foragers (many with doctorates) who would submit typed, single-spaced reports on some new product or other from an outlying region. Buried in the detail would be biographical comments such as "these farmers settled here after the 1905 pogrom in Russia"; I adored this attention to irrelevant detail and painstaking research on the actual products. Further south, in Beverly Hills, Wolfgang Puck had shown commendable style by producing designer pizzas at Spago and equally creative fusion cuisine at Chinois in Santa Monica. 

California cuisine was in its prime, thanks to the sparky alliance a decade earlier between Chez Panisse founder Alice Waters and the self-taught genius of chef Jeremiah Tower. Suddenly, there was a premium on absolutely fresh ingredients grilled or given a light touch so that they sang on the plate. (Given its inspiration from Provence, perhaps it should have been called Caliterranean.) Since then, the over-rated nouvelle cuisine rose and fell, replaced by molecular cuisine, which is now being overtaken by Nordic Cuisine.

None of this would be possible without travel—both for ingredients and techniques, and, of course, equally important, curious diners. At least two jumbo-jet cargo planes deliver Thai ingredients to London each week and there are even larger amounts of British shellfish and prime beef going to Continental Europe every day, while foie gras, cheese and prime vegetables from the Rungis Market in Paris are shipped across the English Channel. Nearly five decades on from that Tuscan olive consumed in Australia, all foodies have reason to be grateful for the growing debt we owe to travel.

 Write to  Bruce Palling at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 