MUMBAI – Reliance Industries Ltd. is unlikely to meet the gas production targets it set in its field development plan for the D6 eastern offshore block, the head of India's upstream regulator said Monday. 

Reliance Industries is likely off course from the plan, approved by the Directorate General of Hydrocarbons, to produce 80 million metric standard cubic meters of gas by April 2012,  S.K. Srivastava told reporters. 

He said the company currently produces between 52 MMSCMD and 53 MMSCMD of gas from the block in the  Krishna Godavari basin. 

"So they must be taking remedial measures," he added. 

The D6 block in the Bay of Bengal is India's first deep-water oil and gas-producing asset, and the nation's richest gas find. The D6 block contains three producing fields--Dhirubhai-1, or D1, Dhirubhai-3, or D3, and Dhirubhai-26, or MA1. 

Gas output from D6 has fallen from as much as 60 MMSCMD a few months ago, causing concern among investors as it is a major contributor to Reliance Industries' revenue and also accounts for the bulk of the country's gas production. 

Reliance said the figures are "provisional and indicative and are subject to such variations" over the years, which may be due to "physical inputs, work program as well as geological and reservoir complexity." 

"We aim to go through the technical data on NELP and field performance. Once we look at the performance we will work out the course [of action], correction and solutions and see how production can go up," Mr. Srivastava said. 

He said 18 wells are currently operational at D6 and two wells have been drilled but are yet to be connected. "We have asked the operator to submit their plan for drilling and connecting these wells." 

"The fall in output of KG D6 is notable. We don't know about the reasons completely and it is a technical issue," oil minister S.  Jaipal Reddy said, adding that the ministry is in talks with Reliance Industries to resolve the issue. "The fall in production is not a positive development. We don't know the reason and it is being discussed." 

In February, Reliance Industries agreed to sell a 30% stake in 23 of its oil and gas blocks to  BP PLC for $7.2 billion, plus another $1.8 billion linked to future exploration success. 

The D6 block is part of the deal and analysts expect gas production to recover once BP brings in its deep-water drilling expertise. 

 Write to  Rakesh Sharma at rakesh.sharma@dowjones.com 