Madison Square Garden on Friday announced an increase in the cost of season tickets for next season, with Knicks prices increasing an average of 49% and Rangers prices 23%.

The move, which follows six straight seasons of flat ticket prices for the Knicks, comes as the first phase of the arena's renovation nears completion. As part of the renovation, which will cost more than $850 million, a new lower bowl will be ready by next season. Improvements to the upper bowl are expected to be completed in time for the 2012-2013 season.

For the Knicks, 1,238 seats in the lower bowl not on the floor will rise in price 100% or more. The best lower bowl seats that aren't on the floor currently cost $330.

The Garden did not release a specific breakdown of individual ticket prices on Friday. But officials did say that the most expensive seat in the Garden, a $3,000 floor seat, would rise to $3,600.

Because the arena will be only half-renovated, not every seat will see a dramatic increase in price. More than 50% of seats will see less than a 15% jump.

The Garden will not be implementing personal seat licenses, the one-time fee for the right to buy season tickets that is used by many sports teams.

Scott O'Neil, president of Madison Square Garden Sports, said that the pricing was almost entirely due to the cost of the renovation and not about the Knicks' new star, Carmelo Anthony, who along with Amar'e Stoudemire has finally brought the Knicks back to prominence after nine losing seasons. O'Neil said the new prices were fixed before Anthony was acquired in a trade last month.

For the Rangers, ticket price increases are less dramatic. Thirty-two seats will see a 198% increase in price—while 437 will see a 75% increase, but 14,000 seats will see less than a 10% increase. The Rangers did not increase prices for the 2010-2011 season. 

O'Neil said the Garden is confident it will be able to accommodate season-ticket holders who want to downgrade their seats as a result of the new pricing scheme.

 Write to  Kevin Clark at kevin.clark@wsj.com 