Don't be fooled by the recent—and very worthy—exercises in film preservation, such as MoMA's ongoing Weimar Germany film season and Film Forum's "Battleship Potemkin" revival. Movie film is extremely fragile, and the expenses involved in storing, cataloging and restoring degraded footage to viewable quality continue to erode cinema's viewable history faster than it can be preserved.



Nevertheless, preservation initiatives undertaken by organizations like the Film Foundation and the International Federation of Film Archives (FIAF), as well as by a growing number of archives, commercial film studios and distributors, are boosting efforts to make film's past a part of our culture's future. 

But what of the miles of unheralded footage stored in vaults, libraries, and warehouses around the world, whose existence may not clearly suggest a specific place in cinema's past and film preservation's future? Since 1999, archivists, educators, artists and preservationists have gathered for the biennial Orphan Film Symposium, which examines and presents these overlooked, unseen and sometimes unidentified films that live well outside the mainstream of film history. 

This Friday, in advance of next year's Orphan Symposium, scheduled for April 2012 at the Museum of the Moving Image in Astoria, Manhattan's Anthology Film Archives will present a program called Orphans Redux. The event offers an eight-film cross-section of works culled from the 80 examples introduced and presented at last spring's symposium by members of a global syndicate of film custodians. 

According to Andrew Lampert, archivist at Anthology, an "orphan film" is one "that really has no identifiable maker or history, and that was in a can that came from a family that left it on a doorstep." 

For Dan Streible, an associate chair for cinema studies at New York University and founding director of the Orphans Symposium, seeking viewable order amid the chaos of film's lesser-known backwaters of creation, production, exhibition and ownership is a calling he shares with a growing number of like minded participants like Mr. Lampert. "'Movement' is an appropriate word," Mr. Streible said. "It's become extremely international. We have like 18 or 20 nations coming to each event." 

The Orphans gatherings have, Mr. Lampert said, challenged those charged with attending to cinema's attic to take stock of their holdings. "Archives and archivists don't have a firm grip on everything in their collections," he said. "Everything isn't exactly known. Some holdings are old, some are relatively new, and much of it has lost context. It becomes about finding a context for these things, whether it's the original one or not." 

Anthology's Orphans Redux program includes home movies, newsreel outtakes, aesthetic experiments and some surrealist expression borne of vanished documentation and unknown intentions. In the case of "The Augustas," a travelogue of identically named American towns compiled from the 1930s to the 1950s by an amateur filmmaker named Scott Nixon, conscious intention has arguably been trumped by the unconscious power of pure cinema. "He was kind of a traveling salesman who took movies as a hobby," Mr. Streible said. "Augusta was where he lived in Georgia, so I guess it just became a tic to visit all the places he could find with the same name just to shoot the signage and some local color."

Like most of the films in the Orphans Redux program, "The Augustas" (which will be introduced and narrated by archivist and author Heidi Rae Cooley) is a somewhat difficult cinematic experience to characterize. "Sometimes I see something at Orphans where an explanation doesn't exist or the truth bores me so much that it becomes a completely avant garde film," Mr. Lampert said. "'The Augustas' is like that for me."

Mr. Lampert's own contribution to the program is itself a timely reflection of film as history. While searching for an unrelated title in Anthology's vault, Mr. Lampert happened upon a reel of footage. "I think it said 'Freedom March 1963,'" he recalled. The reel contained color film shot by illustrator and experimental filmmaker Ed Emshwiller at the 1963 March On Washington For Jobs and Freedom, an event that changed the course of civil-rights legislation and yielded Dr. Martin Luther King's "I Have a Dream" speech. 

"It was beautiful edited color footage from within the crowd and audience from the marchers' perspective of that day," Mr. Lampert said. Subsequently restored pro bono by local film laboratory Cineric Inc., the clip was a highlight of last year's Orphans Symposium.

"In our imagination, that whole event is in black and white," Mr. Streible said. "So to see this seemingly freshly minted color footage of that space was uncanny." 