 HSBC's 2010 profit more than doubled, mostly because of lower bad-loan charges. But costs jumped, and the bank said new capital rules would reduce its return on equity. Its new CEO received a $8.4 million bonus through deferred shares.  

 The IEA's chief economist said Europe's rising bill for imported oil could endanger its fragile economic recovery as Libya's uprising keeps oil prices high.  

 U.S. stocks were set to end February with their third month of gains in a row. Indian stocks rose as the government forecast a smaller-than-expected deficit.  

 Deals website Groupon and Chinese Internet giant Tencent agreed to create a group-buying website in China.  

 Korea Exchange is considering an IPO so that it can more easily participate in the global consolidation of stock exchanges.  

 Goldman Sachs relinquished its shares in Japanese real-estate firm Simplex Investment Advisors to private-equity firm Aetos Capital, which is betting on a recovery in Tokyo property prices.  

 New bank credit in China is likely to shrink this year, one of China's senior bankers said.  

 Buyout giant Blackstone's winning $9.4 billion bid for Centro Properties' 588 U.S. shopping centers gives the Australian company cash to reduce its debt.  

 Hutchison Port Holdings' listing seeks to raise $6.4 billion, which would make it the largest IPO in Singapore's history.  

 China Unicom's parent will offer a new mobile-phone brand that will use the company's own operating system.  

 A leading South Korean pastor backed off criticism of President Lee over a plan to boost Islamic finance in the country, but the pastor said he still believes it will cause "big danger."  

 China plans to more than double the value of its entertainment and other cultural industries within the next five years.  

 Equinox Minerals said it will offer $4.9 billion to take over Lundin Mining in a hostile bid that could derail Lundin's planned merger with Inmet Mining.  

 Twitter is in negotiations for a J.P. Morgan fund to take a minority stake in the microblogging company that would value it at more than $4 billion.  

 Mideast tensions escalated as protesters temporarily blocked access to Bahrain's Parliament and massed outside the state-owned broadcaster, while moderate government concessions in Oman failed to quell demonstrators.  

 Experts are questioning why many buildings damaged in last year's earthquake in New Zealand were given the all-clear, an alleged oversight some say added to the calamity from last week's quake.  

 A Vietnamese dissident is being detained for posting an Internet appeal for the overthrow of the Communist government, a state-run newspaper reported.  

The Iranian government arrested opposition leaders Hossein Mousavi and Mehdi Karoubi, along with their wives, according to their children.

Somali pirates released a Japanese ship that was hijacked in October with a crew of 20 Filipinos. 

The PKK, the Kurdish separatist organization that has been at war in Turkey since the 1980s, said it is ending a unilateral cease-fire.

An Iraqi court sentenced a Briton to 20 years in jail in the 2009 deaths of two contractors.