 Terminal 5  610 W. 56th St., (212) 582-6600  March 28-31 

The Strokes are often cited as the quintessential band of post-millennial New York, but another group from the same era can lay claim to arguably even greater influence: LCD Soundsystem. When the two groups started work in scenes that later came to overlap, the Strokes were the purist rock dudes mining mythologized memories of CBGB, while LCD Soundsystem came on like fugitives from a part of the city's lore that had been nearly forgotten: underground discos, ill-gotten art parties, and assorted house jams where DJs reigned. LCD mastermind James Murphy didn't seem a likely candidate for dance-music stardom at the time, but it was he—a pudgy and cantankerous character not exactly known for his footwork—who restored the New York rock scene's sense of rhythm and play. Here, LCD Soundsystem plays a series of four nights leading up to a final show for the beloved band on Saturday at Madison Square Garden. 

 Music Hall of Williamsburg  66 N. 6th St., Brooklyn, (718) 486-5400  Friday 

J Mascis is a guitar hero in a context where anti-heroes thrive. As the longtime leader of Dinosaur Jr., he's cut as lasting a figure as any in the annals of "alternative rock," and he's made good on his legacy by keeping it alive past the point where obsolescence would have been forgivable. The last Dinosaur Jr. album, 2009's "Farm,"  announced a renewed sense of purpose for a band more than 25 years old, thanks mostly to the blaring yet constrained guitar sound that Mr. Mascis has managed to control even as it's grown wilder and more unwieldy. Here, however, he will tone it down in support of a surprising recent solo move: an almost exclusively acoustic album called "Several Shades of Why." Gone are the searing solos and comforting blankets of fuzz, but all the quietude helps amplify two more of Mr. Mascis's gifts: a masterful sense of melody and a distinctive vocal croak never in danger of being copied.

 Nassau Coliseum  1255 Hempstead Turnpike  Uniondale, N.Y., (516) 794-9300  Sunday-Monday 

It's a short list of artists who can embark on a tour called "I am Still Music" and not get laughed out of whatever town comes next. Actually, Lil' Wayne might be the only one. Very little surrounding Wayne of late—from his scarred and seething rap style to his recent stay at Rikers Island (eight months on a gun charge)—has rated as a laughing matter. But then, nervous titters and startled gulps might count as something akin to laughs. Both tend to rise up whenever the rap star takes a microphone and fills it with words almost preposterously rich with images and ideas, not to mention eclectic approaches to vocalizing that make him sound like a chorus of different rappers over time. Here, Wayne will play the seventh and eighth shows of a national tour on which he has a lot to prove. 

 Carnegie Hall  881 7th Ave., (212) 903-9600  Thursday 

Gal Costa came up in the fantastically weird milieu of Brazilian tropicalia, a 1960s-era musical movement that overhauled that country's traditional sounds with some of the strange digressions and loopy improvements common to the 1960s everywhere else. She was a contemporary of characters like Caetano Veloso and Gilberto Gil, and some of her early records count among tropicalia's wildest, with chaotic cut-and-paste collage elements and a psychedelic sense of play. The '60s were a long time ago, however, and these days Ms. Costa, 65, is a considerably smoother and more approachable singer. She'll still swing, but has learned to savor empty space and the right kind of vocal embellishments laid on with a whisper. She performs here as part of Carnegie Hall's ongoing "Around the Globe" series.

 (Le) Poisson Rouge  158 Bleecker St., (212) 505-3474  Wednesday 

The Elephant 6 Recording Co. began as a collective of like-minded musicians whose aspirations, aural and otherwise, drifted beyond the familiar confines of indie-rock in the 1990s. Where many bands around them were making a show of slacking off and retreating into lo-fi scuzz, Elephant 6-affiliated groups—including, at the start, Olivia Tremor Control, Apples in Stereo and Neutral Milk Hotel—created a sort of maximalist fantasy world as an antidote. Their recording style was homey, to be sure, but it also expanded by way of wild experiments with tape recorders and songwriting styles that proved prescient for the ways they mined the likes of the Beach Boys, the Beatles and Pink Floyd. Here, a merry band of pranksters from several Elephant 6 acts—based mainly in Athens, Ga.—will unite to play classics from the catalog.