BEIJING—China targeted total spending of nearly $200 billion this year for the construction of subsidized housing, as the government steps up a campaign to address widespread complaints over the lack of affordable housing while also maintaining construction activity that has driven economic growth in China and abroad.

The 1.3 trillion yuan ($198 billion) goal for spending on subsidized housing represents a two-thirds increase from the roughly 780 billion yuan for 2010. Only a portion of those sums comes from spending by central and local governments, with the rest coming from bank credit and corporate investment.

Property prices have risen sharply in China since a market slump ended in mid-2009, with double-digit increases in average prices for new housing in many major cities. The surge has raised fears of a potentially dangerous bubble in the market and fueled anger that prices have been pushed out of reach for many middle- and lower-income Chinese in a population where home ownership is increasingly seen as a right by urban residents.

The government in the last year rolled out a series of measures to rein in runaway prices, raising minimum down-payment levels, threatening punishment for speculators, and experimenting with new real-estate taxes in two big cities. It has also raised interest rates three times since October to stem broader inflation.

But authorities have been reluctant to crack down too harshly, for fear of derailing an industry that accounts for a major share of China's growth and that propels global demand for steel, cement, copper and other raw materials.

Wednesday's announcement, at a press conference by Qi Ji, deputy minister of housing and urban-rural development, is the latest and strongest sign that Beijing is focusing on expanding state-backed housing to address the market's problem. The funds are to meet a target announced Saturday by Premier Wen Jiabao to build 10 million units of subsidized housing this year. That's up from the 5.9 million subsidized units that were started in 2010, and more than the nine million units of non-subsidized commercial housing that were sold last year.

Global economists and investors have been watching closely how China deals with the problems in its property market. Investment in residential realestate construction alone makes up roughly 10% of China's gross domestic product, analysts estimate—a figure that doesn't including the added demand for raw materials like steel.

In a recent report, economists from Standard Chartered listed a possible collapse in real-estate construction in China as one of their key "risk scenarios" for China in 2011. Given high levels of unsold housing inventories and "the strong possibility that the recent cooling measures successfully turn buyer sentiment, this construction downturn could be dramatic," they said in a report. "Commodity markets would be hit badly" by a hard landing in the sector, it said.

Market participants hope the subsidized housing drive can help prop up construction, and thus economic growth, if private housing construction falters.

But there are risks to the strategy. Authorities have struggled in recent years to meet their targets for subsidized housing construction, because both developers and the local governments that control land in China prefer higher-priced property projects. Last year the government made its target only after repeated exhortations from the central government and promises to hold local officials responsible for any shortfall.

Officials have used sometimes tough language to show they're serious about expanding affordable housing. "I have something to say to property companies," Premier Wen Jiabao said in a public chat with Internet users late last month. "I haven't investigated profit margins at every single one of you, but I believe developers have a social responsibility, they should have virtue in their blood."

The government needs developers because it is providing only a fraction of the 1.3 trillion yuan in projected spending. Mr. Qi said central and local governments will provide 500 billion yuan of the total—about a fourth of that is budgeted to come from Beijing—with the remaining amount to come from "companies and institutions in society," as well as payments by the recipients of the affordable housing.

There's also a risk that if the subsidized housing push succeeds, it could create more problems later. That's because devoting land to the low-cost housing program will reduce the supply available in the commercial market, which could cause prices there to rise even further.

—Eliot Gao contributed to this article.



 Write to  Aaron Back at aaron.back@dowjones.com 