ZURICH—Switzerland said it has frozen hundreds of millions of Swiss francs belonging to people connected to Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi and former Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, as well as 60 million francs ($69.3 million) from ousted Tunisian President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali, offering the first evidence as to how much the leaders had stashed in Swiss banks.

The Swiss Foreign Ministry said Swiss banks have frozen 360 million francs belonging to Col. Gadhafi, his family and close associates, as well as another 410 million francs deposited by Mr. Mubarak and his inner circle. 

The ministry had previously said only that it had frozen tens of millions of francs in assets traced to Mr. Mubarak and had given no indication of amounts deposited by the Libyan leader. It also said about 60 million francs belonging to Mr. Ben Ali and his entourage had been traced. A ministry spokesman declined to name the banks holding the money. 

Switzerland, the world's largest offshore-banking center, has leapfrogged ahead of the European Union and the U.S. in freezing money belonging to the three leaders. The Alpine nation has been anxious to shake off a reputation as a haven for assets stolen by criminals, strongmen and corrupt public officials.

Bern has been working closely in recent weeks with judicial authorities in Tunisia and Egypt to advance the process of returning the assets to the new governments there. 

The amounts, while large, fall far short of the estimates as to the overall wealth of the three leaders, which analysts say could amount to billions of dollars each. The U.S. has already frozen more than $30 billion in assets belonging to the Gadhafi regime. 

Earlier Monday, the Swiss Finance Ministry also said it has taken the first legal steps toward returning money belonging to former Haitian leader Jean-Claude Duvalier back to Haiti. 

Following a 25-year court battle to return about six million francs allegedly stolen by Mr. Duvalier, Bern had to pass a special law last year in order to clear legal obstacles that prevented it from returning the money to the impoverished nation.

 Write to  Deborah Ball at deborah.ball@wsj.com 