Retail mogul   Leo Kahn used a lifetime of experience in the grocery business to co-found Staples, the office-supply giant that helped kill the neighborhood stationery store.

Mr. Kahn, who died Wednesday at age 94, built Purity Supreme, a grocery chain in the northeast, and later founded Fresh Fields, a pioneering natural-foods grocery that was acquired by Whole Foods.

Staples came about when Mr. Hahn and partner  Thomas Stemberg realized they could apply the economics of high-volume, low-margin grocery stores to the paper-clip and rubber-band business. 

The two men previously had been arch rivals in Boston, where their grocery chains competed to the point of filing complaints with the state attorney general claiming false advertising. 

By 1986, Mr. Kahn had sold his grocery business and Mr. Stemberg had lost his job in a corporate shake-up. Both were casting about for new projects, preferably something in specialty retailing where competition hadn't eroded profits. After bonding over Harvard basketball games—both men were alumni—Mr. Stemberg wrote the business plan for a giant office-supply store, and became CEO. Mr. Kahn was chairman and was in charge of adding gravitas to the funding pitch.

"Here's this industry titan who was willing to put it on the line for an unemployed executive's plan," said Mr. Stemberg. "Leo's endorsement meant everything to Staples." Investment flowed from several blue-chip private-equity firms.

The niche for big-box office retailers filled fast as  Office Depot
ODP


-2.82
%




 was founded later in 1986 and Office Max began in 1988. Staples remains the leader, with stores in 27 countries and $24.5 billion in sales 2010, more than the other two combined.

A native of Boston, Mr. Kahn attended Harvard, then earned a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University. He worked as a newspaper reporter and served as an Army Air Forces navigator in World War II. 

After the war, he helped his father's wholesale-grocery operation to open its first retail outlets, which eventually grew to the Purity Supreme chain with 28 supermarkets scattered around New England. 

A well-known figure in Boston, Mr. Kahn became an outspoken consumer advocate when meat prices soared during the 1970s. He ran ads featuring himself holding an egg and announcing "Here's today's meat special at Purity Supreme." The only way to bring meat prices down, he said "is to stop buying so much meat."

Mr. Kahn was an early entrant in warehouse-style stores, opening more than a dozen Heartland groceries that offered restricted inventory in giant packages at cut rates. He sold his retail operations in 1984 for $80 million to Supermarkets General Corp, which operated Pathmark food stores. His grocery stores later became part of the Stop & Shop chain.

In his mid sixties, Mr. Kahn became a jogging enthusiast and boasted running a 3 hour, 30 minute marathon. He embraced natural foods, too, and in 1991 founded Fresh Fields in the Washington D.C. area. He later founded another natural-foods supermarket chain in the Boston area, Nature's Heartland. Both chains were sold to Whole Foods.

Mr. Kahn sat on the boards of several retailers, and endowed professorships at Harvard. "There's not many Harvard guys in the grocery business," Mr. Stemberg said.

—Email remembrances@wsj.com 