DENVER – Amid criticism that academic economists' ethical lapses were partly to blame for the U.S. financial crisis, the American Economic Association said Thursday that it will consider providing new ethical guidelines to its membership.

"The executive committee of the American Economic Association voted unanimously to create a committee to consider the association's existing disclosure and other ethical standards and potential extensions to those standards," the AEA said in a statement here as its annual meeting opened.

The AEA's effort comes as economists face greater scrutiny for their ties to Wall Street banks, hedge funds and other firms. 

The documentary film "Inside Job," released in October in the U.S., drew widespread public attention to influential academic economists' ties to Wall Street firms through directorships and consulting jobs. 

In a recent paper, two economists from the University of Massachusetts, Amherst—Gerald Epstein and Jessica Carrick-Hagenbarth—noted that a number of economists who published comments on financial reforms failed to fully disclose potential conflicts of interest.

This week, Mr. Epstein and Ms. Carrick-Hagenbarth sent a letter, signed by about other 300 economists, to AEA President Robert Hall. It urged the association to "adopt a code of ethics that requires disclosure of potential conflicts of interest that can arise between economists' roles as economic experts and as paid consultants, principals or agents for private firms."

"I think there are many economists who are just as concerned about the issues of disclosure and ethical standards as people outside the profession," said  Janet Currie, a Columbia University economist who is a member of the AEA's executive committee. 

The AEA has considered adopting ethical guidelines in the past, but decided against it on the grounds that they would not be enforceable. Other than academic journals it publishes, the association exercises no real authority over economists' professional lives, said Harvard economist  Lawrence Katz. 

"I think the AEA can play a leadership role, but I don't think it can moderate people in any way," he said. That will be a role that the universities that employ the economists will have to take, he added. 

 Write to  Justin Lahart at justin.lahart@wsj.com and Mark Whitehouse at mark.whitehouse@wsj.com 