The 2012 Senate electoral battlefield began to take shape Tuesday, as Democratic Sen. Kent Conrad of North Dakota announced he would not seek re-election in 2012 and people close to Sen. Joe Lieberman, an independent from Connecticut, said that he would announce plans Wednesday to retire when his term ends.

Mr. Conrad's announcement dealt a blow to Democratic hopes of keeping control of the Senate after the 2012 elections.

The expected announcement from Mr. Lieberman, who is 68 years old, likely will mark the end of a tumultuous political career. Mr. Lieberman was the Democrats' vice presidential nominee in 2000 but later became a pariah among the party's liberal wing for supporting the Republican nominee for president in 2008 and breaking with his party on health care. Democrats hope his retirement will make it easier for their nominee to win in Connecticut next year.

The two retirement announcements signaled the beginning of an election cycle in which Democrats face a difficult landscape. The party holds a 53-47 majority in the Senate after losing six seats in November's the mid-term elections. Next year, Democrats will have to defend 23 Senate seats, compared with only 10 seats the GOP will defend.

Many of the Democratic seats are in conservative or swing states such as Missouri, Virginia, Nebraska and North Dakota, where Democrats are sure to face headwinds.

The party will find it harder to hold the North Dakota seat without Mr. Conrad, 62, on the ballot. In November, Republican John Hoeven won 76% of the vote in the course of picking up the seat vacated by Democratic Sen. Byron Dorgan. A Republican took the state's only House seat with 55% of the vote, defeating Rep. Earl Pomeroy (D., N.D.).

Those results marked a significant reversal for Democrats, who had controlled the full three-person delegation since 1992.

Mr. Lieberman's retirement could boost Democratic prospects in Connecticut. Democratic strategists feared that Mr. Lieberman, unlikely to run as a Democrat, would enter the race as an independent and siphon votes from the Democratic candidate, creating an opening for a Republican to win.

Democrats did well in a head-to-head matchup with a Republican candidate last year. Amid a strong GOP wave nationally, Democrat Richard Blumenthal won Connecticut's open Senate seat by 12 points, heading off former wrestling-company  executive Linda McMahon, who spent close to $50 million on her campaign.

Once a Democrat, Mr. Lieberman lost the party primary in 2006 before winning the general election as an independent. Some Democrats were angry at his support for the Iraq war. He also antagonized them by campaigning for Republican Sen. John McCain for president and by his stance on the Democrats' health-care overhaul. At a crucial point in the 2010 Senate debate on the health-care law, Mr. Lieberman blew up a compromise on plans for a government-sponsored health insurance program, or "public option"—an element that was especially important to the party's liberal wing. 

Republicans welcomed Mr. Conrad's retirement. "We believe this race represents one of the strongest pickup opportunities for Senate Republicans this cycle and will invest whatever resources are necessary to win next year," said  Brian Walsh, communications director of the National Republican Senatorial Committee

"There are a number of potential Democratic candidates who could make this race competitive, while we expect to see a contentious primary battle on the Republican side," the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee said in a statement. 

Many other senators up for reelection in 2012 have not yet stated their intentions. Democratic leaders are uncertain, for example, whether Sen. Jim Webb (D., Va.) will run for a second term. Also uncertain is whether Sen. Herb Kohl (D., Wisc.) will seek a fifth term.

—Jonathan Weisman and Devlin Barrett contributed to this article.

 Write to  Janet Hook at Janet.Hook@wsj.com and Danny Yadron at danny.yadron@wsj.com 