TOKYO—The Japanese government stepped up its direct control of efforts to contain the nation's unfolding nuclear crisis, amid growing tensions with the Fukushima Daiichi plant's embattled operator.

On Wednesday,  Tokyo Electric Power Co.
9501


0.14
%




 said 20 government officials had moved into the company's offices here as part of a joint headquarters formed to handle the crisis. Prime Minister Naoto Kan heads the new team.

On Thursday morning, government officials ordered Japan's Self Defense Force to send in helicopters to start dumping water on the site.

On Tuesday, Economics Minister Banri Kaieda had ordered the company to drench with water a pool containing nuclear waste material, after the water level at the pool—used to cool the fuel rods of the fourth of the plant's six reactors—reached zero at one point without Tepco injecting more, according the ministry. 

"He judged it to be very dangerous" and decided there was "an imminent necessity," said a spokesman for the Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency, which is part of Mr. Kaieda's purview. He also demanded a vent to be built in the plant's No. 2 reactor. 

A Tepco spokesman acknowledged the order, saying it reflected the urgency of the problems, not any delay in the company's response.

The moves followed Mr. Kan's early-morning visit to Tepco on Tuesday to complain about its slow release of information, said a person familiar with the matter. "There's more involvement and more intervention at this point," the person said. "This is a public-safety issue."

U.S. officials indicated Wednesday that they believed the plant's damage at the complex was graver than Japanese officials have outlined.

Tepco has previously grappled with accusations of poor handling of safety issues. The utility admitted in 2002 that it had falsified the results of safety tests 10 years earlier on the containment vessel of the No. 1 reactor at Fujishima Daiichi, which is now one of three reactors that workers are struggling to keep from overheating. 

In 2003, the company was forced to temporarily shut down 17 nuclear-power facilities after acknowledging it had covered up reports showing cracks in the structures of some reactors.

In 2007, an earthquake heavily damaged Tepco's Kashiwazaki-Kariwa plant. The company initially said there was no release of radiation, but admitted later that the quake released radiation and spilled radioactive water into the Sea of Japan. In 2009 Tepco told the government it had designed the Fujishima Daiichi facility against a radiation spill "with even a large earthquake."

More than 100 government personnel have been sent to work on the crisis at the plant, said Kazuma Yokota, head of the team that monitors safety at the facility. They supplement the 50 on-site employees Tepco is rotating to work directly on stabilizing the plant at any one time.

—Yuka Hayashi and Phred Dvorak contributed to this article.

 Corrections & Amplifications  A previous version of the article incorrectly referred to the plant as the Fujishima Daiichi nuclear complex.

 Write to  Andrew Morse at andrew.morse@wsj.com 