Republican senators in Wisconsin Wednesday night maneuvered around Democrats to pass legislation stripping public employees' unions of collective-bargaining rights, setting the stage for other states to pursue similar steps in one of the broadest challenges to organized labor in decades. 

A vote on Republican Gov. Scott Walker's "budget-repair" bill had been stymied since Feb. 17 when 14 Democratic senators left the state, kicking off a rancorous, three-week political drama. Without the Democrats, the senate lacked a quorum to vote on certain fiscal items in the bill.

On Wednesday night, Republican senators convened on short notice and removed appropriations items from the bill to allow a vote on the remaining issues—including curbs on the collective-bargaining rights of public-employee unions. The vote to pass the amended bill was 18-1, with no Democratic senators present.

Republicans said they had waited long enough for Democrats to return to Madison. Democrats complained that their political rivals had abused their power. Spectators in the senate gallery screamed, "You are cowards," while the vote was taken.

Republican Senate Majority Leader Scott Fitzgerald said, "The people of Wisconsin elected us to come to Madison and do a job. Just because the Senate Democrats won't do theirs doesn't mean we won't do ours." Gov. Walker said in a statement that he applauded passage of the bill to "take a step in the right direction to balance the budget and reform government."

Democratic House Minority Leader Peter Barca called the Republican vote "outrageous" and a possible violation of Wisconsin's open-meeting law. Mr. Fitzgerald said the vote was legal.

Senate Democrats were driving back to Wisconsin after the Republican vote when they thought better of it and decided to remain in exile in Illinois, said Democratic Sen. Jon Erpenbach. He said they feared that Republicans would reassemble the original bill and force a vote on the whole thing. "We don't trust them at all," Mr. Erpenbach said.

The new bill is scheduled to go Thursday before the Republican-controlled Assembly, where it's expected to pass. Then it would go to Gov. Walker to be signed. Mr. Barca, the Democrat, said Democrats would be "working through the night" to find a way to delay or block final passage.

The bizarre showdown began in February when the governor proposed his "budget-repair" bill. After the Democratic senators realized they couldn't stop its passage, they left the state for neighboring Illinois. Wisconsin law requires that the Senate have a quorum to vote on legislation involving fiscal matters, such as the budget. By leaving, the 14 Democrats deprived Republicans of a three-fifths quorum—20 out of 33 senators—needed to vote on certain fiscal matters. With Democrats in hotels across the border, the bill sat in limbo.

Tens of thousands of mostly pro-union protesters descended on Madison, Wisconsin's capital, chanting, banging drums and sleeping in the capital rotunda. Republican and Democrat senators held sporadic negotiations. On Sunday, Democrats indicated they might return soon. Talks fell apart as both sides traded attacks about their willingness to compromise.

On Wednesday, the Senate and Assembly passed a resolution to form a conference committee, which then met to amend the bill by taking out the appropriations. The bill that passed would take away the ability of unions to bargain over pensions and health care, and would limit pay raises to inflation.

The bill seeks to address a projected $3.6 billion shortfall by asking public employees to pick up more than $300 million in their pension and health-care costs. The bill requires public-employee union members to contribute 5.8% of their pay to pensions and to pay 12.6% of health-care premiums out of their wages, up from 6% on average—changes that union officials said they would agree to. Two items taken out of the amended bill involve the sale of power plants and legislative oversight of Medicaid assistance, which many Republicans and Democrats opposed. 

 Another fight over public-employee collective-bargaining rights is under way in Ohio, where Republican Gov. John Kasich supports eliminating most bargaining rights for the state's 400,000 public workers. A bill that cleared the Senate is now in the Republican-controlled House and is expected to be passed after a series of committee hearings that began this week.

In Wisconsin, the Republicans' move is likely to ramp up tensions between those who are for and against taking collective-bargaining rights from state employees. A poll this week by Rasmussen Reports found that 57% of people disapproved of eliminating those rights.

Mary Bell, president of the Wisconsin Education Association Council, which represents 98,000 teachers and support staff in the state, said she asked teachers to report to work Thursday while unions coordinate their next actions, but added that Mr. Walker "will not break us." 

Already eight Republican and six Democratic senators have been targeted for recall, with volunteers across the state gathering signatures needed to hold recall elections.

Earlier Wednesday, Republicans in Wisconsin's state Senate began fining each of their absent Democratic colleagues $100 a day, as neither side offered much hope of resuming talks to resolve the standoff.

Alison Omens, a spokeswoman in Washington for the AFL-CIO, said passage of the bill would galvanize efforts to defeat "radical overreaches by corporate-backed politicians."

Matt Seaholm, of Americans for Prosperity Wisconsin, a conservative group with about 100,000 members in the state, said he thought passing the bill was necessary to break the stalemate. "I think Gov. Walker is going to come out of this fight stronger," Mr. Seaholm said. "At the end of the day, he said he was going to make bold moves to balance the budget. That's what he's doing."

 Write to  Doug Belkin at doug.belkin@wsj.com and Kris Maher at kris.maher@wsj.com 