SYDNEY—The flooding in Australia's Queensland state has devastated the region's agricultural heartland which could result in shortages of some fruits and vegetables and higher grocery bills for Australians in coming months. 

Weeks of floods and rain have destroyed sugar cane, cotton, vegetable crops, tropical fruit and livestock, while hindering grain exports and diminishing the quality of wheat produced from the region. 

The destruction compares with Cyclone Larry, which hit Queensland in 2006, wiping out the vast majority of the country's banana crop and causing a 250% increase in the price of the fruit. That sharp rise in banana prices contributed to higher inflation that year. Experts say the same could happen again this year. 

Flood-related crop damage could cause a 15% spike in fruit and vegetable prices in the first quarter, according to JPMorgan's economic forecasts, as well as higher meat, bread and cereal prices in supermarkets. Restaurants are also likely to raise prices, the bank said. For these reasons, JPMorgan is now calling for the consumer price index to rise 3.8% in 2011, up from a prior forecast of 3.2% growth. 

"We are seeing some upward price pressure on meat prices, particularly on beef because of the disruptions in processing," said Luke Matthews, an analyst at Commonwealth Bank of Australia. "These pressures in terms of food prices that are a direct result of the flooding compounds a more structural issue in the global food market. We have a tight market in certain key commodities which is causing a rally across agricultural prices more broadly." 

For the major supermarket retailers, food inflation has been minimal in recent quarters, largely due to stiff competition in the supermarket sector between rivals Woolworths Ltd. and Coles, owned by Wesfarmers Ltd.. But that could change in the wake of the Queensland floods. 

"At the producer level, we have seen price appreciation in recent months and we would expect certainly expect some of those cost pressures to be passed on by those food retailers," Matthews said. 

Retailers are adjusting their standards for the type of produce they accept as the availability and range of produce falls, according to John Crawford, chairman of Sustainable Agriculture at Sydney University. 

"The supermarkets are changing their criteria and admitting fruit that's more marked than they would've admitted because I think they're starting to realize there could be shortages that could affect prices," he said.

Australia is also the world's third largest producer of sugar. The Canegrowers Association estimates in 2010 alone, before the worst of the recent flooding hit Queensland, growers took a cumulative 500 million Australian dollar (US$497 million) hit in the year's earnings due to the rains. That means sugar farmers lost, in aggregate, about 25% of what they expected to make that year. Of the total sugarcane that growers were expected to harvest, 17% couldn't be harvested due to the floods. 

"There are a lot of questions about how bad this is going to continue to be," Canegrowers Chief Executive Steve Greenwood said, as the major sugar region of Bundaburg braced for more floods. 

No one is prepared to call the end to the disaster yet. Even after the floodwater recedes, farmers will have to determine what they can plant in the upcoming fall and winter seasons and there could be ongoing issues with transportation until infrastructure in the region is rebuilt. 

A Woolworths spokeswoman said customers will see the effects of the floods on the selection in stores come April or May. 

"Until farmers can get back in their fields and can ascertain whether or not they can plant stuff, then we're not going to know what the potential impact is on the Queensland produce seasons, which is the autumn and winter," she said.

 Write to  Cynthia Koons at cynthia.koons@wsj.com 