FLORHAM PARK, N.J.—The Jets hired Rex Ryan 729 days ago, and in the straight-laced profession of NFL head coaching, Mr. Ryan has managed to do something remarkable as his Jets prepare for another appearance in the AFC Championship Game: He has never been boring.

He has sworn up a storm on HBO's "Hard Knocks," acknowledged his addiction to M&Ms, made an obscene gesture at a mixed-martial arts event, impersonated his twin brother at a press conference, needled his opponents and unabashedly declared—over and over to his players, to reporters, to anyone else who will listen—his goal of seizing the franchise's first championship in 42 years. In the World According to Rex, there is little nuance and almost no discretion.

Coaches tend to play things close to the vest, and so do boardroom executives. By any measure, Mr. Ryan's brash leadership style, played out in public for everyone to see, is unconventional.

 To his credit, it seems to be paying off. The Jets (13-5), a team shaped in his unvarnished image, will face the Pittsburgh Steelers (13-4) at Heinz Field on Sunday night with a berth in the Super Bowl at stake.

But if Mr. Ryan has nudged—fine, shoved—the Jets into the spotlight thanks to the force of his own personality, there are long-term risks to this approach, according to several people who have studied business leadership and the culture of "celebrity CEOs."

"For the first few years, using the media can really work to your advantage," said Joseph Porac, a professor at NYU's Stern School of Business. "And his honesty has generated a lot of press. But over time, it's pretty clear that being in the public eye can have negative repercussions."

Mr. Porac cited "Lessons from the Top," a book published in 1999 in which authors Thomas J. Neff and James M. Citrin identified the "top 50 business leaders in America." A review of those leaders last year, Mr. Porac said, found that about a quarter of them had been fired, indicted or pressured to step down by shareholders.

 Though the book came out at the peak of the dot-com bubble, it also played a role in elevating the profiles of those people, Mr. Porac said. And that, in turn, intensified public scrutiny on them.

Mr. Porac said he has noticed a new trend: CEOs who actively avoid publicity. These are executives who have learned from the sordid tales of Martha Stewart and Dennis Kozlowski, Tyco International's jailed former CEO. Both are extreme examples, sure. But the lessons are clear.

"Dennis Kozlowski loved the attention—he sought it," said Scott Graffin, an assistant professor at the University of Georgia's Terry College of Business. "In the NFL, it's always the coaches who cultivate the media who get in trouble, even if they have early success. You're better off being conservative, attaining moderate levels of success and staying out of the media spotlight."

The two best examples of this phenomenon, he said, are the Philadelphia Eagles' Andy Reid and the Tennessee Titans' Jeff Fisher. Both are mild-mannered, well-respected coaches who have achieved "broad, continuous, moderate success," Mr. Graffin said. Mr. Reid's record is 118-73-1 over 12 seasons. Mr. Fisher's record is 142-120 over 17 seasons. Mr. Reid and Mr. Fisher are the two longest-tenured head coaches in the NFL, though neither has won a Super Bowl. Mr. Graffin said this is no coincidence.

"The worst thing that can happen to Rex Ryan," Mr. Graffin said, "is winning the Super Bowl."

In 2006, Mr. Graffin co-authored a paper with Mr. Porac and two other academics that found that executives who win "CEO of the Year" contests received higher pay but also higher performance expectations. When this happens, their margin for error tends to shrink.

In Mr. Ryan's case, he has set an impossibly high standard for himself with his bold talk. A championship would beget a raise, Mr. Graffin said. A raise would beget more media attention. And more media attention would beget more scrutiny, more second-guessing by the public, more opportunities for him to make missteps.

 In terms of long-term job stability, Mr. Ryan probably would be better off acting like more of a hermit.

"Even Bill Belichick doesn't win Super Bowls all the time," Mr. Graffin said, referring to the New England Patriots' notoriously bland head coach.

Whenever Mr. Ryan is asked about his press-conference panache, he has a rote response: "I'm just being myself." 

Vince Lombardi, Jr., the son of the legendary Green Bay Packers coach and a motivational speaker who has written about leadership, does not consider himself a fan of Mr. Ryan's unorthodox approach. ("Nobody's bigger than the game," he said.) But Mr. Lombardi said he understands why Mr. Ryan does what he does.

"He'd be a phony if he did it any other way," Mr. Lombardi said. "To Rex's credit, he knows what market he's in, and he plays to his strengths, and he's probably the real deal as far as that goes. And the players understand that, and they respect that. If he tried to be somebody else, they'd see through it and it wouldn't be nearly as effective."

Mr. Ryan's players seem to appreciate his authenticity and relish winning for him. He has a unified locker room. Trevor Pryce, a defensive lineman, played for Mr. Ryan with the Baltimore Ravens, back when Mr. Ryan was a defensive coordinator. When the Ravens released Mr. Pryce this season, he signed with the Jets the following day—purely for the opportunity, he said, to play for Mr. Ryan and vie for a title.

Mr. Pryce said he has played for other coaches who were just as vocal. "I've heard some things come out of other coaches' mouths that would make Rex cringe at times," he said. 

The only difference, Mr. Pryce said, is that Mr. Ryan says what he wants to say both in private and in public.

"Talk about a man with no fear," Mr. Pryce said. "I mean, everybody has a fear of getting embarrassed. He has no fear of that. And the reason he has no fear is because of his confidence. He has confidence because of how hard he works. People don't realize that. He sleeps here. This is where he lives, here in this facility. Same thing when he was in Baltimore. You come in at 6 a.m., and his car hasn't moved."

His effect on the organization, from top to bottom, has been profound.

 His players speak their minds. Owner Woody Johnson, a businessman who once shunned the press, has become far more accessible and willing to do interviews. And the Jets—considered the market's second team, plying their trade in the shadow cast by their co-tenants at New Meadowlands Stadium—were making news long before this postseason run.

"It's very difficult to stick out in the sports industry in a good or non-controversial way," said David Carter, executive director of the USC Sports Business Institute. "It can be equally difficult to carve out shelf space in New York, and Rex has managed to do both."

Mr. Ryan has talked and talked and talked this season, but he usually sticks to one theme: winning. He hopes the Jets will win again this weekend. And he wants to sustain that message for as long as possible, even if the odds are against him.

—Mike Sielski contributed to this report

 Write to  Scott Cacciola at scott.cacciola@wsj.com 