WASHINGTON -- The crafting of new standards for mortgage lending has been delayed as top U.S. regulators clash on whether to attach protections for homeowners on the verge of foreclosure.

The holdup is an indication that the implementation of the Dodd-Frank financial overhaul could be messy as a diverse set of regulators try to reach consensus on numerous rules.

At issue are rules dictating which loans should be exempt from the law's so-called risk-retention requirement, which says issuers of mortgage-backed securities must hold on to 5% of the risk. Lawmakers included the provision to avoid a repeat of the housing collapse by making lenders more cautious, since they now stand to lose if a loan goes bad. Previously, mortgage lenders passed the risk to other investors.

Officials set a tentative goal of completing a proposal by the end of 2010, but the spat has contributed to a delay, according to people familiar with the negotiations. The Dodd-Frank financial-overhaul law mandates regulators finalize the rule by April.

Six federal agencies must sign off on the proposal before it is published for comment. One of those -- the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. -- has been insisting that the risk rules also contain new standards for mortgage-servicing companies, which collect mortgage payments and distribute them to investors.

FDIC officials say they floated the idea among fellow regulators as far back as September. They believe the rules are the quickest way to reform the troubled industry, which has been the subject of numerous complaints.

The other regulators involved agree on the need for such regulations, but believe it's better to tackle them through a separate rule or possibly legislation. They are concerned the FDIC's approach wouldn't cover all mortgages. They also say it is unclear whether the risk-retention rules established by the Dodd-Frank law gave regulators the legal authority to impose standards on mortgage servicers.

Some people involved in the talks believe the agencies are likely to miss their April deadline for the risk-retention rule and therefore argue that crafting servicing standards on a separate track could get a quicker result than the FDIC's proposal.

Many industry officials are pressing for a delay. Defining what kind of mortgages are deemed safe, and therefore exempt from risk-retention requirements, is complicated enough and should not be mixed with the servicing standards, said  Paul Leonard, vice president of government affairs at the Housing Policy Council, a mortgage-industry group.

"There should be a discussion on how you look at servicing standards and what they should be," he said. "We think they should be done separately and take a little more time to do it."

Industry groups also say a move by regulators to include servicing standards could be challenged. "There's certainly serious concern that this would not be in compliance with the legislative intent of the Dodd-Frank Act," said  Tom Deutsch, executive director of the American Securitization Forum, which represents the mortgage securities industry.

The FDIC has the support of some Democratic lawmakers and a number of consumer groups and liberal activists. Investors in mortgage securities and prominent economist Nouriel Roubini also signaled their support in a letter last month.

Supporters argue that servicing standards are critical to fixing the housing market and that the foreclosure mess is too dire to wait for the federal rule-making process or, even worse, Congress.

"We needed this three years ago; we needed it 20 years ago," said  Alys Cohen, a staff attorney with the National Consumer Law Center, a liberal consumer group. Including standards in the Dodd-Frank mortgage rules guarantees they will be in place by April, "which is lightning speed by federal rule-making standards."

The FDIC published a legal memo last month saying that servicing standards are "clearly permitted" under the risk-retention rules.  Andrew Gray, an FDIC spokesman, said Dodd-Frank asked regulators to "help ensure strong underwriting and a safe and stable securitization market, and the FDIC strongly believes that servicing standards are a critical part of this effort."

The need for such standards became apparent, officials say, after revelations in recent months that lenders cut corners when processing foreclosure cases, using so-called "robo-signers" who signed thousands of court documents without reading them. Regulators from numerous federal agencies have completed a review of the mortgage-servicing system. That review has informed regulators' discussions about what fixes are needed, according to people familiar with the matter.

Among the guidelines under discussion: requiring that mortgage servicers set a single point of contact -- a person or phone number -- for delinquent homeowners. Mortgage servicers also could be required to disclose to investors whether they own any interest in the loans they service, such as a home-equity loan.