PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla.—In the end, maybe the most significant moment Sunday morning for the Mets and Johan Santana, their injured ace left-hander, wasn't the eight minutes Santana spent at his locker, insisting that his rehabilitation from September shoulder surgery is progressing at exactly the right pace.

Maybe it didn't happen when Santana—in reference to report from the Record in northern New Jersey that quoted an anonymous source saying the Mets might be close to shutting Santana down for the entire 2011 season—said, "Whoever is saying that I'm not ready, I think, is lying." Maybe it didn't happen an hour earlier, when pitching coach Dan Warthen called the story "an absolute lie." (A Record reporter said the paper stood by its source.)

Maybe it happened when Santana entered the clubhouse and walked into the team's cafeteria, where a female employee offered him an enthusiastic greeting: "Happy Birthday!"

Santana turned 32 on Sunday, and despite the hullabaloo over the timeline of his return and the Mets' denials in the face of the lying liars who are lying about them, his age and his recent past are more relevant to the franchise's future. In the long term, it doesn't matter much whether Santana pitches this season; if the Mets' revamped front office hasn't written off 2011, its members at least have to be realistic about the team's remote chance of contending. The more important issue is whether Santana has any hope of getting back to full effectiveness over the remaining years of his contract—because over those remaining years, whoo boy…

After they acquired Santana in a trade with the Minnesota Twins in February 2008, the Mets wasted no time in making sure he'd have little incentive to leave. They signed him to a new six-year deal—one that will pay Santana $72 million over the next three seasons, that has a $25 million club option for 2014 (with a $5.5 million buyout), and that makes him the highest-paid Mets player, according to Cot's Baseball Contracts, a website that tracks salaries. At the time, of course, Santana was a year removed from winning his second Cy Young Award, the Mets were trying to wrench control of the National League East away from the Philadelphia Phillies and no one outside the organization had an inkling of the franchise's coming financial problems.

Given the Mets' woes since—their ownership is now trying to sell a minority share of the franchise in light of its connection to Bernie Madoff's Ponzi scheme—such largesse to any player, even an everyday star such as Jose Reyes or David Wright, would be an albatross. But each of Santana's past two seasons have ended prematurely because his body has broken down: bone chips in his elbow in 2009, a torn anterior capsule in his shoulder last year. He's doing nothing more now than short- and long-tossing on flat ground (he did not throw Sunday), and anecdotally, neither he nor the Mets have to look far for a pessimistic glimpse at what might be ahead for him.

Both Mark Prior, who is attempting a comeback with the Yankees, and Chien-Ming Wang, who is in the Washington Nationals organization, suffered injuries similar to Santana's. Neither has won a game in the major leagues since.

"It's going to take some time," said Santana, who was 11-9 with a 2.98 earned-run average last season, "and we all are aware of that."

Even if Santana were to return to the Mets' rotation in late June or early July, as team officials have said publicly he might, the nature of this injury and surgery would render him a husk of the pitcher he has been—certainly this year, perhaps beyond. Such late-career attrition, coupled with his exorbitant salary, would make it virtually impossible for the Mets to trade him.

Those circumstances separate his situation from several of the roster's other burdensome contracts. Carlos Beltran, Oliver Perez, Luis Castillo—should those players underperform, at least their deals expire at season's end. But whether Santana pitches this season or not, he's likely to be a Met for a good long while and be paid a princely sum for it. "I'm blessed," he said on his 32nd birthday. And how. His team can hardly say the same.

 Write to  Mike Sielski at mike.sielski@wsj.com 