As unrest in Libya keeps crude prices high, the U.S., Europe and Japan might have to spend almost $200 billion more on imports of crude this year than they did in 2010, potentially threatening their economic recoveries, the International Energy Agency said.

IEA chief economist Fatih Birol said in an interview that if the price of oil averages $100 a barrel this year, the U.S. would have to spend $385 billion on oil imports—nearly $80 billion more than it did last year. The European Union would have to spend $375 billion—$76 billion more than last year and even more than it paid in 2008, the last year of massive oil price spikes.

Such a sharp increase in U.S. import costs would present a "serious problem for business and consumer confidence, which the U.S. economy desperately needs for sentiment to improve," Mr. Birol said. The European Union was also at risk, he added, because "Europe is the weakest link in the chain of the global economic recovery."

Oil markets have been gyrating amid fears that the chaos in Libya could spread to petrostates in the Persian Gulf, potentially disrupting global oil supplies. Recent protests in Oman suggested it could be the next oil producer after Libya to experience upheaval. 

However, with Saudi Arabia stepping in to cover the shortfall from Libya, some analysts say calm may well return to the market.

Oil has been trading at its highest level in two-and-a-half years, rising nearly 14% last week. Brent, the main European benchmark, which broke through $100 a barrel in January, was at $112 a barrel Monday, while U.S. crude was trading at around $98.

The increase in oil prices comes just as the global economic recovery is showing signs of taking off, and economists fear that higher fuel costs could endanger the return to growth, heaping new burdens on already struggling consumers.

The fear is the world could see a return to 2008, when the mid-year spike in the price of crude drove U.S. gasoline prices up to $4 a gallon and triggered a sharp drop in consumer spending.

  James Hamilton, professor of economics at the University of California, San Diego, said a $20-a-barrel increase in the price of crude pushes up gasoline by 50 cents a gallon, costing about $70 billion in the course of the year—and would potentially shave about half-a-percent off U.S. gross domestic product this year. "It's a significant drain on consumers' budgets," he said. "But in the context of a $15 trillion economy, it's manageable."

  Nigel Gault, chief U.S. economist of IHS Global Insight, has calculated that a $10-per-barrel rise in crude oil prices would reduce U.S. GDP and real consumer spending by 0.2% from baseline levels and cut employment by 120,000. A $15-per-barrel rise in Brent prices, if sustained, would take about 0.3% off the 2011 growth rate, he said. But if Brent soars to $130 a barrel and gasoline breaks through the $4 a gallon mark, "the damage to growth would start shifting from an irritant to something worse." 

Production in Libya, the world's 13th largest oil exporter, has halved from around 1.6 million barrels a day since the uprising began, as international oil companies suspended their operations and evacuated hundreds of employees. It could take months for Libyan supply to return to pre-crisis levels, analysts say, as employees return and production is resumed.

In theory, the world can easily deal with any supply shortage. The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries has plenty of spare production capacity, and the industrialized countries boast 1.6 billion barrels in strategic petroleum reserves. Officials in Saudi Arabia, OPEC's biggest producer, say the kingdom is producing 9 million barrels a day, an increase of between 500,000 and 600,000 barrels a day. 

Mr. Birol of the IEA said Saudi Arabia was doing an "excellent job," showing once again that "in an emergency they're prepared to play the role of central banker and make oil available."

But one concern in the market is that Libya is a big producer of high-quality, light sweet blends that are difficult to replace at short notice. The oil that Saudi Arabia has available, in contrast, is of poorer quality with a higher sulfur content, and harder to turn into transportation fuels.

Analysts from Bank of America Merrill Lynch suggested Monday that since most of the oil in the IEA's strategic reserves was medium sour crude, "gasoline-rich light sweet barrels will remain in short supply." The analysts also said OPEC's spare capacity was down substantially, meaning the oil market's ability to deal with further outbreaks of unrest in the Middle East "remains limited." The bank predicted oil supplies from Libya could be off "for months."

"The Libyan supply disruption could be the 8th largest supply shock since 1950, on our estimates," Bank of America went on to say. "More worryingly, with other countries like Algeria, Syria, Yemen or Saudi Arabia scoring highly on social discontent, the risk of continued tensions in the region remains high."

 Write to  Guy Chazan at guy.chazan@wsj.com 