 His Restaurants: 

 The Corson Building and Sitka & Spruce 

 What he is known for: 

Farm-driven cuisine and a strong DIY ethos  

Ever since his first job, at age 13, washing dishes at a family friend's café, Matt Dillon has been drawn to what he calls "high integrity" kitchens. 

At his two Seattle restaurants, Sitka & Spruce and The Corson Building, the 37-year-old takes the notion of high integrity to a whole new level. Mr. Dillon is a devoted locavore who goes to great lengths to use the best ingredients possible. Occasionally he even grows and forages produce himself. "I'd rather spend time finding product than a piece of equipment that manipulates food into something it's not," he says.

Mr. Dillon sets what he describes as "the philosophical guidelines" at his restaurants. These tenets include traditional cooking techniques and conscientious sourcing. To this end, Mr. Dillon works with small, local farms and only buys whole animals. "We buy one cow, and we use all of the one cow," he says. "I'm not going to buy a box of hanger steaks." 

Mr. Dillon, who leaves the molecular gastronomy to others, equips his kitchen with just the basics—"pots, pans, butter and oil," he says. 

His daily-changing menus allow braised shoulder to be served one night and grilled loin chops to be served the next. He says his choice to only buy whole animals was "an evolutionary process." He explains, "Five years ago, buying whole animals wasn't something I was strict about. Now I am." 

Though Mr. Dillon credits his ingredients for the delicate, market-driven dishes that have earned him national acclaim, his kitchen know-how is evident even in his most rustic dishes. At Sitka & Spruce, braised lamb simmers with flageolet beans in a fireplace and ends up in a terra-cotta pot with grilled house-made merguez sausage, a poached egg (from The Corson Building's chicken coop) and a brown butter and walnut drizzle. It's feel-good food at its most elevated.

For this week's Slow Food Fast contribution, Mr. Dillon created a grilled-lamb-chop dish with two dipping sauces: simple salsa verde and creamy, lemon-flavored yogurt. He has an affection for finishing dishes with yogurt, which he says should taste grassy. Both the salsa and the yogurt are balanced with a good amount of lemon juice, a natural complement to lamb. 

Mr. Dillon recommends serving this dish with slabs of flat bread. They makes a meal of things and help with wiping plates clean. 

 Serves: 4  Total Time: 30 minutes 

8 lamb loin chops  Salt and pepper  1 large clove of garlic, finely chopped  2 tablespoons diced shallot  Zest of one lemon, grated  5 tablespoons lemon juice  1 teaspoon toasted fennel, anise or dill seed, ground or smashed with a mortar and pestle  ½ teaspoon chili flakes  ½ cup packed parsley leaves  ½ cup packed mint leaves  ½ cup packed picked dill, roughly chopped  ½ cup grapeseed or olive oil, plus 1 tablespoon for frying  ½ cup Greek yogurt, preferably organic

 What to Do: 

 1. Season lamb with salt and pepper and set aside.

 2. Mix garlic, shallot, zest, 2 tablespoons lemon juice, spices and chili flakes together in a small bowl.

 3. For the salsa verde, roughly chop the herbs and toss them together in a medium bowl. Add chopped garlic-shallot mixture and grated lemon zest. 

 4. Stir in oil. Season with salt and pepper to taste. Add more lemon juice or oil if needed. Allow sauce to rest at least 15 minutes.

 5. Set a large grill or sauté pan over medium-high heat. Swirl in 1 tablespoon oil. Lay lamb chops in the pan, working in batches if need be, and cook each side 6 minutes for medium-rare results. Transfer chops to a platter and let rest for 5 minutes. Squeeze additional lemon juice over the chops and sprinkle with salt. 

 6. Meanwhile, mix yogurt with 3 tablespoons lemon juice. Season with salt to taste. 

 7. Serve lamb with bowls of salsa verde and yogurt alongside for dipping. 