 Please see Corrections & Amplifications below. 

With regulators considering easing fund-raising rules for start-ups, social-networking sites that link entrepreneurs to large pools of donors are gearing up for a boom. 

The sites—which facilitate "crowd-funding"—have taken off in the past few years. Small businesses pitch ideas to people in a site's online network, who decide whether to donate. The sites typically make money by charging the small business a fee. 

Until now, U.S. regulations permitted these sites only to facilitate donations—not purchases of equity stakes. The Securities and Exchange Commission now is reviewing those rules, and many crowd-funding sites are pushing to axe the stake ban. 

The sites hope that the incentive of an equity stake will draw more donors, prompting a surge in business for the companies that run the sites. 

  Jessica Jackley, the founder and chief executive of ProFounder Financial Inc., which runs a crowd-funding site, hopes the ban is lifted. Launched in December, ProFounder has about 500 start-ups signed up and making pitches on the site. The average pledge is about $1,300; the average fund-raising, $30,000. 

ProFounder charges business owners $1,000 in service fees, on top of $100 to publish a fund-raising pitch. 

Ms. Jackley says she is already working with a legal team to lay the groundwork for online equity sales, an option she says will dramatically raise the amount of cash pledged by supporters. To date, ProFounder has raised more than $300,000 for 10 entrepreneurs.

  Sally Outlaw, co-founder of Peerbackers LLC, which runs a crowd-funding site for small businesses, says the incentive of owning real equity will drive up its base of 2,000 registered users and help the 20 projects listed on the site reach their funding targets sooner. 

"We're all holding our breath," says Ms. Outlaw, who launched the site four months ago and says it's not yet profitable. 

This week, SEC Chairman  Mary Schapiro told a congressional hearing on small-business capital formation the agency was reviewing "regulatory questions posed by new capital-raising strategies."

In a recent letter to House Rep. Darrell Issa (R., Calif.), Ms. Schapiro said the SEC was "discussing crowd-funding and possible regulatory approaches" with entrepreneurs and state regulators.

A petition calling for the securities rules to be eased for crowd-funding share issues of up to $100,000 has been backed by almost 150 organizations and individuals, Ms. Schapiro wrote.

Crowd-funding emerged about a decade ago as a way for artists, filmmakers and musicians to raise donations from a community of online supporters. The idea has since spread to small businesses, who sought other sources of financing in the past couple of years as traditional credit dried up.

San Francisco-based IndieGoGo Inc. launched in 2008, takes 4% of total funds raised—plus an additional 3% for third-party payment processors—but doesn't charge for posting a pitch. If the fund-raising target isn't met, the site takes 9% and fundraisers keep the amount raised. CEO  Slava Rubin says the company is profitable.

Mr. Rubin says the site's users have long sought a way to buy shares in promising ventures. 

"This is something we've had in our vision for a long time," Mr. Rubin says. 

Like Ms. Jackley, he expects a rule change would significantly boost activity. IndieGoGo Inc. won't disclose funding totals, but claims to have facilitated more than $1 million in funding for some 24,000 projects over the past three years. 

Supporters of a rule change say current regulations—enacted in the 1930s, and including hefty fees for registering an equity offering and legal and filing fees—are outdated as more sites emerge as a key fund-raising tool for smaller firms. 

"This isn't about de-regulation, it's about modernizing regulations," says  Karen Kerrigan, president of the Small Business and Entrepreneurship Council, a beltway lobby group.

But others fear the move would weaken investor protections and lead to fraud. Instead, they want to limit online investing to "accredited" investors—those who have a $1 million in net worth excluding the value of their primary residence.

Arkansas Securities Commissioner  Heath Abshure says in an interview that crowd-funding sites advertise start-ups to a broad audience, and could easily attract people who shouldn't be involved in speculative offerings. 

"First it's $100, then $200 and next thing you know they're risking thousands of dollars they can't afford," he says. Mr. Abshure says SEC registration includes reporting and disclosure requirements that provide data investors need to make informed decisions. 

"Buying a security is not like buying a car. You can't kick the tires," he adds.

 Write to  Angus Loten at angus.loten@wsj.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications:  IndieGoGo.com, a San Francisco "crowd funding" website—linking entrepreneurs to large pools of donors—charges a 4% fee when a funding target is reached and a 9% fee when the target isn't reached, plus an additional 3% for third-party payment processors. An earlier version of this article incorrectly said the site takes 3% of total funds raised plus the additional 3% for third-party payment processors and returns the cash if the fund-raising target isn't met.

ProFounder Financial Inc. allows a start-up entrepreneur's friends, family and acquaintances to pledge cash in return for a percentage of the start-up's future revenue. An earlier version of this article may have implied that the pledges were donations with no anticipated return.