The lack of a clear 2012 Republican presidential front-runner is prompting lesser-known figures to consider joining the race.

Instead of former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney or former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin, some conservative groups are looking for fresh faces and asking: Why not Wisconsin Rep. Paul Ryan or former Godfather's Pizza Chief Executive Herman Cain?

Former Utah Gov. Jon Huntsman Jr., who is President Barack Obama's ambassador to China, has hinted he might join the GOP contest. Onetime United Nations ambassador John Bolton is talking up a possible bid, and Rep. Michele Bachmann of Minnesota, an early supporter of the tea-party movement, is making her own high-profile jaunt to Iowa.

"We need a good solid conservative who can get the base excited, and that person just isn't out there right now," said Karen Beseth, a New York-based conservative blogger who is now backing Mr. Cain.

Most top Republican prospects are flawed in the eyes of many conservatives. Mr. Romney championed a Massachusetts health-care overhaul that has drawn the ire of the right. Ms. Palin is seen as too divisive by many in GOP ranks, who cite polls showing unease toward her even in conservative circles. Mike Huckabee, the former Arkansas governor, raised taxes while in office.

As a result, some possible dark horses and their backers sense an opening. Mr. Bolton says he is tempted to run because there is no strong national-security candidate. Tea-party groups are touting Ms. Bachmann as a hard-knuckled conservative with proven powers to raise money and seize the limelight.

Despite clear liabilities for a Republican—being part of the Obama administration, above all—Mr. Huntsman potentially could try to stake out space as a centrist. While conservative on many issues, as governor he supported civil unions for gay couples and efforts to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions.

The roster of potential candidates remains highly uncertain. With just over a year before the first nominating caucuses, most candidates have yet to begin hiring personnel in early primary states. Only Mr. Romney appears to have an edge among major donors. 

"The fact that no one really knows what anyone else is going to do gives everyone the opportunity to speculate about who else might run," said Dave Carney, a New Hampshire-based adviser to Texas Gov. Rick Perry, a Republican who said he wouldn't run in 2012 but went on a nationwide tour late last year promoting a new book.

Mr. Bolton's hints at a presidential campaign have stirred interest among security hawks and won him a spread on the cover of the conservative National Review, despite having never run for elected office. "It is very possible that whoever wins the Republican nomination is someone no one is even talking about now," Mr. Bolton said in an interview, describing the 2012 field as "unusually fluid."

Efforts to draft GOP fence-sitters are now plentiful on the Internet. A website touting Mr. Cain's candidacy has gained the backing of more than 2,000 fans of the Atlanta talk-show host and tea-party favorite, according to the site's founder, Maurice Atkinson, who is acting on his own behalf. His supporters tout Mr. Cain's business credentials and his skills as a speaker.

Mr. Cain launched a presidential exploratory committee Wednesday, and said in an interview that he hopes to appeal to "regular folk."

Supporters of Mr. Ryan, a rising star within the House leadership and the new chairman of the House Budget Committee, have launched a "Paul Ryan for President" Facebook page that has more than 13,000 fans. (Mr. Romney's page, by comparison, has over 750,000 fans.) Ryan supporters point to his outspoken effort to slash government spending and overhaul the tax code.

The Ryan page and similar sites touting other potential candidates are filled with postings musing about dream tickets that would pair Indiana Gov. Mitch Daniels, say, with Mr. Ryan, or former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush with Florida's newly elected Sen. Marco Rubio. Mr. Daniels said he was considering a potential run, but the other three have all said they had no intention of jumping into the race.

With no candidate yet officially running, pundits and Washington's political class are on tenterhooks for any whisper of news on the 2012 front. Mr. Huntsman caused a stir this month when he hinted at a 2012 run in an interview with Newsweek, though his intentions were less than clear. 

"We won't do this forever," he told Newsweek when asked about any 2012 plans, referring to his family's stint in Beijing. "I think we may have one final run left in our bones." He then declined to elaborate on any presidential plans.

Presidential fields are often large, especially in years when a party has no clearly anointed front-runner—a vice president, such as Democrat Al Gore in 2000, or a longtime party leader, such as Republican Bob Dole in 1996. With President George W. Bush leaving office in 2008, no fewer than 10 candidates turned out for the first GOP primary-election debate of the campaign in the spring of 2007, ranging from headliners such Sen. John McCain, the eventual nominee, to lesser-knowns such as former California Rep. Duncan Hunter.

Those considering a run say the dynamic is similar this year. "I just don't see any real coalescence around any one candidate," Mr. Bolton said.

Just to be safe, the Iowa Faith and Freedom Coalition, a prominent evangelical group, sent out 13 invitations to would-be candidates for its first-of-the-season GOP candidates' forum in March. 

On the list were those almost certain to run, such as Mr. Romney and former Minnesota Gov. Tim Pawlenty. But invitations also went out to Mr. Cain, South Dakota Sen. John Thune and Texas Rep. Ron Paul.

"We basically sent invitations to anyone who has given any hint they might run," said Steve Scheffler, the group's president. "And the list could get longer."

 Write to  Neil King Jr. at neil.king@wsj.com 