United Nations officials say employees passed sensitive security details to forces loyal to Ivory Coast President Laurent Gbagbo, who has refused to leave office despite losing an election and is facing a mounting rebel movement.

The leaks raise the prospect that critical security plans for the U.N. mission in the Ivory Coast could be compromised, putting at risk U.N. staff and Ivorian civilians.

The leaks also come amid criticism that the body hasn't done enough to protect civilians as postelection violence spreads.

In February, license plate numbers on U.N. vehicles were collected and handed to pro-Gbagbo police manning checkpoints, an official and a diplomat said. Two U.N staff were abducted shortly afterward by pro-Gbagbo youths, but they were later returned to the U.N.

In another case this month, locally hired U.N. employees are suspected of having shared an internal document to Gbagbo-backed soldiers that details the use of three U.N. MI-24 helicopters. The document, which was later published in the state-owned daily, Fraternité Matin, showed how the attack helicopters planned to protect Ivorian civilians. A Gbagbo spokesman wasn't available to comment.

At least 52 civilians were killed in the past week, according to the U.N., bringing the total casualties to 460 since a disputed November presidential election.

In an interview, Young-jin Choi, chief of the U.N. mission, said the document about the U.N. attack helicopters was a draft that he hadn't signed. "We must find out who did it, and where was it leaked," he said.

In response to queries, the U.N.'s New York-based Department of Peacekeeping Operations said there were "ongoing investigations" about the leaks, but declined to provide further details.

Meanwhile, the U.N. Security Council was meeting Friday to discuss the deteriorating situation in the country.

Nigeria and France presented a draft U.N. Security Council resolution that would ban heavy weapons in Abidjan, call for investigations by the International Criminal Court and the U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights, and put travel and financial sanctions on Mr. Gbagbo and four of his closest associates, said France's U.N. Ambassador Gérard Araud.

"There are one million displaced persons and some of my African colleagues were telling me that there are crowds leaving Abidjan," Mr. Araud told reporters. "Law and order are collapsing, humanitarian access is more and more difficult, hospitals, schools are closing. We are very close to a civil war in Abidjan."

He said the U.N. mission's mandate was strong enough but needed to be more robustly implemented. Mr. Araud added that Atul Khare, U.N. assistant secretary-general for peacekeeping operation, on Friday gave the Security Council assurances that the U.N. operation in the country "is going to respond in a very robust way to attacks."

The U.S. and European Union have already frozen overseas assets of Mr. Gbagbo and his allies; banned him from receiving a visa; and restricted dealings with a list of companies including the national refinery and national cocoa body.

Most of the world has recognized Mr. Gbagbo's rival, Alassane Ouattara, as the winner of the November presidential election after the U.N. certified the voting. Mr. Gbagbo later declared U.N. peacekeepers must leave the country, an order the body has ignored.

A rebel movement aligned with Mr. Ouattara has challenged Mr. Gbagbo's security forces.The U.N. Security Council has mandated the 9,000 soldiers and police of the U.N. mission to protect civilians "under imminent threat of physical violence, within its capabilities and its areas of deployment."The U.N. has recently stepped up patrols to neighborhoods under threat from pro-Gbagbo forces. U.N. troops have also surrounded the hotel residence of Mr. Ouattara, who has been living there since the November runoff.The U.N. has been hampered by their peacekeeping mandate, critics say, which doesn't allow them to pursue offensive operations against armed groups who kill civilians. Criticism of the U.N.'s effectiveness has increased after several incidents in which the U.N. has failed to intervene to stop the bloodshed. In one case two U.N. tanks turned back as police were firing into a crowd of unarmed Ouattara supporters. Often, Gbagbo's backers try to obstruct the U.N. from entering neighborhoods they are attacking, sometimes by lying in front of the tanks. 

Confrontations in parts of Abidjan and in the western part of the country have displaced tens thousands of people, health workers have fled clinics, and medicines are in short supply, says Doctors Without Borders.

Forces loyal to Mr. Gbagbo have rallied behind the Ivorian strongman. More than 10,000 pro-Gbagbo youths responded to a recent appeal from the youth minister to enlist in the army, triggering the exodus from the main city of Abidjan.

"What we are here to do is prevent civilian atrocities on a massive scale," Mr. Choi said. 

"There have been attacks and blockades," said a Western diplomat. "It is a complex situation when you have people lying in the streets and you can't roll over them with your tanks. So you have to stop and go back."

 Write to  Joe Lauria at newseditor@wsj.com 