 Obama will name Commerce Secretary Locke as ambassador to China, creating the first opening in his cabinet since the U.S. president assembled his initial team. If approved, Locke will become the first American of Chinese ancestry to be U.S. ambassador to China since the nations established formal diplomatic ties in 1979.  

 The political infighting that looks to unravel the administration of Japanese Prime Minister Kan threatens to undermine the economy's tentative recovery.  

 Nomura Holdings named Tarun Jotwani to head its global markets, part of a broad management shake-up by the Japanese firm in a bid to bolster profits.  

 Banks led the U.S. stock market higher as Bank of America raised hopes it will increase dividends and share buybacks, and crude oil edged lower. Merger news boosted stocks in Tokyo.  

 Vietnam's central bank raised two of its key interest rates in another effort to tame inflation, which remains stubbornly high.  

 Japan's first trade deficit in two years weighed on its current-account surplus, which fell 47.6% in January from a year earlier.  

 U.S. Trade Representative Kirk appealed to congressional leaders to begin work on ratifying a free-trade deal with South Korea. 

 Japan's industrial giants are becoming serious about streamlining their sprawling portfolios, as evidenced by Hitachi's planned $4.3 billion divestiture of its hard-drive business.  

 Starbucks plans to sell its instant-coffee packets in China, expanding beyond coffee stores to also sell consumer-packaged goods in the country. 

 Google is facing pressure to do more to secure its market for smartphone applications following a major software attack on mobile phones.  

 A Chinese nuclear-power firm moved to acquire a stake in a Namibian uranium deposit, and Beijing said China is poised to overtake the U.S. as the world's top user of the fuel.  

 Sprint is talking with Deutsche Telekom about options for combining Sprint with the German company's U.S. subsidiary, T-Mobile USA. 22 

 A humiliating endgame for the buyout of the power producer formerly known as TXU may come sooner than investors expected.  

 China gave final approval to Kuwait to build an oil refinery in the south of the country in a joint venture with Sinopec.  

 Mapletree Commercial Trust expects to list its shares in Singapore on April 8.  

 Iran hard-liners consolidated power after former President Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani stepped down as head of the country's powerful clerical committee.  

EU nations reached agreement to widen the scope of the bloc's sanctions on Libya, a move expected to target assets held by Libya's sovereign-wealth fund and its central bank.

 A car bomb near a military intelligence agency in the eastern city of Faisalabad, Pakistan, killed at least 20 people, the latest in a new wave of militant attacks.  

Malaysian opposition leader Anwar won a key victory in his sodomy trial, with a court ruling that DNA evidence used against him was illegally obtained.

 India's Congress party resolved differences with a regional ally in Tamil Nadu state, averting a political crisis that threatened Prime Minister Singh's government.  