 Fear gripped Tripoli as Gadhafi cracked down. Security forces have arrested scores of people and families of antigovernment activists have gone into hiding as the Libyan leader rallied his base. Anti-Gadhafi forces consolidated their positions in the oil refinery town of Brega, a day after they repulsed an offensive by Gadhafi forces. 

Obama said publicly for the first time that Gadhafi must give up power but didn't specify steps the U.S. plans. 

 Boehner said House Republicans would offer a budget that curbs Social Security and Medicare. The speaker also argued for raising the debt limit. 

 The White House offered to make an additional $6.5 billion in spending cuts for the current year as budget talks with congressional leaders began. 

 The health-care law won a reprieve from a judge who had ruled it unconstitutional. The House voted to repeal a tax-reporting rule for business. 

 GOP lawmakers in Wisconsin and Indiana increased pressure on absent Democrats to force votes on bills curbing public workers' bargaining.  

 Bill Gates called for more transparent accounting by states, saying true finances are obscured from voters.

 The suspected gunman who killed two U.S. servicemen in Germany had radical Islamist links, but investigators think he acted alone. 

 Beijing plans to boost its defense budget by 12.7% this year, a pickup from last year's sharply slower growth. 

 Forces in Ivory Coast backing the incumbent leader opened fire on women marchers, killing at least six. 

 Israel is weighing an interim deal with the Palestinians aimed at breaking a stalemate in peace efforts. 

 Egypt's prime minister resigned, underscoring how protesters aren't letting up their pressure for reforms.

 Thousands of migrants fleeing Libya walked into Tunisia as officials struggled to evacuate those already there. 

 A Pakistani court said it would proceed with the trial of a CIA contractor arrested for killing two Pakistanis. 

Rescuers in New Zealand gave up hope of finding any more earthquake survivors.

Turkish police detained journalists over an alleged plot to topple the government.

A bomb blast near a political rally in Nigeria killed three people and injured 21.

 The proportion of U.S. 15-to-24-year-olds who have had sex fell in the past decade. 

 Died: Walter Zacharius, 87, prolific publisher of romance novels and instant books. 