MANAMA, Bahrain—Bahrain's formal opposition groups on Thursday officially submitted demands to the ruling Al-Khalifa family that included the introduction of a constitutional monarchy and the dissolution of the government, a move that underlined opposition groups' determination to secure sweeping political change but risked splintering antigovernment forces between those prepared for dialogue and radicals insisting the entire regime must fall. 

Track events day by day.

The grouping of six main opposition parties, including major Shiite opposition bloc Al-Wefaq as well as secular groups, outlined its core demands at a press conference in Manama. The proposals included the release of all political prisoners, electoral changes and the formation of a new interim government, along with an independent investigation into the deaths of seven protesters since the clashes here began over a week ago.

The opposition groups said the demands represented a formal response to Crown Prince Salman bin Hamad al-Khalifa's call for dialogue, but stressed that the opening of direct talks would depend on the government's acceptance of their framework and the provision of guarantees for the safety of antigovernment protesters.

"We want [the] regime to say that in principle they agree to [the] abolition of [the] 2002 constitution and [a] new assembly on one man, one vote," said Ebrahim Sharif, a Sunni Muslim and former banker who heads the National Democratic Action Society, one of the groups tasked with unifying the opposition's message, adding that the ruling family must recognize "the rights of people to have [a] fully elected parliament with exclusive judicial oversight power." Bahrain's existing lower house of parliament is elected, but its powers to legislate are clipped by an appointed upper chamber and a royal council that can veto proposals. 

Bahrain's Ministry of Information responded in a press release that the demands demonstrated the "substantial differences between the various groups and parties willing to engage in the national dialogue," and underlined the need for dialogue to begin as soon as practically possible. "It is precisely for this reason that the dialogue must start in order that a political settlement can be reached by consensus," the statement said. 

The formal opposition parties' call for talks, albeit contingent upon sweeping political change, risks widening the gulf between mainstream political groups and protesters and undermining opposition efforts to win reforms. Established political groups have struggled to convince hard-line protesters encamped at Manama's Pearl roundabout to moderate calls for regime change, which were bolstered last week with the return of Hassan Mushaima, a hard-line Shiite opposition leader who returned from self-imposed exile in London following a government amnesty. Mr. Mushaima's Al-Haq party wasn't a signatory to Thursday's list of demands, indicating it backs radical protesters' calls for the overthrow of the monarchy. 

At the Pearl roundabout, focal point of antigovernment protests which began more than two weeks ago, opinion was split on whether to back the formal opposition groups' demands, although most appeared to favor regime change over dialogue. 

"Our only demand is that they leave… they took everything from our country and we should not negotiate with them. The opposition groups are playing politics and they don't represent opinion on the roundabout," said Ahmed al-Aradi, a 20-year-old student from Manama.

Later on Thursday, thousands of antigovernment protesters expanded their demonstrations by parading cars along one of the capital's major highways, enveloping the diplomatic quarter and blocking traffic. The protesters' strategy of gathering at sensitive locations to pressure the ruling family is set to be broadened on Friday, with opposition groups expecting the largest march in central Manama since protests began on February 14, 

The government has offered a series of concessions in recent days, releasing 308 political prisoners, reshuffling the cabinet and reducing citizens' monthly housing costs by 25% in a move to assuage protesters' demands.

Bahrain's ministry of information says the crown prince has made clear he intends to begin a national dialogue with all sections of society to "move away from polarization and ensure that sectarianism does not take root in Bahrain."

The groups given the task of unifying the opposition's message have been struggling for over a week to coordinate a response to the call for talks. Many in the opposition cite the need for further concessions from the ruling family after last week's violent crackdown, which left seven people dead and hundreds injured, before they agree to direct talks. Others fear a replay of 2001, when King Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa pledged to devolve power into a constitutional monarchy but pulled back a year later, leaving control in the hands of the ruling family.

"We are part of the Arab revolution," said Sheikh Ali Salman, leader of Al-Wefaq, the largest opposition bloc that resigned its seats from parliament in solidarity with protesters. "We want a constitutional monarchy, where the king reigns and the people rule; it's not unreasonable," he said. 