KABUL—Afghan President Hamid Karzai lashed out at the international community for fomenting a "crisis" by pressing him to inaugurate parliament, and said incoming lawmakers found to be involved in election fraud would be prosecuted.

About 250 losing candidates met with Mr. Karzai at the presidential palace Tuesday afternoon, refusing to leave after the president stood firm in his decision to open the new parliament on Wednesday. The failed candidates promised to disrupt the inauguration, saying most of the 249 incoming lawmakers won their seats through fraud.

Mr. Karzai last week said he was going to postpone the inauguration by a month to allow a special court, established by him, to review fraud charges.

But after elected parliamentarians said they would proceed without him, and Western representatives, including U.S. Ambassador Karl Eikenberry and United Nations envoy Staffan de Mistura, pressed for a speedy seating of the legislature, Mr. Karzai backed down. He agreed to an inauguration Wednesday, while lawmakers agreed to allow the special court to proceed.

Mr. Karzai on Tuesday bitterly complained about Western interference. "A number of foreign hands brought our decision [to delay the inauguration] under question and started a movement to create a crisis in the country, telling candidates to inaugurate the parliament without the president's presence," he said, according to a statement by the presidential palace.

Unsuccessful candidates accused Mr. Karzai of weakness and of bending to the demands of foreigners.

"I thought that Afghanistan belongs to Afghans," said Haji Farid, a losing incumbent from eastern Kapisa province, according to the palace's statement. "But now I know that this is the country of Karl W. Eikenberry and Staffan de Mistura because they are making decisions for the country."

Afghanistan has been without a parliament for about six months, with the president ruling by decree in the meantime.

Mr. Karzai said the special court, which he established, would continue to investigate fraud in the Sept. 18 elections.

A member of the country's ethnic Pashtun plurality, Mr. Karzai has said the incoming parliament is unrepresentative because it doesn't allocate enough seats to Pashtuns. He has said he wants 30 elected lawmakers replaced.

Afghan election authorities and Western officials have called the court unconstitutional. The country's judiciary is heavily politicized and usually follows the president's directions. Western observers and incoming lawmakers say Mr. Karzai is trying to engineer greater support in the legislature, a claim presidential spokesmen deny.

In the September elections, 1.3 million ballots, nearly a quarter of all votes, were thrown out because of ballot stuffing and voter intimidation.

The U.S. Embassy commended Mr. Karzai's inauguration decision.

"The outcome ultimately reached demonstrates respect for democratic governance and for the separation of powers set forth in the Afghan constitution," the embassy said Tuesday.

—Arif Afzalada contributed to this article.