NEW DELHI – The Indian government is facing a temporary cash crunch due to high tax refunds and will issue cash management bills until June to meet its funding needs, a senior finance ministry official said Friday. 

The government has paid 270 billion rupees ($6.09 billion) in tax refunds so far in April, said the official, who asked not be named. 

The government has sold cash management bills worth 260 billion rupees, including Friday's sale, in the financial year that began on April 1. 

Cash management bills were introduced in August 2009 as a short-term borrowing instrument to help the government meet its temporary cash flow mismatch. It is non-standard in tenor and is of less than 91 days duration. 

The government has the option of using the cash management bills to repay its short-term loans from the central bank. The government has been borrowing heavily from the Reserve Bank of India under the ways and means advances facility, a short-term loan program that allows the government to repay its overdraft with the RBI within 10 days. 

The government's borrowing in the week ended April 15 stood at 506.07 billion rupees, far higher than the 300 billion rupees limit it had set for April 1 to April 20. Under the ways and means advances facility, if the government's borrowing exceeds 75% of the limit it has repay the RBI through the auction of bonds. 

The official said that the government is committed to adhering to its fiscal deficit aim of 4.6% of gross domestic product for this financial year. 

However, Citi said Wednesday in a report that the fiscal deficit estimate might see some slippage. 

"While the [government's] revenue and growth assumptions appear realistic, the expenditure numbers appear optimistic," it said. 

The ministry official also said the government will restart selling shares of state-run companies from May to boost revenue. 

The follow-on share sale of Steel Authority of India Ltd. is likely in June and that of Oil & Natural Gas Corp. is expected in July, the official said. 

The government aims to raise 400 billion rupees from share sales in state-run companies this fiscal year, as outlined in the federal budget announced in February. 

State-run Power Finance Corp. will launch its follow-on public offering of 229.55 million shares on May 10, a company executive said Tuesday, adding that the share sale will close May 13. 

 Write to  Mukesh Jagota at mukesh.jagota@dowjones.com 