On Monday, as the White House debated whether to release photographs of Osama bin Laden's dead body—the head wounds were thought by some to be too gruesome for mass consumption—an unknown media entrepreneur decided to fill the news void by doctoring up some fakes. The ruse was a whopping success.

Soon the images of a convincingly bloodied and eyeless head had appeared on Pakistani television, on the front pages of respectable British newspapers and on not a few here in the U.S. courtesy of the Associated Press, which was suckered.

Welcome to the new sideshow at the media circus made possible by instant world-wide communication networks. The game of wits between Photoshopping pranksters and editors trying to establish a measure of visible truth for their readers is now a routine behind-the-scenes drama that plays out with every news story.

Take, for example, the many bogus photographs of the Japanese tsunami. Within minutes of the devastation of Japan's coast on March 11, another flood began to wash over social-media sites—images from Twitter and Facebook purporting to be eyewitness accounts. As reported on March 16 by Wade Laube, photo editor of the Sydney Morning Herald in Australia, "there were pictures on Twitter more than an hour before anything became available through the news wire services." Many were fakes. Some were clearly so—giant tidal waves cresting against skyscrapers. Others were more subtly fiddled with or just mislabeled. 

Photo editors have grown accustomed to such distortions. Almost every major news event since 9/11, including the Indonesian tsunami of 2004 and last year's Haitian earthquake, has been followed, wrote Mr. Laube, by "dozens of pictures claiming to be what they are not, and scores more that are simply Photoshop fakery."

This problem can seem trivial until it is not. In the case of the Japanese tsunami the number of fakes became so pronounced that on March 15 the attorney general of Oregon, John Kroger, warned citizens about fake charity-relief organizations using fake footage of the disaster on social-media sites to solicit funds and personal information. 

On a more philosophic level, the increased circulation of doctored images on the Internet, a space where images do not readily disappear, only muddles the difficult attempt to arrive at an agreed-upon version of events. Evidence that is not evidence of anything but deception feeds into the conspiratorial mind-set.

Whether paranoid thinking has grown since the 1960s is hard to measure. Recent polls about the JFK assassination attest that almost 75% of Americans now believe that Lee Harvey Oswald did not act alone. But this figure may actually have declined since, say, 1973, when the Warren Commission Report was commonly ridiculed and everyone had a theory about which secret world-wide organization had chosen Oswald as its patsy.

Jonathan Kay, in his book "Among the Truthers: A Journey Through America's Growing Conspiracist Underground," argues that a belief in secret plots and forces guiding news events has spread since 9/11, and not only in this country. Roughly 25% of the responders to recent polls in the U.S., Russia and the U.K. think the moon landing was a NASA hoax, an elaborate charade enacted on a movie soundstage. The TV broadcasts from the time are no proof to these disbelievers—indeed, quite the reverse. 

Whereas photographic images were once a bedrock of verisimilitude, better than eyewitness testimony in a court of law and proof that a specific event had actually happened at a specific time, they have become in some minds proof of the extent to which sinister authorities will go to hoodwink us. 

The "Matrix" films and last year's "Inception" played with this vertiginous trippiness. Not only can we no longer tell if we wake or dream; to some deniers of the moon landing and the Holocaust, the more realistic a piece of evidence seems to be, the greater are the chances it's an enslaving illusion. 

Telling the real from the counterfeit is not a new challenge for interpreters of photographs. Scam artists in the 1850s preyed upon grieving relatives and the public by conjuring up spirits of dead mothers and children. Photographers were the ones who exposed the deceit. They knew enough about the new technology to show how "ghosts" could be created with double exposures and sandwiched negatives.

In the same way, it is the eyes of those trained in Photoshop who are best situated to spot the hands of a fellow manipulator. A degree of skepticism may be a healthy first reaction to any image or piece of footage. All of us have by now been "punked" by bogus images, stories or documents on the Internet or television, a problem fueled by the urge across all media to be the first with a story, however unsubstantiated it may be. The race has only sped up with the advent of Twitter. Mr. Laube's simple rule for sifting the stream of real images from forgeries is "if a picture seems too good to be true, it probably is." 

It also helps now to have tangible reality behind a photograph if you want to attest that something is true. In December 2003, when Saddam Hussein was pulled out of his spider hole, the U.S. military offered as evidence of his capture a photograph showing the bearded dictator with a tongue depressor in his mouth. The picture was so quirky and improbable that many doubted he had actually been found. The lengthy trial proved, if nothing else, that he had not escaped justice. 

The U.S. government now has the problem of proving that bin Laden is dead without a body to present. Even if the actual photographs of his corpse are released, there will be those on Middle East websites and elsewhere who can point to the fakes to claim media manipulation. So while rational people are celebrating his demise, others may already be gathering material for the inevitable "Osama bin Laden Lives" conspiracy.

 Mr. Woodward is an arts critic in New York. 