Chinese car maker Geely Automobile Holdings said full-year net profit rose 16% to 1.37 billion yuan ($209.1 million), supported by China's rising demand for cars. 



 UniCredit said its net profit in the fourth quarter fell 13% to €321 million ($455.8 million) on lower trading income, as financial markets continued to suffer from volatility and investors preferred to invest in the bond market.  



National Bank of Greece, Greece's largest lender by assets, said it swung to a fourth-quarter net profit of €147 million ($208.7 million), compared with a net loss of €87 million a year earlier, boosted by trading gains and cost-cutting measures. 



 Bank of America said in a regulatory filing that the U.S. Federal Reserve won't allow the giant bank to boost its dividend.  



ABB, the Swiss electrical engineering giant, said it won a contract worth $900 million to help build a more than 1,700 kilometer-long electricity highway in India. 



Actividades de Construcción y Servicios's prospects of taking control of Hochtief suffered a blow as Qatar Holding raised its shareholding to above 10% from 9.1%, and the German construction company reported better-than-expected earnings, making its shares more attractive to investors. 

Hochtief reported a 50% rise in full-year net profit in 2010 to €288 million ($408.9 million) as sales increased 11% to €20.16 billion.



 Colgate-Palmolive agreed to buy the Sanex brand from Unilever for €672 million ($954 million), strengthening its personal-care business in Europe. 

As part of the deal, the world's largest toothpaste maker also agreed to sell its laundry-detergent business in Colombia to Unilever for $215 million.



Spanish oil major Repsol said it listed 26.2 million shares of YPF on the New York Stock Exchange at $41 each, as part of its ongoing plan to divest about half of its Argentinian unit. The shares listed account for 6.7% of all YPF stock, compared with the previous plans to sell 6.2%. 



ConocoPhillips unveiled plans to sell an additional $5 billion to $10 billion in noncore assets over the next two years as the oil producer and refiner continues efforts to improve its balance sheet. 



Cnooc, China's biggest offshore oil and gas producer by output, said net profit rose 85% last year to 54.41 billion yuan ($8.30 billion) because its increased production domestically and abroad coincided with higher international crude-oil prices. 



BP's asset divestiture program continued as the U.K. energy giant announced a $575.5 million deal to sell its remaining interest in a Colorado gas-processing-plant to Anadarko Petroleum. 



India plans to tax part of an insurance claim made by Adidas following a fire that damaged a warehouse in the country, according to a probe report by the tax department.



 Goldman Sachs Chief Executive Lloyd C. Blankfein told a jury in a closely watched insider-trading trial in New York that a former director violated the investment bank's confidentiality policy by discussing boardroom secrets with former Galleon Group founder Raj Rajaratnam. 



Hannover Re became the latest reinsurer to announce the cost of the earthquake and tsunami in Japan, as it expects claims of around €250 million ($355 million). 



Munich Re, the world's largest reinsurer by gross premium income, said its 2011 profit target was now out of reach, as it will face an estimated €1.5 billion ($2.13 billion) bill for claims caused by the earthquake and subsequent tsunami in Japan. 



Italian insurer Fondiaria-SAI plans to raise as much as €800 million ($1.14 billion) in new capital to boost its solvency ratios, including issuing up to €350 million in new shares in its subsidiary Milano Assicurazioni. 

Italy's No. 3 insurer reached an agreement with main creditor Unicredit, which will acquire 6.6% of its shares for €170 million. 

AIG Chief Executive Robert Benmosche wants a quick decision on AIG's bid of $15.7 billion to the U.S. Federal Reserve for a portfolio of mortgage-backed securities.



 U.S. regulators are blaming Wall Street's biggest firms for the collapse of five institutions at the heart of the nation's credit-union industry and are seeking to recoup tens of billions of dollars in losses on securities that doomed the five.  



General Mills's fiscal-third-quarter earnings rose 18% to $392.1 million as profit increased in its business outside the U.S. Revenue increased 1.6% to $3.65 billion, while volume also was up 2%.



 The Italian government passed a measure to help domestic companies hold up attempted foreign takeovers, but didn't go as far as it had threatened in blocking corporate raids on Italian firms. The new decree comes amid a Franco-Italian tussle for control of dairy company Parmalat. 



Former Norilsk Nickel chairman and influential Kremlin power-broker Alexander Voloshin has been elected to the company's board, and his election as chairman of the board looks imminent.



GlaxoSmithKline will no longer pursue global approval for the use of its drug Avodart to reduce the risk of prostate cancer, after regulators in the U.S. and Europe questioned whether it cut the risk of aggressive prostate tumors. 



Chances for a quick approval of Novartis lung drug indacaterol have been quashed by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, which alerted the Swiss pharma giant it needs three more months to assess the medicine's trial data. 



 Inditex posted a 32% increase in full-year net profit to €1.73 billion ($2.46 billion), as the world's largest fashion retailer managed to boost sales at new stores despite a recession in its Spanish home market.  



 Apple named Craig Federighi senior vice president of Mac software engineering to succeed Bertrand Serlet, who is leaving the company. Federighi is now responsible for development of the Mac OS X operating system and reports to Chief Executive Steve Jobs.  



Adobe Systems's quarterly earnings rose 84% to $234.6 million but the software maker warned of weakness in the current quarter as a result of business uncertainty in Japan. 



 Japan's chip makers are starting to resume operations at their factories in the northeastern part of the country after a massive earthquake and tsunami and the subsequent power-supply disruption forced most manufacturers in the region to halt production.  



 Groupon's president and chief operating officer Rob Solomon is stepping down from his position at the fast-growing Internet company in the coming months. 



DP World, the Dubai government-controlled ports operator, said cost cutting and a surge in cargo traffic was behind a 35% rise in full-year earnings to $450 million, while trading in the first two months of 2011 was well ahead of last year. 