The Flatiron District's most famous landmark is, of course, the 22-story Beaux-Arts building from which the neighborhood derived its name. The structure, built in 1902, was originally named the Fuller Building, after the construction icon  George A. Fuller. But the nickname Flatiron suited the triangle-shaped structure, and the building came to define the neighborhood.

The Flatiron District—located between Union Square and 28th Street and boarded by Sixth and Park avenues—has only been a residential area for about the past 30 years. 

During the late 1850s, Broadway was becoming a popular retail corridor, and Sixth Avenue was gaining its reputation as Fashion Row. By the end of the First World War, most of the department stores fled uptown, and were replaced with manufacturing facilities and office spaces.

The 1980s brought a revival to the neighborhood as more people along with restaurants and retailers began moving in. Still, parts of the neighborhood remained rough around the edges: Union Square was better known for its crime rather than its farmer's market and artistic marketplace. More recently, the area has attracted publishing, advertising and tech companies.

Now the neighborhood is one the priciest in the city. Of the 155 residences currently listed on real-estate site StreetEasy.com, the median asking price is $1.825 million. The median square price per foot is $1,356. To the south in Greenwich Village the median price per foot is $1,045 and in Chelsea to the west it is $1,103, according to StreetEasy. 

A number of national retail shops lining Broadway and Fifth and Sixth avenues have been attracted to the well-heeled residents of the neighborhood. 

The Flatiron District is also developing a reputation as a food destination. Last year,  Mario Batali opened Eataly, his collection of gourmet Italian restaurants and markets, on Fifth Avenue. Also in the neighborhood is Craft, run by  Tom Colicchio, a judge on Bravo's "Top Chef" series. 

There haven't been very many new residential buildings added to the neighborhood. Many of the area's Art Deco buildings built between 1906 and 1929 have been converted into residential co-ops and condos, said  Francis Lacoste Riggs of Prudential Douglas Elliman. Some of the buildings resembling large Parisian-style buildings previously were used as commercial spaces and hotels, he said. 

One such building is the Grand Madison on Fifth Avenue. The 13-story Renaissance Revival structure opened in 1906 has served as a warehouse, a hotel and a sales showroom. In 2006, it was converted into condominiums with 195 units. A two-bedroom, two-bathroom apartment there is on the market for $2.45 million. 

In the southern portion of the neighborhood near Union Square, much of the housing stock is comprised of large condos and co-op buildings built around the 1960s, said  James Curnin of the Parker Realty. The 380-unit Parker Gramercy on 15th Street was built during the mid-1960s as a rental building. During the 1980s, it was converted into co-ops. A two-bedroom, 1½-bathroom apartment is currently on sale there for $895,000. 

 Schools: Flatiron's schools are in District 2. It includes Ballet Tech, which is a specialized public school that admits students throughout the city based on talent for classical ballet. There is also the high school Manhattan Village Academy and Baruch College Campus High School. 

In 2009, 92.6% of District 2 students in grades three through eight received a proficient score on the math exam, and 85.8% of students received a proficient score on the English Language Arts exam. In 2006, the results were 78.5% for math and 73.8% for reading.

Private schools in the neighborhood include Xavier High School, a Jesuit Catholic school. There is also the preschool Your Kids Our Kids and in nearby Gramercy there is the Epiphany School, which runs from nursery school to the eighth grade. 

 Parks: The six-acre Madison Square Park has been used as public space since 1686 and became a formal park in 1847. The first and second Madison Square Gardens were located near the park during the late 1800s. The Flatiron Building is also nearby. During the summer months, the park hosts a children's concert series. There are also gardens, playgrounds, a dog run and free WiFi. 

Also in the south side of the neighborhood is Union Square Park, which measures about seven acres. It opened in 1839 and landscape architects  Frederick Law Olmsted and  Calvert Vaux, designers of Central and Prospect parks, later redesigned Union Square to allow for larger gatherings. More recently, the north and east plazas, 16th Street transverse and its playground underwent renovations. Work continues on the pavilion building. 

New York's largest green market takes place in the park every Monday, Wednesday, Friday and Saturday. There is also a dog run. 

The birthplace of  Theodore Roosevelt, the only U.S. president born in New York City, is at 28 E. 20th St. The original building has been demolished but it was rebuilt and is now a national historic site. 



 Entertainment: Flatiron is home to the Daryl Roth Theatre, a performing arts space where the show "Fuerza Bruta" is performed. Vineyard Theatre features off-Broadway productions. The Institute of Culinary Education, which offers recreational classes, is also in the neighborhood. 

 Shopping: Numerous national chain stores in the area like Banana Republic, the Container Store, Levi's and H&M. Fishs Eddy has inexpensive glassware, china and kitchen products. Idlewild Books has an extensive collection of travel and foreign language books. There is also a Whole Foods nearby. 

 Dining: The neighborhood offers a diverse selection of dining options. Eleven Madison Park serves new American cuisine, Petite Abeille serves Belgian fare and Sala One Nine is a tapas bar. Burger fans often wait more than an hour for a bit to eat at the original Shake Shack located in Madison Square Park.

 There is also the neighborhood mainstay Mesa Grill, which Bobby Flay opened up almost two decades ago. Or grab a cocktail at Raines Law Room. 

 Write to  Joseph De Avila at joseph.deavila@wsj.com 