The world has marveled at a resurgent Germany, but it could learn a trick or two from Sweden. With expected 2010 growth of 5.5%, Sweden is a star among developed markets. Optimists forecast growth of above 4% again in 2011, while even pessimists expect expansion of around 2.5%. No wonder some analysts are now describing the Swedish krone as Northern Europe’s answer to the Swiss franc. 

Sweden was well prepared for the crisis, having been through its own financial bust in the early 1990s. Its banking system at the outset of the crisis was in robust shape, and the country had a high savings rate, a budget surplus and had spent years undertaking structural reforms. Sweden ended 2010 with an essentially balanced budget and a ratio of central government debt to gross domestic product of just 35%. Based on credit-default-swap prices, it is the second-safest issuer of sovereign debt in the world after Norway. 

The head winds into 2011 are stiffer. Inflation pressures have picked up, along with concern about house prices and household indebtedness. But many of the price pressures are temporary, including rising electricity costs and food prices; Barclays Capital notes wage increases in 2010 and 2011 are the lowest in the past decade at 2.5%, on average. The Riksbank is keenly aware of pressures, however, and is firmly in rate-raising mode. 

Rate increases could push the krone higher, but at present there seems little cause for concern: In trade-weighted terms, the krone is in line with pre-crisis levels after bouncing back in 2010. The bigger threat to exports, which account for 50% of GDP, may come from reduced international demand due to fiscal tightening elsewhere in Europe. But  Citigroup
C


0.67
%




 suggests this may mainly affect consumer goods, of less importance for Sweden, which focuses on intermediate and capital goods. Only 7% of Swedish exports go to the troubled, fiscally weaker European economies, notes RBS. 

That suggests Sweden’s resurgence could continue, giving a further boost to krone-denominated assets and reinforcing the country’s status as a haven. Not bad for an economy that in the 1990s faced the same double-digit budget deficits, hugely swelling debt load and challenging fiscal consolidation that many European countries face today. 

—Richard Barley

 Write to  Richard Barley at richard.barley@dowjones.com 