It was said of the Japanese economy in the 1970s that it was only capable of copying products from the U.S. and Europe and adding value through the assembly process. It subsequently outperformed most of the world for the following two decades. Its innovation and product design—especially in electronics— led the world.

The BRICs have produced few home-grown multinationals. Huawei Technologies, arguably China's first, has grown to its position as the world's second-largest supplier of telecommunications equipment, behind Sweden's Ericsson, despite being almost continuously involved in controversy.

Huawei's response to setbacks has always been aggressive. When it ran into political difficulties in the U.S., it hired some of the country's most powerful lobbyists and, at the same time, invested heavily in Canada. In the face of problems in Europe, it's become more involved in Turkey. That is not to say it has ever retreated from challenging territories. In the U.S., for instance, it is winning contracts with mobile carriers and recently celebrated its tenth year in the country by opening one of its 17 worldwide research centres at the heart of Silicon Valley in Santa Clara. 

This reflects a focus on research and development generally unmatched in either its sector or in other BRIC companies. It's an area where it spends more than 10% of its annual revenue and it employs more than 46% of its 110,000 staff. 

From Huawei's early days as a business telephone supplier, the firm's founder, Ren Zhengfei, imbued a 'wolf spirit' in employees, emphasizing resilience in the face of failure, self-sacrifice and predator instincts. It has served the company remarkably well as it has moved from being a price-leader to having some of the most innovative products on the telecoms market. Initially these were on the 'plumbing' side, but recently the firm has moved into services and consumer products. 

These include aggressively-priced, mid-range broadband dongles, tablets and smartphone handsets. Despite Huawei's undoubted success, however, there are concerns for the future: "The central command worked well when they were mid-sized. Now it has a hidden cost in that they are not using the creativity of the organization. They get the hours but not the creativity," says Erik Almqvist, a director and head of telecom, IT, media, electronics and financial services at Swedish management consultant Arthur D Little. "The culture in Huawei is that hours have no cost. Historically this has been close to the truth, but in the long run, it's unsustainable," he says.

Four decades on and the question on many peoples' lips is: Are the BRICs (Brazil, Russia, India and China) gathered at the cusp of a similar golden age? "The next  Google or Facebook could well come from one of these countries," says Skype founder  Niklas Zennström who has recently been visiting the BRIC nations to look for investments and partners for his venture capital company Atomico. "We're seeing, for instance, Russian entrepreneurs returning from America to their own country to set up businesses," he says. This, he believes, is important because there has often been a lack of global ambition by many BRIC entrepreneurs who have focused instead on their own country's internal markets.

The concentration on home consumers is perhaps not surprising. One of the unifying statistics linking the BRICs is the phenomenal growth of their middle classes. Hundreds of millions of people from these countries have joined the ranks of those earning between $6,000 (€4,100) and $30,000 over the last decade. The number will grow further in the coming 10 years, adding hugely to the demand for imported higher value added goods, according to Goldman Sachs, whose economist  Jim O'Neill is credited with coining the term BRIC in 2001.

"To understand the growth I would recommend you read the twelfth five-year program in China. The Chinese leaders are going to invest in that plan in the billions. Of course, they will not excel in everything but if they succeed in 60% instead of 100% they will still develop a formidable competing power in these areas," says  Dirk van den Berg, president of Delft University of Technology, describing China's transition from being a low-cost source of factory labor to being an industrial innovator in its own right.

A recent report by the U.K.'s Royal Society forecasts that by 2013, China will overtake the U.S. in terms of scientific research publications. It already has the world's second largest gross domestic product, behind the U.S., and is bigger than all the other BRICs combined in terms of GDP and continues to grow fast. This is no accident, but deliberate government policy, according to Mr. van den Berg. However, although China's ageing population acts as a tremendous spur at the moment, he doesn't believe that it necessarily means China's industrial dominance will be long term. "The first quarter of this century belongs to China, but the second quarter could well be India's simply because of demographics," he says. The BRICs dynamism could be treated as a threat, but Mr. van den Berg thinks that would be wrong. "We've had about 150 years where the West has had the lead in science and being successful with all sorts of new products. We simply will have to share this advantage with newcomers like China."

And there is belief among the tech leaders surveyed for this report that there are plenty of opportunities. Despite increased competition,  Chris Dedicoat, president of European markets for Cisco, says European firms can participate in the "high-value elements of global supply chains". The challenge for Western firms will be figuring out how to engage with BRIC countries. 

A point raised by  Tim Watkins, who as vice president Western Europe for Chinese firm Huawei Technologies, has seen at close quarters the developments in the emerging economy: "Over the next few years, more than one billion new users will be added to mobile networks in emerging markets. This will help bridge the digital divide while boosting local economic development. With the help of the right vendor, operators will be able to re-invent themselves and their products to meet demands of economically less privileged groups." Mr. Zennström warns that Europe's legacy businesses may become a hindrance: "BRIC countries' companies and start-ups are incredibly entrepreneurial and really focused on building their future rather than defending the past."

And European firms need to act fast. Mr. van den Berg believes there is a window of opportunity of eight to 10 years in which Chinese and other countries can be made to share systems of open innovation and free trade. After that there is a danger that their brands will be too entrenched to change.

See the full Tech Council report.

