How do you drive change in big corporations? How do you market environment issues effectively? How do you choose the right technologies in the environmental area? How do you deal with regulators?

Read the full  ECO:nomics report .

In a series of "best practices" workshops, corporate executives and other participants in The Wall Street Journal's ECO:nomics conference looked at these four questions and came up with a series of recommendations. Four corporate executives— John Compton of PepsiCo Inc.,  Engelina Jaspers of Hewlett-Packard Co.,  David Lawrence of Royal Dutch Shell PLC and  William F. Tyndall of Duke Energy Corp.—then reported back to the full conference with those recommendations. 

Here are edited excerpts of their discussion.

 MS. JASPERS: There were six key takeaways.

The first: It doesn't really matter where you start. If it's a top-down-driven initiative from your company because the CEO is passionate about it, or if it's a bottom-up, grass-roots-type movement within your organization—it doesn't matter, but at some point the two need to meet. It requires CEO support and organizational readiness.

Second, meet them where they live. If you're trying to drive change, especially in a large, complex organization, you've got to speak their language and understand how it affects their top line and their bottom line.

Third, the business case is not sufficient. There needs to be an internal narrative that goes along with the return on investment. Reason drives the decision, but emotion will drive the action.

Fourth, don't forget it's a team effort and to include your partners, your supply chain, and your employees and others in the efforts.

Fifth, you need to embed the sustainability strategy within the business strategy. There is no app for sustainability, as someone aptly said.

Six, keep it simple.

 MR. COMPTON: Let's assume that your company has articulated a burning platform within your organization, that you have the capabilities within the organization to make a difference, and that you now have either products or services that are worthy to be marketed. The question is, should we market green?

Our belief is you should. It's the No. 1 thing consumers all over the world care about.

If you are going to market green, what are some things we've learned? I'll share with you one thing we've learned at PepsiCo. 

Sun Chips are part of the food business I run. It's a "healthy snack." We decided that Sun Chips, if it's a healthy snack, should be made in facilities that have a net-zero footprint. In other words, I want off the electric grid everywhere we make Sun Chips. We did that. Sun Chips should be made in a facility that puts back more water than it uses. It does that. And we partnered with our suppliers and came out with the world's first compostable chip package.

Now, there was an issue with this package: It was louder than the New York subway, louder than jet engines taking off. What would a company that's committed to green do: walk away or stay committed? If your people are passionate, they're going to fix it for you as long as you stay committed. Six months later, the compostable bag has half the noise of our current package.

So the view of our panel today was, we should market green, we should be proud to do it, you have to stay committed, it has to be a 360 process, both internal and external. And if you do that, you can monetize environmental sustainability for the shareholders.

 MR. LAWRENCE: Here are some key takeaways from our section.

First, the energy sector is not software. It can take decades to get a very small percentage of market penetration in our industry. When you get that market penetration, you can expect to be there for decades. It will take billions of dollars to get that market penetration.

Second, don't create a business that will rely on subsidies forever. It can rely on subsidies right at the beginning for the innovation and the pilot stage, but at some point, this business needs to be able to stand on its own and turn a profit.

Third, options that are capable of using existing infrastructure are good. So if you already have some of the systems in place to get this new energy platform in place, that's going to result in a cost savings.

Fourth, look for projects, especially in smaller investment segments, that can benefit from what would be nontraditional government involvement. Find those small niches and get that knowledge base that you can build on, because that may create a special niche especially in that early phase.

Finally, make sure that the upside is great, because that upside has to dominate the downside in the long term.

 MR. TYNDALL: First, there's the notion that you've got to invite the regulators to visit your sludge pond. Get them to come see your operations. Treat them with respect, listen to what they're trying to accomplish. Don't try and do something top-down, but work with the people who are on the ground, doing the work, with your folks who are doing the work.

Second, have CEOs and other very high-level people meeting with the staff-level folks, because that also indicates respect and gives a certain amount of attention to these folks.

Third, act early, be in there before you're in a crisis, before you need something from them, understanding what they need, what their timing is, what's going to be required to get a decision done. Ask for their help, rather than be demanding that they do something for you.

Fourth, be creative; try and think about ways around roadblocks. At the moment, the federal government is probably not going to be the source of a lot of funding, it's not going to be the source of a lot of certainty. So perhaps you move to state and locals or look to other countries like Australia as a place to do your first pilot or permit your first project.

Overall, the idea was that you should approach regulations and regulators with as much forethought, enthusiasm and creativity as you approach other key things like your investors. If you put that level of effort, you'll probably be successful.