LONDON—U.K. health officials Thursday told the country's doctors to use stockpiled pandemic flu vaccine where appropriate to help cope with a shortage of seasonal flu medicine. 

Interim Chief Medical Officer  Sally Davies said the move was needed due to a "mismatch" of demand for influenza vaccines and a lack of supply in certain parts of Britain. 

"We find there is a mismatch—that there are patients who are not getting vaccines when they wanted them," Dame Sally told journalists. 

"We do believe there is vaccine in the system, but we are still encouraging people to come forward and it's important to increase the access to vaccine." 

The government's move comes amid evidence that flu is spreading across the U.K. as well as a number of European countries. The main circulating forms of influenza are the H1N1 swine flu strain and Influenza B. 

Britain's stockpile comprises 12.7 million doses of  GlaxoSmithKline PLC's Pandemerix, containing only the H1N1 strain. The seasonal flu vaccine that is in short supply in the U.K. contains three flu strains—H1N1, Influenza A and B. 

The jump in cases of severe influenza has put pressure on some intensive care units in the U.K., with such patients now occupying more than 20% of intensive care space. 

Some doctors' surgeries in parts of Britain are running out of flu vaccines, prompting Thursday's decision to release supplies of pandemic vaccines

stockpiled last year during the swine flu epidemic, which turned out to be milder than many had feared. The government says the stockpiled vaccines are still safe and won't expire until late 2011. 

The U.K.'s coalition government is keen to avoid a public health crisis over the issue. 

"The way it works in this country is that GPs are responsible for ordering in advance a flu vaccine, which they did this year," Prime Minister David Cameron said when asked about the subject by journalists. 

"Clearly those stocks are being used up and in some places, yes there have been some shortages, and the Department of Health has been looking urgently and working hard to work out how we can help address that issue," he said. 

Vaccine manufacturers delivered around 14.7 million doses of seasonal flu vaccine to the U.K. this year, a similar amount to that in each of the previous

two years. Of that total, 10% was distributed in Scotland with the remainder earmarked for England, Wales and Northern Ireland, according The U.K. Vaccine Industry Group, or UVIG. 

Manufacturers can't make more vaccine to order in time for this winter because it takes six months to produce. 

A spokesman for Sanofi Pasteur MSD, one of the manufacturers within UVIG, said the company had only "a few thousand" of one particular type of vaccine left, called Intanza, which was only licensed for patients aged 60 or over. He said stocks of other types had run out. Sanofi Pasteur MSD is a joint venture between Sanofi Pasteur, a unit of Sanofi-Aventis, and Merck & Co.

The situation in Britain underscores the need for greater efforts to encourage vaccination, not only for at-risk groups like very young children and pregnant women but also health-care workers, the European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases said Thursday. 

"There are concerns that what is happening in the U.K. could be mirrored in other parts of Europe with France, the Russian Federation and Ukraine already reporting influenza rates above their usual thresholds," the non-profit organization said. 

 Write to  Sten Stovall at sten.stovall@dowjones.com 