MUMBAI— Larsen & Toubro Ltd.
500510


0.81
%




, India's largest engineering and construction company by sales, Monday posted an 11% rise in third-quarter net profit even though rising input costs hurt margins. 

For the October-to-December quarter, net profit rose to 8.41 billion rupees ($186.4) from 7.59 billion rupees, while sales increased 40% to 113.22 billion rupees from 80.71 billion rupees a year earlier. 

The company's operating margin fell to 10.8% from 12.4%, as total costs rose 42% to 103.03 billion rupees from 72.43 billion rupees. 

"Inflation and high commodity prices, especially of silver and copper, hurt margins in the previous quarter," Chief Financial Officer  Y.M. Deosthalee said. 

Mr. Deosthalee said the company hopes to maintain its operating margin for the full year at around 11.4%, even though he doesn't expect any softening in commodity prices. 

Indian companies, from car makers to capital-goods companies, are reeling under high prices of steel, base metals and crude oil, which have driven up production costs and prices, leading to delays in customers' decisions to buy goods and services. 

Larsen said it could miss its earlier guidance for new-order growth for the current financial year. 

"A lot of orders will be decided in March, but if there's a slippage, we may not be able to achieve our earlier guidance of 25% growth in new orders this fiscal year," Mr. Deosthalee said. 

Director  K.V. Rangaswami said there have been delays in the awarding of orders by both the government and private-sector companies, with expected orders of about 500 billion rupees in the infrastructure sector—expected to be granted in the April-September quarter—yet to be awarded. 

"The speed at which decisions are being taken [in the government sector] has slowed down," he added. 

Among the major orders that Larsen hopes to receive are three big projects in the hydrocarbons sector, valued at a combined 70 billion to 80 billion rupees, company officials said. 

Larsen & Toubro had outstanding orders of 1.15 trillion rupees as of Dec. 31. 

Separately, Mr. Deosthalee said the company's plans to launch an initial public offering of stock for its finance subsidiary—L&T Finance—would depend on the market. 

"We have seen tremendous volatility in the markets over the last few days. If markets continue to be such, it may not be desirable to launch an IPO," he said. 

 Write to  Satish Sarangarajan at Satish.Sarangarajan@dowjones.com 