After suffering through one of their most punishing quarters in decades, Treasury bonds may catch a break in the new year. 

Read the complete  Year-End Review report .

Although many observers think the long-term direction for bond prices is inevitably lower as the economy gains traction, they are reluctant to say yields—which move opposite to price—will go much higher from where they ended 2010 anytime soon. 

Many say the abuse that bonds took in the fourth quarter may have been overdone. Factors like a still-sluggish economy and the Federal Reserve's bond-buying program could keep yields relatively low for much of the new year. 

"Given the problems still around, we feel investors will realize yields are too high relative to growth and inflation, and we'll get a swing back down, perhaps to the lows again," said  Robert Michele, global chief investment officer at J.P. Morgan Asset Management's Global Fixed Income and Currency Group, which manages more than $767 billion in fixed-income assets. 

Thanks to a cocktail that included brighter economic data, a darker U.S. budget outlook and some year-end profit-taking, the yield on the 10-year Treasury note jumped 0.78 of a percentage point in the fourth quarter to 3.299%. At one point in December, the 10-year yield, which directly influences residential mortgage rates, topped 3.5%, a seven-month high.

Treasurys of all maturities lost nearly 3% in total return during the fourth quarter, according to Barclays Capital indexes, which may have come as a bit of a shock to investors who bought them seeking safety. Individual investors pulled nearly $5 billion out of taxable bond mutual funds, which largely invest in Treasury and corporate debt, in the three weeks through Dec. 21, the latest data available from the Investment Company Institute.

These were the first such outflows in about two years. Since the financial crisis, individual investors had largely shunned stock funds and poured record amounts of cash into bond funds. 

"This last sharp rise in yields has kind of shaken confidence among the public, which saw Treasurys as a safe haven relative to equities," said  Nick Kalivas, vice president of financial research at brokerage firm MF Global. 

Despite the late-year scare and a roller-coaster ride throughout the year, yields ended 2010 slightly lower, down from 3.83% at the end of 2009. 

Many observers expect yields to rise in 2011—but not too much. A recent survey found that forecasters at "primary dealers," big financial institutions authorized to trade bonds directly with the Federal Reserve, expect the 10-year Treasury note's yield to end 2011 at 3.5%, just a smidgen above its yield at the end of 2010. There are many factors that will be working in bonds' favor and could limit their pain this year.

• First among those will be the calendar. After cashing in bonds for big profits when the Fed announced a $600 billion buying program in the fall to stimulate the economy, investors have been reluctant to rush back into the market, resisting the lure of higher yields, largely to avoid making big bets at year-end. 

A new year could therefore bring a fresh appetite for heavily discounted bonds. Money managers in the U.S. and London have recently told  Mike Pond, Treasury and inflation-linked strategist at Barclays Capital, that they would be buying Treasurys if not for the end of the year, a time when investors typically count their winnings. 

"It wasn't a question of 'Should we be getting long?'" Mr. Pond said. "It was a question of 'When should we be getting long?' "

• Though economic data have unquestionably improved, lessening the possibility of a double-dip recession, they clearly still haven't improved enough to stoke inflationary pressures. 

The Fed's favored inflation measure, the core personal-consumption expenditure price index, rose just 0.8% in November from a year earlier, the lowest annual gain on record, according to Commerce Department data. 

"The main influence on bond yields is inflation," said  Ed Peters, co-director of Global Macro Strategies at First Quadrant LP, a boutique investment-management firm. "The upside for yields can't be more than 4% unless we get a pickup in inflation." 

Even if growth and inflation pressures pick up more than most analysts expect—an oft-cited outlier risk in the year ahead—then 30-year Treasury bonds might paradoxically do well as the market starts to price in tighter Fed policy. The Fed has left 30-year Treasurys mostly out of its bond-buying program, known as quantitative easing, and yields there are relatively high, offering better income and potentially less downside risk. 

"I think that one of the surprises of 2011 is that the long end of the Treasury curve does better," said  Matt Freund, senior vice president of investment portfolio management at USAA, overseeing mutual funds with $43 billion under management. 

Higher-yielding, longer-dated bonds could be especially attractive to pension funds and insurance companies struggling to meet long-term obligations but still scarred after being burned in two stock-market meltdowns within the past decade. 

"From what I hear in the market, pension funds and life-insurance companies are a bit short of duration, and any significant rate rise from here will likely be met with real-money buying," said  Byron Carson, a rates strategist and trader at Principal Global Investors.

• Lingering sovereign-debt problems in Europe will remain a constant threat over the next several months, making Treasurys attractive as potential havens. 

The 10-year Treasury yield's run to its lowest levels of 2010 was sparked when the debt crisis in Greece erupted last spring. Treasurys didn't benefit much from Ireland's problems in the fall, suggesting that some of the safe-haven allure of Treasurys may have faded. 

Still, most observers expect Europe's debt problems won't be solved overnight, and any fresh crisis there has the potential to send investors running back to Treasurys. It also will reduce the allure of European bonds as an alternative to Treasurys.

• There also will likely continue to be longer-term demand for Treasurys from large buyers, beyond just the Fed. Foreign central banks hold hundreds of billions of dollars in Treasurys and have little interest in seeing their investments punished. China in particular needs to buy Treasurys as part of its effort to keep its currency artificially weak against the U.S. dollar. 

"Foreign reserves continue to accumulate, and investors need to continue to put them to work," said  David Leduc, Boston-based chief investment officer of active fixed income for Standish Mellon Asset Management, part of BNY Mellon Asset Management. 

Though net Treasury issuance should easily exceed $1 trillion next year, heavy government borrowing isn't exactly competing with a flood of other borrowing. New corporate bonds are still mostly being used to refinance old debt, the mortgage market is anemic, and the market for exotic debt securities is anemic and unlikely to get much stronger anytime soon. And for at least half the year, the Fed bond-buying programs will take out most, if not all, of the new Treasurys. 

"It won't be a big challenge to soak up all that Treasury issuance," said Mr. Carson of Principal Global Investors. 

Of course, once economic growth returns in force and inflation again becomes a concern, Treasury yields will have nowhere to go but up. It just may be a slower process than investors expect.

 Write to  Mark Gongloff at mark.gongloff@wsj.com 