LONDON— HSBC Holdings PLC said it wants to remain headquartered in the U.K. but is increasingly having to justify the decision to shareholders. 

Responding to a Sunday Telegraph report that HSBC has told its biggest shareholders it is preparing to quit London, HSBC Chairman  Douglas Flint and Chief Executive Officer  Stuart Gulliver said in a joint statement that the bank has been "very clear" that it prefers to stay in London, and that any talk of an imminent change in its position on the matter "is entirely speculative and presumptuous." 

"We are however, in light of possible regulatory changes and additional costs such as the bank levy, being increasingly asked by shareholders and investors about the likely additional costs of being headquartered in the U.K.," they said. "We are very clear that the City of London's competitive position deserves protection and HSBC will play a full part in this: we are encouraged by the U.K. government's recent commitments to do the same." 

HSBC moved its headquarters to London from Hong Kong in 1992 when it bought Midland Bank. It reviews the decision every three years and is due to decide this year on any possible change. Messrs. Flint, Gulliver and other executives have said the benefits of London must outweigh a growing list of negatives that include a new U.K. levy on banks, restrictions on how they pay their staff and potential breakups of lenders being studied by the government-appointed Independent Commission on Banking. 

Last week, HSBC said the levy, which increases as banks' balance sheets grow, would have cost it around $600 million in 2010, making the bank among the largest contributors. The levy is meant to raise £2.5 billion ($4.07 billion) annually. In the bank's annual report, Mr. Flint said it has no issue with the government's right to impose such a levy, but doing so adds to the cost of basing a multinational banking group in the U.K. About $2.4 billion of HSBC's $19 billion 2010 pretax profit came from the U.K. 

Mr. Flint said that if the levy is abolished, the bank would distribute the funds that become available to shareholders via dividends. 

The statement Sunday will be seen as the latest warning shot fired at the government by the country's banks in their battle against further regulation. The industry was alarmed by Chancellor of the Exchequer  George Osborne's comments in October that he would seek the "maximum sustainable" amount of tax from banks. In an effort to stave off additional charges, the country's four major banks, including HSBC, in February agreed to lend more money to businesses this year and provide greater transparency on their pay practices.

 Write to  Margot Patrick at margot.patrick@dowjones.com 