In a large industrial building on the outskirts of Montreal, 14 Russian trapeze artists and six aerialists gathered for rehearsal in a studio the size of an airplane hangar. They were in the final months of choreographing "Zarkana," Debra Brown's 11th creation for the circus company Cirque du Soleil. The show cost $50 million and opens in June at Radio City Music Hall.

"I can't wait to see this," Ms. Brown said as three young acrobats climbed into metal rings suspended from the 75-foot-high ceiling. Frantic drum and piano music blared. The rings spun rapidly, rising and plunging like yo-yos. The women flipped upside down and arched their backs, as agile as spider monkeys. They scissored their legs into full splits, pretzeled themselves into cross-legged positions and dangled by their arms, their bodies whirling like ceiling fan blades. 

Ms. Brown specializes in creating bizarre, hair-raising stunts that seem physically impossible. In her 25 years with the company, she has helped transform the circus into an art form. She developed a routine with four contortionists who twist their bodies into a single, 16-limbed vehicle. For "O," she choreographed a wild water ballet with a giant tank of water serving as a stage, featuring 85 synchronized swimmers, high divers and acrobats. She discovered that a performer in the show "On Air" could bounce on a trampoline and play the electric guitar at the same time; within hours, they had a routine where he strums and does multiple back flips in a row (his record is 39). 

"It was in the show the next day," said performer Dominic Dagenais, who declined to give his age because "I don't believe in time." 

At 56, Ms. Brown shares her performers' energy. On a recent morning, she bounded around Cirque du Soleil's international headquarters, dressed in black yoga pants and a long black scarf that dragged on the floor. She rehearsed with Mr. Dagenais, bouncing and dancing on the trampoline and nearly tumbling into a giant pit of yellow foam cubes. Later, she coached performers on aerial rings, led a dance workshop for 14 Russian trapeze artists and worked on a floor routine with two acrobats. 

An Ontario native, Ms. Brown took up gymnastics when she was 9. After getting degrees in physical education and fine art, she spent eight years training gymnasts for Canada's national team and performed as a dancer and choreographer, blending acrobatics and dance. In her early 30s, Ms. Brown decided to join Cirque du Soleil, which was then just two years old. Today, the company employs 5,000 people, including more than 1,300 performers from nearly 50 countries, and has annual revenues of more than $800 million. 

When she's creating a new act, Ms. Brown begins by leading the acrobats in improvisation sessions to see what they can do. Often, new tricks emerge. Each morning, she watches video of the previous day's rehearsal. Once there's an "acrobatic skeleton" in place, she works on transitions to turn the series of stunts into a fluid routine. Rehearsal days can last 12 or 13 hours. Routines can come together in as little as a week—or take as long as a month or two to finalize. Putting an entire new show together often takes a year. Ms. Brown has been working on "Zarkana" since last November.

Shows often continue to evolve once they hit the stage. After a show debuts, the creative team reconvenes to edit numbers and adjust the tricks and choreography. "Improvisation is part of our blood," Ms. Brown said.

Ms. Brown generates routines that fit the theme and storyline developed by each show's creator. She sometimes builds entire acts based on a single word or phrase, such as "simplicity" or "heroes." For "Mystère," a permanent Las Vegas-based show about the origins of life, director Franco Dragone asked for an act based on the idea of mating birds. Ms. Brown developed a duet with two dancers in nude-colored bikinis, who perform atop a dome. 

"Zarkana" is more scripted. The plot centers on Zark, a magician who lost his powers. The creative team has 14 people, including another choreographer working on different routines.

Uncertainty plays a big role in Ms. Brown's creative process. Some of the most impressive stunts in a Cirque show come from unscripted moments in rehearsal, when the acrobats are playing around on the equipment. 

On a recent gray morning, Ms. Brown coached acrobats performing on aerial rings, trapeze and in a floor routine. The aerialists ran through their dizzying sequence on the rings three times before collapsing limply on the mat. "It's definitely really growing," Ms. Brown said cryptically.

Later, she coached two young acrobats—"circus babies" whose parents are Cirque performers—in a routine, guiding them into different improvised contortions. One of the young women stood up and took a wide stance, leaned forward with her torso hanging between her legs, then flipped her torso so that her face and chest faced the audience. "I want to see it fluid," Ms. Brown said. "That's rocking." The other acrobat tried the same contortion, and they practiced it over and over.

"It's all about the questions you ask—is this possible?" said Ms. Brown.

 Write to  Alexandra Alter at alexandra.alter@wsj.com 