Portuguese cuisine doesn't have much of an international reputation, more because of its relative scarcity beyond the borders of the country than because there is anything intrinsically wrong with it. There is an interesting use of spices, partly thanks to Portugal's key role in that trade and the culinary interchange with former colonies in Africa and Latin America. But the most popular single dish remains bacalhau, or salted cod, for which there are more than a thousand recipes.

One of the most innovative young chefs in Lisbon is José Avillez, 32 years old, who made his reputation more than three years ago when he won a Michelin star while at the historic restaurant Tavares, which began in the late 18th century. He had spent time at Ferran Adrià's El Bulli and in the kitchens of Alain Ducasse, and was heavily influenced by Modernist or Molecular Cuisine. He left Tavares a year ago and last September began a casual place called Cantinho do Avillez (www.cantinhodoavillez.pt) in the shabby chic neighborhood of Chiado. Then, only last week, he re-opened Belcanto, a well-established place just 200 meters away and adjacent to the Lisbon Opera House.

These two restaurants are quite different in style and approach, yet they typify two major concepts in the culinary world that could loosely be summed up as fun dining vs. fine dining.

The Cantinho certainly deals in fun. It is a bustling place adorned with a wall of weather-beaten floorboards and a glass-sided chest full of the sort of kitchen goods, crockery and equipment popular in the '60s. The tables may be all irregular, with mismatched chairs around each one and '60s-style lamps hanging from the ceiling, but the restaurant serves 120 covers a day, rising to 180 at weekends. Mr. Avillez laughs at the chaotic appearance of the place, saying: "Each chair has a story, like each plate of food should have. We brought some from a school in Germany, a pharmacy in Italy and from all over Portugal, too. In a way, it is also to represent the different influences reflected on our menu from places outside of Portugal."

The dishes are eclectic, like miniature partridge pies with bacon and onion; a delicious hamburger made from chopped, rather than minced, Barrosã cattle with foie gras, plus green beans cooked tempura-style with lemon salt and tartare sauce. (I hadn't realized that the tempura style of cooking in Japan originated in Portugal and arrived with the Jesuits four-and-a half centuries ago.) Another successful dish is veal trotters with cumin and lemon, which have had the bones and cartilage stripped out. 

The Belcanto restaurant (Tel: +351 342 06 07) is a far more formal affair, with heavy wood paneling and a library along one wall, making it look vaguely like an English club. This is a far cry from its heyday before the 1974 revolution, when dancing girls would appear after lunch with an entirely different clientele and turn it into a cabaret. 

The library wall has gaps and irregular piles of books on each shelf. It is only when you photograph the entire scene that you realize that the gaps spell out a verse from the Portuguese poet Fernando Pessoa: Para ser grande, sê inteiro (To be great, be whole).

It is always unfair to judge a restaurant on its opening-night performance but it is possible to discern the Modernist approach along with a heavy dose of playfulness, starting with the Menu Degustation, called the Menu do Desassossego (The Uneasiness Menu).

There is a pair of El Bulli-inspired spherical green olives encased in an olive emulsion, slices of Atlantic horse mackerel with pickled vegetables and hazelnut puree, plus Mr. Avillez's idiosyncratic interpretation of salted cod. Served on a ceramic plate sculpted like a fish, the cod components rest on a wafer with gels and herbs, and a single chickpea. The accompanying vegetable dish is a pumpkin puree peanut resting on a tiny white pillar. I ask the chef to deconstruct this arrangement so I can comprehend his thought process.

"We use rice paper from Vietnam, cook cod skin and turn it into powder, then fry everything and add cod gelatin, garlic puree, lemon confit, some paprika then a sprout of coriander and a sole chickpea, which is also sprinkled with chickpea powder." 

Mr. Avillez explains that he wants to provoke a reaction to the traditional salted cod and chickpea dish, as well as juxtapose cheap ingredients with expensive ones. "As Ferran Adrià said, a good sardine is better than a bad lobster, which is why I use horse mackerel when it is at its seasonal peak, though in Spain they only use it for fish meal."

For me, many of the interpretations hark back to El Bulli but Mr. Avillez is unashamed about such references. "When I traveled and took internships, I tried to digest what I learned with my own identity. El Bulli food cannot be made outside El Bulli, but you can still use the techniques."

Is he concerned about launching a new restaurant, given the parlous state of the Portuguese economy?

"I have this feeling that if you are doing everything to give pleasure to the customers sitting at your tables, they will come back. Maybe people who used to go out three times a week will now only go out once a week, but there are still enough of those people in Lisbon to keep me happy."

 Write to  Bruce Palling at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 