As the Jets prepared for their championship game, their coach with ties to Baltimore received much of the credit. He had been ridiculed for his predictions of imminent Super Bowl appearances when he first took the job. 

But this time, with toned down talk, the Jets prepared to wrest New York's football mantle away from the Giants, who once again were sitting at home as the playoffs began.

It was 1968 and the Jets were preparing to face the Oakland Raiders in the American Football League title game at Shea Stadium, with a Super Bowl appearance on the line. There were differences from today, to be sure.

Those Jets were heavily favored, having clinched the Eastern Conference championship on Thanksgiving Day. The 250 media credentials issued for that 1968 game was a record at the time, compared to the 800 issued for Sunday's AFC Championship game between the Jets and Pittsburgh Steelers.

 In that era, players regularly got jobs during the offseason to survive.

"I made more money as a plumber in the offseason than I did playing with the Giants," said Don Maynard, who spent one season with the Giants before joining the Titans, who became the Jets.

But a survey of newspaper coverage from the month before the championship game reveal more similarities, in the way teams were covered, in the personal story lines surrounding the game, and in the character of the Jets, which seems to have remained unchanged through four daunting decades.

Early in his career, the Giants had told Mr. Maynard to shave his sideburns and tone down his western-style outfits. After moving to the Titans, "We kind of did what we wanted," Mr. Maynard said.

That's possibly because no one was paying attention. At the Polo Grounds "people came discussed as empty seats," chuckled Larry Grantham, who anchored the defense on the 1968 team. "My wife had her own personal hot dog and coat vendor standing right by her. There just wasn't nobody in the stands. They would announce 20,000, but it would be about 3,000."

The team moved to Shea Stadium in 1964, where they began playing in front of tens of thousands, crowds with a decidedly more "suburban" cast than their "sophisticated" NFL rivals, noted the New York Times in 1968. Some of them openly checked Giants scores.

But for the championship game against the Raiders, fans began lining up in the middle of the night to grasp one of the 2,500 standing room tickets that would be the only way to watch the game in New York. 

All the regular seats were reserved for season ticket-holders and the network planned to black out the game in the city.

In the hours before the game, unlucky New Yorkers escaped the city in droves. Newspapers printed the nearest towns where the game was being televised, as hotel rooms sold out around the region.

Newspapers were just as nosy as they are today. The Daily News interviewed workers at Bachelors III, the bar part-owned by Joe Namath, to report that "Joe hasn't been around so much for the past week," while the New York Times noted earlier that month when Mr. Namath accepted $10,000 to shave off his "controversial" Fu Manchu mustache. "That's about $10 a hair." 

Three days before the game, papers reported that Mr. Namath had turned down an invitation to attend a champagne party and art exhibition in favor of watching game films at home; he'd learned how to use the projector in his industrial arts class in high school.

"I've always said whatever you've read and heard about Joe's football ability, multiply it," Mr. Maynard said. "And whatever you've heard about his nightlife, divide it because we had two or three guys on the team who put him in the shade.

The Jets were concentrating on the coming game, the entire team more serious than usual as more than one reporter noted. They were bitterly determined to defeat their opponents, in a matchup that all sides agreed was personal. 

With shades of the Jets-Patriots game earlier this month, the 1968 Jets had suffered a humiliating loss to their rivals earlier in the season. It would later become known as the Heidi Game, after NBC cut away in the final minute to broadcast the movie Heidi.

 A few years earlier, the Raiders had smashed Mr. Namath's left cheek, fracturing the bone. 

"We knew how dirty they were," Mr. Grantham said. "If they did something dirty we tried to make amends for it."

But they were also keenly aware of how badly the overlooked AFL needed a win.

 In the month leading up to the game, some reporters theorized that the true ascendance of the league would only come the following year, when the Buffalo Bills were expected to draft a young halfback who had just won the Heisman Trophy: O.J. Simpson.

The Jets had other ideas.

The way this ballclub is playing now, we will win the Super Bowl," declared Johnny Sample after the Jets dispatched the Raiders, 27-23, to win the AFL championship.

And after the Jets upset the Baltimore Colts 16-7 in the Super Bowl, the American Football League and the National Football League did merge in 1970.

"Without us winning that Super Bowl, I think the merger would have been at least postponed for a couple of years," Mr. Grantham said, "if not on the backburner forever.''