At any given gathering in Hawaii, I am the only person dressed like Lou Reed. I've spent the last few years traveling from New York City to the North Pacific to research a book on the American annexation of Hawaii in 1898, but I still look like the last person who would be drawn to sunny, subtropical islands. 

Sure, after deplaning the nonstop from Newark to Honolulu International, I always made a beeline for Waikiki like any other haole—only my destination was the U.S. Army Museum near the beach, to examine the display on Hawaii's strategic importance in the Spanish-American War. While other travelers were taking snapshots of their sunburned families, I was trying to convince my cellphone camera to capture a dimly-lit display case containing 1st New York Volunteer Infantry Private Thomas Todd's knife and fork. 

Yet crisscrossing the islands, even—or maybe especially—a morbid indoorsman like me couldn't help but fall in love with the volcanic terrain, the gothic beauty of gray craters, red dirt and black rocks. I learned that not all flowers in Hawaii get braided into sweet strands of lei; some look like hot pink pterodactyls on the attack. The banyan replaced the Hanging Elm in Washington Square Park as my favorite tree, because it isn't so much a tree as a tree monster, a macabre tangle of branches oozing to the ground so as to support ever more branches, threatening to squeeze to death anything in its path, a tendency that earned it the cute nickname "strangler fig."

Nothing captured Hawaii's altogether ooky landscape like the TV show "Lost." Filmed in Oahu, the series chronicled the struggle of plane crash survivors on an uncharted, off-kilter Pacific island inhabited by armed hippies, a homicidal cloud of smoke, the occasional polar bear and a shipwrecked Scot living in a science basement with a record player. 

A few weeks before the final episode of "Lost" aired last year, I asked one of the show's creators, Damon Lindelof, about his six years filming in the often-ominous Hawaiian landscape. Professing a deep love for Oahu, he admitted that its countryside could give him the creeps. "I'll be standing in the jungle, having to pee and knowing that it'll take me at least 10 minutes to troop down to the porta-potty at base camp," he said. "But ducking behind a tree would most certainly result in me being swallowed up into the ground and never heard from again. Those roots!"

I should emphasize that when I say I adore the Hawaiian landscape's gloomier features, I meant in daylight. On one of my first research trips, I rented a dreamy little cottage on the edge of Honolulu, at the base of the Diamond Head volcanic crater. The house was a 10-minute walk from the spring break atmosphere of Waikiki, but it was nestled by its lonesome at the bottom of an overgrown ravine. In the moonlight, the thicket of trees enveloping it cast haunting shadows, and the bony fingers of their branches seemed to claw at the windows in the breeze. 

Accustomed to hearing the comforting lullabies of police sirens through the windows of my 12th-floor Manhattan apartment, sleeping downhill from an extinct volcano, with polar bears—I guess they could have been mongooses—rooting around the yard made me feel like I was trapped inside Jacob's jungle shack on "Lost." His cabin may have looked like the perfect crash pad for an invisible guardian who has spent 2,000 years protecting an island from his evil brother (the aforementioned murderous plume of smoke), but not so restful when you're a high-strung city slicker who will spend the next day in an archive, trying to decipher the creaky cursive in old missionary letters.

On subsequent stays in Honolulu, I rented apartments in high-rises, including one in the Ilikai, the tower Jack Lord stands atop in the opening credits of the old "Hawaii Five-O"—a comforting show where the only spooks were Red Chinese secret agents, not trees.

— Ms. Vowell is the author of "The Wordy Shipmates" and "Assassination Vacation," as well as a new book on the Americanization of Hawaii, "Unfamiliar Fishes." 