"She's a really good debater. It's not what you would expect—she could murder ya."

Lou Reed was talking about the subject of his new documentary, "Red Shirley." In the Spring of 2009, Mr. Reed, the 68-year-old rock 'n' roll pioneer who has long embodied New York music cool and has lately undertaken a daunting variety of projects, spoke with 101-year-old Shirley Novick during a series of interviews. She is a survivor of not one but two world wars, and was an ardent unionist and activist during America's most fraught historic eras. And she is his first cousin, once removed.

"I've said to her, 'Shirley, how do you deal with all these things? You don't get angry, how do you deal with this?' And she said, 'Eh! I take what's given.' And she means it. Doesn't complain, doesn't try to get away. It's amazing. I think it's a form of enlightenment."

Mr. Reed's portrait of this 20th-century warrior will make its New York premiere Saturday at the New York Jewish Film Festival, which kicks off its 20th year on Wednesday. Even among the perennially rich stories of experience that attract audiences to the festival, "Red Shirley" might be, minute for minute, the most dense. The 28-minute chronicle is told simply through candid and playful question-and-answer sessions between Mr. Reed and Ms. Novick at her Chelsea home, punctuated by archival photographs.

Ms. Novick's story is at once extraordinary and universal in its history-book breadth and depth. During World War I she emerged unscathed from Poland after her family's house was hit by a dud shell. At 19, she journeyed to Canada without her parents, thus escaping the fate of relatives during World War II. ("Hitler took care of them," she curtly remarks in the film.) Leaving Canada, which she deemed "too provincial," Ms. Novick joined thousands of immigrants in New York City's garment industry. There, over the course of 47 years, her debate skills came in handy as an outspoken activist during union scraps. She would later join the 1963 civil rights march on Washington.

"She's a real fair-play person. She wouldn't like the word 'agitating.' She'd call it speaking up for workers' rights," Mr. Reed said of Ms. Novick, who, we learn in the film, at first balked at the prospect of emigrating to America because she was so shocked by Upton Sinclair's "The Jungle." (Even today, Ms. Novick remains on principle a legal resident, not a citizen.) 

Though her sight is failing now, in "Red Shirley" a consistently sure gaze is displayed in photos of a formidable young woman. Keeping to her own pace, Ms. Novick (whose late husband was the longtime Forward editor Paul Novick) shows a seen-it-all old-timer's tolerance for her 68-year-old cousin's queries, correcting this or that bit of wording. The film's experience lies not only in the tales but in their concise, matter-of-fact telling—though the photos in the film took some initiative on Mr. Reed's part.

"I had to really search around and find those photos," he said. "They were in a closet underneath something. I said, 'Don't you have any photos?' She said no. I said, 'Can I look in the closet?' And then we went through all this stuff, and said who's who. And of course, 'Are they still alive?' Because almost every relative she has is dead."

Mr. Reed completed "Red Shirley" with the help of art photographer Ralph Gibson after being impressed with the short-segment video capabilities of a new camera he had acquired. The film, which screened last fall at the Vienna International Film Festival, is the first directorial effort by the former leader of the Velvet Underground, whose activities of late have spanned playwriting, compositions for canines, a deep interest in tai chi, and collaborations with his wife, musician Laurie Anderson. Further filmmaking, though, may not be in the offing.

"This was an act of love," Mr. Reed said. "I realized if I didn't do this, a connection to a lot of things would be lost forever. So there was great impetus to do this. The only other thing I would like to do is make a movie about martial arts. Like, travel around to different teachers and tournaments, compare techniques and training."

"Red Shirley" will screen at the Film Society of Lincoln Center (which is co-presenting the festival), along with a conversation with the filmmakers, and it will be featured for a similar evening at the Sundance Film Festival later this month. The resilient Ms. Novick still lives in the Chelsea Garment Worker Project apartment—"right by Grand Sichuan," added Mr. Reed—where she has resided for almost half a century after living "all over the place" in Brooklyn. 

Her exceptional hardiness has extended into the 21st century. Mr. Reed recalled an operation she had on her shoulder a few years ago, with reduced anesthetic that meant she could hear the surgeon cutting. "They said, 'You have to have an operation, but you're too old.' She said, 'Why am I too old?' 'Because you can't survive that amount of anesthetic.' 'She said, 'Don't worry about that.' She calls me up later, and I said, 'You didn't even tell me you were in the hospital!' 

"She said 'Eh, I didn't want to bother you.'"