  Hewlett-Packard Co.
HPQ


0.14
%




 is overhauling its board, with four directors closely involved in the decision to oust former chief executive  Mark Hurd departing as five new directors, including former  eBay Inc.
EBAY


0.63
%




 CEO  Meg Whitman, take their places. 

The shuffle is the latest effort by the technology giant to move past Mr. Hurd's controversial resignation last August—which came after the board investigated a sexual-harassment claim made against him by a former contractor—and move forward under new CEO  Leo Apotheker. 

The Hurd debate "took a lot out of this board," said  Ray Lane, who joined H-P's board as chairman in November, in an interview. He applauded the board's decision to remove Mr. Hurd, he said, "but it wasn't without some pain, so we stepped back and said let's self examine the board."

Mr. Lane said that the four departing board members volunteered to leave and that he "couldn't single out someone who should go." But he said that some change was both expected and necessary as he and Mr. Apotheker try to push the company ahead.

Leaving H-P's board are  Joel Hyatt, John Joyce, Robert Ryan and  Lucille Salhany. Mr. Ryan and Ms. Salhany oversaw an investigation of Mr. Hurd's conduct, people familiar with the matter have said. The investigation found that the then-CEO didn't violate the company's sexual-harassment policy, but found that he misstated expenses and concealed meetings with the contractor.

Former eBay CEO Meg Whitman; Alcatel-Lucent ex-CEO Patricia Russo; Booz & Co. head Shumeet Banerji; former GE executive Gary Reiner; AXA Private Equity CEO Dominique Senequier.

Retired Medtronic executive Robert Ryan; vice chairman of Current Media Joel Hyatt; John Joyce, executive at Silver Springs Networks; and Lucille Salhany, CEO of JHMedia.

H-P named five new directors: Ms. Whitman, former CEO of eBay and the unsuccessful 2010 Republican candidate for California governor;  Shumeet Banerji, CEO of consulting firm Booz & Co.;  Gary Reiner, former chief information officer of  General Electric Co.
GE


-0.08
%




;  Patricia Russo, former CEO of Alcatel-Lucent and  Dominique Senequier, CEO of AXA Private Equity. 

The changes bring to 13 the total number of directors at H-P. The company will hold its annual meeting for shareholders on March 23.

The departing H-P directors represented two sides of a rift that developed in the board over the debate about Mr. Hurd's future. During board deliberations about the investigation's findings, Ms. Salhany said that she thought Mr. Hurd was lying to the board about his relationship with the contractor, people familiar with the matter have said.

Messrs. Hyatt and Joyce were Mr. Hurd's biggest boardroom supporters, people familiar with directors' deliberations have said. During board discussions over whether to retain Mr. Hurd, these people said, Mr. Hyatt said that forcing out the CEO would hurt shareholders by causing H-P's stock price to drop. Mr. Joyce suggested letting Mr. Hurd continue as CEO for a period of months to allow for a smooth transition when he departed, said people familiar with the matter.

Mr. Hyatt declined to comment Thursday. Ms. Salhany and Messrs. Joyce and Ryan didn't respond to requests for comment. 

Mr. Lane said that he and Mr. Apotheker know the new board members and that they each have a background in a business that H-P is pursuing. Mr. Reiner, a former chief information officer, is familiar with H-P's customer base, for instance, while Ms. Russo has a background in communications equipment. Ms. Whitman ran a large consumer business, and her massive gubernatorial campaign gave her exposure to government issues.

Mr. Apotheker said in an interview that he didn't expect the new board members to have any difficulty getting familiar with H-P's business. 

"It is unusual" to see four board members step down at the same time, said  Espen Eckbo, director of the Center for Corporate Governance at Dartmouth College's Tuck School of Business Administration. Still, he said, there is often board turnover among members identified with a prior CEO once a new leader arrives.

The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission has been investigating circumstances surrounding Mr. Hurd's departure, people familiar with the matter have said.

H-P's board came under heavy criticism for its decision to get rid of Mr. Hurd and for the generous exit package it handed him, which was valued at more than $35 million at the time. Mr. Hurd was widely credited with reviving the Palo Alto, Calif., company and turning it into the world's largest technology company by revenue. H-P's stock price more than doubled during his five-year tenure.

Several shareholders sued H-P's board following the resignation. 

In September Mr. Hurd was named co-president of  Oracle Corp.
ORCL


0.02
%




, an H-P rival. Later that month H-P announced Mr. Apotheker, formerly the CEO of software maker  SAP AG, as its new chief. 

Mr. Apotheker is also remaking H-P's executive ranks.  Michael Mendenhall, the chief marketing officer, and  Jonathan Hoak, the chief ethics and compliance officer, are both leaving the company for new jobs.  Marcela Perez de Alonso, executive vice president of human resources, retired in December. Mr. Apotheker created the post of chief communications officer and filled it with  Bill Wohl, a former public-relations executive at SAP, who will report to Mr. Apotheker. 

 Write to  Ben Worthen at ben.worthen@wsj.com 