EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J.—He started as a scout, grew as a player personnel director and in his first year as Giants general manager, Jerry Reese put together a golden draft: making five picks who played a major role in getting to and winning that season's Super Bowl.

The three drafts since, however, haven't been quite as spectacular. As he prepared to begin his fifth draft as Giants' GM Thursday night, let's evaluate Reese's last three drafts.

 2008 

Round 1: S Kenny Phillips; Round 2: CB Terrell Thomas; Round 3: WR Mario Manningham; Round 4: LB Bryan Kehl; Round 5: LB Jonathan Goff; Round 6: QB Andre Woodson, DE Robert Henderson,

 Consensus Then: This was deemed an exceptional draft at the time, especially for a team picking last. Phillips gave them speed in the middle, Thomas was a physical corner needed at an aging position, and Manningham was a better-graded talent missing some intangibles. Even Woodson was supposed to be a real talent.

 Reality Now: Maybe not exceptional, but not a terrible class, either. Before microfracture surgery, Phillips was a burgeoning star. This upcoming season, his second after surgery, should bring him fully back. Thomas is a strong corner, Goff started all year in the middle and Manningham has developed into one of the league's best deep threats. Kehl was a special teamer before being jettisoned early in 2010.

 Grade today: B



 2009 

Round 1: WR Hakeem Nicks; Round 2: LB Clint Sintim, OL Will Beatty; Round 3: WR Ramses Barden, HB Travis Beckum; Round 4: RB Andre Brown; Round 5: QB Rhett Bomar; Round 6: CB DeAndre Wright; Round 7: CB Stoney Woodson.

 Consensus Then: Draftniks were calling this one of the top drafts of the year. Nicks and the 6-foot-6 Barden filled the hole Plaxico Burress left when he shot himself, Beatty and Sintim buttressed aging positions, and Beckum, Bomar and Brown were all deemed real talents.

 Reality Now: Nicks, if he stays healthy, will be a Pro Bowler. Beatty and Barden have suffered injury, although Barden was finally coming on before he was hurt this year and Beatty was surprisingly staunch at LT after he came back. The Giants are still waiting on Sintim to produce. Beckum, although not an ideal fit, was serviceable later in the year.

 Grade B-



 2010 

 Round 1: DE Jason Pierre-Paul; Round 2: DT Linval Joseph; Round 3: DB Chad Jones; Round 4: LB Phillip Dillard; Round 5: OL Mitch Petrus; Round 6: LB Adrian Tracy; Round 7: P Matt Dodge

 Consensus Then: A so-so draft. The Giants wanted a linebacker and didn't get one early, but they may have gotten a steal in Dillard. Pierre-Paul was an athletic beast, but raw and maybe a risk. Joseph and Jones both had promise and Dodge was necessary when punter Jeff Feagles retired.

 Reality Now: If coach Tom Coughlin has a blood-pressure problem, the doctor has to look no further than Dodge, who dropped snaps he'd already caught, shanked punts and punted, instead of at the sideline, right at DeSean Jackson. Jones was in a horrific car accident and may never play football again, Tracy spent the season sidelined, Dillard was hurt early and Joseph didn't see much playing time. Still, Pierre-Paul was even better than hoped for and Petrus showed promise the few times he played.

 Grade: C

 Write to  Aditi Kinkhabwala at aditi.kinkhabwala@wsj.com 