LONDON— Barclays PLC Chief Executive  Robert Diamond Jr. said the giant U.K. bank will keep London as its headquarters, but the vow from the bank's new American-born chief did little to blunt angry attacks from British lawmakers that reflected ongoing angst over bankers' compensation here.

Testifying before a parliamentary committee on Tuesday, Mr. Diamond, who became Barclays's CEO on Jan. 1, was cast again as a political punching bag, a role he has played at various junctures in recent years as ire over bank pay became a hot political issue in the U.K. 

Lawmakers bashed Barclays, one of the largest british retail banks and one of the world's largest investment banks, for allegedly not lending enough to small businesses; overpaying its employees; engaging in risky "blackjack"-like trading activities; skimping on dividend payouts; dodging British taxes; being insufficiently transparent; and even for supposedly freezing Jewish customers' bank accounts during World War II.

"You're not a big fan of Barclays, are you?" Mr. Diamond quipped to one lawmaker, John Mann, when he accused Barclays of masking the true extent of its executive-pay packages.

"I'm a big fan of getting answers out of you," Mr. Mann shot back.

The 2½-hour grilling—at a hearing ostensibly intended to discuss the state of competition in the British retail-banking sector—was the latest reminder of the toxic relationship between banks and the British government and public. Other banking CEOs already have appeared before the committee.

The combination of an ailing economy and a profitable banking industry has prompted calls for the government to clamp down on bonuses and force banks to lend more. A government-appointed commission is studying the possibility of imposing structural changes on the industry. And politicians rarely miss an opportunity to personally bash leading bankers.

While Barclays has fared better than its rivals on profitability, Mr. Diamond has been a particularly popular bogeyman. British politicians view the Massachusetts native, the architect of Barclays's investment-banking business, as embodying the type of executives who torpedoed the U.K. banking system and necessitated massive taxpayer bailouts of several institutions. 

At Tuesday's hearing, Mr. Diamond repeatedly tried to defuse the situation. Speculation has been mounting in the U.K. that he will try to escape the country's anti-bank climate by moving the company to the U.S., where much of its investment-banking operations are based. Mr. Diamond denied that. "We're going to be here in the United Kingdom," he said. "This is the place we want to succeed."

Mr. Diamond also said the bank is talking to the government about setting potential lending targets.

To the frustration of some lawmakers, Mr. Diamond refused to say whether he would accept a bonus for 2010 on top of his £250,000 ($389,500) base salary. (Barclays has said his base pay as CEO will be £1.35 million this year.) Last year, he turned down the bonus for 2009 that the bank's board recommended. "If I were to make a personal decision, I'd do that with my family," he said Tuesday.

Mr. Diamond attempted to deploy folksy flourishes. As he defended Barclays's business model, he said that when Barclays takes risks, it's primarily on behalf of clients. He cited a Welsh sheep farmer whom Barclays is helping to hedge against volatile fertilizer prices. "He can focus on his sheep farming and not have to focus on all the other risks," Mr. Diamond explained.

Later in the hearing, George Mudie, a Labour Party lawmaker from Leeds in northern England, told Mr. Diamond that nurses or teachers would have trouble understanding why millionaire bankers would need to make millions more to be encouraged to do their jobs well. Mr. Diamond responded with a soliloquy about his Irish heritage and his cash-strapped childhood.

"I can hear the bloody bagpipes going," Mr. Mudie interjected, cutting Mr. Diamond off mid-sentence and redirecting the question to why bankers deserve to be paid so much. 

Mr. Diamond then told him it was to be competitive and not lose employees to other firms.

The questioning at times took a nasty tone. A Labour lawmaker, Chuka Umunna, noted that Barclays had tried to buy Dutch bank ABN Amro, only to be outbid by  Royal Bank of Scotland Group PLC. That 2007 acquisition later proved to be RBS's undoing.

"You may well have ended up being the Fred Goodwin of the crash," Mr. Umunna told Mr. Diamond, referring to RBS's former chief. "Do you understand why people perhaps don't think you're suited to be running one of the biggest banks in the country?"

Mr. Diamond rejected the premise of the question. He pointed out that Barclays's offer for ABN was in stock, unlike RBS's cash offer, which would have shielded Barclays when markets subsequently crashed. He added that, unlike RBS, Barclays wouldn't have shed ABN's lucrative Italian and Brazilian businesses.

Other questions appeared to stump Mr. Diamond. "Why is it easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle than a rich man to enter the kingdom of heaven?" Mr. Mann asked at one point. 

Mr. Diamond simply smiled and didn't attempt to answer.

 Write to  David Enrich at david.enrich@wsj.com 