NEW DELHI -- India's federal budget welcomed more infrastructure funding from overseas and retail investors, and the announcements are likely to help bring down the cost of capital to build the country's much-needed roads, ports, power plants and airports. 

In his budget speech, Finance Minister  Pranab Mukherjee said the limit for foreign institutional investors to invest in corporate bonds specifically targeted for infrastructure has been raised to $25 billion from $5 billion earlier. 

Besides, the government has also reduced the tax on interest paid to foreign investors lending money for infrastructure projects to 5% from 20% earlier. 

"The two measures of reducing tax and increasing the limit of investment would spur foreign funds' investment into the infrastructure sector, which has so far been restrained. It would deepen the fund source for Indian infrastructure developers," said  Jai Mavani, head of infrastructure and real estate practice for PwC in India. 

Asia's third-largest economy has laid out a target to spend $1 trillion for infrastructure projects in the five-year project that will begin April 1, 2012. 

Indian infrastructure developers are scrambling to raise funds for its mega projects, as banks are often reluctant to finance loans for high-gestation projects and a shallow bond market limits access to cheaper capital. The federal government is taking steps to broaden and deepen the corporate bond market. 

Apart from making it more attractive for foreign funds to invest in infrastructure, the government also dangled a carrot for retail investors. 

Mr. Mukherjee said the government proposes to launch 300 billion rupees ($6.6 billion) in tax-free bonds to finance railways, ports, housing and highways development projects. Besides, he has allowed an income tax rebate for 20,000 rupees a year more to buy these bonds, taking the total rebate to 40,000 rupees each year. 

"[The rebate and tax free-bonds] is a step in the right direction, but a lot more needs to be

 Write to  Prasenjit Bhattacharya at prasenjit.bhattacharya@dowjones.com 