BANGALORE -- Aavishkaar India, an early-stage venture capital firm, will complete raising a $120 million in June for its fourth and largest fund. 

The size and speed of Aavishkaar's fund-raising effort -- six months to close a fund -- reflect the hurry venture capitalists are into make new investments, taking a cue from their more active private equity investors. There are at least half a dozen other venture-capital firms that are either raising funds or increasing the size of their funds.

Another impetus for this hectic activity is that it's almost time many venture capitalists exit their current investments. Typically, VCs begin raising fresh capital after committing at least 70% of their existing funds toward fresh investments. For instance, Clearstone Venture also will look to raise its fourth fund this year as its third fund of $215 million is nearing the end of its investment cycle, the company has said earlier. 

Others, though, want to grab at fresh opportunities. 

TVS Capital Funds Ltd., the asset-management venture of TVS Group and Shriram Group, is looking to raise its second fund, two people with knowledge of the matter said. The firm expects to secure internal approvals for the fund at its board meeting later in May, said a senior executive at TVS Capital. The fund size will be about $100 million and the money will be used to invest in infrastructure services. 

"While we had initially concentrated on investments in the consumer sector, we now want to build more into other verticals," the executive said. 

Management consultants Bain and Co., in a recent report, said the appetite of limited partners -- the main investors in funds -- for greater exposure to Indian start-ups remains strong. Bain cautions that although there is plenty of capital waiting to be invested in India, not all the firms that are trying to raise funds will succeed. 

One limited partner said in an interview to Bain that investors have on their priority lists a few quality general partners, or fund managers who have emerged in India. 

"(Limited partners) are closely looking at the kind of value-add that general partners can bring to their portfolio firms and how different the fund's investment thesis is from others," said Vineet Rai of chief executive of Aavishkaar, which plans to invest its fourth fund in companies seeking second or third rounds of investments. 

Ennovent, a social-investment fund that will back for-profit companies catering to the poor, is looking to raise $30 million to $50 million. 

"Most (limited partners) want us to raise more because the feeling is that smaller funds are not viable," said Tripat Preet Singh, managing director, India, at Ennovent. "Our area of focus is (bottom of the pyramid) and the gap that lies in the $1-million funding space." 

Among other VC firms looking to raise capital are IndoUS Venture Partners and IDG Ventures India. 

IndoUS Venture is considering raising a second fund, turning its attention to early-stage deals from being stage-agnostic. IDG Ventures' next fund will be bigger than its present $150 million fund, said an executive at the firm requesting anonymity. 

The fresh fund raising, however, is raising concerns as well. 

At least $20 billion of committed capital remains uninvested and is still available. More liquidity will add to the competition, leading to auction-like situations and unrealistic valuations, experts said. 

"These will be great times for entrepreneurs but as an investor, I would worry about too much capital chasing too few quality deals... and what it may imply longer term for valuations and returns," said K.P. Balaraj, managing director at WestBridge Capital, a fund which is looking to raise an yet-to-be determined amount. 