WASHINGTON—The wife of a senior White House aide was found dead in a burning car in the garage behind her Capitol Hill home on Monday morning.

Fire officials didn't identify Ashley Turton, 37 years old, by name as the victim. But a spokesman for her employer, Progress Energy Inc., confirmed on Monday that she was the victim.

She was married to Daniel Turton, a White House liaison to Congress, with whom she had three children. A White House spokesman declined to comment. 

Firefighters were dispatched to the scene shortly before 5 a.m. after neighbors called to report that a garage was on fire, according to Pete Piringer, a District of Columbia fire-department spokesman.

The driver crashed a 2008 BMW X-5 into the interior of the garage at about 4:45 a.m., the Washington, DC, police said in a statement. A fire started and quickly engulfed the entire garage as well as the car, the police said. 

The news was the latest to shake Capitol Hill and the White House, which are still reeling from the shooting of Rep. Gabrielle Giffords (D., Ariz.) in Tucson over the weekend. An aide to Ms. Giffords and five other people were killed in the rampage.

White House staffers had returned to their desks after a moment of silence for the victims in Arizona to find an email with the news of Ms. Turton's death.

Ms. Turton was a lobbyist for energy firm Progress Energy and the mother of four-year-old twin boys and a girl who was about 18 months old, according to people who worked with her.

"I don't know anyone who didn't have a marvelous time working with her," said Scott Segal, an attorney at Bracewell & Giuliani, who has done work for Progress Energy. "She was such a vital part of every meeting I was in with her. Her opinion was always thoughtful. She was well respected and she was funny and delightful to be around."

Ms. Turton would have played a role in the merger between Progress Energy and Duke Energy Corp. by communicating with congressional staffers, Progress Energy spokesman Mike Hughes said. Duke and Progress agreed to an all-stock merger on Monday, valued at about $13.7 billion.

One adult and two children were evacuated from the home, about eight blocks from the U.S. Capitol, Mr. Piringer said. The victim was discovered in the driver's seat of an SUV-type vehicle, he said. 

Before joining Progress Energy in September, 2007, Ms. Turton had worked on Capitol Hill for Rep. Rosa DeLauro (D., Conn.), among other people.

 Write to  Siobhan Hughes at siobhan.hughes@dowjones.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications  Ashley Turton worked for Rep. Rosa DeLauro (D, Conn.) among other lawmakers before joining Progress Energy, but didn't work for then-House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D., Calif.), as reported earlier.