LONDON— HSBC Holdings PLC—called "the world's local bank" in its ad campaigns—won't be quite as close to home for many customers after a strategy shift that could see it pull back on retail banking and withdraw from some of the 87 countries where it now operates. 

In a much-anticipated strategic review unveiled Wednesday, new Chief Executive Officer Stuart Gulliver laid out plans to cut costs by between $2.5 billion and $3.5 billion by 2013 and be stricter with how the bank's capital is deployed in an age when regulators are requiring big banks to hold more of it.

The move upends HSBC's long-time agenda of entering new countries and rolling out everything from credit cards and mortgages to investment-banking products. 

"We are not going to try to be all things to all people in all markets," Mr. Gulliver said during an investor presentation in London. "We must allocate capital in a more disciplined way than in the past."

For HSBC, the rollback isn't so much about the virtues of retail banking as it is about the way the company has gone about expanding globally. Due to the bank's decentralized model, there are management overlaps and technology differences among HSBC's 6,000-plus retail branches world-wide. In many countries, the retail presence isn't big enough to be as efficient as competitors'. Mr. Gulliver said there are about 39 countries where retail operations aren't performing as well as he wants. 

"Outside of the U.K. and Hong Kong, retail hasn't made a substantial return," said Mr. Gulliver.

HSBC's pullback in retail is somewhat of an anomaly among banks. Among U.S. banks, for example, retail operations are largely flat. Total U.S. branches reached 106,088 last year, down from 107,382 in 2009, and compared to 96,412 in 2002, according to data from SNL Financial.

More recent data suggests U.S. banks are adding branches, though, in part because retail banking tends to be less capital-intensive than other activities. That makes it more attractive under new capital requirements, while deposits provide a stable source of funding. 

HSBC will still court retail depositors, but will now zero in on what it calls strategic markets. The U.K., Hong Kong and the U.S. are at the top of that list, but it also includes countries such as Germany, Turkey, Brazil and Singapore. 

Executives said they couldn't yet say how many markets the bank would ultimately leave, nor how many jobs might be lost. The bank has already said it plans to exit retail banking in Russia.

Some paring back of the retail operation is likely even within some of the remaining key markets. HSBC has said, for example, that parts of its U.S. branch network, such as outlets in upstate New York, don't fit well with the group's international focus. For similar reasons, the bank said Wednesday it would review its U.S. cards business.

HSBC weathered the financial crisis better than many of its peers, but its share price has been generally flat. Costs relative to its income began to spiral while management was distracted with the disastrous fallout from the acquisition of U.S. subprime lender Household International Inc. 

The bank will also develop its Global Banking and Markets business, the wholesale division that Mr. Gulliver headed before he took over as CEO earlier this year. He said Wednesday that the division's annual profits before tax had grown from roughly $5 billion to $6 billion prior to the financial crisis to $9 billion to $10 billion today. Its expertise in both developed and emerging markets will let it capture more cross-border business, he said.

HSBC will also position its commercial bank to take advantage of cross-border commerce.The Private Banking and Wealth Management areas will remain priorities as the bank attempts to benefit from growing wealth in countries such China, India and Brazil.

Tapping wealthy customers world-wide should add $4 billion in revenue, Mr. Gulliver said.

Investors were lukewarm on HSBC's news. The bank's stock closed down 1.5%, or 10.1 pence, at 646.1 pence in London. 

There had been some anticipation of a "big-bang announcement on sales or a large restructuring charge," said Ronit Ghose, a banking analyst at Citigroup in London. That didn't happen. But Mr. Ghose said the presentation was "useful" and lauded Mr. Gulliver for saying he would take personal accountability for the results. "He's putting himself on the line," Mr. Ghose said.

The bank plans to ramp up U.S. commercial lending in an economy that Mr. Gulliver believes will rebound due in part to its reserves of shale gas. HSBC sees an opportunity to finance trade for U.S. companies doing cross-border business in Asia and Latin America.

—Margot Patrick contributed to this article. 