Art lovers are livid at museums that sell off portions of their collections to pay the bills. The National Academy Museum in New York, the Philadelphia History Museum and the art museums at Brandeis and Fisk universities have all been raked over the coals because they dared to unload a few minor artworks so they could keep the lights on and the heat running.

Art lovers shriek that this sort of philistine "de-accessioning" violates the public trust and discourages benefactors from giving away their masterpieces. Heaven forbid that the beloved Velázquez hanging in the bathhouse in Bar Harbor for the last 75 years might get shipped to some rube in Arkansas to pay for a new unisex bathroom on the mezzanine level.

I, for one, do not think that precious works of art should be shoved out the back door just to cover a museum's operating expenses or to underwrite the curators' annual Christmas party. That's merely robbing Peter to pay Skyler and Bree. It doesn't help the public's mood one bit. But what's wrong with selling off a few items from municipal art museums and using them to pay for something the public might really enjoy?

Reliable left-handed relief pitching, for example. The financially strapped New York Mets aren't going anywhere this year without some help in the bullpen. Obviously, it's more important for the city's psyche for the public to have good baseball than to have good art; everyone knows that. So would it be so wrong for the Metropolitan Museum of Art to quietly unload a couple of second-tier Monets and ship the money to the Mets front office to help pay for a solid southpaw reliever? And maybe toss in one of those Egyptian lion-headed statues standing guard in the Temple of Dendur to land a right-handed bat? It's not as if the Met is going to run out of Monets anytime soon; they've probably got dozens of them rotting in cold storage somewhere. And the Met could sell off a 5,000-year-old mummy every spring for the next half-century without making a dent in the Egyptian antiquities in its inventory.

The nation's capital is an even better example. The Redskins stink, the Nationals stink and the Wizards really stink. Yet the fat-cat National Gallery is sitting there with more Renoirs and John Singer Sargent canvases than you can shake a stick at. So why not, just to boost civic pride, put a couple of Canalettos on the block and get the Redskins a quarterback who is not yet collecting Social Security? Or package a second-rate Bronzino with a third-rate Van Gogh and acquire a defensive end who can stuff the run? Who's going to be the wiser?

I am certainly not suggesting that museums literally gut their collections to beef up local sports. I oppose selling any El Grecos to pay for a new stadium just so Los Angeles can have pro football again. But who's going to miss the odd Jackson Pollock? Or notice if the Art Institute of Chicago dumps a couple of Ellsworth Kelly monochromatic wall panels and helps the Cubs win their first World Series since 1908? Or get the Bears a wide receiver who can actually catch the ball?

Purists are sure to raise the "slippery slope" argument: that once you start selling off youthful, crummy Edward Hoppers to pay for backup quarterbacks, soon you'll be selling off first-rate Raphaels to fund Ben Roethlisberger's legal expenses. That's hooey. Museums like the Met and the Museum of Modern Art probably exhibit no more than 1/10th of 1% of their holdings at any given time. MoMA could ditch a couple of Picassos every winter for the next 50 years without feeling the pinch. Which would be great for the public's spirit.

If the major museums in New York City banded together and sold off a few minor artworks—sculpture, videos, whatever—they could give the Jets enough money to get themselves a pass rush and maybe even a field-goal kicker who doesn't make your heart stop every time he steps onto the field. Even Andy Warhol would be on board with that. He lived in New York. He died in New York. 

The Jets may have hastened his demise.