Despite HenkelAG and Co. KGaA's decision to sell its Indian subsidiary, it could maintain a presence in India through some of its popular brands, according to two investment bankers involved in the transaction.

  Henkel's
HENKY


0.30
%




 hair-care brand, Schwarzkopf, one of the German company's most profitable globally, will be sold back to the parent, which may then look for a potential licensee that can sell the styling and colouring products in India, the bankers said. On March 1, Henkel India told the Bombay Stock Exchange it had decided to sell movable assets and other components of its hair-care division.

The company may also keep its laundry detergent brands, the bankers said. Henkel would have the option to enter long-term agreements with the buyer, or transfer brand rights for detergent brands Henko and Mr. White, one of the two bankers said.

Henkel, last week, said it would sell its 50.97% stake in the local unit and has sought bids next month. The buyer would obtain the licence to market global dish-washing liquid brand Pril and soap and deodorant brand Fa, according to the sale information memorandum, one of the investment bankers said. The German company would allow the buyer to retain global brand and intellectual property rights for Margo and Chek. The buyer can also make Henko and Mr. White at the existing plant in Karaikal, Pondicherry, but won't be allowed to export these products.

Jyothy Laboratories Ltd, the maker of fabric whitener Ujala, announced that it was bidding for the Henkel India stake, after having purchased a 14.9% holding in the unit from Tamilnadu Petroproducts Ltd on Wednesday for 607.3 million rupees. Also in the running are soap and detergent makers Godrej Consumer Products Ltd;  Wipro Ltd's consumer arm, Wipro Consumer Care and Lighting; and Emami Ltd.

The purchase by Jyothy "has not deterred Emami from bidding for the (Henkel) stake," said  Harsh Agarwal, director at Emami.

"We have signed a non-disclosure agreement, so I will not be able to comment more, he said. His company hasn't appointed an investment banker.

Mint couldn't independently verify whether Godrej Consumer and Wipro Consumer Care would be bidding for the stake, despite calls to the companies.

HSBC Securities and Capital Markets (India) Pvt. Ltd and HSBC Trinkaus and Burkhardt AG are advisers to Henkel AG.

Henkel India, established in 1987 as a subsidiary of Henkel AG, is saddled with high debt and declining margins.

Despite Henkel AG's plans to increase its focus in certain key markets including Asia, the move to exit the Indian joint venture wasn't a surprise, said an analyst with the brokerage arm of an international investment bank.

"The company exited its business in China last year," the analyst said, declining to be named due to company policy.

Henkel was unable to stand up to competition from global rivals in the detergent business in India, the analyst said. The company will stay only in markets in which it can grow profitably, it had told analysts in a recent conference call, he added.

Henkel's worldwide sales amounted to €15.092 billion (approximately 956.93 billion rupees) in fiscal 2010, according its website. Eastern Europe, Africa, West Asia, Latin America and Asia, excluding Japan, contributed to 41% of sales. The company intends to increase this to 45% by 2012.

Meanwhile, Henkel India posted a loss of 23.4 million rupees for the quarter ended Dec. 31, on sales of 971.4 million rupees, according to its filing with the BSE. Detergent brand Henko posted sales of 1.32 billion rupees for the year ended March 31, 2010. During the same period, detergent brands Mr. White and Pril earned revenues of 520 million rupees and 680 million rupees, respectively, Margo soap 780 million rupees, Neem soaps 70 million rupees, and Fa soaps and deodorants 220 million rupees.