SÃO PAULO, Brazil—Brazil's commodity-rich economy has downshifted from the torrid rates it posted last year, government statistics showed, as the government eases back on stimulus and businesses reach their limits of production.

Latin America's biggest economy grew a sizzling 7.5% in 2010, officials said Thursday. But the pace of growth slowed significantly to 3% in the fourth quarter compared with the third quarter, using the seasonally adjusted standard for measuring gross domestic product in the U.S.

Using the year-on-year comparison more often cited by local officials, Brazil grew 5% in the fourth quarter compared the 2009 fourth period. That is a decline from a 6.7% pace in the third quarter compared with the year-earlier period.

In recent years, Brazil has attracted a frenzy of investment in part by posting growth rates that far surpassed those in the U.S. But with its ports, roadways and power grid taxed by a yearslong boom, Brazil may be nearing its maximum speed. Its fourth-quarter growth rate of 3% is about on par with U.S. growth for the same period.

"The significant outperformance of Brazil compared to the U.S. or other emerging markets is no longer as impressive as it was," said Goldman Sachs economist  Alberto Ramos.

To be sure, Brazil's economy is still expanding rapidly. It is poised to grow 4.3% this year, the consensus of economists surveyed by Brazil's central bank.

"The economy is slowing, but it's slowing from a supercharged rate," said Standard Chartered economist Douglas Smith. "It's still pretty robust."

The slower growth rates are a welcome relief for government officials concerned about rising inflation, a symptom of an overheating economy. Brazil's central bank on Wednesday raised the country's benchmark lending rate to 11.75%—creating the highest real rate among the world's major economies—to halt rising prices.

Enough inflationary pressure has already built up, however, that economists expect the central bank to continue the rate increases even as the economy slows. 

Brazilian consumers, driven by higher wages and easier credit, show few signs of backing off from a buying binge that's helping drive up prices, said John Welch, an economist who follows Brazil at the Australian investment bank Macquarie.

Underscoring concern that the economy has overheated, the two-month old government of President Dilma Rousseff has announced plans to cut some $30 billion in spending from this year's budget. However, even if the cuts go through, spending will still rise compared to last year, which itself saw a huge expansion in outlays in the run up to the presidential election.

 Write to  John Lyons at john.lyons@wsj.com 