When the Tenement Museum opened its doors at 97 Orchard St. in 1992, it was in a Lower East Side that still bore living relics of its immigrant past.

You could get a flaky rugulah at Gertel's Bakery on Hester Street. Orchard Street was a Sunday market of multigenerational vendors. And Max Fish, then open for only three years, was a night-life pioneer in a neighborhood that rolled up the sidewalks at sunset.

In June, the museum will open a visitor's center in a neighborhood that no longer resembles its humble beginnings. But that doesn't faze officials who say the visitor's center location, at 103 Orchard St., reflects the evolution of the Lower East Side from slum to sleek.

"We won't freeze history here," said  Morris J. Vogel, the museum's president. "This building [unlike the other] will bridge the past and present, and it will live in more than one moment."

Named for the daughter of an immigrant dry-goods merchant, the Sadie Samuelson Levy Immigrant Heritage Center will occupy 11,000 square feet over three floors of a mixed-used building circa 1888. In between the two museum buildings are still-occupied tenements with ground-level shops. 

The renovation to create the visitor's center will including reskinning the street-level facade of 103 Orchard in glass—an attempt to enliven what project architect  Nicholas Leahy calls a "dead corner."

"It's a great opportunity to keep the regeneration of the Lower East Side going," said Mr. Leahy. "You can turn the city into a museum or you can keep it lively."

At the moment, the interior of the center is a construction site consisting of a labyrinth of small rooms that will be consolidated into large, light-filled spaces for the museum's educational program. The building also will house an expanded gift shop, one of museum's primary revenue streams. The overcrowded shop at 97 Orchard currently brings in nearly $1 million a year in sales.

In addition, the new center will include exhibition spaces, classrooms, a demonstration kitchen and performance space. Not to be found in the center will be multimedia kiosks, costumed interpreters or anything presenting what  David Eng, vice president of public affairs, calls, a "Disney-fied experience."

"We'll join the 21st century with a couple of LED screens, but there won't be anything jarring," he said.

  Holly Kaye, a planning and development consultant for historic sites, lauded the museum's efforts to maintain its evolving cultural identity.

 "You want to preserve what you can, and where you can't, you want to find a moment of significance and articulate that significance," said Ms. Kaye.

The Tenement Museum is one of the city's most successful small museums. It attracted more than 173,000 visitors from 56 countries in the year ended June 30—its largest audience ever and a 5% uptick from the previous year. About 40,000 students visit each year. 

Perhaps the museum's greatest success of late: its ability to carry the visitor's center project through the recession. Some $2 million of a $15 million capital campaign jump-started the 2007 purchase of the building at 103 Orchard and its renovation. A mix of fund raising, membership and sponsorship will pay for continuing renovations and operations.

Construction began in March 2008, at a time many other museums cancelled major projects. Despite the growing pains, the museum maintained visitorship through the downturn, says Mr. Eng. Some of the original plans, such as a theater for live performances, however, were scaled back.

"I think it's even more important to show support when times are bad," said  Shelby White, a trustee for the Leon Levy Foundation, which provided $1 million of the capital campaign, and whose mother-in-law is the center's namesake.

The building at 103 Orchard has long housed retail on the ground floor. The new facilities will occupy the basement, ground and second floors. Upper floors will remain apartments—an additional revenue source for the museum, which—coming full circle—is now a landlord itself. Tenants will remain, but as units become vacant, they will be converted to exhibition space interpreting newer immigrant experiences.

Transfer of the shop and education spaces to the new center will allow the museum to build out other exhibitions at 97 Orchard, which will include a German beer saloon, a kosher butcher shop and a Depression-era auction house.

"The shop space will show how outsiders created something out of nothing and rejected [the rules] of the traditional economy," said Mr. Vogel.

 Corrections and Amplifications 

Sadie Samuelson Levy's father worked in the cloak and suit trade. This article incorrectly says she was the daughter of a dry-goods merchant.