PARIS—French crash investigators said they are optimistic about extracting data from the black boxes of an Air France airliner that crashed in the Atlantic Ocean almost two years ago, despite unprecedented challenges in reading the digital recorders.

The two units, each about the size of a wine bottle and locked inside a clear plastic container, were briefly displayed at a news conference on Thursday by France's Bureau d'Enquêtes et d'Analyses, which is leading the investigation.

"From the outside, they look in good shape," said BEA Director  Jean-Paul Troadec at the conference soon after the units' arrival from the crash site. "We hope that we can read them, but nothing is guaranteed."

Each device contains at least 12 microchips on memory cards, which hold cockpit voice recordings and technical data about the plane's equipment. The chips' condition was unclear from external examination.

Reading data from recorders after so many months in deep salt water "is a first," said  Christophe Menez, head of the BEA engineering department. He said technicians will need at least three days to extract the data, and the BEA will report on the units' condition on Monday. If problems arise, the process could take much longer.

Air France Flight 447, with 228 people aboard, disappeared while flying through heavy storms from Rio de Janeiro to Paris on June 1, 2009. The cause of its crash remains unknown.

Specialist teams earlier this month located wreckage of the Airbus A330 jetliner on the sea floor and raised elements of it 3,900 meters to a salvage ship. It marked the fourth search of a crash zone the size of Switzerland. It centered on some of the deepest, most rugged and least-charted terrain on Earth. Finding the black boxes was a major technical achievement, and reading them could require similar ingenuity. The boxes aren't designed to be entirely water-tight, Mr. Menez said. The memorychips are protected inside a thick steel casing, a coat of rubber and a thin layer of varnish designed to resist salt water.

But air-safety experts fear the plane's impact or the intense water pressure on the sea floor could have damaged the protections, allowing corrosive brine to leak in. The two cylinders containing the data cards were transported from the salvage ship in demineralized water to avoid the risk of further corrosion.

BEA experts will first remove the chips from the casings and wash them to remove all traces of salt. The memory cards will then be dried in a special oven for at least 12 hours. They will be inspected with a microscope for damage and tested to see if they still function, Mr. Menez said.

The drying process has sparked debate among technical experts about the best and safest way to handle the recorders without jeopardizing data. Some specialists say the memory cards and chips should dry gradually, over several days, to prevent delamination—separation into layers—or other internal damage. Since the intense pressure on the seabed may have pushed microscopic quantities of water inside the recorders, these experts advocate keeping the devices in special ovens for as long as five days, with the temperature hovering around 100 degrees, and only then hooking them back up to electric power.

Experts on both sides of the Atlantic agree the effort is heading into uncharted territory, without clear-cut precedents. But based on Thursday's developments, French technical specialists apparently have decided to dry out the chips by subjecting them to higher temperatures for what may be a significantly shorter period.

Mr. Menez said his team will move judiciously. If the cards appear to be in good condition after 12 hours, they will be plugged into a new black box linked to a computer. All the information on the cards will copied onto an encrypted hard disk for analysis.

If the memory cards are damaged or unreadable, engineers will attempt to extract data more directly from the individual chips. Industry officials say the BEA has been seeking advice from chip makers on how to do this. Specialists from  Honeywell International Inc.,
HON


-0.23
%




 which produced the black boxes, are standing by to assist if necessary, BEA officials said.

Even after information is retrieved, specialists may still need many days to sort through the various readings, distill them into a precise timeline and synchronize them. Preliminary readouts from black boxes can be slightly jumbled or misleading, particularly when some data on the recorder has been lost or partially corrupted, experts say.

Based on the relatively good external condition of the recorders, several U.S. air-safety officials also said they were optimistic valuable data would be downloaded.

But one former senior U.S. crash investigator cautioned that French officials may have to cope with only partial retrieval of data. If that occurs, this person said, it could significantly complicate efforts to get a clear-cut answer about how the cockpit crew reacted to commands issued by the plane's flight-control computers.

The plane's two engines and its avionics bay, which have already been retrieved, also contain memory chips. They may also be analyzed, especially if the black boxes aren't fully readable.

Two bodies have been retrieved from the wreckage, and results of DNA tests on them should be announced Wednesday, said Col.  Francois Daoust, head of the French Forensic Institute. If they can be identified, the salvage ship will lift as many as possible of the 50 corpses on the sea bed, he said.

But the bodies are unlikely to help establish the causes of the crash, so retrieving them isn't an absolute priority, said Mr. Troadec of the BEA. 