Ian Rankin broke into the best-seller lists with his chronicles of the hard-drinking, risk-taking Edinburgh police detective John Rebus. Having rounded off the Rebus series a few years ago, Mr. Rankin now gives us, in "The Complaints" (Little, Brown, 438 pages, $24.99), quite a different Scots policeman: the recovering alcoholic Malcolm Fox, who is "slow but steady, and only occasionally to be feared."

A detective on the Complaints and Conduct squad ("the cops who investigated other cops"), Fox is accustomed to the hostility of officers who resent his power to disrupt their lives. But even Foxy, as he's known, is surprised by the nastiness he must endure when he himself comes under suspicion after the violent death of his sister's abusive boyfriend. Suspended for the duration of an official inquiry, the detective teams up with another officer—also unfairly targeted by the inquiry, Fox believes—and the two begin a rogue investigation into who set them up and why. It could be anyone: "the guy you'd once arrested; the guy whose uncle or cousin you once gave evidence against; the guy you'd persuaded to turn informer one time so he'd save his own skin." Their probing leads into murky corners of an Edinburgh where the economic downturn has given villains even more reason than usual to play rough.

Mirroring his protagonist's methodical ways, Mr. Rankin unfolds his suspenseful story with a steady hand that easily draws the reader into Fox's world of hope and regret. The challenge of trying to clear his name stirs in Fox a new sense of initiative. "We're civilians now," he tells his colleague-in-travail. "That gives us more room to maneuver, not less." Then again, there are limits. In a relatively small city such as Edinburgh, Fox reflects, "it was difficult sometimes to escape your own history."

The past also haunts the present in Kate Atkinson's wonderful "Started Early, Took My Dog" (Little, Brown, 371 pages, $24.99), the fourth of her novels featuring Jackson Brodie, a "semi-retired" just-turned-50 English gumshoe whose specialty is looking for people who have disappeared.

The mordant Brodie provides just one of several points of view in the telling of this complex tale set in Leeds. Another prominent voice is that of Tracy Waterhouse, an ex-policewoman now working as a shopping-mall security chief. Waterhouse is still tormented by the memory of a child who was spirited off the books and into official limbo in the wake of a horrific case that she worked as a beat cop in 1975. In the present day, when she runs across an endangered child, Waterhouse impulsively—and illegally—attempts a rescue by buying the little girl, prompting her to then go on the lam, child in tow. As the narrative shifts between the present and the 1970s, other characters also step forward, including a 70-something actress who's appearing in a TV police drama being shot in Leeds. Her witty stream-of-consciousness inner monologues take on a certain poignancy as they're filtered through a fraying memory—her mind "was like lace, delicate and full of holes."

"Starting Early, Took My Dog" is full of artful digressions and unexpected turns, but it amply makes good on its obligations as a mystery novel to explain the who, what and why.

A note to fans of the author known as Trevanian (Rodney William Whitaker), who died in 2005: It's safe to relax. The novel that his estate sanctioned to posthumously expand his oeuvre does not besmirch the Trevanian tradition of spinning entertaining spy tales like "The Eiger Sanction" (1975) and "Shibumi" (1979). The writer-for-hire, Don Winslow, who is himself a best- selling author, has produced  "Satori" (Grand Central, 504 pages, $25.99), an accomplished, page- turning prequel of "Shibumi."

Mr. Winslow writes in an afterword of his longstanding admiration, as a reader, for the assassin-hero of "Shibumi," the cultured and imperturbable Nicholai Hel, who looks European but thinks Asian. An adept at the ancient Japanese game called Go, Hel applies its precepts to his deadly profession: "Defeat a straight line with a circle, a circle with a straight line."

When Mr. Winslow's story starts, it's 1951 and Hel is sprung from a Tokyo prison—where he has been sent for assisting in his Japanese mentor's honor-suicide—in exchange for agreeing to carry out an American-conceived assassination of a Russian minister in Beijing. "I will not kill an innocent person," Hel warns his "benefactors," but they assure him that his target, a sadistic KGB man, is no innocent. 

Hel casts a dispassionate eye on all the players he encounters, from a narrow-minded American major ("unimaginative, brutal, his prejudices undisturbed by thought or education") to tasteless and incompetent Russians ("Soviet architects—a perfectly oxymoronic phrase") to Chinese master-planners who boast that Tiananmen Square, when completed, will hold over a million people: "Many of whose homes had been torn down, Nicholai thought, to create space for them to publicly gather."