Read the full  ECO:nomics report .

In recent years, China has spent enormous sums on clean technologies. The Wall Street Journal's Alan Murray and Kimberley A. Strassel talked about the China market with  Louis R. Chênevert, chairman and CEO of  United Technologies Corp.
UTX


-0.48
%




;  Mark R. Pinto, executive vice president of  Applied Materials Inc.
AMAT


-0.64
%




; and  Shi Zhengrong, chairman and CEO of Suntech Power Holdings Co. Here are edited excerpts of their conversation.

  MR. MURRAY: Three years ago, people thought of China as a problem because it had the highest rate of greenhouse-gas emissions. Increasingly, you hear people talk about China as the source of the solution. All three of you work in both the U.S. and China. We'd like to talk about how the two markets compare.  

 MR. CHÊNEVERT: I spend a lot of time in China because it's a high-growth market for us. China today is growing extremely fast. You can't be an elevator company and not be in China because one in two sold globally is sold to China.

We sell today the regenerative drive, which is the energy-efficient elevator, representing one-third of sales in China when it was only 5% 10 years ago. They've caught up. It's now the same percentage of ReGen drive elevators sold in China as what we sell in the U.S.

  MR. MURRAY: But is the difference just that China is a much faster growing market and so you sell more units? Or is there a clearer focus on energy-saving products?  

 MR. CHÊNEVERT: A big driving force is that you've got a lot of urbanization momentum, which drives all these new cities to be built. Because you build everything new, it's easier to do it with the latest technology. And, I would say, the pressure from the government to adopt some of these latest technologies is pretty substantial.

  MR. MURRAY: Mark, you made a decision not long ago to relocate from Silicon Valley to China. Is that because you agree with what John Doerr [partner at Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers] said, that there's a sense that in the clean-tech area, China is winning?  

 MR. PINTO: No, I wouldn't say that. We make manufacturing equipment for semiconductors, flat-panel displays, and now energy and solar. What we certainly see is that most of the manufacturing is in Asia.



  MR. MURRAY: How much is solar?  

 MR. PINTO: This year over 80% of our solar business will be in China. Most of the panels are being built and shipped to Europe, some to the U.S., but Europe is the biggest end market.



  MR. MURRAY: Dr. Shi, you run one of the largest solar companies in the world, starting in China. How important was government policy in terms of you being able to get your foothold? Could you, for instance, have done the same thing in the U.S.?  

 DR. SHI: I spent 14 years in Australia, and many [there] ask the same question. In the first three to five years, if Suntech had been founded here or in Australia or Europe, it would probably be OK. At that time, the price was higher and the supply chain was not very much developed. After 2005, [if we had started in] Australia and we decided not to go to China or other parts of Asia, then I think we'd probably be less competitive.

The reason for that is because the Chinese government streamlined the policy of supporting innovation for this new energy industry. That really supported supply-chain development in China. If we move to the U.S. or anywhere, if it is without a supply chain, we are not going to be competitive.

  MR. MURRAY: How do they support the supply chain? Are we talking about subsidies?  

 DR. SHI: No. For example, First Solar is very successful. Why? First Solar has a whole supply chain within the company because in thin film they're vertically integrated, from glass to the panel. But for the silicon-based solar industry, you have a very long supply chain and any single company cannot do it. 

You need a big group of enterprises to focus on each section of the supply chain to innovate, improve manufacturing efficiency and reduce cost. 



  MR. MURRAY: Louis, you saw the John Doerr quote. Is it your sense that in clean technology the leading edge of innovation is in China, not in the U.S., which is what he was suggesting?  

 MR. CHÊNEVERT: I would say that the rate at which China embraces that technology and their willingness to integrate between, for example, HVAC, lighting, etc., in buildings, is perhaps a faster pace because of all this new construction.



  MR. MURRAY: So you really see it very much driven by the rate of growth and the fact that there's so much more new construction?  

 MR. CHÊNEVERT: Absolutely.



  MS. STRASSEL: If you're manufacturing products, is China simply going to beat us every time because costs are lower there? Do you want to invest significant amounts of money to compete with that?  

 MR. PINTO: That's the way it might be today, but where you've got the manufacturing scale—since that's such a big factor in improving the technology—scale plus technology is going to win. Where would you invest? The place where they're investing in the scale. 

 DR. SHI: Manufacturing also requires innovation. Nobody believes there's a labor shortage in China, but it's a fact.

In the younger generation, life quality has been improving. Nobody wants to do this hard work on the manufacturing floor, so I think China is actually in the situation where they have to consider the future in manufacturing technology.

So that's why the Chinese government has focused so much on innovation. If we don't change, maybe in 10 or 15 years' time, China will not be competitive in manufacturing. So I think there's definitely a lot of innovation in manufacturing.



  MR. MURRAY: Dr. Shi, what's your advice for the United States?  

 DR. SHI: I've lived in the Western world for 14 years and I sometimes feel perhaps there's too much democracy here. 



  MR. MURRAY: Too much democracy?  

 DR. SHI: There are no decisions being made. It's like in a company. Sometimes you hear all the voices. The CEO knows what the right decision is and sometimes they just want to bang the table and say, "Let's do it."