 Her Restaurant: London's River Cafe

 What She's Known For: Bringing authentic, seasonal Italian cuisine to the British food world.

Ruth Rogers, an American in London, and partner, Rose Gray, who passed away last February, opened River Café in 1987 and quickly earned a reputation as one of England's best restaurants. Twenty-four years later, River Café has become an institution, a breeding ground for top chefs and a magnet for high profile clientele (Ms. Rogers counts Wes Anderson and Jake Gyllenhaal among regulars). 

Inspired by Alice Waters and Wolfgang Puck's casual, produce-driven California restaurants, Ms. Rogers and Ms. Gray decided River Café would serve serious food in an informal setting, a novel idea in England at the time. 

Though rustic (their cavolo nero soup with polenta is notoriously thick), River Café's food is refined and nuanced. Winter menu items include thyme and black-pepper-crusted beef carpaccio with arugula salad, premium olive oil, lemon juice and mustard. Delicate raviolis are filled with chestnuts, thyme, ricotta and nutmeg and finished with butter and Parmesan. 

For her third of four Slow Food Fast contributions, Ms. Rogers shares a recipe for roasted pears with grappa, vanilla bean and cinnamon, which combine to produce a striking dessert. Roasting fruit perfectly depends on its ripeness, so baste the pears and check on them often. Ms. Rogers recommends using only ripe ones here; they will cook slightly faster and taste more of the fruit itself than fruits that aren't in peak form.

A slow roasting plumps and transforms pears into something velvety and ephemeral. Roasting them whole, as Ms. Rogers says, "melts them inside." Cinnamon and vanilla are traditional complements to their sweet buttery flavor. Grappa adds kick. Ms. Rogers recommends using a grappa that's white, not yellow. Cognac or brandy, she says, is a good substitute. Though the pears are rubbed in butter, the final dessert is light and beautiful, both to eat and behold.

—Kitty Greenwald

 Total Time: 1 Hour Active Time:15 Minutes Serves: 4

4 large Comice pears

7 tablespoons unsalted butter, room temperature 

2 tablespoons light brown sugar

2 vanilla beans, split lengthwise

2 cinnamon sticks, broken in half

1/2 cup grappa (or cognac or brandy)

2/3 cup crème fraîche, for serving

 What To Do: 

 1. Preheat oven to 300 degrees. 

 2. Cut a small slice off the pears' bottoms so they stand upright. 

 3. Grease a small baking dish with 1 tablespoon butter. Rub remaining butter over pears, coating each in a thin layer.

 4. Arrange pears evenly in the baking dish and sprinkle sugar over top. Tuck vanilla beans and cinnamon sticks under and around the pears. Cover dish with aluminum foil and bake for 20 minutes. 

 5. Remove foil and pour grappa over pears and into dish. Baste pears with cooking juices and return dish to oven. Roast until pears are cooked though and easily pierced with a knife, about 40 minutes. As pears roast, baste with pan juices. If pears are done before the alcohol mellows, remove pears from the oven and continue to roast the juices until the alcohol burns off.

 6. Serve each pear with a few spoonfuls of cooking liquid poured over top and a dollop of crème fraîche alongside.