Employees in the distressed capital city Harrisburg, Pa., once again find their paychecks this week in jeopardy—this time because of a disagreement over protocol. 

City Controller  Dan Miller is barring the release of paychecks due Thursday for the city's 543 workers because the 2011 budget hasn't been enacted. 

"Without a budget, we can't pay bills," Mr. Miller said. 

  Chuck Ardo, spokesman for Mayor  Linda Thompson, said the administration believes paychecks should be released since the pay period is for 2010 and added that discussions are continuing to resolve the dispute. 

"It's not a matter of finding the funding," Mr. Ardo said. "It's a matter of appropriate bookkeeping." 

Mr. Miller said he would release the paychecks if he receives confirmation that the five council members who voted for the budget on Thursday would also vote to override a possible veto by the mayor. 

Ms. Thompson hasn't yet received the 2011 budget the council passed, Mr. Ardo said.

The council made numerous changes to Ms. Thompson's original budget and passed a $56 million spending plan. 

Ms. Thompson has 10 days from the receipt of the budget to sign it, veto it or let it pass without her signature, according to Mr. Ardo. 

Harrisburg for several of the last few months of 2010 had to scramble for funds to meet its $1.2 million payroll, as the city struggled with a $4.5 million budget gap. It narrowly avoided defaulting on a $3.29 million general obligation debt payment in September. In November, a cash infusion from the Harrisburg Authority, a municipal agency that owns the debt-laden incinerator threatening to tip the city into bankruptcy, helped ease short-term cash problems. 

Harrisburg last month was accepted into the state's oversight program for distressed municipalities known as Act 47. City administration officials hope the program will lead to fiscal recovery. 

Meanwhile, New York law firm Cravath, Swaine & Moore LLP has started work on advising the city council on a possible bankruptcy filing; the mayor opposes bankruptcy. 