For years, Eastern Europe has dominated the Eurovision Song Contest, the continent's kitschy annual musical extravaganza that is staged for the 56th time on Saturday. But as Düsseldorf prepares for the event, Old Europe is staging a major comeback. 

Germany is hosting thanks to its win last year and Italy is returning after an absence of more than a decade. France's entry, an operatic choice from  Amaury Vassili, is the favorite to win. The U.K. and Ireland, after years of pretending they don't care who wins, are trying hard again. 

While many viewers regard the contest as an excuse to enjoy high-camp dance routines and belting power ballads and guffaw at other countries' quirks, Eurovision is a serious business. It costs about €25 million ($35.5 million) to host. Last year, 125 million people tuned in—three times as many as the audience for the Oscars—making it the world's biggest live television event outside of sports.

It's also a place where the strife of European politics bursts into the open, with 43 countries from Ireland to Israel battling it out for the honor of hosting the event the following year.

"What's geopolitically interesting about the French entry is that it's sung in Corsican," said  Robert Deam Tobin, editor of 'A Song for Europe: Popular Music and Politics in the Eurovision Song Contest,' a collection of academic essays about Eurovision. 

"This is an effort to indicate increasing European support for linguistic minorities and a belief that they can be accommodated without separatist tendencies," said Prof. Tobin, a professor of foreign languages and cultures at Clark University in Worcester, Mass.

Because of the contest's popularity, there are now two semi-finals in the week before the main event, with countries competing for one of the 25 spots on the night itself. Only the 'Big Five' countries—the U.K., Germany, France, Spain and Italy—qualify automatically, as they are the largest contributors to the European Broadcasting Union, the confederation of European radio and TV companies which controls the competition. 

Because of the way the voting works—countries get the same number of points to allocate, regardless of their size—the years since the fall of communism saw a string of Eastern European victories as neighbors voted for each other.

Traditional Eurovision heavyweights complained, blaming political voting: In 2008,  Terry Wogan, who hosted the BBC's coverage of Eurovision for 37 years, said that "Western European participants have to decide whether they want to take part from here on in, because their prospects are poor."

What changed? One factor is a tweak to the voting system, taking away some power from the public, which has an inclination to vote for neighbors or for countries that share the same language. Germany and Turkey consistently give each other high scores due to the high immigration flow of Turks into Germany. Since 2009, voting has been split 50-50 between the public phone vote and a professional jury selected by each country whose identity is not revealed until a few days after the competition. 

This has returned some weight to artistic qualities, although purists complain that flashy stage effects and gimmicks, such as world champion figure skater  Evgeni Plushenko appearing onstage with Russia's  Dima Bilan when the latter won in 2008, continue to count more than they should. 

The other factor is a renewed seriousness from the West. Recent Eastern European winners have been established pop acts with a strong following both at home and in neighboring countries. In Western Europe, entries were largely selected by the public, who sent runners-up from TV talent shows and novelty acts, such as the sock-puppet turkey Ireland fielded in 2008, with predictably disastrous results. 

The U.K. changed tack after last year, when teenager  Josh Dubovie came in last with 10 points, compared to Germany's winning 246. Getting rid of telephone voting, the BBC made an internal decision to send boy band Blue, who topped the charts repeatedly at the start of the decade before splitting and reforming for Eurovision. 

Ahead of the night itself, Old Europe looks set do well. At bookmaker Paddy Power, France is 15/8 favorite to win. Odds on Ireland, which is sending identical twins Jedward, have shortened dramatically to 4/1, while the U.K. is at 8/1 and Germany 18/1.