BANGALORE --Jyothy Laboratories Ltd is open to selling its minority stake in Henkel India Ltd at a profit if a bidding war breaks out for control of the consumer goods maker.

Jyothy Labs last week bought a 14.9% stake in Henkel India for 607.3 million rupees in cash from Tamilnadu Petroproducts, and is now looking to buy  Henkel AG & Co. KGaA's
HENKY


0.30
%




 51% stake in the company. But rival consumer goods makers such as Godrej Consumer Products Ltd. and Emami Ltd. are also reportedly bidding for Henkel AG's stake in Henkel India. 

"Let's see how the bidding goes," Ullas Kamath, deputy managing director at Jyothy Labs told Dow Jones over the weekend.

"If it's something which we can buy, we'll buy," he said. "If not, then the person who wins the bid will have to make an open offer." 

"If anybody is interested in buying us out, we'll exit at a profit," he said.



Jyothy Labs has lost 15% of its market value since the announcement of the deal due to investor fears that the company may end up overpaying for a controlling stake in Henkel India if a bidding war breaks out. The shares, which had touched a one-month low of 184.40 rupees earlier Monday, closed 1.1% up at 198.90 rupees on the Bombay Stock Exchange.

Mr. Kamath said under local rules, the successful bidder for Henkel AG's stake in the Indian company will have to make an open at more than 51 rupees a share.

"So, we have nothing to lose," he said.

Jyothy Labs last week bought the stake in Henkel India from Tamilnadu Petroproducts Ltd at 35 rupees a share. Henkel India closed Monday at 45 rupees, while its 52-week high is 76 rupees, hit on Sept. 24.

Under Indian regulations, any acquisition of a 15% or more in a listed company will trigger a compulsory open offer for another 20%. The open offer should be at least at the higher of the acquisition price or an average calculated using the stock's trading prices for six months.

In addition to its current purchase price, Jyothy Labs would have to shell out about 2.68 billion rupees if it buys Henkel AG's 51% stake in Henkel India at 35 rupees a share.

Meanwhile, Mr. Kamath sounded confident of Jyothy Labs' ability to acquire control of Henkel India without straining its balance sheet.

"We know what we are doing," he said. "We know that our math is right."

The company already has a war chest of about 3 billion rupees, of which 2.28 billion rupees was raised from an institutional share sale last year and another 700 million to 800 million rupees in cash.

Mr. Kamath added that the company is open also to raising funds via debt for financing the planned acquisition, adding that the company's net worth is nearly 6.50 billion rupees.

"We are debt free," he said. "So, raising debt is not an issue."

He said the company's minority stake in Henkel India puts it in a better position compared with rival bidders while going into the bidding process.

"Henkel knows that we have a complementary business," Mr. Kamath said. "None of the others have as much as we have. Because we are in fabric care, we are in household insecticides, we are in dish wash and surface care."

Henkel India sells products such as Henko detergent, Fa deodorant, Margo soap and dish washing soap Pril. Jyothy Labs sells laundry products under the popular Ujala brand, insecticides under the Maxo brand and dish-washing products under the Exo brand.

While Godrej Consumer declined to comment on any possible bid for Henkel AG's stake in the Indian company, Emami wasn't immediately available for comment.



