When John Boehner takes over one of the most powerful jobs in Washington this week, he says his first order of business is to make himself less powerful.

On Wednesday the new speaker of the House of Representatives plans to offer a package of rule changes that, he says, will give minority-party members more of a say and decentralize power. In short, Ohio Republican Mr. Boehner is promising he'll be a different figure from many speakers throughout history—from Republican Joseph Cannon a century ago to his immediate predecessor, Democrat Nancy Pelosi—who kept a tighter leash. 

The Washington insiders closest to the new Speaker of the House.

But there's a reason so many speakers try to keep close control: It works.

"New speakers always say they want to have a more open process," says Rep. Anthony Weiner, a New York Democrat. "Then the sheer demands of making the trains run on time and getting things passed requires that you change your mind."

How this tension is resolved—between Mr. Boehner's promises and the need to get things done—will help determine the success of the new Republican majority. The GOP is in a hurry to show that it's different, not just from Democrats but from its old self. Mr. Boehner himself was catapulted into a GOP leadership role in 2006 after a fund-raising scandal deposed then-majority leader Tom DeLay.

Mr. Boehner now finds himself master of a Republican majority created by a group of newcomers whose hallmark is a restless cry for action. On issues from cutting spending to raising the government's debt ceiling, Mr. Boehner's burden will be letting his freshmen members vent while keeping the House on track.

Below, a look at Republican lawmakers who will take the reins of key House committees in the 112th Congress.



His pledge to reshape Congressional practices isn't aimed at Beltway wonks, but at voters who view Congress as the epitome of a dysfunctional government. A primary example cited by Republicans: President Barack Obama's health overhaul, which they criticize as having been written by a small group of Democratic party leaders who traded favors with key lawmakers. Democrats reject that, saying the bill included many Republican ideas and played out in public for nearly a year.

Mr. Boehner has promised to give more power to committee chairmen, and to put cameras in meetings of the powerful Rules Committee, which sets guidelines for congressional debate.

"I'm going to run the House my way and work with members on both sides of the aisle to decide what should come to the floor and what shouldn't come to the floor," Mr. Boehner told reporters recently. He declined a request for an interview.

One of Wednesday's first votes could be Mr. Boehner's package of rule changes. Among them: 

 • Lawmakers will be required to vote on whether or not to raise the federal debt ceiling, a move sought by tea-party representatives. Current rules let the House automatically raise the limit when they pass a budget.

 • All legislation must be posted online 72 hours before going to the House floor to prevent party leaders from changing bills the night before House votes, as has been the practice over the years.

GOP House members are expected to approve the changes at a meeting on Tuesday, making passage most likely a formality when the full House votes.

The newly proposed House rules preserve an ethics office Democrats created in the wake of the earlier scandals. In the past, Mr. Boehner has taken a hard line against colleagues facing ethics probes, a problem that contributed to his party's being swept from power in 2006. He forced one Republican to abandon his seat on the House Appropriations Committee after the FBI raided his home, and he pushed another to leave Congress after he was indicted. 

Rep. Kevin McCarthy of California, the No. 3 Republican in the new Congress, acknowledges that Mr. Boehner's proposed changes could make the chamber harder to manage, at least in the early going. "You will have some tough times," said Mr. McCarthy. "People will play games with it. People will use it for mischief. We'll just have to work through that." 

Challenges include the fact that Republicans want to cut spending in areas cherished by individual lawmakers. And the White House and Senate remain in Democratic hands, while in the House a group of 87 GOP freshmen is pushing for actions Mr. Boehner might not be able to accommodate.

Success in the job will entail Mr. Boehner, a former packaging executive, sublimating a fastidious personality. Most days Mr. Boehner, 61 years old, spends the early-morning hours vacuuming his apartment or ironing. He eats breakfast alone at Pete's Diner, a cramped eatery a few blocks from the Capitol, and checks his Facebook page on an iPad. At night, he stops whatever he's doing at 10 o'clock.

Even when Mr. Boehner is managing, sometimes he tries to make it look as if he isn't. A small example: One of his early actions as minority leader in 2006 was in response to seeing lawmakers sleeping on the red leather couches in the Republican cloakroom, something Mr. Boehner disapproved of. To prevent an outcry, he had the couches removed one at a time over a period of weeks. By the time colleagues realized what was happening, the project was well under way.

Aides say his aversion to centralized House control was formed in part by years spent outside the party's leadership. As a young congressman he was an ally of Newt Gingrich, who became House speaker when Republicans took over in 1994. Mr. Boehner's job was to manage the party's message, but he clashed with people above him and felt that Mr. Gingrich made his job harder by micromanaging. For instance, Mr. Gingrich scrutinized the talking points Mr. Boehner gave to lawmakers.

Eventually, other senior Republicans tried to oust Mr. Gingrich. "What [Mr. Boehner] was trying to do was clean up," said former Rep. Bill Paxon (R., N.Y.). "He was following the wagon train with a shovel, and it was an impossible task."

In 1998, Mr. Boehner was kicked out of the party leadership when Republicans lost seats in the midterm election. He spent the next eight years outside the House GOP's senior circle of leaders. The focus shifted to Mr. DeLay, the House majority leader from Texas.

By 2006, when scandal-plagued Mr. DeLay was forced to step down, Mr. Boehner was positioned to take his place as party leader partly due to his distance from the then-leadership. "Being outside the leadership had some appeal," said former Rep. Bob Walker (R., Pa.), a friend.

Despite Mr. Boehner's efforts to distinguish himself from former Republican leaders, his desire to make the House run more smoothly has nevertheless prompted him to hire veterans of that era. He has brought in Mr. DeLay's former chief of staff, Brett Loper, to be his top policy adviser, for example.

He is known for being plain-spoken, colleagues say. Two years ago, Rep. Lynn Westmoreland (R., Ga.), went to Mr. Boehner with a request, the lawmaker recalled. The Republican leader pulled out a Camel Light and said, "Whadda you got?" When Mr. Westmoreland asked for a spot on an influential committee, Mr. Boehner tilted his head back, took a drag, and said, "Not gonna happen."

As minority leader, Mr. Boehner railed against Ms. Pelosi. During consideration of health care, he gave a speech on the House floor in which he asked a rhetorical question: Could Democrats argue that the legislation was written out in the open? "Hell, no," he said. Democrats in the room yelled, "Yes!"

His predecessor, Ms. Pelosi, ran a tight ship. She could do so in part because she invested hours listening to her members' concerns and raised more than $200 million to help them get re-elected.

Democrats say their approach in the House was forced by Republican obstructionism and by the realities of governing. House Democrats showed their devotion to Ms. Pelosi late last year by electing her minority leader despite the fact that the party had been swept from power, and despite her own low approval ratings.

"I don't want to be dismissive of participation," says Rep. George Miller (D., Calif.), an ally of Ms. Pelosi who chairs the Education Committee and also worked closely with Mr. Boehner. "I believe in that on my committee. ... But somebody has to do the sorting if you are interested in getting a work product."

As minority leader, Mr. Boehner sought to create a contrasting style within his own caucus, giving relatively junior members, such as Mr. McCarthy of California, significant roles in the recent campaign. More recently he has also shown a willingness to reach out to lawmakers who have been a thorn in his side, although those moves often have a political motive as well. For instance, in backing Rep. Jeff Flake for an open seat on the powerful Appropriations Committee, Mr. Boehner elevated a perennial critic, but one whose crusades against federal spending have made him a champion of the conservative activists Mr. Boehner needs to appease.

Mr. Boehner asked Rep. Mike Pence to join the leadership two years after the Indiana Republican challenged him for the job of minority leader, a Pence aide said. He also handed Rep. Roy Blunt, the Missouri Republican he edged out in 2006 to become majority leader, with critical tasks such as negotiating the final version of the Wall Street bailout.

That approach didn't always work. The GOP's election manifesto, the "Pledge to America," took months to write as camps within the party's leadership tussled over what it should say. On its launch, some in the party gave it a lukewarm reception.

The tea-party groups that helped elevate Republicans to power last November say they'll be carefully watching GOP leaders for any deviation from what they see as purist conservative principles. That could cut down on Mr. Boehner's flexibility to make accommodations with Democrats or even veteran lawmakers of his own party.

Asked if he foresaw working well with the GOP leadership, freshman Rep. Billy Long (R., Mo.), who says he shares many of the tea-party activists' priorities, said, "I think it's a little too early to say yet...We'll want to bring our fresh ideas into it. We came with a big mandate. This is a huge class and I think the American people have spoken."

In response to those who warn of chaos, Mr. Boehner's allies say he won't cede all power. They also note that Mr. Gingrich and Ms. Pelosi, despite pushing through a lot of big legislation, lost their leadership positions relatively quickly.

"If you put all the power into the select few, they can run it for a time," Mr. McCarthy said. "But in the end they will lose it all."

 Write to  Naftali Bendavid at naftali.bendavid@wsj.com 