Give NPR this: Its own online report on the embarrassing sting/prank is fair and balanced:

The Muslim Education Action Center website now describes the group as "an element of 'Project Muslim Brotherhood' by James O'Keefe's Project Veritas." You may remember O'Keefe as the twentysomething man who in 2009 donned his grandmother's jacket and visited various offices of Acorn, the left-wing "community organizing" outfit, to ask for help in trafficking underage sex slaves, which was forthcoming.

Last month two O'Keefe associates took Schiller and his colleague Betsy Liley, director of institutional giving, to lunch at Washington's Café Milano, and kept a video recorder rolling throughout the meal. "They were allegedly interested in having their organization donate $5 million to NPR," reports NPR.

NPR adds that NPR's Dana Rehm, who carries the unwieldy title of senior vice president of marketing, communications and external relations, issued an official statement in response to the exposé:

Rehm adds that "Schiller announced last week that he is leaving NPR for another job," a move that she later said is unconnected to the video.

"Ron Schiller embraces and lives the values that we share as a community," Walter Isaacson, Schiller's new boss at the Aspen Institute, said in a press release. In fairness, we should note that the press release is dated March 3, five days before the video's release.

The Washington Examiner's Byron York reports the video has caught the attention of at least one pork-busting congressman, Rep. Doug Lamborn of Colorado:

Meanwhile, today's New York Times features an editorial denouncing Rep. Peter King, a suburban New York Republican who plans to hold hearings later this week on radicalization of American Muslims:

The Times editorialists give no examples of other "groups" among the "wide variety" that they think may be subject to al Qaeda recruitment. Perhaps they mean "Republicans and particularly their most virulent supporters in the media," the group the Times scapegoated, knowing full well that they were doing so falsely, for the shooting two months ago of Rep. Gabrielle Giffords.

NPR's Rehm did not specify which comments of Schiller's "appalled" the network. It's hard to believe his oikophobic attitudes toward "scary" "white, middle-America gun-toting" types--attitudes that precisely match those of the New York Times, the leading institution of the formerly mainstream media--are anything out of the ordinary at NPR. 

Maybe she just meant NPR was appalled by his suggestion that NPR could do without federal funding. But why can't it? The New York Times manages to do so even though it's up against heavily subsidized competition on the radio.

  Free-Range Chicken   "Britain and France are drafting a U.N. resolution that would establish a no-fly zone over Libya to prevent Moammar Gadhafi's air force from bombing civilians and rebels fighting to oust him from power," the Associated Press reports. The report continues;

After eight dark years of George W. Bush, it sure is good to see America leading again! The New York Times adds;

Completely organic, like a free-range chicken!

  The Fierce moral Urgency of Whatever!   "President Obama on Monday reversed his two-year-old order halting new military charges against detainees at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, permitting military trials to resume with revamped procedures," the New York Times reports today on page A19.

 James Taranto on Obama's Guantanamo order. 

The Times adds that the administration is "implicitly admitting the failure of his pledge to close" the detention facility, which is to be shuttered by Jan. 22, 2010, under an executive order the president issued a year earlier.

The Washington Post leads with the order's provision to "create a formal system of indefinite detention" for combatants "who continue to pose a significant threat to national security" but cannot be tried. The Times leaves this for the fourth paragraph and notes lower down: "Mr. Obama had suggested that he might go to Congress for a law governing indefinite detention. Human rights groups were relieved that he instead issued an executive order, which is easier to undo in the future.

Good luck with that, "human rights groups"! If this president, coming to office after the reviled George W. Bush, couldn't deliver on the promise of a kinder policy toward terrorism, it's highly unlikely any successor will manage to do so.

  Hard Cases Make Bad Law   "The Milwaukee teachers union has dropped a lawsuit seeking to keep Viagra coverage in its health insurance plans, a spokesman for the organization confirmed Monday," reports Milwaukee's Journal Sentinel:

The good news is that if Gov. Scott Walker succeeds in his effort to neuter government employee unions, Milwaukee teachers will be able to buy Viagra with the money that's now going to union dues.

  Bushism of the Day   "The National Endowment of the Humanities is the reason we have in northern Nevada every January a cowboy poetry festival. Had that program not been around, the tens of thousands of people who come there every year would not exist."--Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, quoted by Politico.com, March 8

  With DNC in Mind, City Bans Carrying Urine, Feces   "Debt Commissioner Links Social Security Debate to 'The Enema Man and Snoopy Snoopy Poop Dogg' "--headline, ace.mu.nu, March 8

  Who's the Lucky Gal?   "Hoyer Defends Obama, Says President Is Engaged"--headline, RollCall.com, March 8

  Don't Touch That Dial, Don't Try to Smile   "Dems: Congress's Styrofoam Cups Could Cause Cancer"--headline, TheHill.com, March 8

  What Is Justice Kagan, Chopped Liver?   "Sonia Sotomayor on Dating, Deciding, and Being the Newest Supreme Court Justice"--headline, NationalJournal.com, March 8

  World's Biggest Fish   "Talks to Resolve Impasse in Wisconsin Flounder"--headline, New York Times, March 8

  Wyoming, Georgia, Minnesota or California   "What Comes After Wisconsin?"--headline, Salon.com, March 7

  At Least He's Not in Illinois   "Assigned to Forge Crucial Congressional Budget Deal, Joe Biden Instead Visits Finland en Route to Moldova"--headline, Los Angeles Times website, March 8

 It's a Cookbook 

 Life Imitates the Onion 

  The Lonely Lives of Men   "Men Dating Themselves"--headline, The Wall Street Journal, March 8

  'No Sex, Please, We're Anglo-Saxon'   "What Wasps Can Tell Us About Sex"--headline, ETH Zurich press release, March 3

  So You Might as Well Have Another   "There Is No Such Thing as a Safe Level of Alcohol Consumption"--headline, Guardian website (London), March 7

  Unless They Have Fronds in High Places   "Mexican Palm Trees Cannot Cross Border"--headline, El Paso Times, March 8

 Hey, Kids! What Time Is It? 

 Questions Nobody Is Asking 

 Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  Reporters Shoo Away Obama--Now That Would Be News   "Obama Shoos Away Reporters"--headline, Politico.com, March 7

  Senate Career Ends Affair--Now That Would Be News   "Ensign's Affair Ends Senate Career"--headline, KVVU-TV website (Las Vegas), March 7

  Police Unit Hated Scraps--Now That Would Be News   "Tunisia Scraps Hated Police Unit"--headline, Associated Press, March 7

  It's Always in the Last Place You Look   "Voodoo Dolls Found in Historic New York Mansion"--headline, FoxNews.com, March 8

  Everything Seemingly Is Spinning Out of Control   "Cyndi Lauper Cheers Up Stranded Airline Passengers With Rendition of 'Girls Just Want to Have Fun' "--headline, Daily News (New York), March 6

  News of the Tautological   "AOL Closes Huffington Post [sic] Deal; Its Stock Hits All-Time Low"--headline, Los Angeles Times website, March 7

  Breaking News From Stardate 2821.5   "Capt. Kirk Wakes Up Shuttle Crew"--headline, CNN.com, March 7

 News You Can Use 

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  Second Prize Is Two Obama Speeches   "The White House is ramping up an effort to promote a nationwide competition to decide which high school wins a commencement speech by President Obama," CBS News reports. Apparently the president is so unpopular, hardly anyone wants him to come and speak:

That compares with more than 1,000 last year. Maybe they should offer the teachers an incentive to apply, like a year's supply of free Viagra. 

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Michele Schiesser, Joe Perez, Hillel Markowitz, Paul Gross, Chris Hayes, Ed Lasky, Keith Rasmussen, John Bobek, Steve Obeda, Ray Girouard, Ed Grinberg, John Sanders, Michelle Mussmann, Mark Zoeller, Monty Krieger, Mike Brennan, Bill Palmer, Mark Van Der Molen, Herbert Harjes, T. Young, J.S. Henkel, Bruce Goldman, Salim Furth, Don Stewart, Zack Russ, Mike Mitchell, Dan O'Shea, Ira Stoll, Christopher DeLange, Marion Dreyfus, Tom Wheatley, Peter Huntsman, Arlene Ross, Frank Free, Scott Syfert, Ethel Fenig, John Williamson, Clifford Crouch, Rowe Sergent and David Gerstman. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)