LONDON—U.K. graduate unemployment hit its highest rate in 15 years in the third quarter of 2010 sparking concerns that the government's public-sector job cuts will cause the rate to rise even higher. 

Data from the Office for National Statistics Wednesday showed that the jobless rate for new university graduates had nearly doubled—reaching 20% between July and September last year—from before the start of the recession in the first quarter of 2008, when it stood at 10.6%. 

News of the rise in graduate unemployment comes after the government last month won a controversial vote to triple the cap on university tuition fees to £9,000 a year. 

Employment prospects for young people have been particularly hard hit by the economic downturn, with data last week showing that the number of 16 to 24-year-olds out of work reached 951,000, giving a rate of 20.3%—the highest since records began in 1992. 

The unemployment rate for the wider U.K. population stands at 7.9%, but is set to rise as the coalition government embarks on its plan to cut around 330,000 jobs in the public sector—traditionally a big employer of graduates. 

Liam Byrne, the opposition Labour Party's Work and Pensions spokesman, said the U.K.'s graduates were in danger of becoming a "lost generation." 

A study by High Fliers Research last week reported that employers received an average of 45 applications per graduate vacancy in 2010. It also found that two-thirds of recruiters said graduates who have had no previous work experience were unlikely to be successful during the selection process. 

"These new figures show that graduates are encountering an exceptionally hostile jobs market and the government persists with policies that put the burden of the country's debt on the young," said Aaron Porter, National Union of Students president. 

Emma Robinson, who has a post-graduate degree in French from the University of Edinburgh, has been looking for a permanent job since August, but has been forced to take temporary jobs, such as working as a tour guide. 

The 24-year-old has been applying for clerical work, but has found there is steep competition for any available positions. 

"There were just so many people that had experience and were leaving other jobs, so there was no way I was going to get a job like that," she said. "It's frustrating. The thing that annoys me is there is no effort by the government to create jobs. People our age were encouraged to go to university to get extra skills and are now finding themselves overqualified." 



 Write to  Ainsley Thomson at ainsley.thomson@dowjones.com 