Some of the Pentagon's newly announced modernization programs are focused on countering a new generation of Chinese weapons, Defense Secretary Robert Gates said Saturday evening.

Mr. Gates said he was concerned with some of China's new weapons programs, including its advancing anti-ship technology and its stealth fighter, images of which were recently published on Chinese websites.

Some defense analysts and Pentagon officials believe both the China stealth fighter and anti-ship missile are designed to limit America's ability to operate freely in the Pacific and East Asia.

On Sunday, Mr. Gates will arrive in Beijing for three days of talks with his Chinese counterparts, which are designed to improve relations between the Pentagon and the People's Liberation Army.

On Thursday, the Pentagon announced it would invest in a new generation of ship-based jamming technology, a long-range penetrating bomber, a new generation of sea-borne unmanned aircraft and improving the radar on older the F-15 fighter planes.

Defense officials said those weapons systems could help counter weapons systems meant to prevent American access to international waters near China.

"Some of these higher priority areas for investment are focused on some of these anti-access programs," Mr. Gates told reporters traveling with him aboard his plane.

After the images of the Chinese stealth fighter were published, some military officials said this week that they may have underestimated the pace of some parts of China's military modernization, which Mr. Gates also acknowledged.

"We've known they were working on a stealth aircraft," Mr. Gates said. "I think what we've seen is that they are some what further ahead than our intelligence had earlier predicted."

But he made clear that the Pentagon has doubts about exactly how stealthy the new aircraft might be. He also said he stood by his statement that even by 2020 or 2025, there would be a vast disparity between the U.S. fleet of stealth aircraft and that of any other country.

Mr. Gates sounded more concerned with advances in the China's anti-ship ballistic missile program. Some defense officials believe a salvo of the missiles could potentially strike a maneuvering aircraft carrier.

"We've been watching these developments all along," Mr. Gates said. "Ever since I took this job I have been concerned with the development of the anti-ship cruise and ballistic missiles."

 Write to  Julian E. Barnes at Julian.Barnes@wsj.com 