More Silicon Valley employees are biking to work, taking advantage of a growing number of bike lanes and services and a cycling-friendly culture at many of the region's tech companies.

Statistics indicate a rough doubling in bike-to-work traffic in Silicon Valley over most of the past decade, from 1% of commuters in 2000 to 2% in 2008—with higher percentages in bike-friendly cities such as Palo Alto, where it was 5% then, according to the most recent Census Bureau figures.

But bicycle advocates say the real numbers are higher because the census counts only people who list a bicycle as their primary mode of transportation, when in fact many cyclists may use a car to drive their bike to a nearby train station and then use the cycle for the last leg of the commute.

Another gauge of the growth comes from the "energizer" stations deployed every year for Silicon Valley's Bike to Work Day, which is being held again Thursday. Last year, about 30,000 bicyclists stopped in at the stations for water and snacks, or about 20% more than in 2009, said Corinne Winter, executive director of the Silicon Valley Bicycle Coalition, which sponsors the event and runs the 100 stations.

Since the bike-to-work day began in Silicon Valley eight years ago, the number of participants has climbed 20% to 30% annually in Santa Clara County and 5% to 10% in San Mateo County, Ms. Winter said.

Biking enthusiasts say the surge is being driven by two main factors: rising gasoline prices and an exercise culture in the youth-focused technology and venture-capital industries. "There is a saying down here that if you're not in a peloton [a pack of bicycle riders] then you're not in the deal," Ms. Winter said.

Bike riding has been on the upswing across the Bay Area in recent years, but advocates say Silicon Valley has been particularly conducive to the growth because of its relatively flat topography and the fact so many tech companies encourage it. Indeed, the Silicon Valley Bicycle Coalition started a contest three years ago in which companies compete to see which can get the most employee participation for one month. 

But biking to work has its limitations in Silicon Valley. One issue is safety; there have been collisions between cars and bicycling commuters, Ms. Winter said. And while bike lanes have been marked throughout Silicon Valley, Ken Yeager, a Santa Clara County supervisor, said there should be many more. 

Earlier this month, Mr. Yeager, who sits on the board of the Caltrain commuter rail line and bikes to work himself, successfully sponsored a measure allotting $300,000 to increase the number of rail cars equipped to store bicycles.

 Write to  Jim Carlton at jim.carlton@wsj.com 