 From the secret reflections of executives at CBS and Warner Brothers, broadcaster and producer, respectively, of "Two and a Half Men": 

Well, it could have been a lot worse. Fashions apparently exist even among the deranged. There was a time when every nut job liked to think he was Napoleon. Now they fancy themselves characters out of Hunter S. Thompson. Oy vey. Our star goes on national TV and brags about "banging seven-gram rocks" of cocaine. He says his partying makes Keith Richards, Errol Flynn and Frank Sinatra look like "droopy-eyed, armless children." Charlie Sheen tells the world he's got "tiger blood" in his veins. His constitution is "extraterrestrial." Don't try this at home, kids!

Of course, CBS and Warner didn't put our heads together and fire him just for the pleasure of it. Still, we won't lie. Letting Mr. Sheen go did provide a certain frisson of relief. But it was a business decision.

The cost of canceling the most popular sitcom on TV can be toted up a hundred ways. CBS loses a powerful audience builder for its Monday night lineup, though it also saves the reported $4 million an episode it was paying Warner for the show. Warner loses not just the money but an expected 32 more episodes to sell into the biggest syndication bonanza in a long time. That's gotta hurt. There were good reasons, in other words, for sticking it out with Charlie. On the other hand . . . 

CBS got seven good years from Charlie Sheen playing Charlie Sheen, prolonging CBS's run as the "hot network." Warner has 177 episodes in the can, more than enough to bring in huge bucks for years. In fact, "Men" already is ringing up huge sums in syndication. The head of the Sinclair station group last year called the show an "immediate game-changer—one of those rare shows—like 'Friends' and 'Seinfeld'—that will continue to deliver for decades." And nothing about recent controversies seems likely to dim that appeal.

All in all, our legal departments are probably right: A bullet has been dodged. Mr. Sheen could have flamed out in year two instead of year eight. He could have flamed out in a way that killed our investment altogether. Phew. We get the willies just thinking about it. The gunshot that "accidentally" winged a starlet could have killed her. The alleged knife threat to wife No. 3 might have been more than a threat. Twice last year cars disappeared from his garage to end up in ravines off Mulholland Drive, with nobody sure how they got there. Until the law intervened this week, he had twin toddlers living with him, along with an array of "goddesses" and porn stars and the like.

His personal life is his personal life. We'd effectively made our statement by tolerating his antics for seven years. For that matter, viewers had us over a barrel by making "Men" one of the highest-rated shows on the air.

We sewed ourselves into a corner and then, Charlie, you got us out. Thanks. You went on radio and maniacally slurred our highly valued colleague, Chuck Lorre, producer of "Men" and two other shows that arguably are even more important right now to our future. You crossed a line no self-respecting business in America could tolerate.

Even more, every time you open your mouth, the "$320 million" lawsuit you keep threatening to bring becomes more of a farfetched longshot. Did you enjoy the statement put out by the CBS publicity department? "The most important thing right now is that Charlie is seeking help. Any immediate programming or financial implications pale in comparison to his long-term health, safety and well-being." Oh, by the way, the statement added, those financial implications are not entirely unpleasant: "Any ratings declines will be more than offset by the reduced programming costs for episodes lost this season."

All's well that ends well. Charlie, your place in TV history is secure. A few years ago everybody said the sitcom was dead, but shooting of sitcoms in L.A. last fall was up an unbelievable 1500%. You and Chuck Lorre did that.

Not only did you save the sitcom, you saved it from being dominated by that arch and cinematic stuff they do at NBC, like "30 Rock" and "The Office." "Men" revived the true art form, with laugh tracks and everything.

Funny thing. Folks here have been rereading an interview you gave to an entertainment rag back in 2004 after the show's first season. You said you wanted to do six or seven years and retire for good.

Guess what! You're retired for good.