Investors have started the year in bullish mood. Stock markets have risen in the first few days of trading and bond issuance on both sides of the Atlantic is breaking records for the start of the year. This bullishness reflects a combination of ultra-loose monetary policy driving investors into riskier assets and increasing optimism about the global economy, fuelled by positive news this week. 

In the U.S., private sector payrolls increased by 270,000 in December, far ahead of expectations, while consumer spending is picking up and auto sales have risen significantly. The latest global industrial purchasing managers indexes—a key barometer of economic health—suggest the recovery picked up speed in December, a conclusion supported by recent surveys of economic confidence. 

Germany's remarkable economic performance continues to help pull other euro-zone countries out of recession. Asia and other emerging markets continue to behave as if the global financial crisis had never happened. So what could possibly go wrong? Here are four risks to watch out for: 

 A China slowdown: China has been the engine of the global recovery, its economy likely to have expanded at a breakneck 10% in 2010. But there is now plenty of evidence the economy may be over-heating, with inflation running at 5%. The central bank has already raised interest rates by 0.25 percentage points, imposed price controls on a range of goods, especially food, and has placed restrictions on bank lending. The market now expects interest rates to rise a further 0.75 percentage points this year. 

Some other Asian economies have introduced capital controls to try to prevent huge capital inflows driving up domestic inflation. What's unclear is the effect of all this tightening on Asian and global growth. The market is betting that growth will remain strong, but if inflation proves harder to control, a bigger slowdown could be on the cards.

 A bond market rout: Who would want to be a central banker right now? Headline figures show inflation is rife in Asia and ahead of target in the euro zone and U.K. But how much of this is due to one-off factors such as commodity price rises, sales tax increases and currency devaluations that will eventually pass through and are beyond the control of monetary policy? 

The situation is most acute in the U.K., where a majority of members of the Monetary Policy Committee believe that underlying core inflation is very weak and that raising rates now just as government austerity measures are kicking in and with the banking system still weak risks badly damaging the recovery. But inflation expectations are picking up and both the Bank of England and European Central Bank may come under pressure to raise rates sooner than expected. Over their heads hangs the specter of 1994 when the U.S. Federal Reserve's surprise decision to raise rates triggered a bond- market rout, which if repeated in the current fragile economic environment could cause real problems for companies and banks. 

But if central banks wait too long to raise rates, they may need even more aggressive action to regain control of inflation. Getting the timing of central bank exit strategies right will be crucial to markets this year.

 A euro zone crisis: Spreads on Spanish and Portuguese government bonds have already risen ominously in the first few days of the year in a clear sign the euro-zone sovereign debt crisis is far from over. Investors are spooked at proposed European rules to require bondholders to bear the losses of failed banks.

Meanwhile, potential future flashpoints include the substantial redemptions of existing bonds due in February and April, a new round of tougher European bank stress tests that may reveal big capital shortfalls beyond the ability of some governments to fill, and the Irish elections likely in March. No one believes the euro-zone bailout mechanisms cobbled together in response to the Greek and Irish bailouts are adequate. But much depends on whether Europe has the political will and, crucially, leadership to provide a more credible long-term solution that must involve stronger euro- zone members taking more responsibility for weaker economies. 

German Chancellor Angela Merkel's powerful New Year affirmation of Germany's commitment to the euro was encouraging, suggesting she now recognizes the need to spell out to her countrymen the catastrophic consequences of allowing the euro zone to collapse. But it may take further hairy moments to focus political minds.

 Protectionism: Bank of England Governor Mervyn King warned in October of the dangers of failing to tackle global imbalances: without collective action, "it will be only a matter of time before one or more countries resort to trade protectionism… That could, as it did in the 1930s, lead to a disastrous collapse in activity around the world. Every country would suffer ruinous consequences—including our own." 

Western countries with large external deficits need to rebalance their economies away from debt-fuelled domestic consumption in favor of export-led growth. But that requires surplus countries particularly in Asia to provide a market for these exports. So far there's not much sign of the necessary rebalancing; indeed, Mr. King's BOE colleague Andrew Haldane argues that global imbalances are on track to get much bigger as emerging market economies grow, savings rates rise and global capital flows increase.

The solution is straightforward: exchange rate adjustments, structural reforms to stimulate demand in surplus countries and measures to boost saving in deficit countries. Tensions over the lack of progress simmered dangerously in 2010 as Western countries struggled with high unemployment and domestic austerity—perhaps 2011 will be the year these tensions boil over. 

 Write to  Simon Nixon at simon.nixon@wsj.com 