A sitting president, a former president, friends, journalists and Democratic foreign policy types filled out the Kennedy Center Opera House in Washington, D.C., Friday to remember Richard Holbrooke, the diplomatic operator who died suddenly last month at the age of 69. And at the reception afterward, talk turned to the future of his last effort in government, the special office created at State to oversee Afghanistan and Pakistan.

For five weeks, the post of Special Representative held by Holbrooke until his death has gone unfilled. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, who wants to find a replacement, has considered a host of people without any success. "She's finding it very hard," says one official. I'm told that Nicholas Burns, the former career diplomat who was number three in Condi Rice's State Department under President George W. Bush, rebuffed an approach, citing his wife's health problems. 

Some other names in the mix are Ryan Crocker, the former ambassador to Iraq during the surge, and Ambassador Anne Patterson, who served until recently in Pakistan. Both are a career foreign service officers. Mr. Crocker, who looked exhausted after Iraq, went into academia and may not want another tough job so soon. Ms. Patterson is seen as too close to Pakistan for some Afghans' comfort. Other potential candidates hold lucrative jobs in the private sector, and this post comes with a big pay cut, crammed offices next to the first floor State cafeteria and lots of travel to hard places. 

The Holbrooke job must seem like a poisoned chalice. Whoever takes it has a small chance of walking away covered in laurels. And any progress will likely be slow. Holbrooke was frustrated at many turns in the region and back in Washington. White House officials like former National Security Adviser Jim Jones undermined him, and President Obama never fully embraced him. He sparred with Afghan President Hamid Karzai. The job was also specially created for Holbrooke, a larger-than-life figure. Mrs. Clinton wants to keep the staff he assembled together in one office, but many of those people joined to work for Holbrooke and have other options. 

The one prominent figure in Afghan policy almost certainly ruled out of consideration is Karl Eikenberry, the current ambassador in Kabul. Appointed two years ago (partly at Holbrooke's urging) after a tour commanding allied forces in Afghanistan, the retired lieutenant general has clashed with the Afghans, the U.S. military brass and State during his time there. He is expected to be moved out of Kabul this spring, though nothing has been announced yet. 

Names mentioned as a replacement for him include Mr. Crocker and Frank Ruggiero, Holbrooke's deputy and the current acting special envoy. David Petraeus, the senior U.S. military commander in Afghanistan, and Mr. Eikenberry aren't close. Gen. Petraeus wants to have "someone at the Embassy he can talk to," says one official, someone like Mr. Crocker in Baghdad. But recreating the "Petraeus-Crocker show" from Baghdad in Kabul may be a step too far for the White House -- assuming Mr. Crocker would even agree to go back into the field. 

The coming months will see new faces in other jobs overseeing the war. Secretary of Defense Robert Gates says he's leaving this year. Adm. Mike Mullen, the chairman of the joint chiefs, finishes his term at summer's end. The uncertainty comes as a beefed up American force is in the midst of a critical fighting season in Afghanistan.

To read more stories like this one, please subscribe to Political Diary.