The tariff used to be what all the shouting was about. Over the great question of what levies to lay, industrialists dueled with farmers, Northerners with Southerners, protectionists with free traders. The battles raged at close intervals for the 100 years preceding the enactment of the Smoot-Hawley tariff of 1930, an event that either did, or did not, cause the Great Depression. "Peddling Protectionism," Douglas A. Irwin's history of that notorious legislation, deftly weighs the charges and counter-charges. 

The pundit and sometime actor Ben Stein, playing the droning high-school teacher in "Ferris Bueller's Day Off" (1986), educated a generation of movie-goers in the one indisputable fact of this piece of Hoover-era measure. "It did not work," Stein's pedagogue tells a classroom of bored students, "and the United States sank deeper into the Great Depression."

As every schoolboy used to know, the tariff was the workhorse of the U.S. Treasury before the 20th-century income tax. But it did more than finance the government. It also fattened the profits of the manufacturers who succeeded in lobbying for tariff rates high enough to keep out foreign competition. 

Interestingly, Mr. Irwin reminds us, Smoot-Hawley was no Depression measure. Enacted in June 1930, it was conceived as a political gambit intended to win struggling farmers over to the Republican Party in the elections of 1928. While the GOP wanted no part of overtly subsidizing agricultural prices, it was only too happy to legislate a rise in the duties on imported farm products (of which there were actually precious few), as well as a broad-based upward revision in tariffs on manufactured goods. "Equality for agriculture" was the unpersuasive slogan. 

Most of us, though not Mr. Irwin, forget that the Republican Party was once the citadel of protectionism. High tariffs, the party of Lincoln had claimed from its founding, were the basis of American prosperity. "Free trade" was then the political epithet that "protectionist" has now become. Today low-cost foreign merchandise crowds the aisles of Wal-Mart, while dollars reciprocally accumulate on the balance sheets of America's Asian creditors.

 By Douglas A. Irwin  (Princeton, 244 pages, $24.95)

U.S. tariffs these days are nothing compared with the towering levies of yesteryear—less than 5% on dutiable imports versus 45% in 1930. Which is not to say that goods and services and money flit freely across the face of the earth. Exchange-rate manipulation is the preferred modern method for managing one's balance of payments. 

Economists debate what part Smoot-Hawley played in causing the Great Depression. We should, of course, listen respectfully to these sages, though once upon a time learned men blamed the radical reduction of tariffs for the financial panic of 1857. (Free trade was a job killer, the antebellum authorities agreed.) Neither Sen. Reed Smoot, Republican of Utah, nor Rep. Willis Hawley, Republican of Oregon, entertained the slightest doubt about the GOP doctrine of their day. "If this bill is enacted into law," Hawley predicted on the eve of its passage in June 1930, "we will have a renewed era of prosperity such as followed the enactment of every Republican tariff bill." 

As for the stock-market crash and the business downturn that followed, Republicans blamed the long drawn-out gestation of their pet tariff measure. Hearings, debate and logrolling had consumed 18 interminable months. "Once the bill becomes law," predicted Rep. Frank Crowther, a New York Republican, "business confidence will be immediately restored." 

Passage of the Republican-sponsored Fordney- McCumber tariff of 1922, which had lifted the average tariff rate by 64%, had approximately coincided with the start of the gorgeous prosperity of the 1920s. Smoot-Hawley, in contrast, raised the average dutiable rate by a mere 15%-18%, Mr. Irwin reckons. It wasn't the handiwork of Smoot and Hawley that brought down the world, in the author's opinion, "futile" though that bill was. "The magnitude of the tariff shock in the Smoot-Hawley legislation, which increased the domestic price of imports by 5% at a time when dutiable imports were just 1.4% of GDP, was simply not large enough to trigger the kind of economic contraction experienced after 1930," Mr. Irwin concludes.

If not the Smoot-Hawley tariff, then who or what put the "Great" in Great Depression? Mr. Irwin tosses out a number of possibilities, including the monetary arrangements of the day, which promoted lending and borrowing in ways that the pre-World War I monetary regime never did. I will beg to differ with him on a critical point of nomenclature, however. Whatever system was in place in 1930, it wasn't, as he maintains, "the gold standard."

The gold standard perished in 1914. Its post-World War I successor, the gold-exchange standard, provided none of the semi-automatic balancing functions of the true-blue, prewar original. Though the dollar continued to be "backed" by gold, the gold had long been rendered inert. It sat in vaults rather than moving from country to country to signal changes in relative prices. The central bankers who let it gather dust bore a closer intellectual resemblance to Ben Bernanke than they did to their 19th-century predecessors. 

"Peddling Protectionism" admirably conveys the context of the events its describes, surveying America's domestic politics in the late 1920s and providing a vivid account of the foreign retaliation that the tariff called forth. Here is a model of the economic tract. Lavishly illustrated with political cartoons, it contains but one algebraic equation, and that probably unavoidable.

 Mr. Grant, the editor of Grant's Interest Rate Observer, is the author of the forthcoming "Mr. Speaker: The Life and Times of Thomas B. Reed, the Man Who Broke the Filibuster."  