

HONG KONG—Plans to divide nearly all of Macau gambling giant  Stanley Ho's casino holdings among members of his family were thrown into question Tuesday morning after a challenge to those plans from lawyers who said they represent Mr. Ho.

Since falling ill in 2009, the 89-year-old billionaire has pulled away from the daily affairs of his gambling, real-estate and transportation businesses. Key among these is  SJM Holdings Ltd.
SJMHF


-4.07
%




, which controls roughly a third of the gambling market in Macau, the only Chinese territory with legal casinos. 

Mr. Ho has a complicated family tree, which includes four women who he and others refer to as his wives. Ownership of parts of his empire by the women and their children have complicated the outlook for SJM's succession.

Mr. Ho's complicated family tree includes three women whom he and others refer to as his wives, plus their children and the children of an earlier companion, who died in 2004. Ownership of parts of his empire by the women and their children have complicated the outlook for SJM's succession.

An official announcement by SJM to Hong Kong's stock exchange Monday laid out how Mr. Ho—who, through a series of holdings held about 32% of the company that controls SJM—was splitting up his stake. According to the announcement, he gave his third wife,  Ina Chan, slightly more than half. Most of the rest he split evenly among the five children of his second wife. 

 Market Share: See a slideshow of Macau's gambling kings. 



However, lawyers at the firm Oldham, Li & Nie, say they have issued letters on behalf of Mr. Ho to the second wife's family and third wife challenging the division of assets, which are held through a vehicle called Lanceford Co. The division leaves Mr. Ho a minimal stake in the empire he created.

"It would appear the assets at Lanceford have been hijacked by members of the second and third family insofar as shares were issued to the effect to dilute Stanley to nothing," said  Gordon Oldham, a partner at Oldham, Li & Nie, in an interview Tuesday morning. He asserted that Mr. Ho had always made it clear he wanted his assets to be held in a trust for the four families in equal share.

In other words, Mr. Oldham said, certain members of the family were attempting to make a grab for Mr. Ho's assets against his wishes. 

If an appropriate response wasn't forthcoming, "we have instructions to pursue claims of fraudulent misappropriation," Mr. Oldham said. 

See a timeline of Mr. Ho's casinos business.

A person familiar with the family said a letter had been received. Mr. Ho couldn't be reached directly for comment. Representatives for Lanceford declined to comment, as did a spokesperson for  Lawrence Ho, the son of the second wife. Other family members couldn't immediately be reached for comment.

Questions about who would inherit control have left a cloud over the prospects of SJM, which has a market capitalization of about $9 billion. 

Mr. Ho late last year gave his fourth wife,  Angela Leong, a separate stake in SJM, cementing her role at the casino operator. In December she was appointed managing director of the company that holds the gambling license for SJM.

Monday's transaction, if it stands, would leave three branches of Mr. Ho's family owning significant stakes in SJM, potentially leading to clashes over strategy and control if the family members don't cooperate. 

In the past, any family conflicts largely have been kept under wraps. Tensions have surfaced only occasionally, as in 2008, when the patriarch's sister  Winnie Ho tried in vain to block his effort to list SJM on the Hong Kong stock exchange.

Without the unifying force of Mr. Ho, however, tensions may bubble up more often, analysts say. SJM shares fell 4% in Hong Kong on Monday, but the company's stock has more than tripled in the last 12 months, outperforming many of its peers. On Tuesday, trading in SJM shares was suspended after a Hong Kong newspaper reported that lawyers for Mr. Ho were challenging the division of his assets.

Two of Mr. Ho's children have set up casino ventures beyond the family business. In addition to  Pansy Ho's 50-50 joint-venture with MGM, his son Lawrence Ho has a 50-50 partnership with Australian tycoon  James Packer. Macau forbids casino operators to hold more than one license, essentially barring Pansy or Lawrence Ho from taking over. 

But combined, Mr. Ho and those two children control three of the city's six casino licenses. Pansy Ho and several other of Mr. Ho's children also have large ownership stakes and management positions in property and transportation company  Shun Tak Holdings.
SHTGY


-8.50
%






The changes in ownership come as Macau faces a transition amid new competition from casinos in Singapore and increasing businesses from the mass-market segment, thanks to improved transportation to mainland China. On Jan. 5 a high-speed rail opened across Macau's border in Zhuhai, sharply cutting travel time from Guangzhou, one of China's richest cities. Citigroup Global Markets predicts there could be 20 million arrivals from the mainland this year, up from 12 million last year.

When Portugal ceded control of tiny Macau back to China in 1999, few people predicted that Mr. Ho's raucous, smoke-filled casinos would survive the territory's strict new Communist rulers. Beijing ended his four-decade monopoly in 2002, and many people in the industry assumed he would be pushed aside by the Americans sweeping in, such as  Steve Wynn, founder of  Wynn Resorts Ltd.
WYNN


-2.25
%




, and  Sheldon Adelson, head of  Las Vegas Sands Corp.
LVS


-0.49
%




 

But instead of shrinking, Mr. Ho's empire grew, fueled first by a surge of rich Chinese gamblers and then by an even bigger wave of middle-class Chinese bettors crossing south thanks to better transportation and looser visa requirements. Together with his competitors, Mr. Ho has given Macau a glitzy face-lift, turning it into the world's biggest gambling center. 

More broadly, Macau's story reflects a shifting balance of power from West to East and the rise of China's consumer class. Initially, there were worries that Macau wouldn't attract enough Americans. But Las Vegas now competes to attract Chinese tourists. Macau's gambling revenue rose 60% last year to $28 billion, four times that of the Las Vegas Strip. Analysts predict the Macau market could grow another 30% this year.

Born in 1921 to one of Hong Kong's most influential families, the  Ho Tung clan, Mr. Ho skillfully navigated Macau's transition to Chinese rule and was appointed to China's highest political advisory body. 

He curried favor through spending lavishly to repatriate national art treasures. Most famously, he spent $8.9 million in 2007 for a bronze horse head, part of a fountain destroyed by British and French troops in an 1860 imperial retreat. 

He also has courted controversy. Mr. Ho opened North Korea's only casino earlier this century, in the basement of a Pyongyang hotel. And over the years his family's planned casino partnerships in the U.S. has attracted the attention of U.S. State Department officials and state casino regulators, who linked Mr. Ho with Macau's organized-crime rings. Mr. Ho has denied all such allegations and was never charged with any crimes.

But the allegations continued to reverberate for Mr. Ho's children. New Jersey casino regulators last year said Mr. Ho's daughter Pansy Ho was too close to organized crime to be a partner with New Jersey casino-license holders because of her associations with the family business. That led her partner,  MGM Resorts International,
MGM


-0.74
%




 to decide to sell its stake in an Atlantic City property. Nevada didn't share the same concerns. It was unclear how Monday's move would affect business dealings between Mr. Ho's children and U.S. companies. The family has denied these allegations.

—Jonathan Cheng and Alexandra Berzon contributed to this article.

 Write to  Shai Oster at shai.oster@wsj.com 