The Knicks are in the NBA playoffs for the first time since the LaGuardia administration, and a hungry city is pleased. How could it not be? For many bleak winters we've been told New York City is a basketball town at its core, that all it needed was a flicker, an injection of talent, maybe LeBron James, or if not that, Amar'e Stoudemire, and hey, also Carmelo Anthony, and possibly Phil Jackson, and then this dormant hoops mecca would be rocking like it did when Red Holzman was showing Latrell Sprewell how to dunk on an outdoor peach basket on "The Tonight Show with Jack Paar." Or something like that.

So now it's happened. They did it. They're in. Despite a few weeks of post-Carmelo doubt, the Knicks qualified for the playoffs for the first time in seven seasons. Entering Tuesday night's guilt-free lasagna buffet against the Eastern Conference top seed Chicago Bulls, they were riding a seven-game winning steak. And they already know their first-round opponent: the Boston Celtics.

But it's been a while since Knick fans have done this. In recent years, mid-April—or mid-December—was a time for Knick fans to start focusing on bigger questions, like why they remained Knick fans after each season left them feeling they'd been hit in the head by a sock full of squash balls. If you were an mild masochist, you lingered on, watched other people's teams in the NBA playoffs. If you were a true masochist, you watched the Mets.

You probably jumped back on the Knicks party bus this season. How some of us laughed when Amar'e Stoudemire came here in July and pronounced "The Knicks are Back." It was like someone walking into a 90 square-foot studio apartment and declaring it "The New Luxury." But Amar'e was right. Here they are, back. Or at least back-ish enough for a six seed.

Still, you're playoff rusty. The last time the Knicks were in the playoffs, you were in elementary school. You could smoke in hospitals. 

Bikes rode on the city sidewalks, along with the sheep and horses.

The NBA playoffs have evolved. Here's how to prepare:

 1. New Format. The 1st round of the playoffs is Best-of-23 games—the first team to win 12 games takes it. For a while, the NBA used a Best-of-5 format to settle the first round, but then it was determined that a Best-of-5 game series might actually be dangerous and exciting. 

So it was extended to a Best-of-7 format. Now the first round is an exhaustive, precise 23-game extravaganza, ending the first week of August. But there's nothing like the drama of Game 23.

 2. Free Tickets. All playoff tickets are free to anyone who can walk up to a Madison Square Garden turnstile and sing an a cappella version of Billy Joel's "The Downeaster 'Alexa''' or anything off of Talking Heads' "More Songs About Buildings and Food." At least this was true in the early '90s.

 3. The Celebrities Are Different. During the regular season you might get Spike Lee, or a pop star like Kanye West, or our next president, Donald Trump. But in the playoffs, the entire first row is given to the masthead of The New York Review of Books.

 4. Where Crazy Happens. Way back when, there was a playoff fracas in which New York coach Jeff Van Gundy crawled on the floor and wound up hanging onto the leg of Alonzo Mourning, where he lived for six years.

 5. Nobody ask Knicks legend Patrick Ewing for a prediction. If you're new around here, just trust us on this.