"It's like a high school reunion," Alva Chinn said with a giggle as she spotted each of the seven other women of color she made history with nearly 40 years ago. "Some of these girls I haven't seen in decades."

Ms. Chinn was chatting and air-kissing with fellow models and fans alike during the reception portion of a luncheon held Monday at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. The event honored 10 models of color who took part in a legendary fashion face-off between five American designers and five French couturiers at the Palace of Versailles in 1973.

 Monday's reunion was put on by the Met's Costume Institute and its Multicultural Audience Development Initiative; it was co-hosted by Oscar de la Renta and Stephen Burrows, two of the five American designers who took part in the fashion show, titled the Grand Divertissement à Versailles.

The show, at the palace's Theatre Gabriel, was intended as a benefit to restore the aging structure—and a way to give exposure to American fashion, which was held in far less esteem than French fashion. 

The French team consisted of Pierre Cardin, Hubert de Givenchy, Yves Saint Laurent, Emanuel Ungaro and Marc Bohan of Christian Dior. Representing America were Bill Blass, Mr. Burrows, Mr. de la Renta, Halston, and Anne Klein.

Encouraged by Mr. Burrows, who is black, the American designers made a point of using several models of color, a rare thing at the time. The girls strutted, vamped and sashayed down the runway, moving to the beat of the disco and R&B music blaring from speakers, a lively contrast to the fashion models of the day who walked devoid of personality. (In his remarks on Monday, Mr. Burrows called the French designers' presentations "corny.") 

The audience cheered and gave the Americans a standing ovation. The event was considered a pivotal moment for American fashion—and for black models, opening the door for future models of color, though just how open those doors are today is a matter of contention. 

On Monday, many of the models said they didn't think they were making history, they were just doing their job. Some, like Charlene Dash, were stunned at the attention. "It's flattering that people remember us," she said. She was standing next to another Versailles model, Amina Warsuma, who was hawking the 2004 "sexy spy" novel "Amber Stone, Agent Zero The Ultimate Spy," of which she appeared on the cover. Neither could remember how long it had been since they had seen each other. 

Supermodels Iman and Veronica Webb, designers Donna Karan, Isabel Toledo, Jason Wu and Francisco Costa of Calvin Klein and former White House social secretary Desiree Rogers were among those who helped celebrate the models—Billie Blair, Ms. Chinn, Pat Cleveland, Norma Jean Darden, Ms. Dash,  Bethann Hardison, Barbara Jackson, China Machado, the late  Ramona Saunders, and Ms. Warsuma—in the Met's grand Temple of Dendur.

Tracking down the nine surviving models took some sleuthing, says  Audrey Smaltz, a veteran fashion stylist and fashion-show producer, who served on the luncheon's committee. She had maintained contact with at least three of them but for the others, "we hit that Internet and ate it up and did whatever we could to find folks." Still, her best efforts couldn't turn up Ms. Jackson. "I'm still upset about that."

The eight models attending hugged and got life updates from each other, let fans and paparazzi take pictures of them together and recalled their French adventure and culture shock. Several pointed out it wasn't all glamorous. "Did we know that the French don't have toilet paper in the bathroom?" said Ms. Chinn. "I would have brought my own."

Ms. Darden, who now operates restaurants and a catering business in Manhattan, said she had one regret. "The fact that there's no video of the show is so heartbreaking." 

 Write to  Ray A. Smith at ray.smith@wsj.com 