LONDON—-Authorities in the U.K. and Iceland arrested nine men, including a pair of high-profile U.K. property moguls, in connection with the collapse of Iceland's Kaupthing Bank hf, the latest arrests connected to the failure of the island's banking system.

The U.K.-led probe is examining the extent to which funds were withdrawn from the bank prior to Kaupthing's 2008 collapse and who was involved. The British investigation is being conducted in addition to a separate probe by Icelandic prosecutors. 

Among those arrested Wednesday were U.K. property tycoons Vincent and  Robert Tchenguiz. The brothers, whose business interests included shareholder and borrower relationships with Kaupthing, denied any wrongdoing.

In a dawn swoop, more than 130 British police officers arrested seven men, ages 42 years to 54 years, and searched business and residential properties, according to U.K. authorities. That included two main offices of the Tchenguiz brothers in London's Mayfair district, a person familiar with the matter said.

Meanwhile, police in Iceland arrested two men in their early 40s at the request of the British authorities, according to U.K. and Icelandic authorities. 

As of late Wednesday afternoon, authorities in both countries expected to release all the men without charging them, a person familiar with the ongoing probe said.

The specifics of the investigations underway in both the U.K. and Iceland remain unclear. Last year, as part of an investigation they are conducting, Icelandic authorities arrested and questioned at least four senior Kaupthing executives, including its former Chief Executive Officer  Hreidar Mar Sigurdsson. The men aren't in custody but the Icelandic investigation continues. The Icelandic prosecutor also questioned Sigurdur Einarsson, Kaupthing's former chairman. Neither man could immediately be reached. 

In the U.K., however, the investigation has, for the moment at least, ensnared a pair of marquee names. 

  Vincent Tchenguiz, 54, and Robert Tchenguiz, 50, cut a glitzy profile on the social circuit in London and elsewhere, with a well-known affinity for parties, flashy cars and spending time on their yachts in the south of France. Vincent Tchenguiz had been due to stay on his yacht there this weekend while attending a property conference in Cannes, a person familiar with the matter said. It's unclear whether he will still go.

The brothers grew up in Iran and moved to the UK in the 1970s. They built up a portfolio property valued at roughly £4 billion ($6.46 billion) at its peak and held large stakes in well-known British companies. While they previously ran a firm together, they now have separate businesses. U.K. corporate filings show they have connections to a long string of companies. 

Robert Tchenguiz, who once dated U.S. model Caprice Bourret, used loans from Kaupthing to buy stakes in grocer J. Sainsbury PLC, and in a pub chain.But he was forced to sell when the Icelandic bank collapsed. According to reports, Robert Tchenguiz lost as much as £1 billion in the wake of Kaupthing's fall. 

Known as Robbie, he was Kaupthing's largest borrower, with some €2 billion ($2.8 billion) of loan facilities, according to a special investigative commission appointed by Iceland's parliament. He also owned shares in the bank, both directly and indirectly via a stake in Kaupthing's largest shareholder, an Icelandic insurance company called Exista hf, the investigative commission said in a report last year. 

In a joint statement Wednesday, the brothers said: "We were arrested earlier this morning and are being questioned with regard to matters relating to our relationship with Kaupthing bank. Both of us are cooperating fully [with] the investigation and are confident that once concluded, we will be cleared of any allegation of wrongdoing."

By mid 2008, Kaupthing had some 6.6 trillion kronur (about $56.76 billion) of assets. It failed later that year, along with Iceland's two other largest banks. Combined, the three financial institutions accounted for around three-quarters of Iceland's stock-market value. Their loans and other assets totaled about 10 times the country's gross domestic product. Kaupthing was subsequently split into a "bad" bank, holding soured investments, and a healthy institution named Arion Bank.

Of the three banks, Kaupthing had the largest operations in the U.K., lending to British-based businesses and collecting deposits from British savers. The U.K. probe was launched in 2009 by the Serious Fraud Office, which has estimated that more than 30,000 British individuals, companies and organizations invested in high-yield deposit accounts with the bank.

 Write to  Cassell Bryan-Low at cassell.bryan-low@wsj.com 