NEW DELHI—After losing hundreds of millions of dollars on a long-term currency-hedging strategy, Indian information-technology company HCL Technologies Ltd. is taking a more short-term view.

HCL, which gets 96% of its $3 billion in revenue from overseas, has developed its own process of hedging that doesn't involve taking a clear bet on exchange rates.

"In the absence of a wise model of predicting currency, we have adopted a layered hedging so that you have a uniform position," Vice Chairman and Chief Executive  Vineet Nayar said in an interview with The Wall Street Journal.

"So instead of significantly swinging left, or swinging right, you are able to achieve middle of the street," he said.

HCL, whose shares are listed in India, learned its hedging lesson the hard way. In July 2007, it took a consultant's advice and began taking a view on where exchange rates would be in two or three years. The company bet that the rupee would continue to rapidly appreciate against the dollar and other currencies. Instead, the opposite has happened, and HCL's long-term hedge on more than $1 billion cost it almost $300 million over three years.

It was time for a new strategy, Mr. Nayar said.

HCL decided to cover its risks and not worry about making money through foreign-exchange plays, as some companies have sought to do, he said. "It's not a profit-making strategy but to cover your risks so you do not get wrong-stepped on issues," Mr. Nayar said.

HCL does that by spreading its risk across multiple currencies, he said. As a result, only 55% of its revenue is in U.S. dollars, he said, and the rest is spread across euros, pounds and Japanese yen. A few years ago, a greater percentage of revenue was in dollars.

The company also adopted a policy of hedging its currency exposure monthly for each of the next 12 months. The result is a layered book built over time rather than one taking a specific view on currency moves. "And that's important because every time you take a view on currency, something goes wrong, and I'm yet to meet someone who can predict it and get it right," said Mr. Nayar.

The third piece in its strategy is to have a short-term view in the belief that currencies are too volatile to hedge for a longer period.

"I truly believe that six months to 12 months is what you should predict and beyond that you have to handle it as a business. You can't handle it as currency hedging," he said. 

Should the dollar-rupee exchange rate go "completely crazy," the solution is to go back to the customers and renegotiate the rates, he said. 

"You can't use instruments of foreign exchange to cover long-term positions. You have to allow business to do it, and, therefore, variabilization of cost is very, very critical," he said "You can bring them up and down at an appropriate level."

Once HCL devised this policy, it back-tested it using a model for the last 10 years—month by month, week by week, day by day—starting from 2000, he said. And other than in one year, the results showed that profits and losses from currency fluctuations averaged out.

So HCL adopted the new strategy in July, after three years of the old hedging policy.

"Now, we don't have any predictions [on where the rupee-dollar is headed]," Mr. Nayar said. Instead, the company applies its rule-based policy, which it said reduces earnings volatility yet gives it enough flexibility to tap into extreme market moves.

He said the company adds some hedges every month so profits or losses from currency fluctuations average out and don't really affect the balance sheet either way, and HCL no longer has to make decisions based on predictions.

"Else we can have, and we used to have, intellectual [discussions on predictions] for hours, but one oil price shock here and one Egypt there and [all predictions are] out the window," he said. "We don't call the dollar. We will cover no matter what."

  Hemant Mishr, managing director and head of global markets at Standard Chartered Bank South Asia, said he can't speak specifically to HCL's strategy, but many large Indian companies get large chunks of revenue from overseas. These firms feel sensitive to, and worried about, fluctuating foreign-exchange rates and interest rates, particularly in light of the huge movements since the global recession.

To the extent they can, the firms want to reduce this risk, he said. Among the strategies employed, he said, are having an automatic hedge strategy within the business so receivables and payables offset each other, or spreading out receivables across multiple currencies. Also, companies are no longer trying to catch the highs or lows of currency fluctuations that may occur in a month or a day, and are instead looking to average those out.