It took time to get to the heart of Martha Graham's dance theater in the season now under way at the Rose Theater.

To be sure, Ms. Graham's name and renown as a modern-dance innovator during her long working life—she died at age 96 in 1991—were much invoked at Tuesday's gala opening, which brought the Martha Graham Dance Company's 85th anniversary celebrations to town. And all of the good-looking and dedicated dancers currently performing with the troupe were in well-rehearsed form throughout.

The run's opener, however, was not a Graham work, but an homage by Graham admirer Robert Wilson, the overrated experimental-theater director. Mr. Wilson's "Snow on the Mesa," subtitled "Portrait of Martha," dates from 1995, when it was commissioned by the company.

 Rose Theater 

Broadway at 60th Street

(212) 721-6500

Through March 20

"Mesa" unfolds as a strung-out series of 12 mostly decorative vignettes intermittently graced by odd, effective lighting strokes (by AJ Weissbard) and stylish, Graham-influenced costume effects (by Donna Karan). Mr. Wilson's usual precious titles, such as "The Wolf Wife" and "A Room With Too Much in It," duly spell out each scene's imagistic intentions as segment follows segment with no particular regard for theatrical transition or momentum.

"Maple Leaf Rag" (1990), which closed the gala, was Ms. Graham's final work. Set to recorded Scott Joplin selections, it's mostly an exercise in good-humored self-mockery. Its nearly full-company cast also included five socialites—Muffie Potter Aston, Cornelia Guest, Somers Farkas, Grace Hightower, Karen LeFrak—who were worked into the mix by artistic director Janet Eilber to mostly giddy effect.

On Wednesday, the second of five bills opened with "Cave of the Heart," a 1946 Graham creation that has lived memorably in the choreographer's 181-work canon. The approximately 30-minute dance based on the Medea legend has a dramatic score by Samuel Barber and a reductive but evocative set design by Isamu Noguchi. Ms. Graham created the striking costumes and the sometimes hair-raising choreography.

In Ms. Graham's physical telling, a spurned and vengeful sorceress wreaks havoc on her fatuous husband, Jason, and his new bride, while an alert chorus, in the form of a single dancer, remains helplessly alarmed. But with canned music, the potentially stinging quality of the dance seemed more evanescent than evident.

As the central player once danced by Ms. Graham, Blakeley White-McGuire pushed hard but failed to reveal her character's power in more than one tone. More effective were the dynamic and rock-solid Ben Schultz (as Jason), the sleek and supple Xiaochuan Xie (as the Princess), and the commanding Katherine Crockett (as the Chorus).

Later on the second program, the less-distinguished music by Hunter Johnson that accompanies Ms. Graham's "Deaths and Entrances" (1943), more like a moody movie soundtrack than a motivating force, proved less debilitating to the effectiveness of her choreography. 

Handsomely set by Arch Lauterer's original sculptural pieces, which delicately indicate a fusty interior, and somewhat dulled by Oscar de la Renta's busy reworking of the original costumes, "Deaths and Entrances"—recently trimmed of some 10 minutes by Ms. Eilber—concerns a turbulent household dominated by three sisters, said to be based on England's literary Brontës.

Taking on the role of the most dominant sister (Emily?), a stoic yet steely Miki Orihara brought remarkable resonance to Ms. Graham's former role and to the choreography's deep and dark picture of an insular world—one fraught with memories and filled with moves that suggest running toward and away from haunting personal recollections.

The rest of the cast framing Ms. Orihara's key figure brought all due honor and luster to Ms. Graham's penetrating yet oblique depiction of sisterly feelings and individual longings. As a secondary sister, Ms. White-McGuire was fine, illuminating Ms. Graham's sometimes emphatic movements with the shade of expressive gesture.

The less said the better about "Chasing," the season's lone premiere, promoted in the program as a "companion piece to 'Deaths and Entrances.'" This jumbled exercise by Bulareyaung Pagarlava amounts to a shapeless sampler of miscellaneous moods and shticks, from the cloyingly cute to the utterly arbitrary.

"Chasing" closed Program B as a cautionary tale against pitting one's dance efforts against Ms. Graham's. 

—Mr. Greskovic writes about dance for the Journal.