NEW DELHI – State-run Nuclear Power Corp. of India Ltd. is working to allay the concerns of the Gujarat state government, where it plans to set up nuclear reactors made by GE  Hitachi, and is trying to get regulatory clearances for its coastal project in southern India, its chairman said Friday. 

"Nuclear power is important for the country and we are committed to meeting all the safety and regulatory norms for our projects. Reviewing our sites is a constant process,"  S.K. Jain told Dow Jones Newswires. 

India's widening energy deficit calls for the use of all available energy sources as conventional ones--such as coal, oil and gas--remain insufficient and expensive. India plans to take its nuclear power generation capacity to 63,000 megawatts by 2032 from 4,780 MW at present. 

However, India's civilian nuclear program has come under fresh scrutiny after the crisis in Japan reignited debate about its safety, highlighted by protests against NPCIL's nuclear project at Jaitapur on the country's west coast. 

NPCIL is facing stiff resistance from a number of quarters against several of its projects, as confidence in nuclear power has eroded in recent months. 

Global nuclear energy majors such Areva SA, GE Hitachi Nuclear Energy and Westinghouse Electric Co. gained access to India's multi-billion dollar nuclear energy market after a 2008 civilian nuclear deal with the U.S. and a waiver from the Nuclear Suppliers' Group, which let the country import uranium. 

NPCIL plans to set up reactors made by GE Hitachi at Mithi Virdi in Gujarat, which has also seen protests. 

"There are emotions after Fukushima and we understand that. We are talking to the Gujarat government [about the proposed nuclear project]," Mr. Jain said. 

India's environment ministry April 28 deferred coastal regulatory clearances for NPCIL's four new nuclear reactors at Kudankulam in the southern state of Tamil Nadu, citing environmental hazards and the need for a fresh risk assessment after the crisis in Japan and local protests. 

NPCIL will submit its report on the coastal Kudankulam Atomic Power Project to the environment ministry in two to three weeks and expects to receive regulatory clearance within two months of the submission, Mr. Jain said. 

The Kudankulam Atomic Power Project is being set up with six Russian-made nuclear reactors of 1,000 megawatts each. Two units are already nearing completion. 

Trial runs at the first unit will begin by June and at the second unit by March 2012, Mr. Jain said. He said construction of units three and four will begin by March 2012 and of units five and six will start by 2015-16. 

"There is not a coastal regulatory problem for Jaitapur. We have the clearance in place," Mr. Jain said. 

NPCIL plans to spend 50 billion rupees ($1 billion) in the current financial year as capital expenditure, of which 35 billion rupees will be raised through loans and debt in local and international markets, Mr. Jain said. "We are expanding our capacities so our funding requirement would rise. We are a cash-rich company." 