Inundated with demand,  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
GS


0.97
%




 plans to stop taking orders for shares of Facebook Inc. on Thursday, and has told some would-be investors to expect just a small fraction of the shares they requested, according to people familiar with the situation.

The interest, amounting to several billion dollars in an equity offering likely to be no more than $1.5 billion, is a sign of investor fascination with the closely held social-networking company despite a dearth of available information about its operations and financial condition. Goldman has provided some potential investors with little more than a snapshot of Facebook's online traffic, advertisements and other basic measurements, with no disclosure of the Palo Alto, Calif., company's bottom line, people familiar with the matter said. 



Some additional details about Facebook's performance emerged late Wednesday as part of an offering document. According to people familiar with the document, Facebook had net income of $200 million in 2009 on revenue of $777 million. Figures for 2010 weren't disclosed, but analysts have said the company's revenue last year could be as much as $2 billion, fueled by advertising growth.

A Facebook spokesman declined to comment.

Wealthy Goldman clients have been jockeying for a piece of Facebook since the deal was struck last weekend, a situation reminiscent of the technology bubble of the late 1990s when online-grocery seller Webvan Group Inc. and other upstarts with far shorter track records than Facebook sold stakes to investors.

Goldman initially was expected to solicit investors at least until the end of this week. The Wall Street bank mostly is approaching individual Goldman clients, though an unknown number of hedge funds, private-equity firms and other institutions that make trades or do other business with Goldman also have been asked if they would be interested in buying a piece of Facebook, according to people who have been contacted by Goldman. Goldman declined to comment. Firms where officials were called about a potential Facebook investment include Blackstone Group LP and  Fortress Investment Group
FIG


0.40
%




 LLC, according to people familiar with the matter.

Such investors must promise to invest at least $2 million and not sell shares until 2013, including on secondary markets that allow investors to buy or sell stakes held in private companies.

Hundreds of Goldman partners also can get in on the deal, and aren't subject to the $2 million minimum investment.

Only about 470 of Goldman's roughly 35,000 employees have the title of partner, according to a person familiar with the number, which isn't publicly disclosed by the company.

The deal includes a $500 million investment by Goldman and Digital Sky Technologies of Russia. Goldman is likely to wind up owning roughly a 0.8% stake in Facebook, while DST would have slightly less than 10%. Last year, DST invested $200 million in Facebook.

Even though some would-be investors declined a chance to buy Facebook shares, the deal is a coup for Goldman's investment-banking unit. The operation was the heart of the firm for decades, but has been overshadowed the past several years by Goldman's fixed-income trading business, a profit juggernaut even during much of the financial crisis. But trading results have suffered recently.

In some ways, the Facebook deal represents all sides of the classic Goldman business model: Take a stake in a fast-expanding company, advise it on capital raising, help the company rake in cash from investors, and eventually sell a stake to outside investors through an initial public offering.

Goldman will collect from new Facebook investors upfront fees of 4%, plus 5% of any gains, according to people familiar with the matter. Analysts said the securities firm also is likely to get a private-placement fee for arranging the deal. Such fees typically range from roughly 2% to more than 4%.

Goldman would get another windfall if Facebook eventually goes public and Goldman manages the IPO.

"When you have a chance I wanted to find a time to discuss a highly confidential and time sensitive investment opportunity in a private company that is considering a transaction to raise additional capital.

For confidentiality reasons, I am unable to tell you the name of the company unless you agree not to use such information other than in connection with your evaluation of the investment opportunity and to keep all information that we reveal to you strictly confidential. All I can tell you is that it is a private company, but that its stock trades in a limited manner on certain private markets. If you are a participant in trading on private markets, you may wish to decline receiving information about this opportunity because of the restrictions that will be imposed on you, which I will now describe.

If you agree not to use information that we reveal to you (including the name of the company and that the company is considering a transaction) other than in connection with your evaluation of the investment opportunity and to keep all such information strictly confidential until the information has become public, I will be able to disclose the name of the company and provide you with more information about the company and the investment opportunity.

In addition, certain information we will reveal to you about the investment opportunity and the related transaction will constitute material nonpublic information about this private company. US federal securities laws impose restrictions on certain securities trading on the basis of material nonpublic information. You must agree that if we disclose to you information regarding the company, the investment opportunity and the related transaction, you will not purchase or sell the company's securities until the earlier of (i) the date when all of the information either has been publicly disclosed or is no longer material and (ii) 6 months after the date on which we provide you the information. However, even after such 6 month period has elapsed, trading in the company's securities will remain subject to federal securities laws and you will need to determine at the time of any transaction, in consultation with your advisors and based upon the prevailing facts and circumstances, whether purchasing or selling the company's securities would be in compliance with such laws.

If you agree to these restrictions either by responding to this email or verbally on any subsequent telephone conversation that we have, I will send you an email confirming your agreement to be subject to these restrictions and, on that basis, will provide you with a summary of the investment opportunity."

IPOs are one of the most lucrative types of deals on Wall Street, generating fees of about 4% to 7% of the total offering. Facebook's potential IPO fees could be smaller because the deal is expected to be unusually large. Investment banks that took  Google Inc. public in 2004 earned 3%.

More revenue could come from managing assets of Facebook executives such as President and Chief Executive  Mark Zuckerberg, who owns about 25% of the company. It isn't clear if Mr. Zuckerberg is a wealth-management client of Goldman.

Some current and former Wall Street rivals said being on so many sides of the Facebook deal could expose Goldman to conflict-of-interest accusations.

The company has been trying to revamp its image after settling a civil-fraud lawsuit with the Securities and Exchange Commission last July for $550 million. 

Goldman is expected to release later this month the results of an internal review that included potential conflicts of interest at the firm, its financial disclosures and dealings with clients. 

"This is one more example to those in the rest of the country that are one step removed from Broad and Wall [streets] that the advantage for those in the financial markets goes to those on the inside," said  Michael Driscoll, a former Bear Stearns Cos. banker who now is a visiting professor at Adelphi University.

Despite the potential criticism, one executive at another Wall Street investment bank said Wednesday that he would "love to have their problems." The Facebook deal is a chance for Goldman to tout its access to marquee deals and distribute shares in a way that will "tighten their relationships" with key clients, the rival executive said.

Some investors approached by Goldman initially got a 400-word email, offering them a chance to "discuss a highly confidential and time sensitive investment opportunity in a private company that is considering a transaction to raise additional capital." Facebook isn't named in the email, and potential investors must promise to keep any information about the deal secret.

Some of those who want more information have been sent by Goldman a four-page document. The first page was titled "Investment Profile," according to one person who saw the document. The following three pages were filled with information about the deal's structure, including restrictions, fees and disclaimers, said the person.

Another person described the material as a PowerPoint presentation. A Goldman official talked him through by phone some assumptions about Facebook's revenue and hits received by the company's website.

One former Goldman partner turned down the chance to buy Facebook shares because he believes the $50 billion valuation implied by the deal is too high.

"Google's trading at seven times sales. I'm not going to buy Facebook at 25 or 50 times sales," the former Goldman partner said.

After saying no, the former partner got another offer from his broker at Goldman. He could get a smaller stake by buying into a private-equity fund Goldman is raising money for called Goldman Sachs Partners Private Opportunities Fund. The Goldman broker said the fund might invest in Facebook. For that fund, Goldman is charging a fee of 1.5% of invested capital and 20% of profits exceeding 8%, he said.

It isn't clear how many Facebook shares will be sold as part of the deal. Goldman has gone back to Facebook several times to test the company's interest in expanding the size of the sale, according to a person close to the matter, though the tone of the requests was informal.

Employees at Facebook aren't currently allowed to sell shares. Last year, though, Facebook arranged a deal in which employees could sell a total of at least $100 million in shares to DST.

—Anupreeta Das  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Gregory Zuckerman at gregory.zuckerman@wsj.com, Liz Rappaport at liz.rappaport@wsj.com and Aaron Lucchetti at aaron.lucchetti@wsj.com 