Military spending has become the fodder for one of the early policy rifts among potential Republican candidates for president. Some say spending cuts should come from all parts of the federal government, and a larger number say the Pentagon should remain off-limits.

The cleavage is noteworthy because it is one of the few points of difference among potential candidates who have so far agreed on most other major issues, such as a desire to keep taxes low and to overhaul Medicare and Medicaid. 

Mississippi Gov. Haley Barbour this week told an audience in Iowa that any effort to balance the federal budget must include cuts in defense spending. 

"We can save money at the Pentagon," Mr. Barbour told a group of about 200 GOP activists in Davenport. "If we Republicans don't propose saving money on defense, we lose credibility."

Mr. Barbour joins Indiana Gov. Mitch Daniels, who had been budget director for President George W. Bush, and Rep. Ron Paul of Texas in saying budget cuts should extend to the Pentagon. 

By contrast, former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney has called for annual increases in the defense budget of $50 billion, in part to replace decades-old ships and airplanes. He has also called for adding 100,000 troops to the Army and the Marines.

Former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin favors deep reductions in government spending. But she made the case in a speech in Norfolk, Va., last year that the Defense Department should be shielded. In a Facebook posting afterward, Ms. Palin also said the government should "cut spending in other departments—apart from defense. We should not be cutting corners on our national security."

Former House Speaker Newt Gingrich and Mr. Romney have supported the Heritage Foundation's "Four Percent for Freedom" platform calling for missile defense funding and maintaining a minimum defense budget of 4% of gross domestic product.

Defense spending currently equals 4.7% of GDP, according to the White House, but it is projected to fall over time.

Former Minnesota Gov. Tim Pawlenty has called on the Pentagon to find savings in its budget, but he would ask the Department of Defense to shift that money to other defense programs. 

In recent interviews, Mr. Pawlenty has emphasized that he wanted to preserve military spending, which accounts for roughly half of the money Congress allocates each year.

More distinctions are bound to arise as Republicans become formal candidates and offer more details on what in many cases are general policy positions.

The debate comes as the United Nations Security Council has voted to authorize military strikes on Libya. The potential U.S. role remained unclear, but the prospect of U.S. involvement in an additional war would likely add urgency to the question of whether the Pentagon budget can be reduced.

Renewed attention to defense spending is being driven by a deficit that's expected to grow to $1.65 trillion this year and a debt that equals the yearly output of the U.S. economy. In his proposed budget for fiscal year 2012, President Barack Obama calls for cutting $78 billion from the Pentagon's spending plan over the next five years.

On Capitol Hill, many of the newly elected, tea party-backed Republicans have shown a willingness to cut procurement programs. The GOP-led House voted to strip funding for a fighter jet engine built in the backyard of Speaker John Boehner (R., Ohio). Some of the leading voices, such as Sen. Rand Paul (R., Ky.), have called for deeper cuts.

In his comments in Iowa, Mr. Barbour said his party can't succeed in balancing the federal budget without raising taxes unless they go beyond the spending cuts currently being debated in Congress and look at fundamental changes in federal entitlements such as Social Security and at cuts in defense spending.

"That's important," Mr. Barbour said of the budget cuts approved in Congress. "But it's a drop in the bucket."

Mr. Daniels, who like Mr. Barbour served in the Reagan White House, has cast the nation's debt as a national security problem, a "menace" of red ink.

"I served in two administrations that practiced and validated the policy of peace through strength," Mr. Daniels told a crowd at the Conservative Political Action Conference last month. "But if our nation goes over a financial Niagara, we won't have much strength and, eventually, we won't have peace."

That view may have an audience among a segment of conservative voters, but polls show it remains unpopular with most Republicans. A poll taken by the Pew Research Center earlier this year showed that only 18% of self-identified Republicans want to cut defense spending, while 41% would like to increase it.

 Write to  Douglas Blackmon at douglas.blackmon@wsj.com and Patrick O'Connor at patrick.oconnor@wsj.com 