Beginning Tuesday,  Will Ryman's first public art installation, "The Roses," will appear along the Park Avenue Malls between 57th and 67th Streets. For many New Yorkers, its 38 colossal red and pink blossoms, blooming from stems up to 25 feet tall, will serve as an uplifting reminder of the tulips that sprout there each spring. 

But to Mr. Ryman, 41 years old, they represent something else. A former playwright with an absurdist edge, he turned to sculpture in 2004 out of a desire to "let the play's scenery tell the whole story," he said recently at his Bowery studio. "I wanted to create theater with no lines or actors, but just the world itself." 

"The Roses," presented by the Paul Kasmin Gallery and running through the end of May, can be seen as an extension of Mr. Ryman's last exhibit, "A New Beginning," which made its debut at the Marlborough Gallery in Chelsea in the fall of 2009. The show featured an oversized urban flower bed littered with trash, its dilapidated roses slapped together with epoxy resin, rebar and aluminum mesh. Although it succeeded in making the viewer feel part of an "Alice in Wonderland" fantasy, its confinement to an indoor space left the artist wanting. 

"I like public sculpture because it exists outside of the gallery world, which can be pretty elitist," Mr. Ryman said, adding that outdoor installations reach a broader audience, and "the focus tends to be more on personal interaction than intellectualization." 

Indeed, one can interact with "The Roses" from a variety of perspectives: the sidewalk, the surrounding apartment buildings, the seat of a car. People below the roses, Mr. Ryman said, will have a completely different experience than those above.

Of course, with greater exposure come tighter restrictions, especially in Midtown. City Hall, the Borough Hall Commissioners Office and the Park Avenue Sculpture Committee all rigorously reviewed Mr. Ryman's proposal. They accepted the dog-sized brass bugs—aphids, ladybugs, beetles, ants—that will adorn the steel stems and fiberglass petals, but rejected the coffee cup, Doritos bag and extinguished matches he envisioned strewn about the medians. 

"We liked the idea," said  Jennifer Lantzas, public art coordinator for the city's Department of Parks and Recreation. "But City Hall is doing a big anti-trash initiative, and we wanted to respect that." 

Twenty giant petals will appear in place of the litter, she said, six of which will serve as lawn chairs. 

Initially chagrined, Mr. Ryman has come to accept the need for compromise on site-specific works. The artist Christo, he pointed out, wanted to blanket Central Park in saffron-colored nylon fabric, but settled for making "The Gates," whose scale and unseasonable vibrancy match those of "The Roses." 

Unlike Christo's fabric panels, Mr. Ryman's roses are handmade. He showed up every day at KB Projects—the Greenpoint-based art fabricator whose clients include Paul McCarthy, Richard Prince and Louise Bourgeois—to shape and paint each petal. "If it has my name on it, I need to be intimately involved in its creation," he said. 

As a result, the blossoms have a delicate quality up close, despite weighing approximately 250 pounds each. They're also intentionally out of proportion, lumpy and shiny—an effect created using several coats of industrial-strength boat paint. 

Mr. Ryman admitted that the meaning of a rose changes when it's 25 feet tall, with thorns the size of dinosaur teeth. This slightly menacing quality links "The Roses" to his other, less child-friendly sculptures, like the grotesque re-imagining of Da Vinci's "The Last Supper" currently on display in his studio. 

Still, it's hard to imagine anyone recoiling from "The Roses." The biggest threat they pose may be to the prevailing bleakness of winter in Midtown. 