 Global economic productivity rallied strongly last year thanks to a notable economic recovery, but productivity growth is likely to flag in 2011 in advanced economies as employment catches up, the Conference Board said. Euro-zone labor productivity may even outpace the U.S.'s this year, although that is likely to prove a temporary blip, the U.S.-based think tank's chief economist said.  

The European bailout facility should be increased in quantity and quality, European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet said ahead of a meeting of finance ministers from the euro zone in Brussels. Improving the quality means the fund should be "as flexible as possible" in the way it is used, Trichet said in a French broadcast interview. 

The euro zone's annual rate of inflation rose above the European Central Bank's medium-term target for the first time in more than two years in December, driven by fuel, food, alcohol and tobacco prices, official data showed. 

 Embattled Irish Prime Minister Brian Cowen said he would call for a motion of confidence Tuesday in his leadership of the ruling Fianna Fail party and said he plans to remain in office for the next general election, which is due in March after the passing of the Finance Bill to bring into law the remaining measures from December's budget.  

 France's Front National chose Marine Le Pen to succeed her father as leader, as the right-wing party tries to rejuvenate its populist message ahead of next year's presidential election. 

German annual inflation picked up to 1.7% in December from 1.5% in November, the Federal Statistics Office said, confirming its preliminary reading in Europe's largest economy. 

Germany's dioxin-tainted food scandal widened, as authorities banned 934 more farms from selling eggs, poultry and pork after finding out that one company had hidden its deliveries of contaminated livestock feed. 

Italian prosecutors placed Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi under investigation for allegedly patronizing a prostitute and for abuse of office in a case involving an under-age Moroccan woman, prosecutors and Berlusconi's lawyers said. 

In a television speech aired on two of his Mediaset channels on Sunday night, Berlusconi reiterated that the charges against him were unfounded. He also said that he had never paid to have sex with a woman. 

Spain's National Court said it has issued an international order to extradite John Demjanjuk, an alleged former concentration camp guard and former U.S. citizen who is currently on trial in Germany for crimes against humanity. Spain wants the 90-year old retired Ohio auto worker to stand trial on separate charges. 

 Portugal's prime minister, in his first visit to the Persian Gulf, said the purpose of his trip was to develop commercial relations with Qatar and not to discuss Qatar's interest in buying Portugal's sovereign debt. He did acknowledge that Portugal's finance minister met with his Qatari counterpart but didn't provide further details.  

Pope Benedict XVI attributed a medical miracle to the intercession of the late Pope John Paul II and announced plans to beatify his predecessor during a Vatican ceremony on May 1.

In Hungary, police say three young women died in a stampede at a Budapest nightclub. A police spokeswoman said thousands of people were caught up in the stampede and the victims may have been trampled by the rushing crowd at the West-Balkan nightclub, housed inside a communist-era shopping mall and office complex. 

Greek authorities said a ship carrying a reported 263 migrants has sunk west of the island of Corfu and 22 passengers are missing. Coast guards said they were alerted by a passenger on the Hasan Reis saying that the boat was in danger, but high winds prevented rescue boats immediately taking to the water. 

 A top Turkish official defended regulations on the sale and promotion of alcohol, a tightened regime that has reignited claims that the government has a hidden Islamist agenda. Islam forbids alcohol consumption. 

Russia released an opposition leader after his arrest Dec. 31 at an antigovernment rally that had been authorized by officials. Former Deputy Prime Minister Boris Nemtsov was detained after leaving a rally at which he called for Prime Minister Vladimir Putin's ouster. Police said Nemtsov, 51 years old, was trying to attend a second, unauthorized demonstration, charges he denied. 

Belarus accused Germany and Poland of trying to overthrow its authoritarian president by organizing a large street protest against his disputed re-election last month, an event that set off a sweeping crackdown against the former Soviet republic's democratic opposition. The allegation was denied by both countries.

The U.S. Treasury said it plans to auction warrants in Citigroup, Boston Private Financial Holdings, and Wintrust Financial, disposing of its remaining holdings in the financial institutions. 

 Top financial regulators charged with issuing recommendations on how to implement the "Volcker rule" appear to be leaning against suggesting precise rules for specific assets or trades, and instead may focus on the amount of risk being carried by a firm or trading desk, according to people briefed on the negotiations.  

The Obama administration eased travel restrictions to Cuba and said Americans may send money there more freely, fresh steps aimed at encouraging engagement with the Cuban people. 

 The death toll from flooding and mudslides in southeastern Brazil climbed to at least 626 people, as authorities struggled to reach blocked neighborhoods in mountains north of Rio de Janeiro.  

 Chinese President Hu Jintao emphasized the need for cooperation with the U.S. in areas from new energy to space ahead of his visit to Washington this week, but he called the present U.S. dollar-dominated currency system a "product of the past" and highlighted moves to turn the yuan into a global currency. 

China Investment Corp., the country's $300 billion sovereign-wealth fund, has requested more investment from the central government as it has already used up its current pool of money, a senior CIC official said. 

 A cabinet shuffle by Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan gave a slight boost to his government's tepid approval ratings, providing some breathing space amid his continuing efforts to reform Japan's economic and fiscal policy.  

A stampede of pilgrims returning from one of India's most popular Hindu festivals killed at least 102 people and injured 44 others. 

In Sri Lanka, floods that have killed 27 people and displaced 360,000 people have submerged huge swaths of rice paddies and are hampering food distribution. Days of heavy rain have swamped the Eastern Province, affecting more than a million people and flooding more than 30% of the land in the rice-growing region. 

 Pakistan placed parts of Karachi, the country's biggest city and financial hub, under curfew after a week of ethnic and political violence left more than 30 people dead. 

A minivan full of civilians struck a roadside bomb in southern Afghanistan, triggering a blast that killed six of the people in the vehicle. The explosion in southern Helmand province also wounded three others riding in the van.

Seven international envoys got a look inside an Iranian nuclear site for a tour before a new round of crucial talks with world powers on its disputed atomic activities. Ambassadors to the U.N. atomic agency from Egypt, Cuba, Syria, Algeria, Venezuela, Oman and the Arab League arrived in Tehran early Saturday and visited the unfinished heavy water reactor near Arak in central Iran, state TV reported.

 Tunisia's caretaker prime minister announced that a new coalition government would be announced Monday that includes members of the country's opposition and some leaders, like himself, from the previous regime, a move that could fill the country's power vacuum and help stabilize the tense North African country. 

The director of former President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali's security force was arrested in the afternoon, and, after nightfall, army special forces battled armed units loyal to the former president that had holed themselves up in the presidential palace on the outskirts of Tunis.

 European tour operators have spent the weekend flying back stranded tourists caught up in the civil unrest. Several European governments have issued travel warnings, and airlines are urging passengers who have booked trips to Tunisia to check flight schedules as they are canceling flights.  

Australia's flood crisis continued to spread with parts of Victoria state in the country's southeast suffering record flooding, forcing the evacuation of 3,000 residents just as a major cleanup operation in flood-ravaged Queensland begins.The flooding in Victoria was largely confined to the northwest of the state, affecting some 13,000 properties and leaving 3,000 people to seek refuge at evacuation centers, while parts of northern New South Wales also were impacted. 