Are some nations more intrinsically fearful than others? A new study identifies "clear geographic patterns" in the distribution of fear in Europe—and to a lesser extent in Asia.

The study drew on six surveys, conducted by various groups between 2000 and 2009, which touched on such subjects as nuclear conflicts and accidents, terrorism, organized crime, medical accidents and avian flu.

In Europe, the Mediterranean nations of Greece, Portugal, Spain, Italy, Cyprus and Malta registered the highest levels of fear, followed by the former communist countries. The Netherlands, Finland and Austria were least fearful. Three in four Portuguese expressed fear of world war, for example, compared with only 28% of Finns. And 82% of Greeks said they were afraid of genetically modified food, compared with 43% of the Dutch. (Controlling for religious tradition, the effect of economic development usually wasn't statistically significant.)

A narrower range of questions was asked in Asia (nothing about nuclear accidents). Asians tended to be more worried about their home and work situations than Europeans, less so about international affairs. 

The most robust determinant of a nation's fear factor was the proportion of citizens who believe in hell. 

 "The Geography of Fear," Daniel Treisman, NBER Working Paper (February)    

Having an unrealistically rosy view of your romantic partner bodes well (at least for three years), a study finds.

Researchers recruited some 200 newlywed couples and asked them how affectionate their partners were—and how confident, extroverted, controlling, complaining, etc. Everyone had to give themselves a rating on these characteristics and to rate their "ideal" partner. They were also asked how happy they were. The exercise was repeated every six months for three years.

The researchers created an "unrealistic idealization" score by measuring how well a spouse's analysis matched the partner's self-description and the spouse's ideal.

The unrealistically positive partners were happier at the start of the study, and their happiness held up better over time. Partners scoring in the top half of unrealistic idealization started with a contentment score of 7, on an 8-point scale. After three years, the score had dropped only to 6.8. The realistic partners began with a 6.75 contentment score, which dropped to 5.75 by the end of the study.

 "Tempting Fate or Inviting Happiness? Unrealistic Idealization Prevents the Decline of Marital Satisfaction," Sandra Murray, Dale Griffin, and four other authors, Psychological Science (forthcoming)   

If there's a genetic component to religious belief, the pro-religion variant is mathematically bound to win out, a study shows, if believers continue to outbreed nonbelievers.

Assume a single "belief" gene that comes with "religious" (R) and "nonreligious" (N) variants, or alleles. And consider a closed sect, representing a tiny 0.5% of the population. No one outside the sect has the R allele, and everyone within it does. (Having R doesn't mean you'd practice religion, though you'd be more likely to.) 

Consider what happens if sect members have a fertility rate triple that of nonmembers, even if 50% of them leave the church. In 20 generations, sect membership would rise to 15% of the population, and plateau. But genetically, at that point, nearly the entire population would possess the religious allele, partly because defectors carry the R allele into the wider population.

The logic holds even if many genes contribute to religious tendencies, the study said.

 "Religion, Fertility, and Genes: A Dual Inheritance Model," Robert Rowthorn, Proceedings of the Royal Society B (forthcoming) 

A map of the eastward march of the planet's "center of economic gravity" shows how fast Asian growth is outpacing the West's, according to a study.

The study's author took gross-domestic-product data since 1980 for 210 nations and averaged those numbers, in each country, across all urban centers with one million or more people as of 2009. Each nation also got a figure for rural agricultural production, which was assigned a geographic location. By using these weighted figures, he identified a spot within the Earth as a figurative center of economic activity (much as a literal center of gravity is the point where the total weight of a body may be said to be concentrated). Then this point was projected onto Earth's surface.

In 1980 economic gravity was centered in the Atlantic Ocean, 900 miles west of Morocco. By 2008, the center had moved nearly 3,000 miles to a spot south of Izmir, Turkey. By 2050, the study projects, the center will be in rural China, 400 miles east of Katmandu.

 "The Global Economy's Shifting Centre of Gravity," Danny Quah, Global Policy (January 

—Read more from Christopher Shea at the Ideas Market Blog, blogs.wsj.com/ideas-market.