PARIS — In the latest twist in an embarrassing corporate-espionage affair at Renault SA, French prosecutors have begun investigating whether the French car company has been the victim of fraud, according to people familiar with the matter. 

As of Sunday night, no individual had been formally named as a target of the probe. However, an investigating magistrate—following a request by prosecutors—was questioning  Dominique Gevrey, an employee in Renault's security department, in order to decide whether to formally investigate him as part of the probe, the people familiar with the matter said. 

Mr. Gevrey couldn't be reached for comment. The Paris prosecutor's office said it would comment on the case on Monday.  Jean Reinhart, a lawyer for Renault, declined to comment. 

Police stopped Mr. Gevrey Friday night as he was about to board an Africa-bound plane at Paris's Charles de Gaulle Airport, and took him in for questioning, the people said. Also on Friday, another Renault security department employee,  Marc Tixador, was taken in for questioning, and on Saturday the security department head,  Rémi Pagnie, was interrogated, the people said.

The men were questioned on how Renault's security department handled €250,000 ($347,453) the company supplied to obtain information during the car company's internal investigation into alleged corporate espionage. Messrs. Tixador and Pagnie were released, and no charges have been pressed against them, the people said. 

Two months ago, Renault claimed that it had been the victim of corporate espionage and fired three executives who worked on its electric-car business. But French prosecutors have so far found no evidence against the three men, and Renault is preparing to exonerate them, according to the people familiar with the matter, in what is shaping up to be an unflattering coda to a case that even the French government had at one point compared to "economic warfare." 

The questioning of the three security managers over the weekend signals that French state prosecutors are shifting the focus of their own investigations to Renault's security department.

In particular, prosecutors are trying to figure out whether someone hatched the plan as a way to defraud the auto maker, the people familiar with the matter said. Renault says the company paid the €250,000 to  Michel Luc, an Algeria-based private investigator whom Renault has alleged was a middleman who helped procure information about secret bank accounts that the three fired Renault managers allegedly held in Switzerland and Liechtenstein. Mr. Luc couldn't be reached for comment despite repeated attempts.

According to Mr. Reinhart, the Renault lawyer, the car company is waiting to hear back from Paris prosecutors about the outcome of their search for the alleged bank accounts before exonerating its former employees. All three have denied taking bribes or holding foreign bank accounts. Police in Switzerland and Liechtenstein haven't found any secret bank accounts connected to the three managers, people familiar with the matter have said. 

According to Mr. Reinhart, in the past Mr. Gevrey has refused to explain who ultimately supplied him with information about the alleged bank accounts. Mr. Tixador, who is Mr. Gevrey's manager, has said he doesn't know who provided the information to Mr. Gevrey, according to Mr. Reinhart. 

Renault's espionage affair traces back to an anonymous letter that was sent to several top Renault managers in August. In it, an anonymous tipster said he had heard  Michel Balthazard, head of the firm's development projects and one of the company's most respected executives, negotiating a bribe. 

By December, Renault claimed it had assembled information pointing to the existence of bank accounts in Switzerland and Liechtenstein. In January, the company dismissed Mr. Balthazard and two colleagues. Soon after, Renault CEO  Carlos Ghosn went on national television to say the company had evidence against them. The three men have professed their innocence,

 Write to  David Gauthier-Villars at David.Gauthier-Villars@wsj.com 