The award for the best airline in the world goes to ... Singapore. And Eithad. And Asiana. And  British Airways, too. The best airport in North America is Portland, Ore., Chicago O'Hare, Detroit and even Atlanta. The best airline in North America is American Airlines. No, make that  Air Canada. Or Continental, Virgin America or Alaska.

The travel world is overbooked with awards these days, with some two dozen organizations around the world giving out annual awards for the "best." Each has different selection criteria, different funding and different judging, so they end up with different results.

What they do have in common: money. Though most award programs say there is no connection between winning and paying, many ask airlines to buy advertising, survey results or tables at banquets, pay licensing fees to use award logos or results, purchase sponsorships or even provide free tickets. So the awards doled out to airlines, airline alliances, hotel companies and credit-card firms have proliferated.

"There's tons of them and there are probably going to be more," said  Francis Gallagher, publisher of Global Traveler Magazine, which has been publishing its own awards for more than 20 years. 

But all these awards make it hard for travelers to objectively compare airline service around the world. Some awards are based on extensive, credible surveys of travelers or readers of travel magazines, while others are based on the ponderings of a panel of experts. Some awards companies charge for opportunities to influence voters or even require payments from travel companies to be included in consideration. "It's hard for consumers to distinguish,'' said  Abby Lunardini, a spokeswoman for Virgin America Airlines.

Virgin America has declined to participate in contests that require up-front payments from airlines, she said. But the start-up airline has won several awards for its service and in-flight entertainment and found the awards help draw new customers. Other airline executives say awards can be crucial in building awareness in the competitive—and confusing—travel industry.

"There is a luster that pays dividends in the marketplace for revenue and in employment, too," said  Gordon Bethune, the chief executive who led the turnaround of Continental Airlines. Mr. Bethune said winning J.D. Power and Associates quality awards and "Best Places to Work" awards became a rallying cry, raising employee morale as well as the caliber of job applicants. 

The awards provide an advertising edge, especially for lesser-know airlines and programs.

"It's an additional cachet," said Michael Blunt, spokesman for the oneworld alliance, that is currently touting its three awards for "best global alliance." 

But some awards aren't exactly free. At the World Travel Awards, one of the biggest of the major worldwide awards, six airlines paid to be sponsors last year: Virgin Atlantic, TAP Portugal, Turkish, Air India, Caribbean and Sky. All won awards, from Virgin Atlantic being named best trans-Atlantic airline and best business-class world-wide to TAP being named best airline to South America. 

Sponsors get the opportunity to woo voters with their own campaign. That means an airline, for example, could have World Travel Awards email its registered users promotional materials in hopes of improving its odds of winning.

"They legitimately campaign to earn more votes," said  Manon Han, executive vice president of World Travel Awards, a private company whose main business is the awards. 

Six to eight award banquets held around the world each year generate much of the company's revenue, Ms. Han said. Lots of winners, nominees and industry executives pay to attend; resorts pay to host the events. 

Last year the company gave out 998 World Travel Awards, ranging from basic categories like leading airline in the world (Eithad) and leading in North America (American) to the obscure, such as awards for the leading hideaway resort in the United Arab Emirates, the Indian Ocean's leading airline (Air Mauritius) and the world's leading ferry website (aferry.com). World Travel Awards said it had 184,000 voters.

SkyTrax, a market-research firm, conducts the most extensive survey of airline satisfaction world-wide, conducting an online survey with travelers that last year counted more than 13 million votes in its World Airline Awards. SkyTrax contacts previous voters and quizzes 95,000 frequent travelers who agreed to be part of a travel advisory panel. Airlines can also encourage their customers to vote. Votes are weighted with the number of passengers each airline carries so that small airlines don't simply get trounced by larger carriers, says Chief Executive  Edward Plaisted.

SkyTrax doesn't allow sponsorship of its awards, doesn't sell advertising and doesn't host glitzy star-studded award ceremonies. "We've resisted entering into the money side of it," said Mr. Plaisted.

But SkyTrax does sell its survey data to airlines, and about 20% buy it. Buying the survey results doesn't skew the award results more favorably, Mr. Plaisted said.

For magazines, awards bring attention to the publication, draw readers and generate advertising. Condé Nast Traveler Magazine recorded 25,916 votes in its annual survey last year, and Travel + Leisure Magazine said it had 16,000 votes. Readers of both thought Singapore Airlines was the best airline in the world last year and Virgin America was best in North America. London-based Panacea Publishing International (best airline in the world: British Airways) has 10 Business Traveller Magazine editions around the world, and seven produce their own awards. 

Global Traveler Magazine, which also toasted Singapore last year and declared that Alitalia had the best cuisine in the sky, had more than 25,000 readers respond to its awards survey. The December awards issue is the best-read issue of the year, says Mr. Gallagher, the publisher.

Advertising in the awards issue is robust as well—the magazine informs winners of their success in the fall and invites them to advertise in the December issue, where awards are unveiled. Buying an ad has no bearing on future awards, he said. The magazine also asks airlines—all carriers, not just winners—to donate tickets to a charity auction held with its awards banquet, but says that has no bearing as well.

"Some choose to [buy ads] and some don't. Most don't, and I wish more did," he said. "A lot of people win who never buy an ad."

Global Traveler doesn't charge fees to winners to tout their award, doesn't charge winners to attend its awards banquet and doesn't allow airlines to sponsor the awards. But to try to rise about the award mosh pit, it does insist that its awards be listed before other surveys in any press releases or ads.

The magazine tries to police ballot-box stuffing airlines by requiring that at least 50% of the survey questions be filled out for a ballot to be counted. 

Travel companies do try to sway results. A group of volunteer mileage junkies last year created the Frequent Traveler Awards as a successor to the Freddie Awards, which honored travel-loyalty programs. The group set up a nonprofit organization and had 996,000 votes cast from "unique" visitors in 200 countries.

But airlines and hotel companies helped drive traffic to the online voting. Marriott scored landslides in some categories after blitzing customers with appeals for votes. Other hotel chains, including Hilton and Starwood, also sent out voting encouragement to customers, but not as aggressively as Marriott, according to the awards' organizer  Tommy Danielsen.

To level the flying field, the group this year plans to put out marketing "recommendations" to competing travel companies. "Even my mom in Norway got three emails from Marriott last year," Mr. Danielsen said. 

 Write to  Scott McCartney at middleseat@wsj.com 