Fox Broadcasting's "American Idol" saw the audience for its Wednesday premiere decline for the fourth consecutive year, as the singing-competition program wrestles with the departure of a key judge and makes changes to its format. 

Approximately 26.2 million people tuned into the kick-off of Season 10, down 13% from a year earlier, according to preliminary Nielsen data provided by Fox. Among younger viewers between the ages of 18 and 49 years old—a group prized by advertisers—the decline was 18% from last year's premiere. 

Fox executives had said they expected declines for the show, which has seen its overall audience slip for the prior four seasons. This year, the show faces a particular handicap: the departure of  Simon Cowell, the often icily critical British judge who had become a central character. 

Wednesday night marked the debut for the revamped judging panel that Fox installed in Mr. Cowell's wake. Singer-actress  Jennifer Lopez and Aerosmith musician  Steven Tyler joined remaining judge  Randy Jackson in the first episode, which focused on auditions in New Jersey. 

"Idol" remained the No. 1 show for the night, followed by ABC's sitcom "Modern Family" among viewers between 18 and 49 years old, and CBS drama "Blue Bloods" among all viewers, according to Nielsen data from the three networks. 

The "Idol" audience grew as the night progressed—from 23.6 million during the half-hour between 8 p.m. and 8:30 p.m. to 27.4 million in the final half-hour from 9:30 p.m. to 10 p.m., according to data Fox provided. The increase from the first half hour to the second half-hour outpaced the overall increase in the number of people using televisions, the data showed. 

Despite the continued declines, a Fox executive described the mood at the network as "a big sigh of relief." Fox, like The Wall Street Journal, is owned by  News Corp. 

Fox has a lot riding on efforts to slow the decline at "Idol." Through last season, it has remained the most-watched regular program on U.S. television and brought in $830 million in advertising revenue last year, according to Kantar Media. 

In an effort to reboot the show, Fox executives and producers have made changes from last season beyond adding judges. They plan to expand "Hollywood Week," where contestants head to Hollywood to perform on stage, and compressed less popular middle rounds of the competition. They also focused in the premiere more contestants who prevailed to next round of competition. In some past seasons, audition rounds have often showcased more try-outs by singers who were rejected, playing for humor. 

At a news conference last week, Ms. Lopez said she is attempting to be supportive of contestants. "We throw them pearls of wisdom when we can," she said. "You'll definitely see us mentoring." 

 Write to  Sam Schechner at sam.schechner@wsj.com. 