WASHINGTON—Rep. Dave Camp, chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, said he wants to begin discussions on rewriting individual and corporate taxes at the same time. 

Obama-administration officials have focused their discussions in recent weeks primarily on tax changes that would affect corporations. 

Mr. Camp (R., Mich.), said Friday that tackling the corporate-tax code alone wouldn't help the growing number of small businesses that are organized as partnerships, sole proprietorships or s-corporations. 

"Tax reform is about getting the economy moving again," he said in a brief interview outside the House floor. "I'd like to begin discussions on both" individual- and corporate-tax changes, Mr. Camp said. 

Businesses organized as so-called pass-throughs aren't subject to the corporate-tax regime and pay taxes at individual rates. Obama administration officials have criticized large businesses that aren't organized as corporations and have weighed proposals to raise more money by bringing such businesses under the corporate-tax code. 

Congress in late 2010 extended Bush-era tax cuts through 2012, taking the pressure off in the short term for lawmakers to permanently set rates for individuals. But that puts the issue on Congress's plate in the run-up to the 2012 elections. 

Republicans are taking a deliberate approach to the tax-overhaul question and are settling in for a long debate. Mr. Camp said he will hold a series of hearings in the Ways and Means Committee this year to examine proposals. 

"It'll be a multiyear process," said Rep. Charles Boustany (R., La.), of the tax-overhaul effort. "You've really got to lay the groundwork." 

Another key question is whether changes to the tax code would result in a net increase in revenue to the government or whether the changes should neither raise nor lower taxes as a whole. 

The deficit-reduction advisory commission, led by former Clinton White House aide Erskine Bowles and former Sen. Alan Simpson (R., Wyo.), last month proposed simplifying the tax code and using $100 billion annually from the new system to pay down the deficit. 

Mr. Camp, who was a member of that commission and didn't endorse its recommendations, said he "would have real concerns" about a tax-code rewrite that increases government revenue overall. 

"But I don't want to lay down markers before we begin," he said. 

 Write to  Martin Vaughan at martin.vaughan@dowjones.com 