BERLIN—German authorities were investigating the cause of a head-on collision late Saturday between a freight and passenger train in northern Germany that killed 10 people and seriously injured more than 20 others.

The regional train was carrying about 50 passengers along a single track through farmland covered with dense fog Saturday night when it collided with a train hauling a load of lime near Magdeburg, about 160 kilometers (100 miles) west of Berlin.

The force of the crash was enough to push the passenger train off the tracks and into a field, federal police and regional authorities said at a news conference Sunday. They warned that many of the surviving passengers' injuries were so severe that the death toll could rise.

"We are still speechless and shocked by the images and the level of destruction," said  Holger Hövelmann, interior minister for the state of Saxony-Anhalt, where the crash occurred.

It was the country's deadliest train accident since 2006, when 23 people died in a collision between a prototype magnetic levitation train and a service train in Elmsland. In 1998, 101 people were killed when a high-speed ICE train derailed near Eschede, south of Hamburg.

Authorities said they were moving quickly to determine what caused the collision, and the governor of Saxony-Anhalt speculated during a visit to the scene that one of the conductors may have driven past a signal light telling that train to stop.

"The investigation is ongoing—into the signal circuitry, into the technical equipment on the trains," said  Ralph Krüger, who is leading the investigation for the federal police.

Among the dead were the conductor and another employee on the passenger train, which is owned by Veolia Verkehr GmbH, a private company that runs a network of regional routes throughout Germany. The conductor of the freight train, owned by a subsidiary of Salzgitter AG, one of Europe's largest steel producers, survived with minor injuries but was being treated for shock and hadn't spoken to authorities about the accident on Sunday afternoon.

In a statement, Chancellor Angela Merkel thanked the hundreds of rescue workers who converged at the crash site and said she hoped the accident would be explained soon. "My thoughts are with the families of the victims," Ms. Merkel said.

 Write to  Patrick McGroarty at patrick.mcgroarty@dowjones.com 