The proposed merger between Singapore Exchange Ltd. (SGX) and ASX Ltd., Sydney's exchange, has traveled a rocky road since the deal was announced in October, and now the going is getting tougher. Domestic newspapers were rife this weekend with reports that Treasurer Wayne Swan is set to kill the deal during the national security review process, a claim he promptly denied. As entertaining as it is, this kerfuffle misses the broader point that Mr. Swan and Prime Minister Julia Gillard are failing a significant economic policy test.

The biggest test will not be in the national security review that was the subject of this weekend's stir, although Mr. Swan could certainly fail there too. He and Ms. Gillard have been appropriately mum about their views on whether the merger raises security concerns—it would be unseemly for them to comment too soon—but they need to offer a compelling reason if they do kill the deal on those grounds. 

The more pressing question is the statutory 15% cap on any single ownership stake in ASX, which is more likely to scuttle the SGX takeover attempt. The exchanges need Australia's parliament to lift the cap, and on this issue—on which, as a policy matter, Ms. Gillard and Mr. Swan definitely should be willing to state an opinion—the government has been as quiet as a trading floor on a Sunday. 

The right answer would be to lift the ownership cap and let the market sort out the best way to structure ownership of ASX (subject to a reasonable, transparent security review, if Canberra really must). That would signal that Australia remains committed to the free market principles that have spurred its economic success over the past three decades. Canberra could simultaneously open the exchange marketplace to greater competition. Regulators started that process in 2009 by lifting ASX's monopoly on share trading, but they have yet to license any of the several applicants who have sought permission to operate competing exchanges.

Ms. Gillard professes to understand the general principle involved, having said that "An open economy has been in Australia's interest." So the failure by her and Mr. Swan to more aggressively support lifting the ownership cap to open the economy further is puzzling.

She may feel politically constrained as the head of a minority government beholden to a small band of Greens and independents. But that's all the more reason to mount an aggressive persuasion campaign. Equally disappointing is the reaction—ranging from silence to outright hostility—from members of the ostensibly more free market opposition.

None of this relates to the business merits of the deal, which the market ultimately will decide (the jury is still out on other cross-border mergers of recent years). But it's up to Australian politicians to give the market a chance. 