SYDNEY—Australia's central bank left interest rates on hold Tuesday, as economists predicted, but it also signaled that a policy tightening isn't too far off as inflation looks set to rise further. 

The Reserve Bank of Australia left its cash rate at 4.75%, where it has remained since November 2010. 

RBA Governor Glenn Stevens said in a statement a mildly restrictive stance of monetary policy "remains appropriate" for now, but he also warned that inflation will rise, even in the face of an Australian dollar at 29-year highs. 

Core inflation has reached a low point for the current economic cycle, Mr. Stevens said. "Recent information suggests that the marked decline in underlying inflation from the peak in 2008 has now run its course." 

Rate changes since 2004 in dozens of countries.

"While the rising exchange rate will be helping to hold down prices for some consumer products over the coming few quarters, over the longer-term inflation can be expected to increase somewhat," he added.

The remarks follow the release last week of first-quarter inflation data that came in higher than market expectations. Consumer prices rose 3.3% on year, above 2%-3% inflation target that underpins RBA policy decisions. 

"The RBA are getting ever closer to resuming their tightening policy given their commentary on core inflation clearly troughing," said Michael Blythe, chief economist at Commonwealth Bank of Australia. 

The RBA raised interest rates seven times since late 2009, setting the bank well apart from many of its international counterparts still holding rates close to zero. 

The Australian dollar was marginally weaker after the RBA's announcement. At 0455 GMT, it was trading at US$1.0906, down from US$1.0915 just prior. 

Record commodity prices are driving solid growth in Australia's A$1.3 trillion economy, fueling a record investment boom in the mining sector, and with the focus on coal, iron ore and liquefied natural gas. 

Many economists expect the boom, which is being driven by China's expansion, to underpin strength in the economy for years, potentially decades, to come. 

Still, the RBA could wait until the second half of the year before raising interest rates, say some economists. 

The RBA has clearly elevated its warning on future rate moves, "but it's not exactly flashing red" just yet, said Citi economist Paul Brennan. 

Brian Redican, senior economist at Macquarie Bank, said another interest rate rise is likely within months, but the RBA "wasn't the fire-breathing central bank that most people expected." 

—Enda Curran and Geoffrey Rogow contributed to this article.

 Write to  James Glynn at james.glynn@dowjones.com 