The spontaneous gathering at the World Trade Center site in the hours after Navy SEALs killed Osama bin Laden was a vivid reminder of how much this city and country needs a place to go for Sept. 11 catharsis.

But New Yorkers shouldn't get their hopes up that the Sept. 11 Memorial set to open on the 10th anniversary of the terrorist attacks will provide an experience conducive to peaceful reflection. Initially, the frustrating process of accessing the site will inevitably detract from the power of the Michael Arad-designed Memorial.

The fault lies not with the design but with the construction delays that have for a decade plagued the rebuilding effort.

 As a result, the Memorial is opening in the middle of a construction site, and is subject to all the attendant safety and security constraints.

In the future, visitors will theoretically be able to go to the site when the mood strikes, much as they visit the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington D.C. But for now and the next few years, accessing the Sept. 11 Memorial will entail a laborious process requiring the reservation of tickets ahead of time, and then, on the appointed date, wending through a downtown obstacle course involving two outdoor ticket screening points and a security checkpoint inside 90 West St.

Indeed, at this point, officials at the Memorial foundation won't even say how many people they think will be able to visit the site when it first opens. All they have said is that the Memorial can host only 1,500 visitors at once, because the surrounding streets are blocked by construction.

But they won't say how many tickets will be issued per day initially. "It doesn't help anybody to release that right now," says Joe Daniels, president of the National September 11 Memorial & Museum.

Mr. Daniels says that initially the number of tickets issued will be less than the Memorial's capacity so that officials can study how long average visitors stay. The shorter the stay the more tickets they'll be able to issue per day. 

Mr. Daniels acknowledges there's a chance that the Memorial won't be able to accommodate all of the demand the first year. The Memorial Foundation estimates that 4.3 million people per year will want to visit the Memorial. While this is theoretically possible if demand is spread out, it will be more difficult to get tickets for peak hours, like on weekends.

"The good news is that the Memorial is not going anywhere," Mr. Daniels says.

The other good news is that even a suboptimal visiting experience is better than nothing. We've needed this Memorial for a long time and certainly can't wait for 2013 or 2014, when Mr. Daniels estimates the interim period will end.

"It's the positive outgrowth of the fact that all the stakeholders prioritized the opening for the 10th anniversary," he says. "The flip side is that construction is all going on. The flip side [of that] is people visiting will really have a unique perspective—seeing the tallest skyscraper in America being built."