I knew why my brother James was calling even before he started yodeling. When he finished, he issued the dread proclamation I'd heard many times before: "You're going." He was referring, of course, to the opera and in this case to last Thursday night's premiere of Wagner's "Die Walküre."

I'm aware I run the risk of offending a significant portion of the population by stating that I hate opera. What makes it even worse is that I know people would kill for the tickets. My brother told me that it was going to be a big deal – starring Bryn Terfel as Wotan, Deborah Voigt as Brünnhilde, and with James Levine conducting. 

"How long is it?" I demanded.

"Five hours," he answered.

"Forget it," I said.

We eventually reached a compromise: I'd occupy the seat for the first act. After that all bets were off.

I've been going to the opera, involuntarily, since I was approximately 16 years old. I got into this fix because I'm a good son. My mother loves opera and my father refused to accompany her from the day she got her subscription. As the oldest son I was next in line. So after a full day of school, and probably basketball practice, and with homework yet to do, I'd have to sit through several hours of ear-splitting music. The torture eventually became so great that I started bringing a transistor radio, and an earplug, to listen to Yankee games.

One may wonder: If your mother loves opera and your brother does also, why don't they go together and leave you out of it? They sometimes do. But my mother isn't as young as she once was and sometimes can't get it together to go out at night. The problem is that she has every intention of attending up to the last minute, which is why I receive these 11th-hour calls. I'd hate to see the tickets go to waste especially because—and opera fans who don't already hate me can start now—we have great seats. 

I don't want to give the exact location for fear some rabid Puccini or Verdi fan forced to stand in those ignominious docks at the rear of the house will march down the aisle and start to harangue me. Even if the whole family hated opera we couldn't give the seats up. They're that good.

Mind you things aren't as bad as they once were. These days some of the sexy young heroines are actually young and sexy. I'd toss out names except I can't remember what I've seen as soon as it's over. However, the greatest innovation is the subtitles. I finally understand, basically, what's happening. That's my biggest complaint about opera. Can't anyone sing clearly, even if it has to be in French or Italian? Or better yet just say the lines. Not all of them. Just some. 

Why must everything be sung? I know I sound like a philistine, I am a philistine, but think about it—go to a Broadway musical and there's dialogue. No one feels the need to set every last word and emotion to music. That's my other problem with opera—it's so over the top. Must love always be doomed? Must the heroine always be attracted to some guy in Act I who's got trouble written all over him, and commit suicide in act three? 

Despite the allure of the new generation of divas and the explanatory subtitles (I'm loath to admit it but I do occasionally enjoy opera, just so the opera is "Carmen") one obstacle I haven't managed to surmount is the urge to sleep, usually about halfway through Act I. I admire those who do so without attracting attention (by causal observation approximately a quarter of the house.) That's not me. I try arduously to stay awake because I know what will happen if I fail: My entire body will jerk involuntarily, as if to prevent itself from going into free-fall, and in the process sending shock waves along the entire row.

And if falling asleep is your greatest fear, then Wagner, with his marathon operas, constitutes Armageddon. But I'm aware he has passionate fans. I know people who go to Bayreuth every summer the way others visit Rome or Paris, to be immersed in Wagner for days on end.

Part of the reason I agreed to accompany my brother is that I'd like to be a better person. I want to be educated. I'm not utterly impervious to improvement. And to show my heart was in the right place I even tried to take a nap beforehand and then drank a double espresso. 

It didn't help. It also made no difference that the opera started at 6:30 p.m., well before my bedtime. I didn't pass out once during the hourlong first act; I did so twice—the second time one of those mortifying, seat-rocking moments where your head snaps backwards, accompanied by a loud snort.

As painful as the first act (my favorite part was the versatile set, composed of moving planks which turned into trees or promontories as the plot required), I agreed to stick out the second act, if only because 7:35 p.m., when Act I ended, seemed rather early to call it a night. Besides, my brother, a critic who often writes for this publication, told me the music improved in Act II.

The experience was not without its rewards. Wagner understands sexual tension. And it doesn't get much heavier than the scene where the unhappy Sieglinde stumbles upon the handsome young wounded warrior Siegmund (did i mention they're long lost twins?) their mutual attraction obvious to anyone, especially to Sieglinde's vengeful husband Hunding. 

Wagner also had quite the imagination, Act II occurring among the gods who control the destinies of the mortals in Act I. Imagine Harry Potter for grown-ups. Yet even the gods can't escape their fates. Any overmatched husband who has ever wrangled with his wife will recognize that submission is the only rational course in Wotan's struggle against the persuasive and insistent Fricka, the goddess of marriage.

But must it all go on until 11:40 at night? "I enjoyed it," my brother said during the Act II intermission, while conceding, "but if it's not your bag it could be quite painful." 

By the time Act III started and Brünnhilde, Wotan's daughter in full body armor, and her eight warrior sisters had gathered on their mountaintop, I was at home in my pajamas watching "The Daily Show." My devout wish is that someone more worthy than me, sitting in the nosebleed section, spotted the open seat before the curtain went up and grabbed it.

— ralph.gardner@wsj.com 