So much for the optimism of a few weeks ago.

The turmoil of the past 10 days has wiped out nearly all the stock market's gains for the year and left many indexes in the red.

The big news, of course, was the sudden nuclear crisis in Japan, following the devastating earthquake and tsunami of the previous week. But share prices had already been sliding since mid-February -- the Dow Jones Industrial Average tumbled more than 200 points the day before the Japanese earthquake -- amid rising concerns about fuel prices, raw-materials costs and escalating turmoil in the Middle East.

In the end, investors were feeling glad to end last week with a modest rally. Markets were helped by some hopeful news from the stricken Fukushima Daiichi power plant, a few positive signs on the U.S. economy, and by news that the G-7 group of leading countries planned to coordinate action to restrain the sudden, damaging spike in the yen.

The Dow gained 0.7% on Friday, following a 2.7% rally in Tokyo's Nikkei average. Over all, the Dow lost 1.5% for the week but remains up almost 2.5% year to date. The Nasdaq Composite lost 2.7% last week and is now virtually flat for the year.

Overseas markets have done no better. And investors in emerging markets -- last fall's "sure thing" -- are in the red for the year.

The financial turmoil in Tokyo, naturally, was sharpest. The main Nikkei 225-stock average has lost 12% since the disaster struck. Small-company stocks have crashed. The Bank of Japan was forced to pump record amounts of liquidity into the financial system to prevent a collapse.

In the end, what threatened financial markets most of all last week was the one thing they fear above all else: uncertainty. That's what causes investors to flee in panic -- and keeps others from stepping in to buy.

No one had any financial models for the effects of a possible nuclear disaster on the world's third biggest economy. By Wednesday, some were wondering what the "doomsday scenarios" might look like for the financial system -- and what their exposure might be. There was brisk buying of put options on the Japanese and other stock-market indexes. Put options are a type of insurance against a collapse.

(Yet in a sign of remarkable gumption on Main Street, U.S. investors responded to the crisis by pouring record amounts into exchange-traded funds that track the Japanese stock market, sending their prices leaping.)

What's ahead for markets now? While the exchanges ended the week on a positive note, by the time traders went home for the weekend the situation at Fukushima Daiichi remained deeply uncertain.

Japanese authorities were actually escalating their own assessment of the problems. Japan's nuclear safety agency raised the severity of the crisis to a 5 on the international scale -- the same level as the Three Mile Island disaster in Pennsylvania in 1979. Any deterioration over the weekend will doubtless rattle nerves when markets reopen on Monday.

Meanwhile, the economic disruption caused by the latest events are still mounting. Japanese institutions need to bring money home to deal with the costs of the crisis. And that sent the yen soaring on currency markets last week -- raising a new headache for the country's big exporters.

Japan has lost crucial parts of its energy supply as nuclear reactors have been taken offline. Major corporations, including  Honda Motor,
HMC


0.75
%




 Toyota Motor, Nissan Motor,  Sony, Panasonic and  Toshiba,
TOSYY


-2.04
%




 announced they were temporarily suspending operations at some factories.

And Japan's woes are disrupting supply chains overseas.  General Motors
GM


-0.98
%




 said Thursday it was halting production at a pickup plant in Shreveport, La., because of a shortage of parts from Japan.

Meanwhile, the upheaval in the Middle East continues. The United Nations authorized military action and a no-fly zone in Libya, in response to the country's civil war. Colonel Moammar Gadhafi's regime responded by agreeing to a ceasefire with rebels. (Later, the government was reported to be renewing attacks.)

Elsewhere the Arabian states of Bahrain and Yemen have been rocked by unrest. Most ominously, the repressive autocracy in Saudi Arabia, the cornerstone of the world's energy supply, resorted to the use of rubber bullets recently to suppress riots.

The debts of European countries such as Greece and Portugal remain a matter of concern. Over all, the potential for yet more uncertainty in the financial system remains high. No wonder some are wondering whether the Federal Reserve may respond to the recent turmoil with "QE 3" -- a third round of "quantitative easing," or bond purchases, to stimulate activity.

All the while, inflation has become a mounting concern for the world's economies. Costs of fuel, food and other raw materials have been rising. The Department of Labor last week reported that the inflation rate had jumped to 2.1% in February, twice the level seen six months ago.

Yet there also are some grounds for optimism. The world's economies continue to heal, albeit slowly, from the effects of the financial crisis. Many of the disruptions caused by Japan's troubles are likely to be short-term. One factory's lost output will prove another's extra shift. Japanese spending on rebuilding may prove stimulative to its economy. Most important of all, the selloff on markets means stocks are cheaper than they were a few weeks ago.

There are always risks in the economy. But investors are getting paid a bit more for taking them.

 Write to  Brett Arends at brett.arends@wsj.com 