 Paris 

Here's a T-shirt you probably don't have yet: a mink tee. Made from strips of fur hand-sewn on a fine cashmere knit, this Brunello Cucinelli shirt is one of many pieces on the runways in Europe and New York that signaled luxury is back.

Both the lifestyle and the luxury business are in recovery. Bain Capital predicts the industry will grow roughly 5% this year to as much as €176 billion, or $245 billion. 

Certainly, these were the most dramatic, newsy fashion weeks in recent memory.  John Galliano lost his job at Dior, and luxury conglomerate LVMH agreed to buy  Bulgari—even as it continued to press for a takeover of Hermès, which announced that its earnings rose 46% last year. 

Even as the luxury industry is looking like one to watch in coming months, fashions for this fall are richer and dressier. British-gentry tweeds, luxe furs and leather all walked the runways in the past few weeks. 



There were other hints of what's to come in fashion. We'll be wearing longer skirts this fall—knee-length or below—and lots of pleats. Also, this is the season to bring out your black leather. 

Not every garment in the shows will have legs (see "poonts," below). But stores are placing bets on many of the runway looks, and versions of them will begin arriving in stores in August. Here are some of the most notable looks and moments of a dramatic season.

 ALEXANDER MCQUEEN (Paris): The latest collection by designer Sarah Burton cements her position at the head of modern fashion design. Little more than a year ago, she worked behind the scenes as Lee Alexander McQueen's assistant. Now, she is showing that she has the chops to sustain the brand—and its sensational powerful-woman aesthetic. 



 BOTTEGA VENETA (Milan): The latest collection by  Tomas Maier was still being discussed a week later. This dress in particular offered haunting layering and a graceful drape. What's more, it can do double duty, shifting from day into night.



 HERMÈS (Paris): Pant-boots. Poonts? The fact that there is no sensible name for this garment suggests that it shouldn't be worn. The poonts—for lack of a better word—were fashioned of the creamiest leather. But Hermès clients, known as women of good taste, probably don't want to field the questions these items raise.



 THEYSKENS' THEORY (New York): Last time we heard from Olivier Theyskens, the designer had lost two jobs in a row. The retail buzz was that he was too much of an artist, and his clothes didn't fit well enough to sell strongly. His team-up with Theory proves that theory wrong. The line managed to be art and wearable at the same time.



 LOUIS VUITTON (Paris): French maids in uniform greeted 1,300 guests with waving feather dusters. Models emerged one at a time from old-fashioned elevators in the massive tent: Chauffeurs, footmen, parlor maids and various fetish characters were represented by 85 leggy models, ending with a cigarette-puffing Kate Moss. Oh, and the clothes were great, too.



 CHRISTIAN DIOR (Paris): When designer  John Galliano was caught on video slurring "I love Hitler," Dior executives dismissed him. CEO  Sidney Toledano personally opened the runway show with remarks condemning racism. At the end, dozens of white-frocked "petites mains"—the craftspeople who sewed the collection—appeared onstage. Fashion hasn't been this excited about Dior in decades.



 SALVATORE FERRAGAMO (Milan): You probably thought this was a shoe brand. But since Massimiliano Giornetti took over designing its womenswear last year, the clothes have been well worth seeing. This collection is not to be missed. It's for female power brokers who favor pinstripes and houndstooth.



   BILLY REID (New York): The designer lives in the southern U.S. and isn't a fashion-crowd gadabout. Perhaps it helps: His clothes are fashionable without the fashion shenanigans, such as short pants and polka dots, that frighten men. 



 BALMAIN (Paris): After the last Balmain model disappeared backstage at the Grand Hotel in Paris, audience members waited. And waited. When designer  Christophe Decarnin, above, failed to emerge, rumors blazed. The brand said Mr. Decarnin had stayed away on doctor's orders, but the episode tarnished a brand that was as hot as can be just a few seasons ago.



 JIL SANDER (Milan): A recipe for stylish comfort: Take one pair of high-grade black stirrup pants, add a bright sweater, yank on chic boots, and off you go. 

 Write to  Christina Binkley at christina.binkley@wsj.com 