LONDON—The U.K.'s preparations for the wedding of Prince William and Kate Middleton are proceeding quite nicely. The ceremony will take place in Westminster Abbey. A lavish reception is planned for Buckingham Palace.

But there's a problem: clearing a stubborn group of protesting squatters from a public square across the street from the church. Some have been a fixture there for years. And they are deeply disinclined to vacate for a mere royal wedding. 

Parliament Square, a small grassy park also overlooked by the Houses of Parliament, is a popular site for protesters against everything from student fees to the Sri Lankan civil war.

With many people around the world taking an interest in the April 29 nuptials, authorities are eager to conclude a multiyear effort to clear camps of longstanding protesters they view as an eyesore. Even Prime Minister David Cameron has championed the cause, telling parliament he wants "this problem sorted out" before the wedding.

But things haven't been looking good for the government. On Jan. 17, the local Westminster City Council distributed notices warning campaigners they had until 5 p.m. Friday to leave or face a possible £1,000 ($1,578) fine. 

When Big Ben chimed five bells across the road, however, the protesters stayed put. About a dozen campaigners milled about in the cold surrounded by banners, tents and sheds. 

"I'm ready," said a 62-year-old man who is protesting the regime in Iran. "We're all ready." The public is not trying to run his group off, he says, it brings the protesters hot coffee and food. 

Local government officials plan in coming days to initiate a court fight that may be their last, best chance to prevail before Prince William's happy day. 

"We feel this has gone too far," says Colin Barrow, leader of Westminster City council. He's not opposed to demonstrators, he says. It's the tents and other structures he doesn't like. 

A decade-long encampment "is so far removed from the concept of reasonable protest that it is time to move these people on and reclaim the streets of a very, very beautiful part of town," says Mr. Barrow.

The saga dates to June 2001, when peace campaigner Brian Haw put up a tent to protest sanctions on Iraq.

Mr. Haw, 62, has spent most nights there since. Over the years, he and his associates have been joined by other groups espousing causes. They typically are camped in tents and equipped with placards and loudspeakers.

Even acts of Parliament have failed to clear the park. A 2005 law banned unauthorized demonstrations in the area, following complaints from politicians about megaphone noise. But Mr. Haw obtained police permission to continue to demonstrate, though local government officials say that doesn't allow him to have tents.

Last May saw a surge of new campaigners espousing causes including the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq as well as environmental and other issues. The encampment grew to about 40 tents, scaffolding and straw-bale toilets.

London Mayor Boris Johnson, who manages the grass square on behalf of its owner, the Queen, sprang into action. He secured a possession order from the High Court to evict the campers for trespassing, a decision that was upheld in the Court of Appeal.

In the early hours of July 20, dozens of uniformed court bailiffs, backed by police, swooped into the square. One woman chained herself to scaffolding with a bicycle lock. Other protesters staged sit-down demonstrations. 

Bailiffs cleared the square, which Mr. Johnson then had sealed off with seven-foot-high metal barriers that remain in place today. His office estimates the effort has cost hundreds of thousands of pounds, including legal costs and a £50,000 clean-up effort to remove garbage and feces and to replant grass and flower beds. Taxpayers, not the queen, pay for that.

But the protesters stayed in the game. The court of appeal made an exception for Mr. Haw, partly because he has been protesting so long, allowing him to continue to camp while his case is reviewed by the high court. The barriers around the grass square currently leave a small patch for five tents belonging to Mr. Haw and his associates. 

Meanwhile, other protesters redeployed to the adjacent pavement, which technically doesn't fall under Mr. Johnson's order, but rather the Westminster City Council. Hoping to close that loophole, the government last November proposed to outlaw tents in and around the square. But the law is unlikely to be passed in time for the big wedding. 

The remaining protesters argue that it is the government acting illegally. Among them is Barbara Tucker, who has camped alongside Mr. Haw since 2005.

"We haven't done anything wrong," said Ms. Tucker, a mother of two adult sons, wearing a multicolored parka and woolly hat. "It's just bullying," she added, before sticking antiwar posters on the metal fence.

Mr. Haw, who is being treated for cancer, couldn't be reached and his lawyer didn't respond to requests for comment. 

With the wedding clock ticking, the Westminster City Council is making a final push through the courts. A similar attempt by the council in 2002 failed after the court ruled that evicting the protesters would be an unreasonable breach of their human rights. 

So last week, the council geared up to try again with its widely ignored letter to protesters explaining that under a 1980s law one can't "willfully obstruct" a public sidewalk. The letter was a prelude to the injunction battle that is due to get under way this week. 

Ms. Tucker, it turns out, is no stranger to royal weddings. As a girl, she stood on a nearby street to catch a glimpse of Princess Diana on the day of her 1981 marriage to Prince Charles. This time around, she'll be broadcasting an antiwar message. 

"It's business as usual for us," she said. "On the day of the royal wedding, the war will continue. There will still be suffering and dying. We can't forget that just because there's a royal wedding."

 Write to  Cassell Bryan-Low at cassell.bryan-low@wsj.com 