  Madelyn Biggs wants to help make New York City feel like home for women coming here from around the world. 

The octogenarian is planning to give about $1 million to the Salvation Army of Greater New York, through a bequest, to create an endowment fund for the Markle Evangeline Residence for Women in Greenwich Village. 

"The bulk of the money would come from the sale of my classic Upper West Side co-op apartment, which I hope would approach the $1 million mark," Ms. Biggs says. "Maybe it would be even more. That would be wonderful, but who knows." 

The 17-story residence was created in the late 1920s when the Salvation Army's Commander, Evangeline Booth, realized that young working women in New York City needed a safe place to call home. Mining magnate and friend  John Markle donated $500,000 in memory of his late wife, Mary, to build the nearly 300-room residence hall on 13th Street. 

In 1941, at age 17, Ms. Biggs left her Pennsylvania home to attend art school. Looking for a safe place to live, she stayed at the Markle Evangeline for four years. During her time there, she volunteered with other residents to help servicemen coming home from World War II. 

"I feel so indebted to the Salvation Army for those wonderful years of feeling so safe and comfortable in such a caring, loving environment," she says. "There is no other place like it left for women in the city." 

Today, women ages 18 to 50 come from all over the world to stay in the residence's 199 rooms. 

But to keep it viable, Ms. Biggs is asking former residents and other supporters to add to her endowment and help fund the costs to upgrade the residence. 

"I never expected to live this long, but here I am and I'm hoping to do some good before I pass," she says. 

The Salvation Army is looking to add new furniture and carpeting, computer-lab equipment, art work and decorations for the walls, and to renovate the lounge area and library. It also wants to raise enough money to support the residence so it doesn't have to divert other charitable funds for the building's upkeep. 

"The cost of real estate in the New York area, coupled with the needs of people and dollars that are available, are critical reasons we have to move forward in endowing this residence," says Lt. Col. Guy Klemanski of the Salvation Army's Greater New York division. "We are encouraging people who called the residence home over the past 80 years to come forward." 

 Write to  Shelly Banjo at shelly.banjo@wsj.com 