MUMBAI -- India will open its gates for foreign investors to invest in equity schemes of domestic mutual funds, the finance minister said Monday in his federal annual budget speech, in a step to liberalize the portfolio investment route.

"It has been decided to permit SEBI-registered mutual funds to accept subscriptions from foreign investors who meet the 'Know Your Customer' requirements for equity schemes,"  Pranab Mukherjee told lawmakers in parliament in the capital city of New Delhi.

"This [move] would enable Indian mutual funds to have direct access to foreign investors and widen the class of foreign investors in the Indian equity market," he said.

Only foreign funds and sub-accounts registered with the Securities and Exchange Board of India, or SEBI, and non-resident Indians are currently allowed to invest in local mutual fund schemes. Indian mutual funds aren't sold abroad.

But tight regulations have limited inflows into local debt and equity schemes, causing turbulence in the last year for Indian mutual funds. Asset managers in India welcomed the move to broaden the investor base.

"To be able to broad base this service it must be possible to passport our schemes, but this is a first step to opening up of a new and exciting opportunity," said Krishnamurthy Vijayan, managing director and chief executive of IDBI Asset Management Ltd.

Inflows into equity funds slowed when the capital market regulator decided to scrap the entry load--or the service money investors pay to buy units--on funds from August 1, 2009, in a bid to make such investments cheaper for retail investors and raise mutual fund penetration.

Asset management companies used to spend a major portion of the money they collected as entry fees from investors to pay commissions to their distributors. But distributors lost the incentive to sell funds once the entry load was scrapped.

Last February, SEBI directed mutual funds to mark-to-market debt and money-market securities with a maturity of up to 91 days, effective from July 1, 2010, effectively increasing volatility. Fund managers have said this directive could discourage banks and corporates from investing in short-term debt funds.

 Write to  John Satish Kumar at john.kumar@dowjones.com 