When should a small-business owner promote an employee?

New data released Wednesday from networking website LinkedIn.com suggest that U.S. employers in general tend to advance workers most often during the months of January, June and July. The findings are based on information listed in the profiles of its more than 90 million members world-wide between January 1990 and December 2010. 

  Peter Cappelli, a management professor at the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School, says the data likely reflect times when many companies see business slow down or their fiscal year comes to an end. That's when "a lot of restructuring decisions get made, which creates turnover and openings," he says.

But unlike their larger counterparts, small businesses generally don't need to make such judgment calls at a specific time of year to satisfy stock holders, union leaders or other regulators. They also generally don't need to do as much reshuffling of their workforces on an annual basis since their career ladders tend to have fewer rungs. 

For the typical small-business owner, what's most important in deciding when to promote an employee is whether the company needs – and can afford – to make the investment, says  Tim Irwin, an organizational psychologist in Atlanta, and author of "Derailed: Five Lessons Learned from Catastrophic Failures of Leadership." And naturally, he adds, it's also critical to make sure the person in mind is qualified to take on the new responsibilities that a promotion commonly entails.

  John Jordan, owner of Jordan Vineyard & Winery in Healdsburg, Calif., says he found himself in this position nine months ago. He had stopped paying for an outside marketing agency to save money, which resulted in a need—plus sufficient funds—to build a less costly in-house team instead. A receptionist eager to move up at the 100-employee company demonstrated she could produce and edit videos for promoting the company on social-media outlets like Facebook and YouTube, and he gave her the job. "She had extraordinary film-editing skills and I had a need to fulfill," he says. 

When promoting star employees to management roles, don't forget to provide training, something small companies often skimp on, Dr. Irwin says. "Don't take your best person and automatically promote them because of that," he says. "Either equip them to be a manager or bring someone else in" to fill a management vacancy.

If an owner can't afford to promote a top performer into a higher-paying position, there are other ways to compensate him or her, says Mr. Cappelli, such as by offering the opportunity to lead a project or take on new responsibilities. 

Another option: Inflate the employee's job title. "People actually like titles," says Mr. Cappelli. "They can show off to their friends."

  Jose Costa, owner of branding and marketing agency Costa IMC, says he does all the above, plus offers extra paid time off, if he can't afford to give a pay bump. "You can see their confidence levels go up," he says. "They feel more in power."

Still, Mr. Costa acknowledges that the strategy is limiting for a small business like his, which has 12 full-time employees at its Miami headquarters, plus about 225 spread throughout its five other offices world-wide. "You don't want to give away titles and have a lot of chiefs and no Indians," he says, adding "the love affair with the title fades after three or four months."

Mr. Costa's solution: to remind employees that their odds of landing a promotion hinge on the success of the company. "It serves as a motivator," he says. "If the company's doing well, they're going to be compensated."

 Write to  Sarah E. Needleman at sarah.needleman@wsj.com 