 Investors   Ron Conway and  Yuri Milner agreed to a deal with  Paul Graham, head of the incubator Y Combinator, to provide about $6.5 million in funding to its current class of entrepreneurs, but the parties didn't sign a document. An April 19 front-page article on Silicon Valley start-up companies incorrectly said the men signed a deal.

 The head of the Mississippi River Commission will decide no sooner than this weekend whether to blow up a Missouri levee to activate an emergency floodway and ease expected record floods at the confluence of the Mississippi and Ohio rivers. A U.S. News article Thursday incorrectly said officials had already decided to blow up the levee should floodwaters continue to rise.

 A chart with an April 23 Weekend Investor article on  Fidelity Magellan Fund plotted the cumulative weekly performance of the fund's shares since the beginning of 1991. Information with the chart failed to make clear how the performance was being measured.

   Andrew Exum  is a fellow at the Center for a New American Security. A U.S. News article Thursday on Lt. Gen. John Allen being picked to lead the Afghanistan war effort incorrectly said he was affiliated with the New America Foundation.

   David S. Cohen , acting U.S. Treasury undersecretary for terrorism and financial intelligence, said he was unaware of an Indian proposal to route oil trade financing through Turkey when asked to comment Wednesday. A World News article Thursday on the Indian proposal incorrectly implied Mr. Cohen had commented directly on the deal, when he said Turkish cooperation was critical to the success of sanctions aimed at pressuring Iran. The article also misstated Mr. Cohen's title as acting U.S. undersecretary of state for terrorism and financial intelligence.

 The San Diego Chargers selected quarterback Ryan Leaf in the 1998 NFL draft after the Indianapolis Colts had picked Peyton Manning. A Thursday article in Sports incorrectly said the Chargers took Mr. Leaf instead of Mr. Manning.

 During coronary-artery bypass surgery, surgeons often use a section of a vein taken from the leg to reroute blood around a blocked coronary artery. One end of the vein is sewn or grafted onto the aorta and the other to a segment of a coronary artery below the blockage. A diagram accompanying an article about bypass surgery in Personal Journal on April 5 incorrectly depicted the vein as being grafted to other vessels.