 Libyan rebel forces consolidated their westernmost positions in the oil refinery town of Brega, a day after they successfully repulsed an offensive by forces loyal to Col. Moammar Gadhafi. 

Gadhafi's fighter jets reportedly dropped bombs on or near the city early in the morning, according to residents, but it wasn't clear what had been hit. 

Meanwhile, near the western rebel-held city of Zawiya, a heavy government military presence could be seen. A group of armed antigovernment protesters remain holed up inside the important oil city.

U.S. President Barack Obama said Gadhafi should "step down from power and leave." In response to a question about where he stood on U.S. military intervention, Obama said he instructed the Defense Department to examine a full range of options. "I don't want us hamstrung," he said. 

 Middle Eastern oil wealth is no stranger to funding splashy deals, but Libya has only recently emerged as a significant player in global markets. With the government of Gadhafi in turmoil, the country's assets in banks, funds and real estate have counterparties around the world scrambling to grasp the implications of asset freezes and sanctions. 

Unrest in Libya is starting to affect Europe's oil supplies, although no member country of the International Energy Agency has requested permission to release strategic oil stocks, IEA Executive Director Nobuo Tanaka said.

 Egypt's Prime Minister Ahmed Shafiq resigned and was replaced by U.S.-educated former transport minister Essam Sharaf, a move that met a major remaining demand of the protest movement that toppled Egypt's former President Hosni Mubarak.  

 World food prices rose 2.2% in February from the previous month to a record peak, the United Nations' food body said, as it warned that volatility in oil markets could push prices even higher.  

 European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet signaled the bank will likely raise interest rates next month for the first time in almost three years. 

The euro-zone economy grew at a steady, albeit modest, rate in the final quarter of last year as export and household consumption growth was offset by a slump in new investment and a slowdown in government expenditure, official data showed.

Separately, retail sales in the 17 countries that use the euro rose for the first time in 10 months in January, boosted by sales of nonfood products. 

 European airlines and regulators plan next month to test a new regional emergency-response system intended to help reduce air-traffic disruptions from volcanic ash. 

The European Union's second-highest court upheld a €397 million ($551 million) fine levied against German conglomerate Siemens for having operated a cartel in gas-insulated switch-gear, but reduced penalties imposed on Siemens's Austria subsidiaries and on French power-generation firm Alstom and nuclear giant Areva. 

 Portugal had about €2 billion ($2.8 billion) in cash at the end of 2010, an official of the country's debt-management office said. New borrowing and other public transactions suggest Portugal has this year likely increased that number to around €4 billion. 

 The weakness of the U.K.'s new measure on bankers' bonuses, which was touted as a centerpiece of a clampdown on bank pay, illustrates how the government continues to play to public anger while also quietly acquiescing to banks' insistence that they need to pay employees competitively. 

 Growth in the U.K.'s dominant services sector slowed further than expected in February after January's rebound from a snowy December. 

Bank of England policy maker Charles Bean said inflation might prove more persistent next year than the bank is forecasting but doesn't necessarily strengthen the case for an early rate increase. 

 French Prime Minister François Fillon confirmed the government intends to abolish a tax shield that has become a controversial hallmark of Nicolas Sarkozy's presidency.  

 The suspected gunman who killed two U.S. servicemen at Frankfurt's airport on Wednesday had links to Germany's radical Islamist circles, but German investigators currently believe the 21-year-old Kosovar carried out the attack on his own. 

 The Swiss National Bank said it posted a book loss of 19.2 billion Swiss francs ($20.8 billion) last year as the franc's appreciation eroded the value of its foreign-currency holdings. The consolidated loss, which compares with a profit of 9.96 billion francs in 2009, was overwhelmingly dominated by currency movement. 

The Securities and Exchange Commission is scrutinizing U.S. banks that have restructured troubled loans in order to make them appear healthier than they really are, according to people familiar with the situation. 

 President Barack Obama and Mexican President Felipe Calderon unveiled a deal resolving a longstanding dispute over cross-border trucking that has subjected the U.S. to billions of dollars in punitive tariffs. The plan will allow for half of those tariffs to be lifted immediately. 

A federal judge in Florida stayed his January ruling that declared the new health-care law unconstitutional, allowing the Obama administration to keep implementing the law while it appeals the decision.

 The number of workers filing new claims for unemployment benefits unexpectedly dropped last week, pointing to continued improvement in the jobs market as the economy picks up speed. 

Separately, the U.S. non-manufacturing sector expanded further in February, but cost pressures continue to squeeze service providers.

Billionaire philanthropist Bill Gates is stepping into the U.S. debate over state budgets with a call for states to rethink their health- care and pension systems, which he says stifle funding for public schools. 

 U.S. officials are beginning to talk about the possibility of keeping some troops in Iraq beyond 2011, complicating the Pentagon's plans to rein in military spending. 

Business investment in Japan posted its second straight quarter of increase, suggesting that improving corporate activity may help solidify the economic recovery in the months ahead. 

In Bangladesh, Nobel laureate Muhammad Yunus launched a court case to reverse a government order dismissing him as the head of the microfinance bank he founded.

 Israel is losing hope that it can settle the outlines of a final peace accord with the Palestinians in the coming months and instead is weighing plans that would offer them a provisional state with temporary borders, according to several officials familiar with the deliberations.  

The Palestinians have rejected such interim solutions in the past, and leaders in the West Bank said they would do so again. 

 Security forces backing Ivory Coast's incumbent president opened fire on female protesters, killing at least six and pushing the West African nation closer to civil war as the continent's leaders grope for a solution. The clash came during an all-women march in Abobo, residents said. 

In Nigeria, a bomb exploded at a ruling-party rally for a northern governor, killing three people and wounding 21 others as a decisive

April election looms for the oil-rich nation. Attackers threw the explosive from a speeding vehicle as it passed the rally in Niger state, a federal police spokesman said. 