INDIANAPOLIS—LaDainian Tomlinson was dressing at his locker when an old friend stopped by and grabbed his shoulder. Marty Schottenheimer coached Mr. Tomlinson for five seasons with the San Diego Chargers, and he knows how badly Mr. Tomlinson covets a trip to the Super Bowl. It is an achievement that has eluded him, and Mr. Schottenheimer's son, Brian, the Jets' offensive coordinator, is trying to help him get there.

"Enjoy this for 24 hours," Marty Schottenheimer was telling Mr. Tomlinson in a quiet moment, "and move on to the next one."

Less than an hour had passed since the Jets had dispatched the Indianapolis Colts from the NFL playoffs with a thrilling 17-16 victory at Lucas Oil Stadium on Saturday night. It was a first-round contest that required a bit of everything from the Jets. In other words, business as usual: a sloppy first half, plenty of second-half dramatics, a stout defensive effort and a game-winning field goal as time ran out. Who expected anything different?

But Mr. Schottenheimer's words resonated. Even if coach Rex Ryan said he wanted "12 hours" to enjoy the win, many of his players already were turning their collective attention to next Sunday's second-round game against the top-seeded New England Patriots. The media buildup figures to be about as understated as a fire alarm. These are two teams that are not particularly fond of one another.

"We knew we'd get back to them. We always knew," said wide receiver Braylon Edwards, quick to cite the Jets' 45-3 loss to the Patriots on Dec. 6. "It's not even about revenge. Yeah, we got embarrassed, but that's the regular season. This is the playoffs. We're fighting for something so much different than, 'Oh, we got embarrassed,' and all the bounce-back s---. If we beat them by one point, it's a win."

The Jets, the sixth seed in the AFC, are a confident bunch once again, thanks in no small part to the performance of their offense. It started with Mr. Tomlinson, who looked fresh after sitting out the team's regular-season finale against the Buffalo Bills the week before. He rushed for 82 yards and averaged 5.1 yards per carry, and fellow running back Shonn Greene rushed for 70 yards on 19 carries.

Mr. Ryan was clear in his intentions before the game: Run the ball and keep the clock moving, largely to keep Colts quarterback Peyton Manning off the field. It was an effective strategy. During a 9-minute, 54-second drive that bridged the third and fourth quarters, Mr. Tomlinson and Mr. Greene combined for 10 rushes over 17 plays, a series that culminated with Mr. Tomlinson's second 1-yard touchdown run of the game. The Jets maintained possession for 60% of the second half. As a result, the Colts had just three offensive series.

"It tests your conditioning, man," left tackle D'Brickashaw Ferguson said. "But I think it gives the team a lot of confidence that you can drive and pass the ball the way you need to, in critical times."

Such was the case with quarterback Mark Sanchez, who labored through a poor first half, completing just 9 of 19 passes for 84 yards with an interception. Almost all of his passes were sailing on him, his receivers consistently jumping for balls that were uncatchable. But he settled down in the second half, completing a much more efficient 9 of 12 passes for 105 yards.

His finest sequence of the season played out in the wake of Colts kicker Adam Vinatieri's go-ahead, 50-yard field goal with 57 seconds left. After Antonio Cromartie gave the Jets outstanding field position with a 47-yard kickoff return, Mr. Sanchez went to work. A 9-yard pass to Mr. Edwards. An 11-yard pass to Santonio Holmes. A 2-yard run by Mr. Tomlinson that put the ball at the Colts' 32-yard line with 29 seconds left.

Over on the Jets sideline, kicker Nick Folk was telling the coaching staff that he felt comfortable from anywhere inside the Colts' 35. And then, for some inexplicable reason, Colts coach Jim Caldwell called a timeout. It gave Mr. Sanchez an opportunity to huddle with Brian Schottenheimer and Mr. Ryan, who wanted to be conservative and hand the ball off. But Mr. Sanchez, with an assist from Mr. Edwards, had another idea. Mr. Edwards felt he had outside leverage on cornerback Jacob Lacey, and he urged Mr. Sanchez to take a shot downfield. 

"Braylon's like, 'They're playing me in man, and I know I can go over the top of this guy,'" Mr. Ryan recalled. "And Schotty just turned to Mark and said, 'All right, kid. You throw the ball you want.' And he made that huge throw right there."

Mr. Sanchez's 14-yard completion to Mr. Edwards along the right sideline put Mr. Folk in much better position. His 32-yard attempt was true as time expired, and the Jets stormed the field as the stadium fell silent.

 In the process, Mr. Sanchez, in just his second season, became the first Jets quarterback to win three postseason games. (Although that might be just as much an indictment of the franchise's lackluster history.)

In either case, the fact that Mr. Ryan gave Mr. Sanchez the autonomy to make his own call at such a critical moment once again revealed Mr. Ryan's trust in his players—a trust many say they value. "He's got our back, and he knows we've got his," Mr. Cromartie said.

And so the Jets march onward, their Super Bowl dreams intact, another challenge on the horizon, with little time to savor the experience.

 Write to  Scott Cacciola at scott.cacciola@wsj.com 