Let's just play it over.

C'mon. We have plenty of time to squeeze in a replay. Rutgers is out; St. John's is now out, courtesy of a loss to Syracuse Thursday in the Big East tournament quarterfinals.

  Follow Jason Gay on Twitter  

The three embattled officials are out, too, having removed themselves from the remainder of the tournament. The Big East said the officials voluntarily left "in the best interests of everyone involved," which essentially means, "Please stop talking about this! It's driving us nuts! Look, Connecticut just won on a thrilling last-second shot!"

But everyone's available from Wednesday afternoon's RU-SJU mess. The two teams, the three officials, maybe even that ball Justin Brownlee threw into the stands. Don't need Madison Square Garden. Probably could knock this out down at the West Fourth Street court. 

Get Rutgers coach Mike Rice, tell him it's all going to be legit and on the level. Get St. John's coach Steve Lavin, tell him he can dress like Al Gore on his way to a Paul Simon concert.

Put 1.7 seconds on someone's watch. Blow the whistle, let it rip. See what would have happened without the juicy mistakes.

If there's a foul, call it. If someone travels or steps out of bounds, same. 

With everyone watching, finish it correctly. 

Maybe then it will be behind everyone. Is it not behind everyone? What an agitated 24 hours it was after the Scarlet Knights were robbed of a last-second attempt in a 65-63 loss to St. John's in the Big East tournament's second round. 

It was an official's dreaded nightmare. A missed call that anyone at home could see. Actually, it was worse: a series of missed calls that anyone at home could see.

And it cost Rutgers a chance to win a game it was very much in. The 15-17 Scarlet Knights are hardly a juggernaut —and were probably not about to chomp through the Big East Tournament—but they gave St. John's a furious headache. 

By late afternoon Thursday, Syracuse took care of The Asterisk, knocking out the Johnnies.

 With former Orangemen great Derrick Coleman looking on, Syracuse got two key baskets from freshman center Fab Melo en route to a 79-73 win.

But that's hardly a consolation to Rutgers. 

And it won't make them any happier that the 1.7 seconds of controversy will soon be forgotten, swamped by conference championships and the fussy selection of the NCAA bracket. St. John's will be a part of the Madness. 

But before everyone moves on, it feels like an opportunity was lost to put the humans into a human error. In departing the tournament, the three Big East officials—Jim Burr, Tim Higgins and Earl Walton—left it to everyone else to noisily fill in the dead air, thoughtfully and not so thoughtfully. 

Contrast that to last year's mega-officiating uproar: umpire Jim Joyce's blown call in Detroit pitcher Armando Galarraga's near-perfect game.

Battered on television and the Internet, Joyce was out there the next day at home plate, and took the game's lineup card from a classy Galarraga in an emotional, three-hanky reunion. 

The fury of the lost perfect game evaporated into goo, and the umpire got his name back. Joyce and Galarraga have even collaborated on a forthcoming book, entitled "Nobody's Perfect."

A Rutgers-St. John's do-over at the West Fourth Street court is not possible. But properly moving on could be. 