Residents in Misrata, the country's third-largest city 200 kilometers (130 miles) east of Tripoli, say that Col. Moammar Gadhafi's armed forces are shelling the city outskirts with heavy weapons, possibly using tanks, in what is expected to be a fresh assault to regain control of the city, believed to be the only western Libyan city still in the hands of antigovernment forces.

Misrata's townspeople have rebuffed almost daily assaults by government troops over the last three weeks that it had been independent of Col. Gadhafi's control. 

In this time, Misrata has provided the kind of successful self-rule experiment that many Libyans appear to crave, and if it can withstand renewed pressure by the armed forces it could become a vivid counterpoint to the kind of chaos that Col. Gadhafi has threatened will arise in the country should he be forcibly removed from power.

Misrata residents have a reputation among Libyans for being business-savvy and industrious, as well as being a very tight-knit community. These attributes, plus the emergence of strong city governing councils, are credited for keeping the city both free and united against Col. Gadhafi's assaults. 

"We feel like we only have each other to count on," said Ahmad, a member of the city militia. "We have no contact from [the transitional national council in] Benghazi. We have taken matters into our own hands."

The city's lawyers' association has taken over many of the administrative functions for the bustling commercial city, which is home to Libya's busiest port, including the operation of the local electric-power stations and water services. 

The council has leveraged the city's local radio station as a means to organize services and inform the town about the dangers facing them, according to residents. 

"If the hospitals need a type of blood, then they announce it on the radio. If there's a fire somewhere, they also announce it. That way the fire trucks know where to go," said Iman, a housewife in Misrata.

Meanwhile, a medical committee has coordinated with outside aid groups and non-profit organizations and managed the complex logistical task of importing three tons of emergency medical supplies worth $500,000. 

Most of the supplies have arrived from ships sailing from Malta, which has provided critical logistical support for the city, according to international aid organizer  Mohammed al Misrati, who works with Libyan expatriates to funnel donations and emergency aid to the country of his birth. He says that Misrata officials are better organized and efficient than their counterparts in Benghazi.

"The medical committee gives us a priority list almost daily. They are organized and very professional," he said.

The city's military council, which is run by officers who defected from Gadhafi's army in the early days of the uprising, has organized neighborhood militias as well as civil defense forces that have kept the city's key installations safe from attack. 

The town's militia repulsed an advancing column on tanks which invaded the city on March 6, fighting a four-hour battle that ended with the retreat of the government forces. The militia has also repelled multiple attacks by Col. Gadhafi's special forces against the city's radio antenna, according to two city fighters.

It is unclear how much coordination that the city's civil and military committees have—or even how well the different city officials get along. Journalists invited to Tripoli by the central government have been prevented from traveling to Misrata, and journalists based in the rebel-held eastern part of the country haven't been able to reach the city, due to the heavy fighting in that part of the country.

In one key case, the city authorities failed in their control of their residents' actions. After the tank battle on March 6, town fighters and other residents had captured approximately 20 government soldiers, according to two residents. 

In the celebrations that erupted after the city's victory, the prisoners "disappeared," according to one resident, who said he believed that they had all been killed. 

"The anger was uncontrollable. The people had thought they were going to die and I'm afraid that they took the anger out against the prisoners," the resident said in a telephone interview a day after the battle. The fate of the prisoners couldn't be independently verified.

 Write to  Margaret Coker at margaret.coker@wsj.com 