KABUL—U.K. defense secretary Liam Fox appeared to dampen expectations at home that British troops could begin returning from Afghanistan this year, saying on a visit to the war-torn country that it would be "quite wrong" to make predictions on troop levels over the next 24 months. 

In a December visit to Afghanistan, Prime Minister David Cameron said bringing British troops home in 2011 was "possible," echoing previous indications and triggering a raft of domestic newspaper headlines about an early return.

Mr. Fox emphasized Wednesday that Mr. Cameron had also said 2011 withdrawals would be dependent on conditions on the ground. 

"Conditions have improved but we will want to ensure that that progress has been maintained and we will want to make sure that the training mission for Afghanistan is fully up to speed," he said in Kabul. 

Mr. Fox said the role of British troops may change this year and next to, for example, place greater emphasis on training. Like many nations in the U.S.-led coalition, the U.K. has said it doesn't want its troops in a combat role by the end of 2014.

The Conservative Party minister also suggested that the U.K. needs to think about its North Atlantic Treaty Organization coalition partners before making decisions on pulling troops out. It is "not a unilateral British mission in the south, we are part of the NATO command and we want to be a good NATO partner," he said.

After the U.S., the U.K. has the biggest foreign troop commitment in Afghanistan, with around 10,000 currently serving. That commitment has come at a heavy cost, with over 100 British armed forces personnel dying there last year—and with some Britons and two smaller political parties demanding that troops return home this year.

Mr. Fox said he was "cautiously optimistic" about progress in Afghanistan and gave a bullish account of what he saw as the stability taking hold in some parts of the country. The minister said the coalition is now pursuing the right strategy with the right military resources. 

"For all the talk about the length of the campaign, we have really only been in Afghanistan, in the strength we need and the strength the military wanted, since the summer of 2009," he said. 

His refusal to follow his prime minister in ruminating about possible early withdrawal may resurrect speculation of disagreements between the two men. Mr. Fox had a number of disagreements with Mr. Cameron over the size and shape of cuts to the military in the country's strategic defense review in October. Aides to both men said at the time that such back and forth was to be expected during negotiations over budgets.

 Write to  Alistair MacDonald at alistair.macdonald@wsj.com 