Welcome to 2011, which already is giving investors a warm and fuzzy feeling, with stock markets in rally mode and averages hitting post-recession highs. Indeed, the feelings are a little too rosy for this column, which has often been wary of the conventional wisdom.

This year, the CW is mostly buoyantly optimistic. It may well be right. But if it is, profit opportunities will be limited. It is when the CW turns out to be wrong that investors can really cash in.

As usual, Common Sense doesn't make a practice of predicting the future, and the CW is all about predicting it. No one has perfected such a skill, and yet the exercise is often fascinating, especially at the beginning of a new year. And investing always involves some assumptions about the future, unknowable though it may be.

Last year, Common Sense proved unusually foresighted in this exercise, which emboldens me to venture another assessment of the conventional wisdom for 2011 and where it might be wrong.

 • Stocks. After two years of double-digit gains, the CW is decidedly bullish, with many pundits again predicting a 10%-plus rise in the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index. There are solid reasons to be bullish, with consumer spending and sentiment on the rise, industrial production humming and the Federal Reserve still in an accommodating mode. Rarely have the stars been so aligned in favor of stocks.

Yet the pervasive bullishness makes me nervous, as it did last year at this time. I said then: "I expect at least one correction of 10% or more this year, which will represent a buying opportunity." For 2011, I expect another modest correction, and gains in the 8%-to-10% range by year end. This also may be the year when large-cap stocks take the lead from small- and mid-caps, and when a value orientation begins to overtake growth.

 • Interest rates. The CW is deafening that the historic post-Lehman Brothers bond rally is over, and that interest rates are destined to rise in 2011. This makes me very skeptical. Where was this chorus in August or October, when bonds actually were hitting new highs and interest rates were at historic lows? The problem with the CW is that bonds have corrected already. Shares of the  iShares Barclays Aggregate Bond
AGG


0.17
%




 exchange-traded fund fell 2.6% over the last two months of the year, which by bond standards is a big move. 

I concede that interest rates remain very low, and long term, they pretty much have only one way to go, which is up. But I'll go out on a limb to say that interest rates will remain low for most of 2011, and that the big correction in bond prices is already over. I still would be wary of long maturities, and stick to intermediate- and shorter-term bonds and CDs. But I feel comfortable adding to bond holdings at current prices and yields. At least investors know they aren't buying at a market peak.

 • Gold and commodities. Gold has been on a tear, hitting new highs during 2010, along with many other commodities. The attendant publicity has only made it more popular, and it has taken pride of place in locker-room chatter. 

All of this makes me wary. Given its limited industrial uses, gold has traditionally functioned mainly as a safe haven during times of turbulence and an inflation hedge. I trust the Fed when it says inflation is in check, and I see no signs of imminent economic chaos despite the hand-wringing over the size of the federal deficit. 

Most commodities other than gold are another matter, since they have industrial uses. As the global recovery gains strength, I would focus on commodity producers rather than the commodities themselves. Energy also has traditionally performed well at this stage of a recovery, and I've added to those positions. I also have maintained or expanded my holdings of commodity ETFs. 

 • Foreign stocks. After surpassing U.S. stocks for several years, international equities trailed the U.S. last year, and the CW is that the bloom is off foreign markets, especially China. Chinese equities were volatile in 2010, and the  iShares FTSE China 25 Index Fund
FXI


-0.44
%




 ended the year with a modest gain of just over 5%. 

I concede that the CW is much less pronounced here, but my sense is that foreign markets remain attractive, especially China. I also expect developed Europe to emerge from the debt crisis, with Germany taking center stage.

—James B. Stewart, a columnist for SmartMoney magazine and SmartMoney.com, writes weekly about his personal investing strategy. Unlike Dow Jones reporters, he may have positions in the stocks he writes about. For his past columns, see: www.smartmoney.com/commonsense.