Entering his 50th year as a decorator, Mario Buatta, aka the Prince of Chintz, is showing few signs of wear, and fewer of relinquishing his commitment to traditional English style or the fabric that won him his moniker. 

He was just feted at the New York School of Interior Design, which renamed its materials library after him. A collector since age 11 (when he brought an opulent antique lap desk to his parents' ultramodern Staten Island home), Mr. Buatta is known for filling the rooms of clients including Mariah Carey, Barbara Walters and Malcolm Forbes with sumptuous fabrics, lively color and a mix of contemporary and historical furnishings. 

Mr. Buatta took time out from his nonstop, assistant-free life, to discuss his jokester leanings and antipathy toward beige.

 Decorating today is dysfunctional. A chair here, a lamp here and a sofa over there—how do you read? How do you have a conversation? Rooms are set up for a camera, not for living. There's nothing personal, no relationship to the past. 

 The best way to lay out a room is to take a minute after you've had a party to look at where your friends moved the chairs. That will give you an idea of the best arrangement. Every room should have at least two groupings.  

 The quickest, cheapest way to szoosh up a room is with slipcovers. You can do it with sheeting—just take a king-size sheet, cover a chair and pin it. 

 I like to put the TV behind a painting. You press a button and the painting moves over. I hate them sitting on a table in a room. You can put them in a bookcase or a cabinet. They're still an eyesore. 

 My style icons are [decorators] John Fowler and Nancy Lancaster. Nancy was a great woman, a real character. They don't make them like that anymore. They're all blondes. They all look alike, dress alike, nobody has any personality.

 There's nothing more boring than a room that's all beige. It's easy to do—all you have to worry about are textures—and it looks great but I happen to love color.

 My decorating advice is usually to light a match.

 I like blue-and-white gingham sheets from Charlotte Moss. I'm a blue and white freak. I like sleeping on something that's restful. But I love flowered sheets for clients. 

 When I get into bed at night I turn on "The Golden Girls." I like to laugh at night. I refuse to watch the news. 

 My favorite decorating sources are Mecox Gardens, 1stdibs and John Rosselli, who makes great reproductions and has great fabrics. 

 My suits are solo Polo, off the rack. I wore one a few weeks back and Jerry Lauren, Ralph's brother, looked at me and said, "That's a great suit, who did that for you?" I told him Thom Browne.   

 I don't entertain. I take people out, to Swifty's or La Grenouille, which is the most beautiful restaurant in New York. I can't deal with shopping, I can't deal with help and I hate people touching my things. You have an 18th-century chair and they're rocking back and forth on it or digging their heels in the carpet. 

  I always travel with Harold the cockroach. I got him from a joke store and I like to put him under the plate or in a salad at a restaurant. 

  I collect dog paintings, mostly Regency and Victorian. I don't like paintings otherwise. I get tired of them. I'd love to have a Matisse or a Bonnard but you get tired of those, too. I never get tired of my dogs—they're always smiling and I don't have to feed or walk them.  

 Chintz is coming back in fashion. Dress designers are using a lot of flowered prints. I think people are tired of all that blandness. 

—Edited from an interview by Deb Schwartz