Recognition matters to me only when I don't receive any. Which is why I probably spend too much time worrying about whether someone "likes" this story or that on Facebook. I can write a piece I think is frankly hilarious and the box beside the Facebook "Like" icon may remain mysteriously, miserably empty. On the other hand, I submit a story that I think isn't my most memorable effort and several hundred people may click "Like."

There are other ways of gauging appreciation, or lack of it, for one's work. Because my email address is at the end of every column, readers can contact me directly, which they frequently do. The majority of the feedback, I'm relieved to say, is friendly. 

People can also comment on The Wall Street Journal website. One guy comments more than most. And he hates everything I do. But at least he's a reader.

But this "like" business makes little sense to me. Let me give you a couple of examples. I wrote an October piece about a men's weekly knitting circle at a yarn store on the Upper West Side. Half of the participants were over 70 and the rest didn't seem like they spent much time surfing the Internet. I mean, they could have been home that Wednesday night blogging about politics or downloading porn. Instead, they were actively rejecting 21st-century technology by engaging in an enterprise that probably peaked around 1850.

Nonetheless, the story received more "likes" than anything else I'd written to that point, 441 of them. As would any self-respecting writer, it makes me wonder what was deficient, or less alluring, about all my previous pieces, unless "liking" something has little to do with the amusement or educational value of the work.

Another example: I wrote a story about Ellen Jovin, a woman trying to learn 13 languages over the course of three years, and perhaps land a book deal in the process. Ms. Jovin was an impressive, serious person, but listening to language tapes certainly doesn't have the inherent excitement, the dramatic arc of, say, climbing to the top of the George Washington Bridge or getting to be pool reporter for the Queen of England's visit to Lower Manhattan in July—columns that received only a fraction of the "likes" Ms. Jovin's story garnered.

So mystified have I become by the seeming disconnect between my work and the "like" of my work, that I decided to consult an expert—my 17-year-old daughter Gracie, who was doing her homework in the next room. In fact, Gracie wasn't doing her homework; she was on Facebook, where she seems to spend half her life, though she denies it. She claims she's capable of going cold turkey for extended periods—as long as two or three hours.

But for my purposes, it was convenient that she happened to be on Facebook at that moment, on her best friend Anthea's page. "This is Anthea's profile picture," she explained, of a photo of a baby in a carriage. "If I don't want to comment, I could just 'Like' it or I could do nothing. Nine people liked Anthea's profile picture."

As we sat there a new message popped up on Gracie's wall. Two of her classmates were talking to each other about a photograph, not Anthea's, on a third person's home page. "I was already looking at that picture you just liked when you liked it," said one to the other—which apparently qualifies as a coincidence of minor cosmic proportions on Facebook.

"You don't get 'likes' because of how good the column is," my daughter told me gently. 

I wasn't visiting her room for counseling. I just wanted to get to the bottom, to the underlying mechanics, of why some respectable pieces went wholly unliked while others generated a fuss. "If that person was sending it to other people, you could be getting likes," Gracie explained.

In that case, I thought, a piece I wrote over the summer about a Coke ad covering the Doge's Palace in Venice might have seen a recent spike in "likes." A few days earlier, the comedian Steve Martin had posted a link to the piece on his Twitter feed. Sadly, the number of "likes" remained at the sullen six it had been for months.

What prompted these existential reflections was that I just achieved a milestone of sorts, when a piece passed 1,000 "likes." (I realize that compared to Sarah Palin or even, probably, Elmo, these aren't big numbers; but everything's relative.) It concerned the ASPCA's mobile cat adoption van. "It probably got the most 'likes' because there are a lot of cat lovers out there," my daughter explained sensibly.

We decided to visit the ASPCA website where the article had, indeed, been posted. Gracie reported that "734 people liked it on that," helping explain the surge in numbers.

Even better, all 734 of them seemed to be engaged in a passionate discussion about my story at that very moment. I wanted to see what they were saying, to eavesdrop, so to speak, on my fans. But as we read the comments it quickly became clear they had nothing to do with me or my story, or even cats.

At the point where we picked up the thread, some kid whose Nintendo Wii had probably crashed had gone on the ASPCA website to harass any animal lovers who happened to be around: "But seriously guys all your doing is giving your money and time to some stupid [expletive deleted] organization. why not give your money to church or some other organizations that helps people who have souls."

The comment, and the expletives, triggered a rash of reactions, including people threatening to report him, wishing a police dog would make amusement of him and a discussion about whether animals had souls. 

Come to think of it, maybe it's a good thing more people aren't "liking" my columns. The lack of response is protecting me from the coarse underbelly of human nature.

— ralph.gardner@wsj.com 