It is the latest twist on an old adage: Trade the first day, and stay away.

Some traders have been adopting a new ritual in recent months—buying early on the first day of the month and selling by the day's close—taking advantage of a peculiar phenomenon that has seen the Dow Jones Industrial Average rise substantially on the first day of each month. That one-day move often has accounted for much of the Dow's gains for the entire month.

In February, for example, the Dow rose 148 points, or 1.2%, on the first of the month, accounting for almost half of the blue chips' 2.8% gain for the month. In January, the Dow rose 314 points, with 93 of those points coming in the first day. About half of December's 5.1% advance was locked in by the market close on Dec. 1, thanks to a 249-point leap that day.

  Ed Yardeni, president of Yardeni Research, an economic-consulting firm, is recommending a new trading strategy: "Work during the first trading day of the month, and take the rest of the month off."

The trend, which has held true for each of the past seven months, will be put to a new test on Tuesday, as March trading begins. The Dow starts the new month after Monday's 95.89-point gain (Mondays, too, have been unusually good lately) and in the midst of uncertainty over the future of the Middle East and North Africa.

Just why the trend has been so consistent is a mystery. But market watchers like Mr. Yardeni point to the release of nationwide manufacturing data that usually hits on the first day of the month. The manufacturing sector has been one consistent source of positive surprises during the economic recovery.

Others suggest that the first day of the month is when money comes out of paychecks and into 401(k)s, ready to be plowed into the market.

Some also point to window-dressing by investors whose performance is measured monthly. These investors often sell toward the end of the month to lock in any gains, only to jump back in at the beginning of the fresh month.

Birinyi Associates broadens the trend out to include the first five days of each trading month. 

Birinyi notes that, since April 2009, the first five days of the month produced gains 83% of the time, for an average advance of 2.9%. 

The last five days of the month have tended to see declines.

As for tomorrow,  Dennis Gartman, who publishes a daily investment newsletter, says he is planning "to err bullishly through Tuesday's close," pointing to recent evidence that stocks tend to gain strongly on the first day of the month. 

Overall, last month was a strong month for the stock market, despite February's reputation as a difficult trading month and the late-month whammy of soaring oil prices and worries about whether that would hurt the U.S. economy. 

The Dow and the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index, which gained 3.2% during February, were helped early in the month by a strong season of corporate earnings. Both gained for a third month in a row.

Oil has surged, thanks in part to the Middle East and North Africa political shock. 

Crude oil vaulted briefly over $100 a barrel toward the end of the month as investors sought refuge in the perceived safety of gold and Treasurys. 

Gold rose $75.50, or 5.7%, for the month to finish at $1,409.30 an ounce, just below its all-time record high, set at the beginning of the year. 

The yield on the 10-year Treasury note, meanwhile, finished at 3.416%, its lowest level in four weeks.

 Write to  Jonathan Cheng at jonathan.cheng@wsj.com 