CHICAGO—Legislation that would make it easier to dismiss ineffective teachers statewide and allow mayor-elect Rahm Emanuel to lengthen the Chicago school day unanimously passed an Illinois House committee Wednesday, despite objections by the Chicago Teachers Union.

The measure, passed unanimously by the state Senate in April, now goes before the full House. 

Lawmakers are pursuing passage of a separate "trailer" bill intended to help defuse a dispute that erupted last week when union officials charged the legislation was changed at the last minute without their knowledge.

Chicago Teachers Union officials object to passages in the legislation that would curb their bargaining rights and limit their ability to strike. 

The bill's backers say the union had ample opportunity to object to the wording before the measure was passed, but that they would attempt to address the teachers' concerns in the trailer bill.

State Rep. Barbara Flynn Currie, a Chicago Democrat and key sponsor of the education legislation, said she has encouraged union leaders, education advocacy groups and Chicago school officials to craft a separate proposal that "reflects what was agreed upon" during the original negotiations.

The overall bill was approved 24-0 by the Elementary and Secondary Education Committee Wednesday. But it wasn't clear whether the trailer bill would pass. 

Liz Brown, spokeswoman for the Chicago Teachers Union, said the union was "working hard to make this bill right for our members." 

Tarrah Cooper, press secretary for mayor elect Emanuel, declined comment. 

Robin Steans, executive director of Advance Illinois, an advocacy group that wants to overhaul teacher evaluations, said, "I feel very encouraged, but I don't know if we can reach agreement given all that has happened."

The bill would link teacher tenure to student achievement, base layoffs on performance instead of seniority, and make it easier to fire bad teachers. 

It also would give Chicago's mayor power to lengthen the school day and make it tougher for teachers to strike over compensation for working longer hours.

The measure is similar to laws passed in many states where Republicans are in control, such as Florida and Indiana, but was widely seen as one of the most far reaching in a state where Democrats control both the legislature and the governor's office.

When the bill passed the Illinois Senate last month, negotiators bragged they had avoided the nastiness that engulfed Ohio and Wisconsin over union bargaining rights.

The unity fractured last week when the governing body of the Chicago Teachers Union threatened to withdraw support. 

On Wednesday, the Illinois Federation of Teachers pulled its backing for the measure and the Illinois Education Association, another teachers union, changed its position on the bill from supportive to "neutral" pending negotiations.In addition to legislative language the union says would limit bargaining rights, union officials also object to a provision requiring approval of 75% of union members to call a strike, rather than 75% of votes cast.