CHICAGO—A sweeping state education bill that passed the Illinois state Senate unanimously and had the support of teachers unions and education-advocacy groups could be derailed by claims it was altered at the last minute.

The bill—which represents a compromise on some of the nation's most divisive education issues—would make it easier for districts statewide to dismiss ineffective teachers, base layoffs on performance instead of seniority, and toughen tenure rules. 

But the bill is threatened by a local fight: Chicago Mayor-elect Rahm Emanuel would get the right to lengthen the school day, which is one of the shortest in the nation. 

The Chicago Teachers Union has charged that a last-minute change to the bill would curb its right to appeal Mr. Emanuel's actions, saying the "atomic bomb" was slipped into the 110-page bill without its knowledge. 

Education-advocacy groups and a lawyer for the Illinois State Board of Education, which brokered the deal, said Chicago union leaders had ample opportunity to change the bill before it went before the Senate. They said CTU officials went home early, while others stayed to hammer out the specific language of the bill after the final negotiations. The union's chief appeared at the April 14 press conference to hail the agreement.

The dispute threatens the compromise developed over three months of negotiations that is needed for the bill to pass the Democratic-controlled House, where a panel is slated to take it up Wednesday. 

Among the states recently adopting education overhauls:

• Ohio. Bans strikes by school teachers; replaces teachers' raises based on years of service with merit raises tied to student achievement.

• Indiana. Links teacher pay to student performance; mandates teachers be laid off based on performance, not seniority; expands charter schools; establishes a statewide schoolvoucher program.

• Florida. Links teacher pay to test scores; effectively ends tenure by putting all teachers on annual contracts.

"We're getting caught in Chicago politics," said state Sen. Kimberly Lightford, a Democrat who helped orchestrate the fragile coalition to support the bill.

This year, Republican-controlled states including Utah, Indiana and Florida have adopted major overhauls to how teachers are evaluated, paid, laid off or dismissed, and the Illinois legislation was expected to be among the farthest-reaching in any state dominated by Democrats.

The Illinois bill came after months of tense negotiations among labor leaders, business groups and education-advocacy organizations, including Stand for Children, an Oregon-based group that supports overhauling how teachers are evaluated and earn tenure. When it passed the Senate, lawmakers, union officials and education advocates crowed that they had avoided the bitter battles over union bargaining rights that racked Wisconsin and Ohio. It is backed by Mr. Emanuel and Gov. Pat Quinn.

But harmony began to fall apart last week when the governing board of the Chicago Teachers Union threatened to withdraw support. In a fiery press release, the union charged that the two-sentence change in the bill would take away their right to bring some contract disputes before the Illinois Education Labor Relations Board, and, instead, vest ultimate power with Chicago school officials. 

They also object to a section of the bill that says 75% of all union members must vote to strike, up from 51% now. They say they thought the deal was for 75% of votes cast. Specifically, they are worried that if Mr. Emanuel lengthens the school day, as promised, they would have less power to negotiate for more pay—or call a strike.

Karen Lewis, head of the CTU, said she had worked behind the scenes to resolve the dispute and "it wasn't until Rahm Emanuel started gloating" about his potential newfound powers during public appearances that her membership revolted.

Chris Mather, a spokeswoman for Mr. Emanuel said, the former White House chief of staff wants to extend the school day, which now runs about five hours and 45 minutes, and is "open to negotiations" on how to pay for it. The district faces a $720 million budget deficit. She declined to address Ms. Lewis's characterization of Mr. Emanuel.

"The CTU's behavior likely has more to do with the fact that they failed to carefully analyze the implications of the bill and failed to bring their members along through the process," said Robin Steans, executive director of Advance Illinois, a group that was at the negotiating table and supports overhauling teacher and principal evaluations.

Darren Reisberg, general counsel for the Illinois State Board of Education, said the wording "might have accidentally gone too far" but said those who negotiated the bill were working to remedy it when the CTU sent the "inflammatory" press release.

Jonah Edelman, executive director of Stand for Children, which entered Illinois last year and spent $610,000 million in local state races, said his group doesn't support most of the changes the CTU has called for.