HONG KONG—Asian stock indexes kicked off the new year with a solid start Monday, with South Korea's main index surging to an all-time high.



South Korea's Kospi Composite rose 0.9% to 2070.08, finishing above its previous closing high of 2064.85 on Oct. 31, 2007. Technology and auto companies fueled the gains amid optimism on the global demand outlook.

Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index added 1.7% to 23436.05, Singapore's Straits Times Index gained 1.4% to 3235.77 and India's Sensex tacked on 0.3% to 20561.05.

Markets in Australia, Japan, New Zealand, Thailand and Vietnam were shut, as were the mainland Chinese bourses.

Korean technology companies advanced as investors took a more favorable view of the prospects of U.S. economic recovery. Samsung Electronics gained 1%, Hynix Semiconductor rose 5.4% and LG Electronics added 1.7%.

Kia Motors' shares rose 3.8%, while Hyundai Motors added 2% among broad gains in the sector on expectations of strong sales this year. Hyundai Motor Group Chairman  Chung Mong-koo said the group is aiming to sell 6.33 million units in the global market in 2011, up 10% from a year earlier. 

In South Korea, one analyst said investors' sentiment remained bullish on further gains, even as the index was nearing a level that warranted caution. 

"I think the market has already entered an overshooting phase. It could rise further from here but is likely to see a correction around the 2100 level," said  Im Tae-geun, an analyst at Shinyoung Securities. "Any small negative news could hit the market harder than usual." 

In Hong Kong, bargain hunting in some of last year's underperforming blue chips led to gains in  Foxconn International. The company, which ranked as the worst-performing Hang Seng component last year, ended the day 5% higher.

Meanwhile,  Petrochina tacked on 2% after agreeing to sell a wholly owned unit to its parent for 2.11 billion yuan ($320.2 million).

Hutchison Whampoa, Hong Kong's best-performing blue chip last year, ended 5.3% higher. The company, controlled by tycoon  Li Ka-shing, unveiled plans ahead of the start of trading to buy several port and property assets from China Resources for 5.7 billion Hong Kong dollars ($735 million).

In Taiwan, financial stocks were standouts, helped by an unsourced report in Apple Daily that the island's financial regulator has agreed in principle to let domestic funds invest up to 30% of their assets in China's stock markets, from 10% currently.

Taiwan Life and Cosmos Bank both ended 6.9% higher, while Taiwan's China Life gained 2.6%.

"Taiwan has the best of both worlds with dual engines of growth: technology stocks are levered plays on developed markets' recovery in 2011, (and) non-technology stocks are quality plays for secular growth in Chinese consumers," said Morgan Stanley strategist  Frank Wang, adding that he expects Taiwan to outperform its regional peers this year.

In other regional action, Malaysia's main stock index ended 1% higher, Indonesian stocks rose 0.7%, Taiwan stocks added 0.6% and Philippine shares gained 0.3%.

 Write to  Colin Ng at colin.ng@dowjones.com 