STOCKHOLM—Riksbank Governor  Stefan Ingves believes that the soaring krona is long overdue and won't hurt the country's competitiveness.

"We have said for 15 years that the krona will get stronger and now it actually has happened," the central bank chief said in an interview at his Stockholm office. 

His stance contrasts sharply with Switzerland's deep concerns at the growing strength of the Swiss franc. Swiss exporters have sounded the alarm and the government is considering measures to counter the problem. The Swiss National Bank has intervened in currency markets to reverse the trend, without success. 

The Swedes are less alarmed. Fueled by one of the strongest economic recoveries among major European countries, the krona in recent months has soared to reach a ten-year high against the euro. Mr. Ingves says this doesn't necessarily threaten Sweden's competitiveness. 

"When it comes to the Swedish economy, the issue is by far not only the exchange rate," Mr. Ingves said. "The issue is what is going on with the rest of the world, which is global growth," he said. Mr. Ingves, who spent six years at the International Monetary Fund, said that Sweden had benefited from the rapid economic expansion in, among other countries, China. Demand for the Swedish goods and services led to a "very good outcome last year and as far as we can judge continued good growth for the coming year." 

The Riksbank forecasts gross domestic product growth of around 5.5% in 2010 and 4.4% in 2011. The European Union, meanwhile, predicts that Swedish GDP will grow 4.8% in 2010, making it the top performer in the EU. 

As Sweden seeks to steer its rebounding economy, the country has attracted attention by raising its key interest rate four times in a row, to 1.25% from a low of 0.25%. More increases are seen likely in 2011. 

Sweden's GDP grew 6.9% in annual terms in the third quarter of 2010 as exporters like truck maker  Scania AB reported strong numbers as orders, deliveries, revenues and profits jumped with key markets like Brazil booming. 

Mr. Ingves's fellow central bank governor  Karolina Ekholm has said that the stronger krona, 13% higher against the euro than a year ago, will dampen inflation, as she put her case for delaying interest rate hikes, a view Mr. Ingves disputes. Inflation has remained low in Sweden, but the consumer-price index jumped to 2.3% year-to-year in December, bringing prices more in line with the Riksbank's target of 2%. 

"What happens with the krona will affect inflation a bit but the situation is quite different today compared to, let's say, in the early nineties," Mr. Ingves said. The effect of the exchange rate then was more pronounced, he said, adding today the krona is "just one component [in inflation] but it is not the component". 

The gravest threat to the Swedish economy comes from increased household indebtedness, the central bank governor said, going on to say that the ratio of loans to disposable income had doubled since the nineties which is "not sustainable". 

"That doesn't mean that there is a problem today but it is not good if it continues," he said, adding that the Riksbank was the only supporter of the financial services authority's 85% loan-to-value ratio which they introduced last Autumn. 

Mr. Ingves, 57, had no comment on his future with his term as governor set to finish at the end of 2011. Whether he would sign on for another six-year term was a "matter for the Riksbank's general council" he said. Two deputy governors— Svante Oberg and  Lars Nyberg—have already said that they will leave the six-member executive board at the end of 2011. The general council has said it will announce the appointment of three members later in the year. 

Founded in 1668, and regarded as the world's oldest central bank, the Riksbank has progressed since Mr. Ingves's time as deputy governor in the mid-nineties, when the inflation target was introduced, the governor said. 

"It has been a fascinating process to live through, starting back in '94 pretty much with a blank sheet of paper moving along to what we have today with all the sophisticated modelling, the interest rate path, the fan charts and the minutes that are published with a two-week lag," the governor said. 

The Riksbank is known as one of the most transparent central banks, publishing the minutes of its monetary policy meetings two weeks after each rate decision and for publishing its own interest rate projections. 

The current projection goes up to the end of 2013, showing the key rate at 3.3%, still below what Mr. Ingves said should be regarded as a "normal level" of about 4%. 

Mr. Ingves, who holds a doctorate in economics, said he hoped the public believed in the rate path because it is a way of telling consumers that the "present rate in a historic perspective is extremely low". 

"So if you get a 30-year mortgage don't count on this nominal level of the rate, because you are likely to be on the dangerous side," he said. 

"Monetary policy is about storytelling about the future in such a way that you can convince others because that is how you can affect people's expectations," Mr. Ingves said. "It is very natural to be transparent because otherwise you might come up with stories that people can't understand." 