Samsung Electronics Co. got a late start in the smartphone race, but has quickly taken market share and become a more potent threat to smaller rivals like  Motorola Mobility Holdings Inc.
MSI


0.36
%




 and  HTC Corp.
HTCXF


0.00
%






Samsung posted the most growth of any smartphone maker in the third quarter of 2010, said researcher IDC, claiming 8.9% of the market, up from 3.0% a year earlier. Overall, Samsung is the world's fourth-largest smartphone maker, trailing  Nokia Corp.
NOK


-0.59
%




,  Apple Inc.
AAPL


1.02
%




 and BlackBerry maker  Research in Motion Ltd., according to IDC.

At this week's Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas, the producer of everything from chips to cellphone screens to tablets is rolling out new 4G smartphones that are featuring prominently in the lineups of Verizon Wireless and  AT&T Inc.,
T


-0.83
%




 the two largest U.S. carriers. Next month, the South Korean company is going to announce a new slate of tablets of different sizes at the Mobile World Congress in Barcelona.

  Glenn Lurie, president of AT&T's emerging devices organization, the group responsible for the carrier's tablet portfolio, said Samsung is a company to watch out for. "They execute extremely well, devices that customers like and don't bring back," he said.

Samsung, the world's No. 2 seller of cellphones behind Nokia, according to IDC, has so far trailed in the smartphone race. Its early efforts were built around Linux software and  Microsoft Corp.'s
MSFT


0.33
%




 Windows operating system, but the phones weren't hits.

Samsung's move up the rankings came after it started using  Google Inc.'s Android operating system and rolled out its Galaxy S line of smartphones. Motorola and HTC were several months ahead of Samsung in launching high-end phones running on Android, which researcher Gartner Inc. says is now outselling the iPhone and eating into the market share of competitors like Research in Motion and Nokia.

  Won-Pyo Hong, executive vice president of global product strategy for Samsung, acknowledges the company came late to Android and slipped behind rivals as a result. "It took a little bit longer for us to understand what this platform is," Mr. Hong said.

"Even though some folks were ahead of us in the Android space, our goal was to leapfrog ahead," said  Omar Khan, chief strategy officer and senior vice president of products and services for Samsung USA.

HTC declined to comment. Nokia and Motorola didn't respond to requests for comment.

Samsung said it has sold 10 million Galaxy S phones worldwide between the June launch and the end of the year, with four million sold in the U.S. It also says it has sold 1.5 million Galaxy Tabs, the company's seven-inch iPad competitor, which came out in mid-October.

The company made a risky decision by deciding to roll out the Galaxy Tab using Android's smartphone operating system, which isn't specifically geared for a tablet-size screen. 

The downside is many applications don't fill out the Galaxy Tab's seven inches, but the decision did allow Samsung to step ahead of the pack.

Motorola and RIM are showing off their own tablets this week, along with a host of competitors.

Some in the industry also think Samsung's decision to work with multiple carriers rather than arranging to have exclusive devices gives carriers less incentive to spend their marketing dollars on the company's products.