LISBON—Portuguese voters elected Aníbal Cavaco Silva to a second term as president Sunday, in a message that they want political stability as the country tries to extricate itself from the European sovereign-debt crisis. 

The seasoned Social Democratic president—who is head of state, but doesn't run the government—is facing tough months ahead.

Amid concerns that Portugal won't be able to repay its debt, Lisbon has been under pressure from its European partners to take a bailout, a measure the government has denied it needs.

Domestic political trouble lies ahead as well. After months of political unity between the ruling Socialist government and the center-right opposition Social Democratic Party, rifts are starting to emerge. In particular, the Social Democratic Party and its leader, Pedro Passos Coelho, are hoping Mr. Silva will call new elections in the spring.

With nearly 100% of the votes counted, official results showed Mr. Silva won 53% of valid ballots cast, while Manuel Alegre from the Socialist Party was in second place, with 20%. The remaining votes were divided among four other candidates. 

Turnout was low, with an abstention rate of about 53%, according to the official results. 

Mr. Silva, 71 years old, will start his second five-year presidential term under great pressure to maintain the political stability that has allowed Portugal to approve a harsh austerity plan and so far to avoid having to ask for outside help.

The minority government of Socialist Prime Minister José Sócrates managed to pass the 2011 budget, which included public-sector wage cuts, reductions in welfare benefits and tax increases, with the help of the Social Democrats, who abstained from voting after forcing the government to accept deeper spending cuts than originally planned. The budget aims to reduce the government's fiscal deficit to 4.6% of gross domestic product in 2011 from an estimated 7.3% of GDP in 2010.

Concern about the country's ability to repay its debt, following the crises that forced the Greek and Irish governments to accept help from the EU and the International Monetary Fund, has pushed the price Portugal has to pay to finance its deficit higher in recent months.

If international financial markets continue to demand higher interest rates from Portugal, the country might also be forced to turn to the EU and the International Monetary Fund for help, despite Mr. Sócrates' insistence that won't be necessary.

The cease-fire between Mr. Sócrates and the biggest opposition party seems to be unraveling following comments from Mr. Coelho that the prime minister and his government will be ousted if the country requires help from the IMF.

"If the IMF enters Portugal, the current government will have to step down," Mr. Coelho, 46, said recently on local radio station TSF.

As president, Mr. Silva's role is largely ceremonial; executive power lies with the prime minister. But the president has the right to dissolve parliament, and he can also use his office as a platform to criticize the government. Mr. Silva has hinted he could do either, or both.

During his campaign Mr. Silva broke away from his traditionally conciliatory tone to underscore the fact that Portugal still faces the possibility of a "grave crisis" in both economic and political terms.

He noted that he would be more demanding of the current government and would be prepared to act as an instrument of last resort in a crisis.

Mr. Silva later distanced himself from the comments, saying he had "little appetite" to use the "atomic bomb" of dissolving parliament and would seek stability for the country.

But political analysts say the threat is still real. The president would only be able to break up parliament from March 9, when he is sworn in for his second term; by law, he isn't allowed to exercise that power before then.

The process of dismantling and electing a new government could also take several months, meaning any change in government wouldn't happen until sometime in the summer at the earliest.

The government will face two trigger points that could spark a general election, according to political analysts and economists: the first-quarter budget results, due sometime around April, and the debate on next year's budget, set to occur sometime this summer.

If the government fails to meet its budget-deficit reduction target for the first quarter, it would lose credibility "and the probability that the government would need to step down would rise," political analyst  André Freire at Lisbon University Institute said.

Failure to agree on a budget for next year could force a vote of no confidence, which would cause the current government to topple, said  João Cantiga Esteves, economist at Technical University of Lisbon.

The president wouldn't dissolve parliament in that case, but rather would have to build a consensus among the parties for a vote of no confidence. Mr. Esteves said such consensus-building was unlikely to happen. 

—David Gauthier-Villars in Paris contributed to this article.

 Write to  Alex MacDonald at alex.macdonald@dowjones.com 