MADRID—Spain will overhaul its bank regulations to allow the partial nationalization of its ailing savings banks and enable the injection of fresh capital into them, in an attempt to calm investor concerns over the health of the country's financial system. 

The change in regulation would allow Spain's state-backed Fund for Orderly Bank Restructuring, or FROB, to acquire direct equity stakes in the cajas for up to five years, Finance Minister Elena Salgado said at a news conference Monday. 

The cleanup of the savings banks is part of Spain's effort to shore up investor confidence in the euro zone's fourth-largest economy. Ms. Salgado said preliminary estimates by the Bank of Spain on the capital needs of the country's banking sector are below €20 billion ($27.23 billion).

 Spain's borrowing costs skyrocketed after Ireland's finances buckled under the weight of massive loan losses among its banks. Spain, like Ireland, is grappling with the collapse of a housing boom, raising concerns its banks could be equally troubled. 

The Spanish government will raise the minimum core Tier 1 capital requirements for all banks to 8% and will later inject capital into lenders that don't meet the new requirements. 

Ms. Salgado said capital requirements could be even higher for lenders that are unlisted, that rely heavily on wholesale funding or that lack a "significant" presence of private investors. 

The measures represent a shift in strategy for Spain, made necessary by investor confusion over the shape of the cajas and doubts over the true extent of their real-estate losses. The strategy to accelerate the cleanup of the sector, however, has been controversial, as the cajas are resisting legal changes on grounds that a new framework is already in place. 

"We have deemed necessary to implement these…measures to dispel doubts on the banks' capacity to resist under adverse scenarios, so they could access markets and grant loans to the country's economy," Ms. Salgado said. 

Banks in need of financial support will be required to become incorporated companies that could list on the stock exchange or raise capital through private sources. 

Ms. Salgado said the government will detail how much higher capital ratios would be needed for the cajas in upcoming regulations. Underperforming lenders will have until autumn to seek new capital. 

"Banks will have to seek funding among private investors, and those who can't will have the FROB at their disposal," Ms. Salgado said. "It's a backstop." 

The government's cash injections won't affect Spain's budget-deficit targets, Ms. Salgado said. 

Many of the cajas, which account for €1.3 trillion in assets—or 42% of total bank assets in Spain—used liberal lending practices to fuel a decade-long housing boom that went bust and left many of the institutions holding billions in bad loans and facing heavy losses. 

Ratings agency Moody's Investors Service said earlier Monday that Spain's increased resolve to strengthen its troubled savings banks through legal reforms and further recapitalization was positive for the savings banks and the country.

Moody's analyst  Maria-José Mori said in a note to investors that the focus of the government is shifting toward an "instant recognition of potential losses" and an immediate recapitalization. 

Trouble at the cajas was one reason Moody's gave for putting Spain's Aa1 credit rating on review for a possible downgrade last month.

By making them more like traditional banks, the government seeks to improve transparency at the cajas, which have long had confusing ownership and governance structures and disclosed far less financial information than the listed banks. 

"The savings banks need different governance, must get cracking and work like banks," said  Javier Salaverri, who heads UBS in Spain. Otherwise, the FROB must step in "because the markets just aren't there [for them]." 

The FROB has committed €11.6 billion in loans to help cajas pay for restructuring and has €3.4 billion left in its coffers. If necessary, it can increase its capacity to a total of €99 billion through new debt issues. 

—Sara Schaefer Muñoz and Santiago Perez contributed to this article.

 Write to  Christopher Bjork at christopher.bjork@dowjones.com 