Security forces backing Ivory Coast's incumbent president opened fire Thursday on female protesters, killing at least six and pushing the West African nation closer to civil war as the continent's leaders grope for a solution.

The clash came during an all-woman's march in the restive Abobo suburb of the capital, Abidjan, residents said. A witness said the security forces arrived in the morning with armor-plated vehicles and shot at the women, who were waving palm fronds in protest against Ivory Coast's embattled president, Laurent Gbagbo. 

Mr. Gbagbo has refused to step down following November's presidential election, despite broad international recognition that the race was won by his challenger, Alassane Ouattara. Forces loyal to Mr. Gbagbo have confined Mr. Ouattara and his associates to a hotel guarded by United Nations peacekeepers, and fought street battles with those trying to dislodge the incumbent president from power. African leaders have broken into camps, with some pushing for Mr. Gbagbo's ouster and others refusing to endorse Mr. Ouattara's victory. 

Abobo has been engulfed by heavy fighting between government forces and insurgents backing Mr. Ouattara. Casualties have risen sharply in recent days, with the U.N. estimating Thursday that at least 26 people were killed in Abobo overnight. 

"The wounded can't get to ambulances because we've been cut off in this district," Abobo resident Kareem Coulibaly said by telephone, the crackling of gunfire audible on the line. He said he saw six bodies, and an additional two women with gunshot wounds. "Young people have been out in the streets burning tires and throwing rocks since the police left," Mr. Coulibaly said.

 The U.N. says that in all, it has verified almost 400 deaths in the postelectoral violence. Most are believed to have been targeted by pro-Gbagbo forces, although the U.N. has been blocked by government security forces from investigating alleged mass graves.

Growing international concern that this season's robust cocoa crop might not make it out of the country, which produces more than a third of the world's supply, sent futures to their highest price since January 1979 on Thursday.

In 2002, an attempted coup plunged Ivory Coast into civil war. While fighting subsided a couple years later, the country has remained divided into a rebel-held north and government-controlled south. Now it appears to be lapsing back into full-blown conflict. Mr. Gbagbo's forces have started using artillery and other heavy weaponry, prompting thousands to flee areas of Abidjan, the commercial capital. 

Mr. Gbagbo's government is also accused of cutting off the electricity supply to the northern half of the country. Health workers there said only a few hospitals with generators were functioning, while electric-controlled water purifiers had stalled. 

A spokesman for Mr. Gbagbo said the outage occurred for technical reasons. "In light of the sanctions we're undergoing, we have to ration electricity because of missing spare parts," said the spokesman, Don Mello.

Mediators from the African Union have repeatedly failed to break the violent deadlock between Messrs. Gbagbo and Ouattara. The U.N., U.S., European Union and the Economic Community of West African States, a regional bloc known as Ecowas, recognize Mr. Ouattara as the November poll's rightful winner. 

A high-level AU leadership team, which included South African President Jacob Zuma, returned last month without any sign of progress toward a political settlement or a decision on measures to address the crisis. The AU has extended its deadline until the end of March. 

In a briefing last month, South Africa's Minister for International Relations and Cooperation, Maite Nkoana-Mashabane, warned Western countries not to meddle in Ivory Coast's crisis mediation. "The solution mainly has to come from African leaders themselves," she said. 

That stance has angered Mr. Ouattara's supporters, who complain that the continent's leaders have focused on minimizing a Western role in the conflict at the expense of millions of Ivoirians suffering through it.

"What is the Africa solution? There's no Africa solution," says Patrice Mallet, Mr. Ouattara's spokesman in South Africa. "There's a solution to the problem. Period." 

Mr. Mallet argues that Mr. Gbagbo has been able to stir up violence in Ivory Coast because much of the world has been distracted by unrest in north Africa and the Middle East. The upshot is that he's stayed in power as the country spirals toward civil war. "Gbagbo is getting away with it," he says.

Separately, Ivory Coast's ambassador to the United Nations said Thursday that Mr. Gbagbo tried to smuggle in three helicopters in violation of a U.N. arms embargo.

"It is true that he wanted these three helicopters to be smuggled into Côte d'Ivoire and be assembled," said Youssoufou Bamba. "This is something we have from credible sources."

Mr. Bamba's remarks call into question an apology Alain Le Roy, the head of U.N. peacekeeping, made Wednesday for what he said was were incorrect remarks from U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon that Belarus had begun delivery of three attack helicopters to Ivory Coast.

Three diplomats confirmed Mr. Bamba's assertion, saying a country tipped off the U.N. so that it would go public and stop Belarus from making the shipment. 

—Leslie Josephs in New York and Joe Lauria in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, contributed to this article.

 Write to  Monica Mark at Monica.Mark@dowjones.com and Peter Wonacott at peter.wonacott@wsj.com 