The flashy parties that often accompany the rites of passage for Jewish children can be hugely expensive affairs. This month, as she turns 12 years old and celebrates her bat mitzvah in Nyack, N.Y.,  Noa Levin is choosing a different course for spending the money. 

In lieu of a big party, she is forming a partnership with New York nonprofit City Arts to undertake what the arts charity calls a "milestone project." Through the project, Ms. Levin says she and her friends and family will get together to draw four paintings centered on the concept of spreading peace throughout the world.

City Arts, which is known for the murals about peace it sponsors on city buildings around New York, will provide the Levins with a professional artist who will help them plan the paintings. The artwork will then be donated to a school, synagogue or other public place in need of an aesthetic pick-me-up. 

"Even if a party allows other people to have fun, giving to charity is going to make a big difference in other places," says Ms. Levin, who will turn 12 next week. 

Ms. Levin will also ask friends and family to donate to City Arts, as well as to other charities chosen by the donors. 

"This way I ask people to do a nice thing in honor of my bat mitzvah but by giving them the choice, that way I don't have to make the big decisions," Ms. Levin says. "I do hope someone gives to an animal organization because I like animals." 

The Levins are part of a growing number of families who are choosing to eschew the expensive parties for bar and bat mitzvahs and instead focus their attention on various service projects and charity initiatives. 

City Arts has so far worked on seven different projects, which are accompanied by donations that typically start at a $10,000, says the nonprofit's director,  Tsipi Ben-Haim. 

"It's a very strong message a 12-year-old gives to their peers when they choose not to just do something for themselves and throw a big party but choose to do something for their greater community," Ms. Ben-Haim says.

"Hopefully Noa will then kick off a different behavior in Nyack for other families to follow." 

 Write to  Shelly Banjo at shelly.banjo@wsj.com 