A recent internal memo at Bank of America Corp. could upset a delicate balance the securities industry has struck for handling financial advisers' transitions to new firms. 

Read the full  Investing in Funds report .

The bank last month sent a memo to many employees at its U.S. Trust wealth-management business, asking that they give 60 days' notice before leaving. During this period—a "garden leave" in industry parlance, because the workers are sent home and thus free to tend to their gardens—contact with clients must be consistent with Bank of America's interests and immediately disclosed to management, the memo said.

Employees on garden leave will continue to receive base salaries, but will lose some benefits and incentive pay. 

U.S. Trust says the policies outlined in the memo aren't new but were expanded to include a small number of additional employees.

  Thomas B. Lewis, a lawyer and chairman of the employment-litigation group at Stark & Stark in Lawrenceville, N.J., as well as others in the industry, say this is the first time a garden-leave policy has been applied to a range of employees below a firm's senior executives. A question now is whether the action will prompt competitors to do the same.

Some industry observers think such a reaction could hurt the Protocol for Broker Recruiting, an agreement that aims to minimize legal wrangling among brokerages. Firms that sign on agree not to sue each other when brokers leave, as long as they take only certain customer information to their new employer. The protocol has been signed by more than 600 securities firms, though not by U.S. Trust. 

Garden-leave provisions could cripple advisers' ability to persuade clients to stick with them during the transition. "Sixty days is an eternity in the brokerage world," Mr. Lewis says. The policy also makes advisers less attractive to potential employers, who won't likely wait around for advisers to complete their extended leaves. 

Securities regulators haven't developed specific rules about investment advisers' use of social-networking sites, but that doesn't excuse advisers who don't have their own guidelines.

The Securities and Exchange Commission has been sending deficiency letters to registered investment advisers it examines who don't have social-networking policies in place, compliance professionals say. The actions are part of a broader scrutiny of social-networking matters by the agency, which has been asking advisers for information.

A document request list sent by the SEC to some advisers asks for a broad range of data related to social-media use, according to a compliance alert from ACA Compliance Group, a Silver Spring, Md., consulting firm. Among other things, the SEC is seeking to identify how often advisers use websites such as Facebook, Twitter and LinkedIn. The SEC also asked for data on record-retention policies, disciplinary actions involving social media, and communications made and received by advisers through the sites. 

An SEC spokesman declined to comment. But at a compliance conference last month, an SEC official said that misuse of social-networking sites is an issue that is cropping up during SEC examinations and enforcement actions. Problems include advisers who use false information in their LinkedIn profiles or overstate their experience, said John Walsh, associate director and chief counsel of the SEC's office of compliance inspections and examinations. 

Many firms have polices that bar their advisers from using social media. That might not appeal to advisers who are enthusiastic about using the sites to meet clients, but it could appease regulators. 

For many people, the local credit union may seem an unlikely place to open an investment account or look for a financial adviser. 

But these member-owned, not-for-profit institutions are among the players intent on wresting clients and investment dollars from big-brand brokerages. 

By 2010, credit unions accounted for more than one million retail investment accounts totaling $43 billion in assets. The percentage of credit unions with retail investment programs rose to 12.2% in 2009 from 10.6% in 2005, according to consulting firm Callahan & Associates. 

And there's more growth in store. For example, PrimeVest Financial Services Inc., a broker-dealer that provides investment services through community banks and credit unions, now works with 22 credit unions. But that number could more than double in the next year because of deals in the pipeline, says  Catherine Bonneau, president and chief executive. 

To be sure, credit unions' share of the investor market is still tiny next to independent brokerages and boutique registered investment advisers. 

But some credit unions are gaining customers from discount brokers as former self-directed investors look for guidance, says Callahan & Associates Inc. analyst  Lydia Cole. Because credit unions are owned by the people who use them, she says, "members feel the credit union is looking out for their best interests." 

—Written by Dow Jones Newswires reporters Jennifer Hoyt Cummings (jennifer.cummings@dowjones.com), Suzanne Barlyn (suzanne.barlyn@dowjones.com) and Thomas Coyle (thomas.coyle@dowjones.com)