During the recession, many companies downsized their art collections. Reader's Digest Association moved to smaller offices with less wall space and pared its artworks back. Playboy Enterprises recently sold a small part of its extensive collection.

But Deutsche Bank has gone the opposite way at its Frankfurt, Germany, headquarters, expanding its collection to include newer and more international works. These days, the bank "is much more global and international," said Friedhelm Hütte, global head of the bank's art. "The art reflects that."

The bank's just-renovated headquarters—twin towers of 38 and 40 stories—feature 1,500 pieces grouped regionally from Asia, Africa/the Mideast, the Americas, Germany and the rest of Europe. One-third are new to the bank's collection.

The bank limits itself to paper-based creations—mostly sketches, water colors and photographs—which the company views as better at reflecting artistic innovations and experiments. The oldest artist was born in 1957, the youngest in 1985. Two pieces were commissioned. (The older work by German artists was lent to a Frankfurt museum.) The bank declined to comment on how much it spent on the art. 

In each elevator lobby, there's a picture of the floor's namesake artist, the artist's signature and an artwork, with more works by that artist in halls and conference rooms on the floor. The bank offers public tours of the art every first Monday of the month. 

On the 19th floor of one tower, Amy Cutler's fanciful drawings include women waiting behind trees at the edge of the forest for a cake-tossing competition, as well as women working in a factory with Rapunzel-like hair. The Poughkeepsie, N.Y., native borrows from fairy tales for inspiration. Her lobby photo shows her fast asleep with a blanket pulled up to her chin.

The self-portrait photographs of Samuel Fosso of Cameroon explore different roles. In one, he's "The Chief (the One Who Sold Africa to the Colonists)," wrapped in fur, draped in gold jewelry and holding a huge bunch of sunflowers. In another, he's "The Liberated American Woman of the '70s," with vibrant clothing, dark lipstick, blue nails, purple heels and a straw hat.

On the 23rd floor of one tower, Nedko Solakov of Bulgaria spent three days covering a 65-foot stretch of red and blue-rose wallpaper with black-ink-and-acrylic sketches, some of which he labeled. A line is dubbed "a lazy snake." A smudge is labeled "a mistake." A little man standing on a leaf is "a scared-to-death investor."

—Laura Stevens