 Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke said the U.S. central bank is prepared to fight inflation, although expectations are not for a sustained price rise. He also defended the Fed's policies and blamed demand for commodity-price increases.  

 World-wide manufacturing jumped in February, as U.S. manufacturing activity turned in its best performance since May 2004 and similar data from Asia indicated regional growth is intact.  

 Japan's Kan passed his first full-year budget through parliament, but the prime minister is far from securing the survival of his government beyond the next few weeks.  

 Las Vegas Sands said it is being investigated by U.S. authorities regarding its compliance in Macau with the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act. 

 In a sign that Japan's private-equity market could be coming back to life, U.S. firm Carlyle Group said it agreed to buy manufacturer Tsubaki Nakashima from a unit of Nomura Holdings. 

 General Motors reported a 46% gain in U.S. light vehicle sales for February, leading monthly gains at auto makers Ford, Nissan, Chrysler and Subaru.  

 Japan's auto sales fell 14% in February as the end of government grants to spur sales continued to weigh on demand.  

 The EU's highest court declared illegal the widespread practice of charging men and women different rates for insurance.  

 Rajat K. Gupta, who headed McKinsey from 1994 to 2000, was charged with insider trading in a civil administrative proceeding filed by the U.S. SEC.  

 Goldman Sachs said it could lose up to $3.4 billion in litigation-related matters involving securities it underwrote for which the purchasers are suing to recover losses or to force the firm to buy them back.  

 Daiichi said it will spend $805 million to buy privately held California drug maker Plexxikon. 

 Indonesian inflation unexpectedly slowed in February due to easing food prices, but some analysts still expect the central bank to raise its policy rate Friday.  

 Obama's effort to win U.S. congressional ratification by July of a free-trade deal with South Korea is in jeopardy due to a stalemate with House Republicans.  

 Carl Huttenlocher, head of Highbridge Capital Management's Asia investments, is leaving the hedge-fund firm. He oversaw about $2 billion in assets.  

 A new rule that would allow Americans and other foreign individuals to buy Indian mutual funds may not find takers anytime soon.  

 The Hong Kong-based Woo family bought an 8% stake in Italian fashion house Ferragamo.  

 Yemen's president accused Obama of fomenting unrest in the Arab world, an unusually vociferous move from a leader who has been receiving millions of dollars in military aid from the U.S. to fight a local arm of al Qaeda.  

 Beijing widened a corruption probe to include a senior Railways Ministry engineer involved in China's $300 billion high-speed rail project, a month after the removal of the railways minister.  

 China appeared to reinstate some restrictions on foreign journalists lifted ahead of the 2008 Beijing Olympics, barring reporting from areas where online activists have called for protests.  

Russia plans to install antiship and antiaircraft missiles on the Kuril Islands, a move likely to heighten tensions with Japan, which claims the territories.

A Vietnamese dissident was released on bail after calling for a revolution inspired by Mideast protests, state-run media said.

China filed a case with the WTO over U.S. antidumping measures against Chinese shrimp. 