FLORENCE—It took a creative revolution for the young Pablo Picasso, Joan Miró and Salvador Dalí to break with the tradition of classical Spanish painting and assume the status of demigods of the modern art world. The exhibition "Picasso, Miró, Dalí. Angry Young Men: The Birth of Modernity," which opened on March 12 at Florence's Palazzo Strozzi, shows how Modernism developed in a series of leaps and pauses. 

The exhibition comprises 60 early works by the three Spanish artists, including sketches by Picasso, among them those for his revolutionary 1907 painting "Les Demoiselles d'Avignon." It clearly shows Miró and Dalí following in Picasso's artistic footsteps and Picasso himself recognizing the radical worth of his younger colleagues.

Covering 30 years in reverse chronological order, the show leads viewers back to the art world of the early 1900s and the birth of Modernism. It opens with a series of works that recall a visit by Dalí to Picasso in Paris in 1926, and then covers Dalí's artistic responses to Miró and the moment when Miró and Picasso crossed paths. It ends on a high note, with works by the three artists that demonstrate the influence of Cahier 7, Picasso's 1907 sketchbook for "Les Demoiselles d'Avignon," in which he struggled to create a new pictorial language straddling two centuries and the traditions of African and classical art. 

There were strong ties between the three artists. They were all from Catalonia and all made big professional and creative breakthroughs in Paris. While the trio carved out individual artistic identities, their work evolved through a dialogue based on common roots. They developed distinctive styles—from Miró's determined opposition to figurative painting to Dalí's Surrealism—but shared a desire to rebel.

They also shared a belief that art should be an agent of social change. Picasso often used his pre-Cubist work to highlight the plight of the poor and his hopes for change for Spain, as shown in "Old Man with a Cloak" (1895). Miró, too, worked his vision of society into his creations, particularly his still lifes and landscapes, in which simple objects such as eggplants or flowers become symbols of the dignity of the poor. Dalí, meanwhile, was expelled from art school before taking his final exams because he refused to accept that anyone there was qualified to judge his work.

 Until July 17 

  www.palazzostrozzi.org  