HONG KONG— Brightoil Petroleum (Holdings) Ltd.
BRTPF


3.03
%




, the biggest supplier of shipping fuel in the export hub of China's Pearl River Delta, said it signed an agreement for loans of up to $4 billion with China Development Bank, in a deal that highlights the bank's ambitions to expand beyond its traditional role as a policy lender.

The deal boosted the Hong Kong shares of Brightoil Petroleum, which has a market capitalization of 33.4 billion Hong Kong dollars (US$4.3 billion), to a record HK$4.92 apiece, up 8.4% on the day.

The company said China Development Bank's Hong Kong unit will provide financial support for the company's mergers and acquisitions and tanker-fleet expansion plan, as well as for its trading of oil products. No further details of the agreement were provided.

Analysts cautioned that the deal, called a strategic cooperation agreement, didn't appear set in stone.

Brightoil needs money to pay for the rapid and costly expansion of its fleet of oil tankers and storage tanks to supply fuel oil to boats, where margins are wider than only supplying fuel oil. Brightoil has operations in major ports in China, as well as Singapore, Malaysia and Rotterdam. 

In past years, CDB has lent tens of billions of dollars as part of government negotiated deals that helped get China access to natural resources in developing countries. 

The Brightoil deal underscores the continued ambitions of CDB, a state-owned policy bank, to expand beyond its conventional role as a lender and move into higher-margin businesses such as investment banking, where it would compete not only with other Chinese commercial banks but foreign investment banks, too. CDB opened a Hong Kong branch just this summer. 

As part of the agreement, announced Friday, Brightoil agreed to make CDB its preferred banker for a broad range of financial services including loans, underwriting corporate bonds, and advising on mergers and acquisitions, investment banking and financial advisory. 

CDB declined to comment. 

  William Chia, executive director and vice president of Brightoil, said China wants to promote private companies in the oil sector, and increase the percentage of Chinese-controlled ships importing crude oil to 50% from 10% by 2015. He estimated China would need as many as 120 new supertankers, and a greatly expanded supply of oil storage, for its expanded national strategic oil reserves. 

 Write to  Shai Oster at shai.oster@wsj.com 