The good thing about getting burglarized, apart from the lesson the intrusion teaches you to not get too attached to worldy possessions, is that crooks are rarely in the market for art and antiques. 

We've been burglarized only once, if you don't include the guy who walked into our unlocked apartment while we were there, told my wife he was searching for the super, and slipped out. I promptly called 911 and the gentleman, a career felon, was caught across the street. The more serious and successful break-in occurred while I was in my office, which was on the ground floor of the apartment building where I live. I heard my dog barking more vehemently than usual and rushed upstairs, where I encountered a burly young man in our hall who brushed past me muttering something about "not wanting any trouble."

I know I should have challenged him, but having written about crime and hung out with cops for years, I'd been taught that defending my honor, and what turned out to be my wife's jewelry, probably wasn't worth getting stabbed to death, or even a black eye, particularly when you're insured.

On the other hand, if I'd caught the thug absconding with my collection of R. Crumb comics, my Browning School Fifth Grade Field Day trophy, or my first edition of The Great Gatsby, I have no doubt I'd have been willing to fight him to the death.

As I have no doubt Jennifer George would, too, if she caught anybody trying to swipe her grandfather's drawings, which she keeps under her bed. Fortunately, she's never had to face that dilemma in the West Side doorman building where she's lived the last 30 years, her security apparently better than mine. In any case, should a crook ever happen to find his way into her apartment he'd undoubtedly go for the jewelry—jewelry-designing being but one of several careers Ms. George has pursued successfully over her 51 years. 

Among the others, and I only just met her so I'm probably missing one or two incarnations, are op-ed contributor, screenwriter, and clothing designer. But it was the drawing under the bed that brought me to her apartment, across the street from the Museum of Natural History, on an afternoon when the light, if not the air, carried upon it the earliest insinuation of spring.

Ms. George's granddad is  Rube Goldberg, the syndicated cartoonist whose name has become synonymous with chain-reaction devices and systems of utterly unnecessary and screwball complexity. Younger people, if they've heard of him at all, probably don't realize Rube Goldberg was an actual person. Yet his legacy lives on and appears on the cusp of a spirited revival. 

Ms. George, who runs a company along with her relatives to protect and merchandize his name, reported they've signed a film deal with the makers of "Elf" to develop a movie based on his characters and contraptions. Also, Purdue University holds an annual national competition called the "Rube Goldberg Machine Contest." Teams compete to meet such challenges as watering a plant or dispensing hand sanitizer, the award given the group that manages to accomplish the task as creatively and one assumes as convolutedly as humanly possible. Finally, the band OK Go has a video—"This Too Shall Pass—Rube Goldberg machine version" that's been viewed more than 25,000,000 times and takes Mr. Goldberg's domino effect concepts to celestial new heights. 

I'd obviously heard of Mr. Goldberg and even had a sense in my mind's eye of what his work looked like. But until Ms. George pulled some examples out from under her bed, I don't think I really appreciated his brilliance as a humorist. For example, his "Simple Way To Fish An Olive Out Of One Of Those Long-Necked Bottles": "At 6:30 weight (A) drops on head of dwarf (B) causing him to drop cigar (C) which sets fire to paper (D) – Heat from fire angers dwarf's wife (E)…" The chain of events unrolls until the aforementioned olive is successfully retrieved.

"There were always midgets, bowling balls and parrots," Ms. George said. "Why this trifecta of imagery I don't know."

She remembers her grandfather, who died in 1970 when she was 11, although not all that well. She said that he was kind to her—"He saw I had a loose hand when I was drawing"—but that living in the great man's shadow took a toll on her father,  George George, a Broadway and film producer. Mr. George — who changed his name at Rube's urging, as did George's older brother Thomas, to escape the anti-Semitism of that era—was no slouch, either. His film credits include "My Dinner With Andre," though he may be best known for possibly the greatest Broadway flop of all time, at least until "Spider-Man" came along—"Via Galactica". He had better luck with "Memphis," which won the 2010 Tony Award for Best Musical, alas too late for him to enjoy its success. Mr. George died in 2007.

"Rube had to be the center of attention," Ms. George said. "I think it was tough having to be his son."

To give a hint of Mr. Goldberg's celebrity in his heyday—he began syndicating his work in 1915, won the Pulitzer Prize in 1948, and was the first president of the National Cartoonists Society, whose Reuben Award was named for and designed by him—Ms. George said her father used to tell her stories of the Goldbergs' soirees at their brownstone off 75th Street and Riverside Drive. "They had these wild parties during prohibition and they'd all get sauced," Ms. George said. "They'd line the walls with paper and all the artists would draw all over the walls, and they'd wheel in a piano and the Gershwin boys would play. My father remembers vividly after one of those parties they brought Charlie Chaplin up to say goodnight."

Ms. George has no intention of selling the roughly 60 pieces of her grandfather's work, which she stores under her bed because her walls are already covered in art. According to the rules of feng shui, she said, "You're not supposed to keep anything under your bed. But I have the most vivid Technicolor dreams every night. I worry were I to move all the cartoons, I might stop dreaming all together."

 Write to  Ralph Gardner at ralph.gardner@wsj.com 