A member of a key tobacco-advisory committee for the Food and Drug Administration who faced criticism from the industry says he stepped down because he can be more helpful to the agency as an outsider.

Gregory N. Connolly, a Harvard School of Public Health professor and tobacco researcher, said Wednesday that he resigned about three weeks ago for "personal reasons" and because "I can be more effective off the committee than on it."

Mr. Connolly said he wasn't pushed to resign, though "I didn't have as many friends as one would like" within the FDA.

He also said his decision had nothing to do with Philip Morris USA's effort last year to have him and three other members of the advisory committee removed on the grounds that they had extensive conflicts of interest. The agency rejected the  Altria Group Inc.
MO


0.04
%




 unit's request early last year.

An FDA spokesman said Wednesday that Mr. Connolly resigned and that "his departure will not impede the schedule or progress of" the Tobacco Products Scientific Advisory Committee. He declined further comment.

Mr. Connolly's apparent departure comes a few months before the panel is scheduled to issue a report on an issue crucial to the tobacco industry—whether menthol cigarettes should be banned. The FDA doesn't have to follow the panel's recommendation and faces no deadline to act. Menthol smokes account for about 30% of industry sales.

The advisory board was created in the wake of the landmark 2009 law empowering the FDA to regulate the tobacco industry for the first time.

Marlboro-cigarette maker Philip Morris USA, in a letter to the agency last year, said Mr. Connolly should be removed from the committee because he had provided deposition or trial testimony in lawsuits against the industry, and had made "highly inflammatory statements to the media" regarding menthol cigarettes.

Mr. Connolly said being on the board created certain restrictions and that he now will be better able to help "FDA get the science right" on menthol and other tobacco issues.

Mr. Connolly said he will attend a meeting of the panel next week to present "hard-hitting" research of his own on menthol cigarettes.

Morgan Stanley analyst  David Adelman, in a research note, said Mr. Connolly's departure makes him more confident that the FDA will ultimately decide not to ban menthol as a cigarette flavoring.

Mr. Connolly's absence "removes an individual who was the dominant anti-tobacco voice in the menthol hearings so far," Adelman wrote.

The issue is of paramount importance to  Lorillard Inc., the maker of leading menthol brand Newport. The product accounts for roughly 90% of the Greensboro, N.C., company's sales.

The tobacco advisory panel is scheduled to issue its report and recommendations on menthol cigarettes to the FDA in March. It could make less-onerous recommendations than a ban, such as new restrictions on advertising.

News of Mr. Connolly's resignation was reported earlier on a tobacco-news blog published by Boston University professor Michael Siegel.

 Write to  David Kesmodel at david.kesmodel@wsj.com 