It's a dilemma every New Yorker faces: It's late, you need cash, and the only option is the sidewalk ATM. It looks harmless enough: a sad little R2-D2 of a machine with a toy-like interface. But it clearly doesn't belong to any reputable bank. It's scuffed, dented and secured to the storefront with a rusty lock. And the operator's name (scribbled on a sticker in black magic marker) is disturbingly generic: Acme ATM Corp. Dare you dip your card in? 

It's the banking equivalent of sex with a stranger, but many of us take the risk because these indy machines are, conveniently, everywhere you look. Eighty percent of the city's roughly 20,000 ATMs are independently owned, and the number of units has been growing about 10% a year. 

The reason? ATMs are cheap. While the fancy cash dispensers hosted by banks still cost about $30,000, the typical street model now costs less than a high-end dishwasher. The popular Korean-made Nautilus Hyosung Mini Bank (you know the model: it features an animated blob doing happy cartwheels as it spits out your money) runs about $1,800. 

With prices that low, you can stick an ATM just about anywhere and profit off the fee revenue.  Dar Reynolds, area manager at New Jersey distributor Green Genie ATM, says that until recently, ATMs were found mainly in busy locations like supermarkets. Now, they're popping up in apartment buildings, parking garages, law firms, nail salons, doctors' offices and tattoo parlors. His clientele includes an upstate strawberry farm.

The machines all do the same thing: dispense cash. But the fees, like everything found in nature, vary magnificently. According to Mr. Reynolds, the city's highest ATM fee is found in a certain Manhattan strip club: $15. High fees also abound at airports, hospitals, college campuses (students are particularly fee-oblivious) and, of course, tourist spots. The ATMs outside Grimaldi's, the famous cash-only Brooklyn pizzeria, charge $4.50. 

Other merchants take a low-fee, high-volume approach. Most McDonald's offer 99-cent ATMs, and some of the busiest machines in the city are said to be the 99-cent sidewalk dispensers outside the Continental, an East Village dive bar. In Queens, there are four Key Food supermarkets that charge no fee at all. 

That's more like it! Everyone hates ATM fees: We imagine the surcharges fund some giant Death Star lounge in outer space, where greedy Citibank and Chase executives laugh the hours away.

That may be the case with bank ATMs, but the indy industry, it turns out, supports hundreds of small businesses. ATM Money Machine, a New Jersey dealer, says it works with hundreds of one-man ATM outfits—often folks who launched their new ventures after losing their jobs. They may own and service five or six machines, splitting the fee revenue—typically $1,000 a month—with the store owner hosting the ATM.

  Pedro Tavarez bought his first machine a few years ago to pad the earnings at his Prospect Heights liquor store. Now, his one-man operation, Uprising ATM, includes 65 machines at locations all over the city, including a Williamsburg lumber yard. It's a good living, he says: "You make money while you sleep!" 

Still, the life of an ATM man ain't easy. The low-end machines weren't designed to operate outdoors—they die in a heavy rain or snow. Then there's the cutthroat competition. When you buy an ATM, you get a master key. Mr. Tavarez says some use their keys to break into each other's machines and swipe the keypads and monitors.

The biggest risk, of course, is a cashbox burglary. The city's most colorful ATM thief might be the local gentleman from a couple years back who used an Econoline van to ram into several sidewalk ATMs, dumping them in Flushing River after extracting the cash. When cops finally caught up to him, according to reports, he immediately proclaimed his innocence: "I was not in the van! I don't know anything about ATM machines!" 

The larger threat to independent ATMs may be the city itself. Turns out, while the law hasn't been enforced, most of those sidewalk ATMs are illegal because they "encroach" on public sidewalks. In 2009, an ATM hater who happens to be Manhattan borough president,  Scott Stringer, issued an anti-ATM report titled, hilariously, "Sidewalks Under Siege." In January, the campaign culminated in Mayor Michael Bloomberg signing a law that boosted shopkeepers' potential fines to $5,000. 

For now, New Yorkers still have a choice, and the decision of whether to use the $2 indy ATM or the $3 Chase machine raises all kinds of questions. If the indy ATM eats your cash, for example, where can you turn? Many independent machines bear little stickers advertising a mysterious "ATM HelpDesk." Ringing 888-486-4949 takes you to a recorded message that tells you to contact your card issuer. Then it hangs up on you. Thanks!

The line, it turns out, is operated by something called WorldPay, "a global leader in payment processing."  Mike Cowart, head of the company's ATM division, says WorldPay is simply following the law—federal regulations require consumers to initiate the cash-recovery process with their card issuer. If you used a bank-owned ATM, you'd go through the same rigmarole to get your money back.

A larger issue is identity theft. Fraudsters target ATMs with fake keypads to swipe pin numbers and skimmers that record card data. They even install entire fake ATMs. But a bank-branded machine is no guarantee of safety.  Luis Corrons Granel, technical director with data-protection provider Panda Security, says thieves are more likely to target the high-volume ATMs found in bank vestibules. 

If the risks are equal, I'd rather use the independent ATM and see my fee support the local deli. But there may be an even better solution: Get your own machine. It's easy to get one installed in your home—you can lease an ATM for just $69 a month. Now all I need is someone willing to stock it with twenties. 

—Ms. Kadet, who writes the "Tough Customer" column for SmartMoney magazine, can be reached at anne.kadet@dowjones.com.