Tuesday afternoon the House passed a three-week extension of the federal budget to avoid a government shutdown, but House Republican leaders are fuming that a handful of conservative groups advised members to vote against the GOP spending measure.

These groups included the Heritage Foundation's new lobbying arm, the Club for Growth, the Family Research Council and various tea party groups that scored any "yes" vote on the budget as a strike against them.

Heritage and these other groups say that they are "holding Republicans' feet to the fire," and that delays in passing a budget for the rest of the year make it less likely that the $61 billion in cuts that Republicans have promised will ever be delivered. They want Republicans to stop cutting deals with the White House and to insist on the full package of cuts now in ObamaCare, National Public Radio and other liberal sacred cows.

As recently as Monday night, the Republican whip operation in the House, under the steady hand of Kevin McCarthy of California, was worried that conservatives might bolt from the GOP budget even though it cuts another $6 billion over the next three weeks. This keeps the budget on a glide path to $61 billion in savings for 2011. Republicans held a powwow the night before the vote to remind undecided freshmen that taking the budget bill down would give House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi a floor win.

"This is a budget that cuts spending, so why are conservatives against it?" asked a veteran House Republican from the Midwest. Moderates complained that when they take tough votes to make these cuts, conservative groups now attack them. One member of the House Republican leadership team told me: "The conservative groups never alerted Speaker [John] Boehner that this opposition to the budget bill was coming. We were caught off guard."

The Senate Republicans have a similar problem on their hands with conservative members. Three Senate Republicans—Mike Lee of Utah, Rand Paul of Kentucky and Jim DeMint of South Carolina—voted no on the GOP House budget last week because they said it does not cut spending enough. Those three will be joined by freshman Marco Rubio of Florida later this week, who has said he will not vote for any additional temporary budget extensions. This has Minority Leader Mitch McConnell worried about getting the necessary 51-vote minimum to pass any budget. One Senate leadership aide said that votes from conservatives against the budget "will only require us to go after moderate Democrats, and we may end up in the end cutting spending less than everyone wants."

Expect this three-week budget extension to pass, but it may be the last temporary funding bill Republicans will accept. A high-stakes budget showdown is still looming with President Obama, and it could be here by the first week of April.

To read more stories like this one, please subscribe to Political Diary.