CARACAS -- The confirmed cases of cholera in Venezuela have reached 111, with potentially hundreds of other untreated carriers "spreading the disease without even knowing it," said the country's health minister Friday. 

Health authorities haven't given any indication that the intestinal infection has actually spread in Venezuela. All of the confirmed patients were part of a group of 452 Venezuelans who were exposed to contaminated food at a large social gathering in the Dominican Republic last week. 

Venezuela's health minister Eugenia Sader has said, however, that successful containment of the disease depends on all of the returning travelers coming forward and receiving medical treatment. 

"They are, at this moment, transmitting the disease without knowing it," she said. 

Speaking during a televised interview, Ms. Sader added that 80% of the group won't suffer any symptoms while roughly 3% to 5% would fall gravely ill. 

Treatment was simple and consists of taking three pills, Ms. Sader said. Of the 111 confirmed cases, 27 patients were hospitalized while the rest were outpatients, she said. 

There was a concern, Ms. Sader said, of someone carrying the disease to parts of Venezuela without sewage systems, like rural areas, which are most vulnerable to a widespread outbreak. 

In addition to the cases in Venezuela, a dozen guests at the gathering sought medical attention in the Dominican Republic. 

Venezuelan authorities also reported that four other cholera cases connected to the reunion have been reported in Spain, the United States and Mexico. 

Cholera is a highly treatable disease that most people survive if it is caught early, medical experts say. If it is not, it can cause severe diarrhea and vomiting and kill in days. 

It is likely that the contamination at the Dominican Republic gathering had its origins in the deadly cholera epidemic that erupted in neighboring Haiti in October. 

Citing figures from Haitian health officials, the Pan American Health Organization reports that as of Jan. 16 there have been more than 190,000 cumulative cholera cases and nearly 4,000 deaths in Haiti from the disease. 

According to the PAHO, there have been 244 confirmed cases of cholera in the Dominican Republic with one reported death. 