   Steve Jobs, who has battled pancreatic cancer and received a liver transplant, is taking another unexpected leave from running  Apple Inc.,
AAPL


0.41
%




 raising uncertainty over his health and the future of the world's most valuable technology company.

In a Monday morning email to Apple employees on a federal holiday, Mr. Jobs wrote that the company's board of directors "has granted me a medical leave of absence so I can focus on my health." 

Apple's 55-year-old chief executive and co-founder didn't specify what health issue was causing him to take the time off or when he might return. Instead, Mr. Jobs said he hoped to be back as soon as possible and his family would "deeply appreciate respect for our privacy."

The leave marks the third time in the past decade Mr. Jobs has been forced to step back from his role at Apple, which he has built into a $65 billion consumer electronics giant with products such as the iPhone and iPad. He took a leave in 2004 when he had surgery to remove a tumor in his pancreas and then again in the first half of 2009 for the liver transplant. 

In his six-sentence email, which Apple released publicly, Mr. Jobs said he will continue as CEO and "be involved in major strategic decisions for the company." In his absence, day-to-day operations will be run by  Tim Cook, his longtime lieutenant and chief operating officer. Mr. Cook, 50 years old, led Apple during Mr. Jobs's previous leave and won praise for his ability to make Apple's sprawling operations move on time.

Mr. Jobs's email came a day before the Cupertino, Calif., company is slated to report its latest quarterly results. It also was released on a day U.S. stock markets were closed to commemorate Martin Luther King's birthday. In Frankfurt trading, Apple shares fell 8% to €239.50 ($317.96).

The CEO's leave raises anew questions about the company's succession plans and product road map, since Mr. Jobs is so closely identified with Apple's gadgets and strategy. It also revives debate about Apple's disclosure practices, given the limited information the company has revealed about a CEO who is seen as so central to its success.

Mr. Jobs's Monday statement to Apple employees "leaves a lot to the imagination—and that was the problem the last time," said  Charles Elson, head of the Weinberg Center for Corporate Governance at the University of Delaware's business school. "It does leave a lot for investors to worry about."

The Securities and Exchange Commission opened an informal inquiry into Apple's disclosure about Mr. Jobs's health in January 2009, but didn't pursue an investigation. The agency is unlikely to open a fresh inquiry, as the company has publicly disclosed Mr Jobs's latest medical leave at its outset, people familiar with the matter said.

Mr. Jobs didn't respond to an email for comment or a call to his home. Apple's six other directors declined to comment or couldn't immediately be reached. 

Asked if the company or board planned to disclose further details, Apple spokeswoman Katie Cotton responded: "We've said all we're going to say."

A person familiar with the situation said that some employees were notified of Mr. Jobs's leave of absence in an email on Sunday and told that the company would make the announcement officially on Monday. This person said Mr. Jobs also said in the note that business would continue as usual. 

People familiar with the situation, including this person, said even some senior executives were completely surprised by the news. One person who met with Mr. Jobs recently said he showed no signs of being ill. 

The news about Mr. Jobs, who was last seen at a public event in October at an Apple Macintosh presentation, surprised many in Silicon Valley. 

Mr. Jobs didn't appear last week at a Verizon Wireless event announcing the iPhone would soon be available through the carrier; Mr. Cook was there instead. Mr. Jobs was expected to announce with  News Corp. a new digital publication for the iPad this week, but the event was postponed. 

Concerns about Mr. Jobs's health have swirled since he appeared thin at a conference for developers in June 2008, before his liver transplant. 

People familiar with the situation said shortly after the transplant that Mr. Jobs was having trouble gaining weight. At his most recent appearance in October, the CEO continued to look thin.

Mr. Jobs was diagnosed in 2004 with a rare type of pancreatic cancer called islet cell neuroendocrine tumor, which could be cured if surgery removed it promptly. But in 2008 he began exhibiting weight loss, and questions intensified when he said he would skip the Macworld trade show in early 2009. The CEO initially blamed a hormone imbalance for his weight loss in January 2009 but a week later went on medical leave blaming a "more complex" condition he didn't disclose.

Apple didn't explain Mr. Jobs's 2009 medical leave, but a physician expert at the time said the type of cancer Mr. Jobs had commonly metastasizes in another organ, usually the liver, during a patient's lifetime. A Tennessee hospital later disclosed Mr. Jobs had received a liver transplant there.

Over the past year and a half, Mr. Jobs has again taken center stage in public events, making it clear that he was providing the direction of the company. 

People familiar with the situation have said Mr. Jobs had come back to work with full energy and was like the "old Steve." During his 2009 leave, Mr. Jobs kept close management ties with Apple.

  Kim Caughey Forrest, an analyst for the Fort Pitt Capital fund, which previously owned Apple stock, said there are concerns about succession at Apple. "I'm not sure that the company, and the board of directors in particular, have answered the question on succession planning," she said. "We had this issue in 2008, and the board was supposed to learn from it, but they haven't." 

Despite concerns about Mr. Jobs's health, Apple's business has flourished. Over Apple's past two fiscal years ended in September, the company's sales have more than doubled to $65.2 billion and its profit has nearly tripled to $14 billion. 

Last year, Apple passed  Microsoft Corp.
MSFT


0.20
%




 in market capitalization to become the world's most valuable technology company. The stock hit its latest high of $348.48 on the Nasdaq Stock Market on Friday, more than four times where it stood two years ago.

—Ian Sherr, Roger Cheng,  Jean Eaglesham and Cari Tuna  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Yukari Iwatani Kane at yukari.iwatani@wsj.com and Joann S. Lublin at joann.lublin@wsj.com 