WASHINGTON—The White House endorsed a plan Thursday to give a chunk of airwaves worth an estimated $3 billion to public-safety groups for a new national wireless public-safety network that could cost as much as $15 billion to build, if Congress approves. 

The proposal is part of the administration's plan to make good on a pledge President Barack Obama made during his State of the Union speech Tuesday to make mobile Internet available to 98% of Americans in five years.

White House officials are also expected to ask Congress to set aside billions of dollars in future airwave auctions for a new broadband public-safety network. The network would allow police and firemen to share video and other data during emergencies. 

In the past, administration officials have suggested that these beefed-up public-safety networks could be shared by private companies to provide Internet access in rural areas. 

White House officials declined to comment on specifics of the new public-safety network plan.

However, the administration's plan depends on the willingness of House Republicans to set aside billions of dollars the government would raise from airwave auctions for the new network, instead of using it for deficit reduction or to offset other federal spending. 

The question of whether to give so-called D-block spectrum to public-safety agencies, or auction it off and put the money in the Treasury has divided members of Congress. 

The wireless industry also is divided on the issue of what to do with the D-block airwaves. 

  Verizon Communications Inc.
VZ


-0.47
%




 and  AT&T Inc.,
T


-0.91
%




 which both hold a large amount of airwaves for new 4G wireless services, favor giving the airwaves to public-safety groups instead of auctioning them off to smaller wireless competitors, such as  Deutsche Telekom's T-Mobile subsidiary and  Sprint Nextel Corp.
S


-2.00
%






Public-safety groups have urged Congress to fund a new national multibillion dollar wireless-data network since the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. 

Since then, lawmakers have spent billions on new radios and other equipment so federal, state and local public-safety officials can talk to each other during emergencies. But Congress has thus far been unwilling to commit billions more for a new wireless broadband network, which would allow police and firefighters to use two-way video or other data sharing.

Last year, the Federal Communications Commission proposed auctioning off a valuable block of airwaves to wireless carriers and using the proceeds to help fund this new public-safety network. The White House projected that the government would raise about $3 billion from the auction. 

At the time, agency officials said it would be more cost effective to auction off the airwaves and require commercial wireless providers to provide priority access to public-safety agencies. 

But the FCC didn't go forward with this auction and the White House Thursday formally rejected the FCC's plan, saying that giving the airwaves to public-safety groups was a better option. Administration officials are expected to lay out details of their new national wireless plan in the coming fiscal 2012 budget request.

The cost of building a new national network could cost upward of $15 billion, the FCC estimated last year.

On Tuesday, Democratic Sen. Jay Rockefeller of West Virginia re-introduced legislation to give the airwaves to public-safety groups. His legislation would also authorize the FCC's plan to take back airwaves from willing TV stations and auction them off to wireless companies. 

Station owners would get a still unspecified cut of the proceeds from those auctions. The rest of the money would be set aside for the new public-safety network under the White House's plan.

 Write to  Amy Schatz at Amy.Schatz@wsj.com 