It is the instinctive summer purchase: the beach cruiser. There's nothing wrong with them. They are the inexpensive workhorses that get you from summer share to the shore in comfort, but try to weave one through traffic and you'll discover that they're not the most versatile bikes around. The European-style city bike, like this Giant Via 1, is the way to go if you want something nimble and comfortable to ride—it has a more natural upright seating position so you won't look like you're training for the Tour de France. It rolls on larger road bike–sized wheels that, if you encounter traffic, you'll discover are much faster and stable than the fat tires you find on cruisers. And despite this bike's low price and clean, classic looks (notice that it has virtually no branding), the Via 1 has well-thought-out features like a steel twin top tube designed to hold a U-lock, a matching rear rack to carry beach or city essentials, bolted wheels (they're harder to steal) and an internal three-speed hub. Just because it's summer doesn't mean that hills will magically disappear on the way to the beach or ice cream parlor. $550, giant-bicycles.com 

The Fuego Element Portable was born to roam. It weighs a manageable 15 pounds by cleverly trimming bulk (its legs, for example, fold up to double as handles), but doesn't skimp on the mass that matters most. The grill's heaviest part is a thick, cast-iron cooking grate, which, paired with its 8,000-BTU gas-fueled burner, consistently delivers the perfect sear. The grill is relatively easy to clean (its grease collector is dishwasher safe and the rest of the grill comes apart with the twist of two wingnuts), which makes for a stellar start-to-finish cooking experience. The Element Portable will rule the tailgate party, to be sure, but it'll also make you seriously reconsider the full-size grill lumbering in your backyard. $150, elementbyfuego.com 



For way less than what it would cost to fix or replace your phone or fancy camera if it got dunked, you can get yourself this rugged, waterproof camera from Kodak and snap away all you want from sea to hot tub. Kodak EasyShare Sport, $80, kodak.com

When Akris, the Swiss clothier known for its meticulous attention to detail, decided to create cases for the iPad 2, it's only natural it would use cervo leather and horsehair. The top-handled Andrea for women and unisex Alpha are perfect for travel and come in six colors. Andrea, $1,990, and Alpha, $1,645; Akris New York Boutique, 212-717-1170.

If you're the paranoid type at the shore—and if you've ever had your valuables snatched while swimming in the ocean, you probably are—try this Seal Line bag. It will allow you to hold onto your important stuff while snorkeling so you can actually enjoy the water rather than keeping a lookout for land-based petty thieves. Wear it over your shoulder or strap it to your waist. While the bag isn't 100% watertight, you can place your wallet and camera in Seal Line's E-Cases, which are sold separately, and drop them in this bag for more solid protection. Seal Line Seal Pak,  $35, cascadedesigns.com 