For years, harried commuters in a gloomy South Bank underpass drew courage from the words that greeted them as they entered a long pedestrian tunnel to Waterloo Station. 

"I am not afraid as I descend, step by step, leaving behind the salt wind blowing up the corrugated river" begins "Eurydice"—a poem by  Sue Hubbard based on the story from Greek mythology, in which Orpheus tries to retrieve his dead lover Eurydice from the Underworld. The poem was painted in bronze and rust on both walls of the underpass 10 years ago, its stanzas taking people all the way from either entrance to the other, past occasional homeless men sleeping in the tunnel. 

 The poem was commissioned when Avery Architects renovated the Southbank cultural center, a concrete city that houses the London Eye, IMAX Cinema, the British Film Institute, the Hayward Gallery and the National Theatre complex, among others. In 2001 the Arts Council and the British Film Institute selected Ms. Hubbard, a poet with a track record as a public-places artist, able to collaborate easily with graphic designers and visual artists. The font, "Disturbance," was designed by  Jeremy Tankard. 

The public welcomed the poem, which stretched along the wall of the tunnel, which runs from the IMAX cinema to Waterloo Station. In autumn 2009, Time Out magazine listed the poem as one of the best-kept secrets of London. 

So it came as a shock when just weeks after the poem's brush with broader cultural fame, workmen employed by Network Rail, which owns the site, painted over it. A modern protest movement ensued. Soon, a Facebook page "Campaign to Put the Poem Back in Waterloo Underpass," was live, orchestrated by Ms. Hubbard's publisher,  Christopher Hamilton-Emery. His small firm, Salt, publishes her collection "Ghost Station," in which the poem appears. The Guardian newspaper's Books Blog encouraged readers to support the Facebook effort. More than 1,200 people signed up to the campaign and demanded the restoration of the poem—and £1,000 (about $1,600) was raised via Facebook and PayPal. 

Ms. Hubbard, the poet, says she "was really, really touched" by the response to the poem's destruction. "One man e-mailed me to say that he had proposed to his girlfriend as a result of reading it; and another message came from a woman who had seen it on her way to the hospital, where her daughter was dying. She said the poem had given her solace." 

A barrister on maternity leave volunteered to help with the campaign, Ms. Hubbard says, and helped on issues of copyright. 

  Lucinda Morrison, head of press at the nearby National Theatre, said she "really missed the poem when it was painted over, because its presence lit up and lightened the dreary subterranean experience" of getting to work from Waterloo. 

Network Rail's  Rob McGregor, the Waterloo Station manager, said that the poem had been installed under a predecessor company, Railtrack, and that the tunnel had been repainted as a part of routine maintenance in an effort to make it less shabby and a "more pleasant environment" for users of the underpass. He said Railtrack hadn't ever made an agreement about how long the poem would be there or for its ongoing maintenance. 

"Network Rail gets many requests for public art projects" on its infrastructure, Mr. McGregor said, and "we have to carefully consider balancing often diverse opinions, as well as how we maintain our infrastructure." 

But amid the outcry of support for the poem's return, Network Rail relented, making a formal agreement to keep the poem in the underpass "for the foreseeable future," according to Mr. McGregor. It made a financial contribution toward the restoration project, which will help in purchasing graffiti-resistant paint, and allocated funds to maintain the poem for the next decade. 

Now, "Eurydice" is back from the dead. 

A single donor, a risk-management software provider, Neural Technologies, put up the remaining £4,500 needed to buy the materials and commission James Salisbury, of the City & Guilds Art School, to stencil the poem back on the wall, now painted blue, with gold and bronze paint. The original font has been retained and Mr. Tankard, the font designer, waived his fee. (A short film of the work was made by Jonas Grimas, posted at vimeo.com/19032378.) The restoration was completed in January, with one twist: Owing to the cost, the poem is now painted on one wall only, in the direction from IMAX Cinema to Waterloo Station. 

Still, the news brought joy to pro-poem campaigners near and far. 

James Fincham, a chef in London who frequently uses Waterloo Station, says he was "thrilled to see it for the first time recently on my way to the Southbank. I was so intrigued by the stylish typeface that I walked back to Waterloo so as to read the verses in the right order. Now it's hard to think of the tunnel without the poem—it would be like the London Eye [Ferris wheel] disappearing overnight." 

On Facebook, Elatia Harris of Cambridge, Mass., sent Ms. Hubbard "stupendous congratulations!" 

"Maybe it's working to the benefit of the project that it was threatened, dismantled and finally put back up—conceivably that's better than just being there all along if we require poems to have their own life stories," wrote Ms. Harris. 

 Write to  Paul Levy at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 