KABUL—U.S.-led efforts to curtail Taliban gains in northern Afghanistan have been buffeted by a concerted bombing campaign that has killed more than 80 people in the past three weeks including at least 35 who died Monday when a suicide bomber struck an Afghan army recruitment center.

Although an influx of U.S. forces helped rout insurgents from their strongholds in Kunduz province late last year, Taliban fighters have regrouped to launch a demoralizing wave of attacks that are threatening to undercut fragile U.S. gains. Monday's dead included four children in the bombing carried out in the province's capital, also called Kunduz.

The string of bombings has heightened concerns that the Taliban are making headway in their efforts to reclaim control of crucial northern strongholds and offset losses to U.S. forces in Southern Afghanistan.

"This is where the turning point comes," said a Western analyst in Kabul who focuses on Northern Afghanistan. "When the Taliban come back in full force, what then?"

Northern Afghanistan, home to some of the country's most ardent anti-Taliban leaders, was once considered one of the safest parts of the country. But in 2009 Taliban insurgents seized control across a region that has become part of an increasingly important U.S. military supply route from neighboring Tajikistan. Since the start of the year, insurgents have staged at least 11 attacks in Kunduz that have killed more than 100 people, according to preliminary data from the United Nations.

Late last month, a suicide bomber killed 45 people gathered at another Afghan security recruitment center. Last week, another suicide bomber killed the Kunduz provincial police chief and two others outside the police headquarters. Anwar Jigdalak, the Kunduz governor, predicted that the Taliban bombing campaign would backfire because the surge in attacks, which has spread across the country, has killed scores of civilians. "They will lose their social support by staging such attacks," he said.

Some local officials and Western analysts blamed poor coordination between Afghan and U.S. forces for again giving Taliban insurgents a chance to reclaim longstanding Kunduz sanctuaries. Though they focused most of their efforts last year on southern Afghanistan, U.S. and Afghan commanders dispatched thousands of extra forces to Kunduz where they staged a concerted operation to put Taliban-led insurgents on the defensive. They succeeded in driving foreign militants over the border into Tajikistan and forcing local Taliban insurgents underground.

But once the Taliban were pushed out of their sanctuaries, Afghan forces failed to fill the void, local officials said.

"Because of a lack of Afghan government forces, security forces were not deployed into the areas that were cleared of the Taliban to hold areas," said Muhammad Ayub Haqyar, district chief of Imam Sahib, a district in Kunduz. "Now the Taliban are taking advantage of that and are making efforts to re-establish their strongholds in those areas."

Afghan and American strategists have been banking on new groups of government-trained local militias, known as the Afghan Local Police, to take the lead in the most troublesome Kunduz districts. But the fledgling initiative has already been sidetracked by leadership problems and complaints that the government-backed forces are capitalizing on their newfound authority to target ethnic rivals in Kunduz while enriching themselves.

Efforts to get the force up and running involved "just bad coordination all around," said U.S. Army Brig. Gen. Jefforey Smith, who serves as chief U.S. military adviser to Afghan Interior Minister Bismillah Khan Mohammadi. Mr. Mohammadi traveled to Kunduz before the recent spate of attacks to try to get the efforts back on track. But local officials said that the Afghan military and Afghan police exert little control over the key Kunduz regions. 

—Walid Fazly  contributed to this article. 