It was all the usual stars who led the Knicks to their 124-106 win over the Detroit Pistons on Sunday. Amar'e Stoudemire. Danilo Gallinari. Timofey Mozgov.

Wait, what?

Yes, Mr. Mozgov, the one-time preseason sensation who had not played at all in the previous 10 games and for only a combined 12 minutes in the last six weeks, got his chance on a depleted Knicks team. The 24-year-old Russian rookie scored 24 points with 14 rebounds in 40 minutes.

With 30 seconds left, the crowd stood and began to chant, "Mozgov!" It did not stop until the final whistle. Four months after he was anointed the next big thing, the 7-foot-1 Mr. Mozgov had finally arrived. 

Mr. Stoudemire scored 33 points while Mr. Gallinari scored 29. Those two combined to go 22 for 23 on the free-throw line.

Knicks forward Wilson Chandler missed his second straight game with a sore left calf. Center Ronny Turiaf started in his place while the normal starting center, Mr. Stoudemire, went to power forward.

The Knicks were also without 3-point specialist forward Shawne Williams, who was serving a one-game suspension for a confrontation with Atlanta Hawks forward Marvin Williams on Friday. Marvin Williams was suspended for two games.

Because of this, even more understudies saw the big stage: Anthony Randolph, a 21-year-old forward who at 6-foot-11 has tantalizing potential and unseen production, got another look. He had played once in 17 games, and that appearance was five minutes long. He went scoreless in nine minutes of action, though he had five rebounds.

The teams were tied at 91 to end the third quarter, and the Knicks took off from there. Mr. Gallinari hit a three to start the quarter, then Mr. Mozgov (who else?) had a Garden-shaking putback dunk. Mr. Gallinari hit another 3-pointer with 9:30 to go to make it 101-93. When the Pistons cut it to 113-106, Mr. Mozgov stuffed home a dunk for keep the Pistons away.

There wasn't much the Knicks could do on defense early—the Pistons made five of their six 3-point attempts in the first half and shot 57% overall in the half. Detroit's Ben Gordon made seven of his 11 3-point attempts and, while Charlie Villanueva made all three of his attempts. 

Mr. Mozgov also made an impact in areas other than his dunks. The Knicks, who have the third-worst rebounding differential in the league, outrebounded Detroit 41 to 32.

He made mistakes—he missed his first shot badly, a hook shot that hit neither rim nor glass. In fact, he missed his first four shots until a put-back dunk with 2:20 left in the first quarter. He had trouble catching some passes—a reminder of his earlier stint as a regular when he was a turnover machine. But on Sunday, he showed himself a viable rotation player, something that is a far cry from the past two months when he looked as if he'd lost his confidence. Mr. Mozgov himself described himself as "scared" during his first run as a Knicks regular.

"He just wasn't flustered," Knicks coach Mike D'Antoni said of Mr. Mozgov on Sunday. "It seems like he was going way too fast earlier in the year."

Mr. Mozgov said he was "excited" to have such a good performance. Mr. D'Antoni, meanwhile, said Mr. Mozgov will play more.

He entered the game with seven minutes to go in the first quarter to a louder-than-normal cheer from the Garden faithful. His dunks brought roars from a crowd that had seen him do nothing but sit on the bench and high five teammates for most his tenure in New York.

Mr. Stoudemire provided a scary moment the Knicks in the fourth quarter, his left knee—the surgically repaired one—colliding with the knee of Pistons guard Will Bynum. He went down for a moment and started limping badly, and he limped occasionally for the rest of the game. After the game, Mr. Stoudemire said he felt "fine."

 Write to  Kevin Clark at Kevin.Clark@wsj.com 