A large Los Angeles County pension fund has stopped funneling some currency trades to  Bank of New York Mellon Corp.
BK


0.40
%




, protesting the way the bank profits from the transactions.

The decision by the Los Angeles County Employees Retirement Association, detailed in correspondence reviewed by The Wall Street Journal under the California Public Records Act, is a rare example of a pension fund ceasing business with a custody bank. The dispute comes amid scrutiny by funds and investigators over currency-trade costs.

At the center of the clash is the role of custody banks, which act as custodians for investment firms' securities, handling various back-office tasks for institutional investors. The Los Angeles County fund alleged in correspondence that BNY Mellon wasn't permitted to profit from undisclosed foreign-exchange transactions.

The fight began last year when an official at the Los Angeles fund asked BNY Mellon for data to better understand how the banks profits on foreign exchange conducted on the fund's behalf. In private letters and emails, the fund claimed that it expected BNY Mellon to be a "fiduciary" and provide real-time prices in handling currency transactions the fund uses to facilitate its investments in foreign securities. The correspondence, from October 2010 to February 2011, provides a window into concerns by pension funds into how custody banks profit from currency trades.

BNY Mellon denied the claim in the correspondence, noting that its contract with the fund says its role is that of a "principal," which trades against the fund and its investment managers.

BNY Mellon, in a letter, said it "executed all foreign-exchange transactions with [the fund] … as a counter-party and acting as a principal, at the direction of [the fund] and its investment managers." This essentially means that the bank doesn't seek to generate profit for the pension fund; it seeks to generate profit for the bank.

The plan's chief executive,  Gregg Rademacher, declined to comment on the documents seen by the Journal and the decision to cease using BNY Mellon for certain foreign-exchange trades. In letters and emails, BNY Mellon said the fund and its investment managers "were solely responsible for choosing whether, how, and with whom, to execute foreign exchange." 

The bank also said in the correspondence that the fund always had known that the bank generated revenue from the currency trades.

BNY Mellon maintains it provides a valuable service and that "standing-instruction" clients are able to minimizes trade-execution costs and risk. 

In a "standing-instruction" contract, clients allow banks to handle currency trades. Funds have the option to negotiate currency trades, which can produce a more-advantageous rate, but that requires staff and expertise in foreign exchange.

"We continue to enjoy very strong use of our FX services, including our standing-instruction program, among clients and their investment managers," a BNY Mellon spokesman said.

"The pricing and terms of our 'standing-instruction' program are spelled out in various materials provided to clients and their money managers," said the BNY Mellon spokesman. "They acknowledge and agree to those terms in writing. Our U.S. trading desks publish a guaranteed range of FX prices every morning. Clients and money managers can compare those guaranteed rates to other market rates, and they can easily switch to a different option or provider."

Last October, the fund's chief investment officer,  Lisa Mazzocco, asked BNY Mellon in a letter for data to better understand how the bank profits on foreign exchange conducted on the fund's behalf. 

Ms. Mazzocco didn't respond to requests for comment.

In a Nov. 19 letter, a BNY Mellon "relationship manager" told Ms. Mazzocco the bank traded with the fund as a "principal," and that it didn't apply a specific "markup" but instead derived prices from a currency's daily range. 

The matter heated up in January, when Ms. Mazzocco said BNY Mellon was obligated to provide real-time, or "best execution" pricing. She alleged in a letter that BNY Mellon was improperly marking up currency-exchange prices.

"As a fiduciary, the Bank has a duty not to make undisclosed profits at [the fund's] expense," she wrote.

BNY Mellon executive  Laurin Moorereplied on Jan. 12 that the bank wouldn't comply with the request. 

Ms. Moore later wrote that BNY Mellon "complied with all applicable provisions" of its contract with the fund. BNY Mellon said Ms. Moore wasn't available to comment.

The fund on Jan. 21 ended its currency trading with the bank on "standing instructions" after more back and forth between the bank and the fund. BNY Mellon remains a custodian for the fund, a BNY Mellon spokesman said. 

In a Jan. 25 letter, a BNY Mellon lawyer said the bank's custody agreement with the fund includes account-management duties. In sweep accounts, funds are automatically managed between a cash account and separate investment accounts.

The lawyer wrote that currency trades never were included in those custody duties.

 Write to  Carrick Mollenkamp at carrick.mollenkamp@wsj.com 