MOSCOW—Russia plans to install modern antiship and antiaircraft missiles on the Kuril Islands, a move likely to heighten tensions with Japan, which claims those territories as its own.

On Tuesday, the Interfax news agency quoted a general staff official as saying the military plans to install Yakhont antiship cruise missiles, as well as the Tor-M2 antiaircraft system and Mi-28H "Night Hunter" attack helicopters, on the islands. At present, the main weapons there are artillery, aging tanks and small arms, according to analysts.

"The Yakhont is the latest technology," said Vitaly Shlykov, a member of a Kremlin defense-policy advisory panel. "The policy now is to strengthen the Kurils."

The military plans are the latest in a series of moves by the Kremlin in the past few months to shore up its presence on the disputed islands amid increasing criticism from officials in Tokyo. 

Each side blames the other for the escalation of a dispute that dates to the waning days of World War II, when Soviet troops occupied the islands just north of Hokkaido, Japan's northernmost island.

President Dmitry Medvedev became the first Russian or Soviet leader ever to visit the islands in November, a trip Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan later called "an unforgivable outrage."

Last month, Mr. Medvedev ordered the Defense Ministry to modernize the aging military bases on the islands but to slightly reduce the number of troops based there. 

President Medvedev is expected to approve the weapons-deployment plan later this month, Interfax said.

The new weapons will be part of a broader buildup in Russia's Pacific presence, officials said. French-made Mistral amphibious-attack ships now on order are also expected to be based there.

In addition to the military, Moscow is sending economic and other resources to the islands. A Moscow tabloid reported this week that Anna Chapman, the young spy deported from the U.S. last year, will plant a flag on one of the islands later this month as part of a delegation from the ruling party.

 Write to  Gregory L. White at greg.white@wsj.com 