Hurricane Katrina was dominating the news, the Star Wars and Harry Potter franchises ruled the box office, and the stock market was just starting its climb. It was 2005, and the players in this year's Yankee clubhouse were the best in the game. 

 Bartolo Colon won 21 games and the AL Cy Young. Alex Rodriguez hit 48 home runs and won the American League MVP. Andruw Jones hit 51 homers and finished second to Albert Pujols in the National League MVP voting. Mariano Rivera posted one of his best seasons, with a 1.38 ERA in 78 innings, finishing second to Colon in the Cy Young race. Robinson Cano was third in the Rookie of the Year balloting. Eric Chavez won a Gold Glove and hit 27 home runs. Mark Prior won 11 games with a 3.67 ERA and 188 strikeouts. Mark Teixeira hit 40 home runs. The list goes on.

If you're looking for 2005 All-Stars, look no further than the 2011 Yankees. That's not as damning as it sounds—many of these players were 2010 All-Stars as well—but there were just as many who tasted glory once and are looking to taste it again. 

All around these Yankees are big-name veterans looking to revive their careers, and the Yankees have become the team willing to take that chance. From the imports to the Yankee vets, this whole team can look at 2005 as an apex of sorts. 

"It's just one of those weird things where 2005 was a big year for a lot of these guys. Hopefully, we can repeat it and win a title," said Jones, who flashed 50-homer power in 2005 before suffering a precipitous decline starting in 2007. 

To a degree, having so many pre-Obama All-Stars speaks to the fact that this Yankee team is a little long in the tooth. The 25-man opening day roster of this Yankees team should feature only 10 players under age 30, and five who will be over 35 this year. But we knew that already.

More than that, it says there is real talent here. If it is healthy, if it is properly harnessed—and if age has not sapped it too badly—this Yankee team could offer guile and an understanding of how to win from backup spots usually populated by journeymen. Normally, the core Yankees have taught their new imports these principles. The players they brought in this year know it from experience. 

"It's nice to play with a bunch of guys who have been, at one time, the best of the best at what they do. It says a lot about the group we have here," Chavez said. 

It also says there's a reason they were available, and it's that big ''if,'' health. If Prior and Chavez can stay on the field, they certainly could be steals. They have looked strong in the first two weeks of spring training, but only time will tell. 

For a team like the Yankees that has financial flexibility, it's smart to take chances on these kinds of players. Offering them minor league contracts that promise significant incentives if they play well will not impact the bottom line in the Bronx the way it might for some other franchises. If they pay off, they're worth every penny, and if they don't, they haven't risked much in terms of total resources. 

At the very least, having these big-name players around camp builds buzz and creates a professional clubhouse environment full of players who have been there, done that, and are hungry to get there again. 

"It's definitely flattering to be with some of these guys for sure, and if you were to get all of us together at our peaks, it'd be something,'' Chavez said.

What if they were all together at their peak? Putting together these players and using their 2005 numbers yields a stacked and surprisingly complete fantasy team. It would have been the most powerful team in major league history. That starting nine—Posada catching, Jeter, Rodriguez, Cano, and Teixeira on the infield, Chavez at DH, and an outfield of Jones, Nick Swisher, and Curtis Granderson–hit 250 home runs. 

That's enough to lead the league in four of the last six seasons. Add in utilityman Ronnie Belliard's 17 homers, and that group would trump the 1997 Seattle Mariners, owners of the home run record of 264 in a season, for the title of most powerful team. 

The pitching staff wouldn't have been quite as strong, but with Colon headlining, and Mark Prior, CC Sabathia, AJ Burnett, and Freddy Garcia all winning at least 11 games, it would have been an excellent unit. Other than Sabathia's 4.03 ERA, all the starters posted ERA's under 4.00. 

It's even possible to build a 2005 bench and bullpen with players the Yankees invited to camp this year, and it's a good one. Relievers Andy Sisco and Luis Ayala posted excellent full seasons. There's a 2005 Yankee for every spot but backup catcher—and Russell Martin was only a year away from making a strong rookie debut. 

The Yankees have rolled the dice with players who made a pretty good fantasy team once. If they can make half that fantasy a reality again, the Yankees offseason may not have been as idle as it appeared. 