As Hong Kong's media scrambled over the family feud that has beset the Ho gambling empire this week, the drama took on a different slant 8,000 miles away in Toronto. 

For Canada's leading national newspaper, The Globe and Mail, the story angle was clear: "Ho's Canadian kids set to take over casinos" read a headline on the front page of the paper's business section.

Parochial? Maybe. But the tangled transfer of wealth from one generation to another highlights a Canadian quirk among the city's demographic. Thanks in part to a favorable immigration policy, a significant portion of Hong Kong's wealthy elite are Canadian passport holders or have strong ties to Canada, including two key players in the battle over  Stanley Ho's inheritance.



The Stanley Ho family feud is a dramatic example of the challenges facing the generational transfer of family fortunes. But in Hong Kong, it is hardly the only.  A look at some of Hong Kong's other fighting families .

Pansy and  Lawrence Ho, children of Mr. Ho's second wife, emigrated to Canada with their mother,  Luucina Nam King-ying, in the 1980s. Lawrence Ho, who attended an elite Toronto private school, has a particular affection for the country's largest city -- he's a fan of the Toronto Maple Leafs, and in Hong Kong he's a regular participant in a local ice hockey league. Both he and another sister,  Daisy Ho, are also among a number of high-profile Hong Kongers sitting on the board of governors of the Canadian Chamber of Commerce in Hong Kong.

In fact, among the estimated 220,000-strong Canadian community in Hong Kong are several of the former British colony's most prominent business people. Most notable is the family ports to telecoms tycoon  Li Ka-shing. Mr. Li, a Canadian citizen and reputedly the richest man in Asia, has significant business ties to Canada through investments in real estate and oil and gas in particular, though he has also been a major investor in the country's financial services sector. 

His sons Victor and  Richard Li are also Canadian citizens. Richard, chairman of Hong Kong telecom giant PCCW, is a regular visitor to Canada, a significant donor to Canadian charities (in 2006, he gave 1 million Canadian dollars [about USD$998,951] to Canada's National Arts Centre, for instance), and his son Ethan was born there in 2009. 

Other prominent Hong Kong business people with connections to Canada include  Michael Chan, chairman of ubiquitous fast-food retailer Café de Coral, who holds a degree from the University of Manitoba and spent much of his early career in Canada; and  Allan Zeman, the "father" of the city's  Lan Kwai Fong entertainment district, who was raised in Montreal, though he gave up his Canadian citizenship in 2008 when he became one of the few foreigners to take Chinese citizenship. 

In total, the size of the Canadian population here ranks Hong Kong as Canada's 17th largest city, just ahead of Saskatoon and Regina, the two largest cities in the province of Saskatchewan. The number of Canadian citizens in the city was boosted in the early and mid-1990s in the run-up to the handover of Hong Kong to China. At that time, Canada's immigration laws were favorable to people who invested significant funds in Canada.

While holding two passports is tolerated by authorities in Hong Kong -- unlike in mainland China -- the practice led to political uproar in 2008 when Hong Kong-Canadian lawyer Gregory So was appointed to a key economic position in the city's government. Under intense media pressure, Mr. So was forced to forego his Canadian citizenship.

 Write to  Duncan Mavin at duncan.mavin@wsj.com 