MANILA—Facing mounting price pressures, the Philippine central bank raised rates by 0.25 percentage point Thursday.

Overnight rates, which have been kept at record lows since July 2009, were raised to 4.25% for borrowing and 6.25% for lending, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas said, adding that it is ready to take further steps "necessary to safeguard price stability." Economists expect the BSP's Monetary Board to raise policy rates by a total of a full percentage point this year.

BSP Gov. Amando Tetangco said rising prices of food, oil and other commodities prompted the central bank to act. "The Monetary Board decided to act promptly to rein in inflation expectations," Mr. Tetangco said. "The Monetary Board will remain vigilant against emerging inflationary risks and possible second-round effects of commodity-price pressures."

BSP Deputy Gov. Diwa Guinigundo said in the absence of the rate increase, inflation this year could average around 5.18%, and that Thursday's rate increase should be enough to pull it back to within the bank's target range of 3% to 5%.

Mr. Guinigundo said the central bank decided to raise rates because of the emergence of second-round effects, including demand for wage increases.

"Another hike in May is on the cards," said  Radhika Rao, an economist at Forecast Singapore. "As we mentioned earlier, these measured moves are not 'aggressive' tightening per se but mark a calibrated move towards rate normalization as current rate-settings ran the risk of looking outdated given prevailing risks."

  Vincent Tsui, an economist at HSBC, said that persistent inflation pressure and the need to normalize real interest rates should nudge the BSP to raise policy rates by 0.25 percentage point in the second and third quarters and possibly by 0.5 percentage point in the fourth quarter.

  David Cohen, economist at Action Economics, said the central bank will likely raise rates three more times this year, each by 0.25 percentage point, in its attempt to contain inflation that he projects will climb to 5% by mid-year.

"This [expected BSP tightening] would parallel a similar tightening of interest rates expected during upcoming quarters by central banks across the region," Mr. Cohen said.

The central bank's next policy meeting is scheduled for May 5.

 Write to  Cris Larano at cris.larano@dowjones.com 