R.A. Dickey declared himself fit to return to the mound for the Mets this week, and he was happy to report that the nail on his right index finger was 100% healthy. 

This is big news for the Mets, who are relying on Dickey—who owns two of the most important fingernails in baseball—to help bail them out of their early-season malaise.

Dickey, a knuckleball pitcher, split his fingernail slightly in a 6-2 loss to the Washington Nationals on Friday. He sustained the injury in the first inning, and he had no choice but to file the nail down in the dugout before the top of the second. 

This cost him valuable control and caused the ball to spin more than it typically does.

The result was one of his poorest outings in recent memory. He allowed three earned runs and issued five walks over five innings. It was just the fifth time in 29 starts with the Mets that he failed to pitch at least six innings.

"My feel was definitely tainted," he said, and all because of a fingernail. "It was the first time something like that had happened in five years."

The term "knuckleball" is a misnomer. Most knuckleballers throw the pitch by pressing their index and middle fingers into the ball. "It's not like he's clawing the ball with his nails, but those are the pressure points he uses," catcher Josh Thole said.

Dickey takes preventive and proactive measures to ensure proper nail health. No, he does not walk around town with oven mitts on. "I don't take it to the extreme," he said.

But he is careful. His most important tool is a glass file that he uses on a daily basis to keep those two fingernails at the proper length. He employs clippers for his other eight nails, just like a normal person. But his two pitching nails essentially are worth millions.

As for the length of the nails, he does not measure them. He goes by feel. He keeps a baseball in his locker and grips it. He can tell if he needs to use his file.

"But it's very rudimentary," he said. "There's nothing incredibly technical about it. It's just a file, you know?"

He also makes sure his diet includes plenty of dairy. He drinks lots of milk. He firmly believes that calcium helps strengthen his nails. He also eats chicken. "Hair and nails are really a combination of protein overflow," he said. "I've obviously never had a problem growing hair, and I definitely don't have a problem with nail growth."

He acknowledged that there are times when he uses a performance-enhancing substance: nail hardener. But only when the weather is cold and raw, and he feels like his nails might be in jeopardy of cracking or splitting. "From time to time, yes," he said sheepishly.

Dickey said he was fortunate that the split in his nail was not particularly deep. If it had extended into the nail bed, that could have caused "a real problem," he said.

Dickey's teammates tend to get a kick out of his daily nail regimen. Thole said Dickey and his glass file are close to inseparable. Righthander Chris Young was asked if he does anything special to take care of his own nails. "No," he said.

One of the oddities of the Mets clubhouse is that Dickey occupies a locker that is just a couple of stalls away from the locker that belongs to Mike Pelfrey, a righthander who—gasp!—bites his nails. Dickey said he feels fortunate that he never developed that habit. He might be out of baseball. Pelfrey, of course, does not throw a knuckleball. He only needs his fingertips. His nails are merely along for the ride.

 Write to  Scott Cacciola at scott.cacciola@wsj.com 