The earthquake that devastated Japan caused as much as $35 billion in insured property losses, a figure that would make Friday's quake the costliest ever for the insurance industry, even before the effects of the tsunami are included, according to a disaster-modeling company.

While the exact cost of the catastrophe won't be known for months, Boston-based AIR Worldwide estimated Sunday the quake caused insured property losses of $15 billion to $35 billion. If claims come in at the middle of that range, the cost of the disaster would surpass all other natural catastrophes except for 2005's Hurricane Katrina. 

Some of the damage to residential buildings and the liability costs stemming from radiation leaked by Japan's crippled nuclear reactors will be covered by the Japanese government, which backs up domestic home insurance and sells insurance on nuclear plants for major natural disasters. Neither cost is included in the AIR estimate. Even so, the losses from the Japanese earthquake will further sap the capital of an industry hit by the quake in New Zealand and severe flooding in Australia this year and by years of falling prices for policies. Equity analysts that track the industry said most catastrophe reinsurers will have a first-quarter loss and some are likely to lose money for the full year.

"This will certainly have a major effect on the reinsurers, especially when you add in some of these other disasters, and we're not even out of March yet," said  Duncan Ellis, the U.S. Property Practice Leader for insurance broker Marsh Inc. "It seems like it has to cause rates to flatten, at least. Whether it causes prices to go up, for those global companies, it's probably too soon to say."

Loss estimates from AIR and its rivals are closely watched by the insurance industry and by Wall Street to gauge potential losses for individual insurers. No major companies have disclosed estimates of their own losses yet, but the size of AIR's estimate will raise expectations of an increase in the cost of insurance and reinsurance. Such a spike would be felt by businesses and homeowners in catastrophe-prone areas around the world, including Florida and California.

  Munich Re AG
MURGY


0.29
%




 and  Swiss Reinsurance Co., the world's largest reinsurers by gross premium income, reiterated Sunday that it was too early to provide estimates of their potential losses, as did smaller reinsurer  Hannover Re AG
HVRRY


-0.60
%




.  Allianz
ALIZF


1.26
%




 SE, Europe's largest primary insurer by premium income said the same. So did  American International Group Inc.
AIG


1.09
%




 and Lloyd's of London, the U.K.'s 322-year-old insurance and reinsurance market. 

However high the insured losses run, total economic losses are likely to be significantly more. Japanese homeowners and businesses have been reluctant to buy insurance to cover potential losses because the cost of the protection has been perceived as too high. AIR estimated about 10% to 12% of commercial property exposures are insured against earthquakes outside of Tokyo.

AIR's number doesn't yet include estimates for the loss caused by the tsunami. But on Saturday, AIR said it had examined prefectures most directly affected by the tsunami, and concluded that $24 billion of insured property had sat within three kilometers of the shore in those areas. Of that amount, $5 billion was within one kilometer of the coast.

AIR said it plans to independently estimate the loss caused by the tsunami as more detailed information becomes available, including satellite photos from NASA of the extent of floods, and provide a combined loss estimate that avoids double-counting in the affected areas.

There have been few reports of major structural damage in the Tokyo and Chiba prefectures, except for several serious fires. However, the risk-modeling agency cautioned that the high concentration of insured properties in the area and that the quake was felt there means that "even relatively small individual claims will likely add up to significant numbers."

  Tokyo Electric Power Co.
9501


0.14
%




, which owns the troubled Fukushima nuclear plant, is required to buy $1.5 billion in liability protection to cover the costs of a radioactive leak, said  Dan McGarvey, a nuclear engineer who chairs the U.S. power and utility practice at insurance broker Marsh Inc. Japanese law says Tepco is responsible for any leaks, while the reactor's manufacturer,  General Electric Co.
GE


0.21
%




 and the contractors that built it, aren't liable.

But that insurance, which is purchased from a group of domestic companies, doesn't cover natural disasters. Instead, the utilities buy policies to cover quakes, tsunamis and volcanoes directly from the government.

—William Launder contributed to this article.

 Write to  Erik Holm at erik.holm@dowjones.com and Ulrike Dauer at ulrike.dauer@dowjones.com 