The National Transportation Safety Board issued six urgent safety recommendations Monday to alert pipeline operators and regulators to the dangers of inaccurate pipeline records.

The warnings came three weeks after the NTSB said it found significant discrepancies between pieces of pipe it analyzed after a massive pipeline explosion Sept. 9 in San Bruno, Calif., and the records maintained by the operator,  PG&E Corp.
PCG


-0.43
%




, of San Francisco.

The utility thought the line was built with seamless pipe, but NTSB investigators said they had found seam-welded sections that "may not be as strong as the seamless pipe that was indicated in PG&E's records."

The safety board said inaccurate pipeline records "could create conditions in which a pipeline is operated at a higher pressure than the pipe was built to withstand," although it added that "it is not known … if that is what happened in the San Bruno accident," which killed eight people and destroyed 37 homes.

"While it may seem like a small paperwork error, if companies are basing operating pressures on inadequate or erroneous information contained in their records, safety may be compromised," NTSB Chairman Deborah Hersman said in a statement.

The NTSB directed three of its "urgent" recommendations to the California Public Utilities Commission, which regulates PG&E, directing it to review records and testing regimens to make sure safe operating pressures are being used. It also directed the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration to "expeditiously inform" the pipeline industry about the circumstances of the San Bruno accident so companies can take steps to review their records for accuracy.

A PG&E spokesman said that the utility "already had begun a thorough review" of its pipeline records and that it was working closely with the NTSB and state regulators to improve pipeline safety.

The recommendations of the safety board, which serves in an advisory capacity, add momentum to action already begun in California. On Dec. 16, the executive director of the California Public Utilities Commission ordered PG&E to operate some of its large urban pipelines at reduced pressures temporarily, pending the completion of additional, more rigorous tests to gauge pipeline integrity.

The NTSB said it would conduct a fact-finding hearing on the San Bruno disaster March 1-2 in Washington.

Rep. Jackie Speier, a Democrat who represents the San Bruno area in Congress, said Monday "it is critical operators be able to prove they know what's under the ground" by verifying the accuracy of records or doing state-of-the-art tests to determine safe operating pressures.

 Write to  Rebecca Smith at rebecca.smith@wsj.com 