  Barry Sternlicht's Starwood Capital Group is moving to expand its investments in distressed condominiums, leveraging the experience it has gained in the 15 months since it led a group that bought the assets of the failed Corus Bank.

The same group of investors that bought the $4.5 billion Corus portfolio from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. is now bidding on other distressed residential assets at a time when condo markets are showing signs of stabilizing in some parts of the country. Executives of the company the group formed, named ST Residential, said they are targeting individual properties and portfolios being offered by banks and the FDIC. 

"We obviously learned a lot about the condo business, the high-rise business along the way here," said  Wade Hundley, CEO of ST Residential. "We'd like to be able to capitalize on that."

The Starwood-led group, which also includes TPG Capital, a unit of TPG, Perry Capital LLC and WLR LeFrak, paid 60 cents on the dollar for the Corus assets in one of the biggest distressed commercial real-estate deals of the downturn. The deal was done in partnership with the FDIC, so the government would benefit if the venture made money.

At this point it is too early to tell how successful the venture is. The Starwood group paid 20% more than the next highest bidder. The 101-loan portfolio of the assets of the failed Chicago-based Corus was seen by bidders as a tricky endeavor, packed with a mess of mortgages on empty, stalled and unfinished condo towers scattered throughout many of the toughest markets in the country.

Many potential hurdles remain, including exposure to the Las Vegas market, and the firm still has to determine a course for numerous troubled properties, including an empty 333-apartment development in Chicago. 

But some condo markets are seeing stable or rising prices as the market absorbs the thousands of unsold units that were delivered during the downturn. South Florida has seen a growth in sales activity lately, as a large inventory left by projects completed in the past few years is starting to winnow. Pending sales of condominiums in Miami-Dade County were up about 40% in December compared with a year earlier, according to the Miami Association of Realtors.

"They definitely rode a general recovery, which made their lives a lot easier," said  Dan Fasulo, managing director at real-estate data firm Real Capital Analytics.

Mr. Hundley would only say the firm was exceeding expectations, particularly in southern Florida.

Part of the challenge facing ST with the Corus portfolio is that a large portion of the assets are distressed development loans. ST Residential has had to foreclose, sell the loan or work out deals with borrowers. 

ST Residential is eager to gain control of buildings where it makes sense, selling or renting out the properties itself in an attempt to make a national brand, sometimes over objections of delinquent developers who are pushed out. 

Since winning the portfolio in October 2009, ST Residential has taken control of 18 new assets on top of 18 that were owned by the FDIC, and another 14 are in the process of foreclosure, company executives said. 

"We're certainly not afraid to own," Mr. Hundley said. "We think we have a good understanding of what it takes to get these properties repositioned into the market." 

ST Residential now controls about 6,700 units throughout the country, and in the past half-year it has relaunched marketing on apartments in Atlanta and Phoenix, among other cities. It plans to formally launch marketing in the Miami area this month, where it has a large number of holdings. 

Mr. Hundley said there wasn't a set dollar amount that ST's investors were looking to put toward new assets, but the company feels it has an infrastructure set up for handling troubled projects that could give it an advantage. He said ST has bid on a few deals but hasn't won any, adding that the existing portfolio is the firm's main focus.

The group recently bid on an 849-unit apartment tower in Miami that was auctioned off in bankruptcy court, according to multiple people familiar with the matter. ST lost out to a group led by Rockwood Capital LLC, the people said.

 Write to  Eliot Brown at eliot.brown@wsj.com 