DALLAS—Texans are about to engage in a political shootout over guns on campus.

Legislators in the Lone Star State have proposed that college students and professors be allowed to carry concealed weapons. Opponents of the measures, including the presidents of some of the state's biggest universities, say handguns would be a bad addition to an environment in which stress and drinking are rampant.

With a vote on the measures coming as soon as late March, the issue is dividing campuses. At Texas A&M University in College Station, students voted 57%-43% against concealed weapons in class in a campuswide referendum, according to results released Tuesday night. Some 13,000 students out of a population of 49,000 participated.

Scott Bowen, a chemical engineering major and speaker pro tempore in the student senate, said the body would now lobby state legislators against the bill. He added that he wasn't taking a public position on the matter.

Daniel Crocker, a student and board member of a group called Students for Concealed Carry on Campus, said, "We can't understand why we lose that option for personal protection, just because we want an education." 

Texas law allows concealed firearms in most public places, but not in college buildings.

Pro- and anti-gun groups nationwide are watching the Texas battle over the guns-on-campus issue, which gained prominence after a student at Virginia Tech killed 32 people in 2007. Gun-rights backers say the lesson of that tragedy is that students should be able to defend themselves against armed attackers. Antigun groups say Virginia Tech showed the danger of guns on campus, and that allowing them there could lead to more shootings.

If a bill passes, Texas would become the second state after Utah to open public-university campuses to licensed gun owners. So far this year, lawmakers in nine other states—including Arizona, Florida and Oklahoma—have introduced bills to allow guns on campus, according to the National Conference of State Legislatures.

Among Texas lawmakers, support for the proposed legislation appears to be strong. Some 80 state representatives, more than half of the House, are backing a bill that would allow people with concealed-carry permits to bring their guns to school. In the Senate, a similar bill that passed during the previous legislative session in 2009 has been reintroduced.

"The students are safer if they're able to defend themselves against the shooter than if they are unarmed and defenseless," said the bill's author, Sen. Jeff Wentworth of San Antonio.

"We're talking about people who are not perfectly responsible and can make mistakes that cost people their lives," countered John Woods, a Ph.D. student in molecular biology at the University of Texas at Austin whose girlfriend was killed in the Virginia Tech shooting.

UT administrators agree. Moments in which students might need a gun for self-defense are "extremely rare," said William Powers Jr., president of the school, in an interview. "Friday and Saturday night come every week on campus."

Texas' private universities want legislators to give them the option of whether to allow guns. Two bills in the legislature would grant that option. A third bill would allow concealed carry at all universities and colleges, whereas a fourth bill would limit the right to faculty and staff. A fifth bill would allow concealed weapons only at junior and technical colleges.

The board of Alamo Colleges, a network of community colleges in and around San Antonio, passed a resolution last week opposing guns on their premises. In 2008, an employee with a concealed-weapon license killed another worker, according to Bruce Leslie, the colleges' chancellor. In emergency situations such as that one, he said, it is preferable for police to respond.

 Write to  Ana Campoy at ana.campoy@dowjones.com 