DOHA—Qatar's veteran oil minister Abdullah Al Attiyah, a trusted lieutenant of the Arab Gulf state's ruler and a key architect of the country's energy empire, has been replaced by former junior energy minister Mohammed Saleh Al Sada in a surprise cabinet reshuffle. 

According to state-run Qatar News Agency, Mr. Al Sada was sworn in Tuesday by decree in front of the Persian Gulf state's ruler, Sheik Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani. Mr. Attiyah will keep his post of deputy prime minister and has been appointed chairman of the Emir's court. 

Mr. Al Attiyah was unavailable for comment when contacted by Zawya Dow Jones Tuesday. 

While no reason was given for the surprise move, analysts and friends of Mr. Attiyah, a well-liked and charismatic individual, said the demands of such a high profile job, which he has held since 1992, could be the reason for his departure. 

"OPEC and media will miss him, he was very open and talkative. He established the blueprint for Qatar energy and gas and petroleum so there is not much that the new guy can add," independent Kuwait-based oil analyst Kamel Al Harami told Zawya Dow Jones. 

Mr. Al Attiyah is 59 years old, according to Zawya.com data. 

He is widely credited with creating Qatar's enormous energy wealth and developing a gas industry that now ranks the tiny Middle Eastern countries as one of the richest in the world. Qatar is the world's largest exporter by far of liquefied natural gas, or LNG. The development of LNG has helped create a global market for natural gas, which before was produced and consumed in the same general geographic areas.

Qatar is one of the smallest members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, pumping around 825,000 barrels a day of crude oil. However, it is through gas exports that gave the tiny Gulf Arab desert state the financial clout to mop a string of high profile assets abroad, including London department store Harrods. Last month, Qatar, whose sovereign wealth fund has an estimated $100 billion of assets under management, won the hosting rights to the 2022 World Cup.

Qatar sits on the world's third largest gas reserves behind Russia and Iran. 

Mr. Al Attiyah was central to Qatar's decision to gamble its future on gas production when he became energy minister in 1992. Qatar is close to reaching its long-term goal to reach annual production capacity of 77 million tons of the supercooled fuel, a milestone that was celebrated late last year. 

Analysts Tuesday said Mr. Al Attiyah's successor would have to grapped with the dilemma that OPEC now faces with crude nearing $100 a barrel. Fears are mounting that triple-digit crude prices could endanger the fragile global economic recovery. 

"Qatar will come under pressure from consumers to react against the high oil prices even though inventory levels are high, so Qatar may need someone new who will take a different approach and be more hardline than Mr Attiyah," said oil expert John Hall, president of John Hall Associates. 

Like Saudi Arabia, the world's top crude exporter, Mr. Al Attiyah was widely considered a moderate on pricing, preferring a stable price but one that allows sustained investments in the oil industry by producers to ensure adequate supplies to meet world demand. 