Vizio Inc., which put inexpensive flat-panel TVs in living rooms, now is setting its sights on cellphones and tablet computers.

Vizio, which has vied with Samsung Electronics Co. for leadership in U.S. sales of television sets, plans Monday in advance of the Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas to discuss its new mobile products. The company so far has been known for LCD TV sets, Blu-ray disc players and related accessories, and success with its new devices could put pressure on its rivals' earnings.

The Irvine, Calif., company said its first mobile phone, to be called Via Phone, will have a 4-inch screen, a front-facing camera for video calls, a rear-facing five megapixel camera and the capability to shoot video. The larger mobile device, the Via Tablet, will have an 8-inch, high-resolution screen; WiFi wireless connectivity; three speakers; and a front-facing camera for video conferencing. Both items will be introduced this summer and run  Google Inc.'s Android operating system, providing access to the application store associated with the popular operating system, Vizio said.

  Matthew McRae, Vizio's chief technology officer, declined to provide prices until closer to the products' arrival. But he said the company's strategy again will be to make affordable products with innovative features. Vizio has thought about how it could "provide the best that's out there to your typical Wal-Mart shopper," he said. "Everybody deserves the latest technology." 

The closely held company, which also plans to announce a lineup of 3-D TV sets this week starting at less than $300, has been a major factor in driving down prices for flat-screen TV sets. Vizio reported $2.5 billion in revenue for 2009, up from $142 million posted in 2005. The company declined to comment on its profitability.

New entrants aren't new to the competitive cellphone market. And some big-name companies, including  Microsoft Corp.
MSFT


0.18
%




 and Google, have struggled with cellphones bearing their brands. Vizio said it has a carrier lined up for its cellphone but declined to disclose who it is until closer to launch. And the company's tablet could be at a disadvantage because it only offers Wi-Fi, not cellular, connectivity. 

Meanwhile, the market for tablets of the sort pioneered by  Apple Inc.
AAPL


-0.04
%




 with iPad is just getting started. Tablet sales are expected to more than triple to nearly 61 million units this year from just 18 million units last year, according to industry tracker iSuppli. Though many companies have announced plans to introduce such devices, Vizio's entry could accelerate price cutting that would squeeze profit margins.

Vizio's plans are "going to cause some Excedrin popping," said  Richard Doherty, an analyst for technology consulting firm Envisioneering Group. "They're going to be a real disrupter." He said Vizio will be able to take advantage of its strong retail relationships and existing base of Vizio TV-set owners. 

Vizio, which was founded in 2002, has only 300 employees but a few years ago vaulted to the top in North American shipments of LCD television sets. Samsung pushed ahead of Vizio in the first half of last year, but Vizio regained the No. 1 spot in the third quarter, with 19.9% of shipments to Samsung's 17.7%, according to iSuppli. Samsung remained ahead in shipments of all types of flat-panel sets, according to iSuppli.

Vizio said its small size, keeps the company nimble and its costs down. In Vizio's typical style, the new phone and tablet were developed over the past year and a-half by a team of fewer than 10 people. Mr. McRae said it hired mobile specialists from  Nokia Corp.
NOK


0.30
%




 and other device manufacturers to gain the necessary expertise. 

A key part of Vizio's strategy is to make it easy for customers to access Internet services across all of its products. The interface on the tablet and phone will have the same look and feel that the company uses on its TV sets. The new products will have ports for HDMI connections, too, so the tablet and phone can be hooked up to TV sets to display high-definition video on the bigger screen. The phone and tablet will be usable as remote controls for other consumer-electronics devices, including all Vizio products. "We've specifically focused on making it a great multimedia experience," said Mr. McRae. 

The devices also will provide access to Vizio's Via Plus Internet service, which lets users access apps such as  Netflix Inc.
NFLX


-0.71
%




's movie downloading service, the Android Market and the Facebook and Twitter social-networking sites.

At the Consumer Electronics Show, which kicks off Wednesday night, Vizio also plans to discuss a new video-downloading service that it calls Vizio on Demand. The services will let users start watching a movie on one device and finish watching it on another.

 Write to  Yukari Iwatani Kane at yukari.iwatani@wsj.com 