LONDON—Hundreds of thousands of Britons marched through central London on Saturday to protest spending cuts in the largest demonstration of public anger since the government began its aggressive austerity program.

The predominantly peaceful union-organized rally was marked by isolated instances of violence when groups attacked shops on Oxford Street, the capital's busiest shopping street, leading to clashes with the police. 

The breakaway protesters—led by a U.K. Uncut, a group that says some multinationals in the U.K. aren't paying their share of taxes—also occupied the 300-year-old exclusive department store Fortnum and Mason, located near Piccadilly Circus. The Metropolitan Police said nine people were arrested.

The Trades Union Congress, the U.K.'s umbrella union organization, said more than 250,000 people attended the march, making it the largest protest in London since a rally against the Iraq war in 2003.

The diverse group of protesters from around the U.K.—which included families with small children, teachers, students, pensioners and off-duty police officers and firemen—rallied around the belief that the £111 billion ($178 billion) in fiscal tightening the government will instigate by 2015 is cutting too much too fast.

"We're here to express the anxiety of being told there will be cuts but still not knowing what they will be. We're here to have a voice," said Shirley Standishday, a local council worker, who travelled to the rally from Northamptonshire with her husband, also a council worker, and their two young children

Ed Miliband, leader of the opposition Labour Party, spoke at the rally, saying the march was in the tradition of the U.S. civil-rights movement and the campaign to end apartheid in South Africa.

"The government will say this is a march of the minority," he said. "They are so wrong." 

Since losing last May's general election, Labour has consistently argued that the government's austerity measures risk sending the U.K. back into recession. 

However, the government has defended its spending cuts, saying they are essential if the country is to avoid a debt crisis.

Cabinet Office Minister Francis Maude told ITV on Saturday that peaceful protest was a legitimate right and that the government was willing to engage with the unions about issues such as public sector pensions.

The protest comes as the pain from the spending cuts is only just beginning to take hold. So far, the government has carried out about £9 billion of its fiscal tightening. Around £41 billion in tax increases and spending cuts will begin to take effect from the start of the new fiscal year on April 5. 

By 2015, around 330,000 public sector jobs are expected to be lost.

Trades Union Congress head Brendan Barber told marchers gathered in Hyde Park that the cuts would add to the misery of 2.5 million Britons already on public assistance. "Let's keep people in work and get our economy growing. Let's get tax revenues flowing and tackle the tax cheats," Mr. Barber said. 

Ninety-year-old Angela Sinclair, walking with the aid of a walking-frame, agreed with one of Mr. Barber's calls, for a "Robin Hood" tax on banks he said were behind the need for budget cuts.

"The alternative to spending cuts is to chase the banks and the tax avoiders and to cut bankers' bonuses," Ms. Sinclair said. "That's what the government should be doing."

For many of those attending Saturday's march, the financial strain from the government's spending cuts has been exacerbated by high inflation—currently at 4.4%—and stagnant wage growth.

Peter Lawless, a 61-year-old retired post office worker from Liverpool, said Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne's budget on Wednesday did little to alleviate the squeeze on households, despite including a tax cut on fuel.

"The budget did nothing because the damage has already been done—it was done last year when they announced the spending cuts."

While it is unlikely that Saturday's protests will derail the austerity measures, it will make the coalition government's junior partner, the Liberal Democrats, feel uncomfortable.

The Liberal Democrats have faced voter backlash after they broke key pre-election pledges by supporting government policies to treble the cap on university tuition fees and impose a sales tax hike. 

Local government worker Francis Keegan, 47, from Walthamstow in north London, says he and many other protesters feel particular anger towards the Liberal Democrats. 

"We expected no better from the Tories [senior coalition partners, the Conservative Party], but we had expected something more from the Liberal Democrats."

Saturday's protest comes just over a month before May's local government elections, which is expected to be a difficult night for both governing parties, but in particular for the Liberal Democrats who have seen their support in the polls plummet.

 Write to  Ainsley Thomson at ainsley.thomson@dowjones.com 