A small family bagel business is showing its support for football's New York Jets by giving away green-dyed versions of the doughy treats for free. 

Warren Bell, owner of Bagels by Bell Ltd., says he'll run the promotion through Sunday when Gang Green takes on the Pittsburgh Steelers for a spot in Super Bowl XLV. Mr. Bell, a Jets season ticket holder, says the initiative wasn't intended as a publicity stunt. But the move has generated a slew of press in recent days, including radio and Internet coverage. 

 10 Reasons to Start a Business This Year  

Mr. Bell also says his business has been inundated with calls from consumers looking to place orders for the green bagels. For the most part, though, he's not taking any since the company is a wholesaler. To get up to six for free, Jets fans must trek out to the company's Brooklyn plant. 

Of course, Mr. Bell says he'll be happy to ship several dozen to players on New York's longtime underdog team—should they ask. 

Bagels by Bell has been in business for some 60 years and was started by Mr. Bell's father,  Martin Bell. Its bagels are distributed to supermarkets and delis throughout the East Coast under several different names. Its main staple, however, is actually the hand-made bialy, a thinner version of the bagel. (Mr. Bell says it was easier to green-dye the bagels, which are mass-produced.) 

The company decided to go green at the suggestion of the New York State Governor's Office for Motion Picture & Television Development. Every January for the past nine years, Mr. Bell has shipped his company's bagels free of charge to a lounge that the government group sets up at the Sundance Film Festival in Park City, Utah. Naturally those bagels will be green this year.

Mr. Bell says he might repeat the green promotion for St. Patrick's Day though he'd probably charge customers for the special treats. He's only giving them away for free now because "I'm an idiot," he says. "We blow money in all different ways in life. How often do you really get to have fun like this?" 

But if the Jets win on Sunday,  Bruce I. Newman, a professor of marketing at DePaul University, says Mr. Bell could capitalize on the recent press he's received by selling his green bagels direct to consumers through his company's website, Bialy.com. Mr. Bell could also cross-promote the deal on its Facebook page, as well as create a YouTube video about the bagels that prominently features the Web address, Mr. Newman adds. "Let it go viral," he says. "Who knows where that's going to go?" 

Whether Gang Green reaches the Super Bowl or not, Mr. Newman says the green bagel giveaway was a smart move on Mr. Bell's behalf—even if the entrepreneur didn't intend for it to be a strategic endeavor. 

"Good P.R. helps any company because it raises your profile," Mr. Newman says. "It identifies who you are and it shows there's a response from the general public at large to what you're doing."

 Write to  Sarah E. Needleman at sarah.needleman@wsj.com 