TEL AVIV—Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on Tuesday asked U.S. President Barack Obama to release Jonathan Pollard, an unusually public request by the Israeli leader on behalf of the former naval intelligence officer, who was sentenced to life in jail for spying for the Jewish state.

The Israeli government has quietly inquired about clemency for Mr. Pollard in the past, and previous requests have been met coolly by Washington. The current appeal comes as the Obama administration and Israel's government have sparred publicly for months over how to proceed with peace talks with the Palestinians.

The U.S. has generally supported a Palestinian call for a freeze in Israeli settlement building in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. Palestinian officials have refused to restart talks until a total freeze is agreed upon, something Mr. Netanyahu has been unwilling to do.

In recent months, the subject of Mr. Pollard's possible release from a U.S. prison has become entwined in the public dialogue over how Israel and Palestinian authorities might re-engage in stalled peace talks. Gaining Mr. Pollard's release would win Mr. Netanyahu political points with Israeli hard-liners, for whom the Israeli spy has long been a cause célébre.

Those hard-liners are also a key pillar in Mr. Netanyahu's governing coalition, and they have vehemently opposed any concessions to the Palestinians. Mr. Pollard's release could make it easier for Mr. Netanyahu to make concessions, including agreeing to a settlement freeze.

A spokesman for the U.S. Embassy in Tel Aviv said the letter had been received and is being reviewed.

After his arrest in 1985, Mr. Pollard agreed to a plea bargain, pleading guilty to one count of espionage, in the hopes of a lenient punishment. Despite the deal, he was sentenced in 1987 to life in jail. Israel belatedly acknowledged that Mr. Pollard passed information to its intelligence services. In his letter Tuesday, Mr. Netanyahu acknowledged Israeli regret for the episode, which frayed U.S.-Israeli ties at the time.

"Even though Israel was in no way directing its intelligence efforts against the United States, its actions were wrong and wholly unacceptable," Mr. Netanyahu read from the letter. "Since Jonathan Pollard has now spent 25 years in prison, I believe that a new request for clemency is highly appropriate."