In the pantheon of Indonesian folk heroes, few are so bizarre as 31-year-old taxman Gayus Tambunan. Since being arrested on bribery allegations last March, Mr. Gayus has been surprisingly footloose for someone awaiting trial in police detention. In November an eagle-eyed photographer spotted him wearing a wig and glasses in the stands at a tennis tournament in Bali. Last week Mr. Gayus admitted that he also traveled to Macau, Kuala Lumpur and Singapore, all while supposedly behind bars in Jakarta.

Mr. Gayus is being tried for, among other charges, accepting bribes in his mid-level post at the country's tax authority. Getting caught, it seems, did not diminish his penchant for greasing palms: It is by paying off his jailers that he was able to buzz about Asia. He confessed to having left and re-entered prison this way 68 times.

Indonesian outrage at the lax supervision of Mr. Gayus is leavened by fascination with his brazenness. Local newspapers christened him "SuperGayus" for his feats, and an op-ed in the Jakarta Post anointed him Indonesia's Person of the Year for 2010.

Even after his exploits came to light, Mr. Gayus continued to make a mockery of Indonesia's justice system. To account for his jaunts, he cited the undue stress of his confinement. He also claimed that there are nefarious forces within the country who wish him dead. In a final plea, which he read in court on Monday, Mr. Gayus announced that he would tender his services to Indonesia's Corruption Eradication Commission, or KPK, in exchange for a reduced sentence. Prosecutors did not take him up on the offer.

Mr. Gayus's case is an embarrassment for Indonesia's government as it tries to re-establish the credibility of its corruption fighters following a politically motivated case against top officials at the KPK. By illuminating in dramatic form the system's true weakness, the spectacle could provide fresh impetus for better enforcement. Mr. Gayus has already become a colorful mascot for the system's critics; antigraft activists attend court hearings and demonstrations wearing paper masks of his face in the infamous wig-and-glasses getup.

The extra attention has not yet succeeded in getting Indonesia's graft-busters out of their seats, however. While a few mid-level prison and immigration officials have lost their jobs, there are signs that factions within the national police have been working to stall or hinder the government's case against Mr. Gayus. While it is encouraging, then, that the investigation into his outings has been taken away from the police and moved to the KPK, a broader inquiry into Mr. Gayus's connections is needed.

President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono won a landslide re-election in 2009 on a promise to clean up corruption, but after some initial successes he has failed to give the KPK the necessary support to carry out its work. By treating this case as though it were any other bribery trial, his government risks letting the public theatrics overshadow the seriousness of Mr. Gayus's offenses—while turning the graft fight into a bad joke at the Indonesian people's expense.