David Stevens, who as commissioner of the Federal Housing Administration steered the mortgage insurer through a critical stretch of the housing downturn, will leave his post by the end of April, the agency said Thursday.

  Mr. Stevens, who was one of the few Obama administration housing appointees with a private-sector background, has emerged as a key adviser on housing-finance policy. He is expected to return to the private sector but wouldn't elaborate on his career plans. 

Separately, the House of Representatives voted Thursday to cancel a program spearheaded by Mr. Stevens to assist borrowers whose homes have sunk in value, arguing the effort is failing and wasting money. The Democratic-led Senate is unlikely to take up the measure.

Mr. Stevens took the helm of the government home-loan insurer in July 2009, when it faced rapidly rising losses from mortgage defaults and dwindling reserves, raising the prospect of a taxpayer rescue. The agency played an important role in the troubled housing market by continuing to make mortgages available with low down payments. Its share of the mortgage market meanwhile swelled dramatically.

That put Mr. Stevens at the center of a debate over how far the government should prop up the housing sector and how big the burden on taxpayers should be. Under his watch, the agency repeatedly increased the mortgage-insurance fees borrowers must pay in order to rebuild its reserves, though he resisted efforts to raise minimum down payments beyond 3.5%.

"We accomplished a lot. It's been extraordinarily hard work," said Mr. Stevens in an interview. He said that after nearly two years in the job it was a "great time for me to transition back to the private sector."

Some critics say the FHA has taken on too much risk and that it's likely to burn through its cash cushion.  Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and many private firms suffered big mortgage-related losses, prompting government rescues.

Nevertheless, Mr. Stevens's efforts to overhaul the FHA earned plaudits from lawmakers in both parties, consumer advocates and the real-estate industry. 

"Dave has been singularly focused on restoring FHA to fiscal health," said  Shaun Donovan, the secretary of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, in a statement. "His leadership...has not only contributed to a renewed sense of confidence in the FHA, but also a restored trust in government and what it can do."

While turnover halfway through an administration is normal, Mr. Stevens's departure comes as policy makers still face big challenges dealing with the housing crisis. 

Last month, the Obama administration unveiled an initial outline of its proposal for the future of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, and regulators are finalizing new mortgage-lending rules as part of the Dodd-Frank Act.

Meanwhile, federal and state officials are entering talks with the nation's largest banks to settle alleged abuses over mortgage servicing as a result of the "robo-signing" controversy that erupted last fall. 

Republicans have advanced bills to terminate the Obama administration's foreclosure-assistance programs, including a fledgling initiative to refinance underwater homeowners that was pioneered by Mr. Stevens. The program relies on voluntary lender participation and has seen disappointing results so far, with fewer than 300 loan applications.

The industry veteran has drawn on his position to urge mortgage-industry executives to do more to help struggling homeowners and to accept greater regulatory scrutiny. 

"We aren't holding ourselves accountable," Mr. Stevens said at an industry conference last fall, warning of a growing "trust deficit" with consumers.

 Write to  Nick Timiraos at nick.timiraos@wsj.com 