DES MOINES, Iowa – Mississippi Gov. Haley Barbour drew polite chuckles at the first extended forum for potential Republican presidential candidates here Saturday when he declared: "The main thing is to keep the main thing the main thing."

The main thing, he said, is economic growth.

But in an Iowa activist world where social conservatism has long dominated, the laughter did not last. Some activists who play a role in Iowa's first-in-the-nation presidential caucuses bridle at any suggestion that economic issues should take a front seat ahead of abortion, gay marriage or other social issues. 

"Social conservatism is fiscal conservatism," thundered Minnesota Rep. Michele Bachmann, bringing the crowd at the Conservative Principles Conference here to its feet.

"We can walk and chew gum at the same time. How about co-top priorities, the economy and the moral issues?" asked pizza magnate Herman Cain, another White House hopeful, in an interview.

"If you don't start with values … the rest of it doesn't matter," said former House Speaker Newt Gingrich, an all-but-declared presidential candidate. "Life is not just about money."

The split over "the main thing" at a conference put on by conservative Iowa Rep. Steve King, a Republican, pointed to a tension that has developed as the party prepares to try to win the White House from President Barack Obama next year. Mr. Barbour was resolute that the party will not win in 2012 unless the campaign revolves around issues of economic growth. His low-key delivery dwelled on energy production and the need to spur private investment.

Mr. Gingrich spoke about Libya and foreign policy.

But it was Ms. Bachmann and Mr. Cain who won whoops and cheers from the crowd with speeches heavy on attacks on Mr. Obama. Ms. Bachmann called for abolishing the tax code and restoring "freedom of choice" in light bulb purchases, a reference to legislation that sets efficiency standards for incandescent bulbs.

Mr. Cain decried "radical socialism … being shoved down our throats." The African-American businessman won a loud ovation when he declared, "I will not stay on the Democratic plantation just because I'm supposed to."

"Americans have made their decision," Ms. Bachmann shouted above cheers. "They have decided we are going to take our country back."

Mr. King, considered a potential kingmaker in the caucuses, said the different approaches can be reconciled. The short-term imperative is economic, he said in an interview, but social issues such as abortion and gay marriage should not be forgotten in the rush to trim the size of government.

With the Iowa caucuses more than nine months away, few Iowa Republicans say they have made their choice from a field in which no major candidate has formally declared his or her candidacy. Two potential candidates considered to be front-runners -- former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney and former Minnesota Gov. Tim Pawlenty -- were no-shows at Saturday's forum.

Even so, some Iowans have begun thinking about their criteria for a candidate.

Dave Funk, co-chairman of the Polk County GOP, in the most populous country in Iowa, said that in the tea party era, fiscal issues will override social ones.

Charlie Gruschow, co-head of the Iowa Tea Party, said charisma will be a top requirement. He is backing Mr. Cain but said Ms. Bachmann is "making a lot of noise."

At the Cedar Rapids Country Club, where a Linn County Republican group was listening to Mr. Barbour on Friday, Dave Mahacek pointed to a different criterion.

"Whoever we go with is going to have to be electable," he said. Mr. Mahacek would not say who wasn't electable, but he said Mr. Barbour "has a real charm."

Supporters of some candidates warned that the flash of an activist conference like Saturday's should not be mistaken for the hard work that it will take to win the caucuses in January. Messrs. Pawlenty and Romney are building organizations in Iowa with top political operatives, and Mr. Romney is building a fund-raising network all over the country.

Mr. Barbour has begun the kind of retail politics that even activists like Mr. Funk, who is not partial to the Mississippian, say will ultimately win the race. On Friday, Mr. Barbour spoke to preachers in West Des Moines at breakfast, to Republicans at a Cedar Rapids country club at lunch, and at the Johnson County Republican Party spaghetti dinner that night at a Tiffin, Iowa, high school.

"Republicans in Iowa are very similar to Republicans in Mississippi," Mr. Barbour shrugged in Tiffin when asked if he can compete. "So I'm going to talk about what I think is important. Then we'll let the people of Iowa decide."

 Write to  Jonathan Weisman at jonathan.weisman@wsj.com 