Leaders of the feuding Palestinian factions ironed out the final details of an agreement to form a unified government, but the deal faces significant hurdles, and looks set to sharpen conflict with Israel.

More than a dozen Palestinian factions converged on Cairo on Tuesday to give their stamp of approval to the Egyptian-brokered reconciliation. Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas, whose Fatah movement runs the West Bank, and Khaled Meshal, the political director of Hamas, which runs the Gaza Strip are due to sign the agreement at a ceremony in Cairo on Wednesday.

Palestinian leaders say they hope the agreement can end years of in-fighting between the two groups, unlock funds for the reconstruction of Gaza, persuade the United Nations to recognize Palestinian statehood and strengthen the Palestinians' hand in dealings with Israel.

"I do believe this is a turning point," said Ahmed Yousef, former adviser to the prime minister of the de facto Hamas government in Gaza. 

Mr. Yousef said the agreement, reached by Fatah and Hamas after years of reluctance, was the result of pressure from uprisings around the Arab world, and the failure of negotiations with Israel. 

"We cannot end [Israel's] occupation without ending the [Palestinian] division," said Azzam Al Ahmad, a negotiator for the more secular Fatah.

That optimism was tempered, however, by the wide differences between factions, which disagree on such core questions as whether to recognize Israel's right to exist, and the usefulness of military attacks on Israel. 

Hamas doesn't recognize Israel and is designated a terrorist organization by the U.S., Israel and the European Union. The group's inclusion in the Palestinian Authority, rather than unlocking funds, could trigger Western donor countries to hold up current aid that might end up in the hands of Islamic militants, including Hamas. 

U.S. Rep. Nita Lowey of New York, the highest-ranking Democrat on the House of Representative's foreign aid subcommittee, said last week that the participation of Hamas in a unity government would put U.S. assistance at risk. Israel froze $88 million in Palestinian funding Sunday.

Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on Tuesday continued to voice his opposition. "How is it possible to achieve peace with a government with one half that calls to destroy Israel," he said in a statement, before leaving on a trip to persuade Washington and London to block U.N. recognition of a Palestinian state. 

People familiar with the draft agreement say Fatah and Hamas will agree to form a policy board of technocrats under a mutually acceptable prime minister; prepare for new presidential and parliamentary elections one year after the deal's signature; and reform the Palestinian Liberation Organization as an umbrella including Hamas and other groups.

The agreement puts off a dispute over whether to consolidate control of the security forces in the West Bank and Gaza Strip under a single command, leaving a decision until after the elections, according to two people familiar with the agreement. 

The deal could stumble, however. Azzam Abu Baker, a Fatah official responsible for relations with Arab countries, said Fatah will expect Hamas to stop importing its own weapons from Iran and to allow Fatah to station personnel at Gaza's Rafah border crossing to Egypt. Egypt has pledged to open that crossing permanently for individual, though not commercial, traffic.

"If they don't give in Gaza, don't forget we run the West Bank," Mr. Abu Baker said of Hamas. "They want a series of issues, like not being harassed." 

On Monday night, security forces in the West Bank arrested several Palestinians linked to Hamas, drawing condemnation from the Hamas leadership.

In a further sign of the complexities involved, almost a dozen smaller Palestinian factions countersigning the deal Tuesday provided comments for attachment to the agreement, said Ahmed El Modallal, a leader of the Islamic Jihad movement in Gaza, which opposes talks with Israel as well as proposals for a two-state solution to the conflict.

"We respect the Palestinian Authority's choice of negotiations with Israel, but we expect them to respect our choice of armed resistance," he said. 

He added that Islamic Jihad's comments in the deal's attachment called for an end to arrests of its members in the West Bank under a current security coordination agreement between the Palestinian Authority and Israel.

Fatah officials said the new government of technocrats would have no say in whether to continue or end that security agreement—a major Israeli concern.

 Write to  Marc Champion at marc.champion@wsj.com 