Metropolitan Transportation Authority officials admitted Friday to a wide range of failures and mistakes during the December blizzard that crippled the region's mass transit system. 

The biggest lapses, according to New York City Transit President Tom Prendergast: the MTA was 19 hours late in raising its weather-alert level and it failed to open a situation room to coordinate the responses of the bus and subway systems.

City Council members questioned Mr. Prendergast and his lieutenants for nearly four hours in an unusually heated hearing that left many of the elected officials unsatisfied. 

"I was shocked by the performance of the transit leaders, the folks from the MTA at today's oversight hearing," Council Speaker  Christine Quinn said afterwards. "It really left me not feeling any greater level of confidence that the MTA can handle the next storm."

Mr. Prendergast's testimony described an agency knocked off its feet by the 20 inches of snow that hit the city the day after Christmas. Confusion and disarray reigned, and nearly 600 buses and multiple subways got stuck.

The situation room admission led to much of the outrage. The MTA has space for one in Midtown, and in the past operations staff had generally set up there without prompting from top managers, Mr. Prendergast said. But the agency had stopped doing so, and the actual room didn't have the proper equipment in it—something Mr. Prendergast said he did not know until the storm was already bearing down on the city.

Low-level managers who oversee train and bus movements don't see what's going on elsewhere in the system, so they didn't know the network was buckling in other places during the storm, he said. If a situation room had been up and running, managers could have seen that things were breaking down and stopped service sooner. That would have kept many trains and buses from getting stuck.

"The fact that it fell out of practice is a serious deficiency," Mr. Prendergast said.

"It's ridiculous!' the speaker shouted back. "And that you didn't know. That's like a heart patient saying, 'I fell out of practice of putting an aspirin under my tongue when I'm in bad heart rhythm.' And then the time they know they should do it not doing it. They're going to drop dead."

Mr. Prendergast said it's possible that the agency tried to offer more service than it should have starting Sunday morning, prompting officials to keep buses and subways running that night as they tried to get people home.

The council also focused on a disconnect between Mayor  Michael Bloomberg's public urging that people take mass transit if they had to get around during the storm and the state that straphangers found the system in when they got to their bus or subway stop. 

Mr. Prendergast vowed that the agency would coordinate better with city officials.

Many council members compared the MTA's handling of the storm and its aftermath to the city's—which they have also blasted. Mr. Bloomberg has been much quicker to announce changes to the city's snow-response plans. He demoted a number of people involved in the handling of the storm. And his sanitation commissioner provided the council with the cost of the city's cleanup at a hearing Monday. 

Mr. Prendergast has announced some changes to the MTA's plan for handling snow—situation rooms were opened for two subsequent storms, for example—but he said Friday that he didn't know what the storm had cost the agency. He also has yet to fire or demote anyone involved, but said that such moves are possible as the MTA reviews its response. 

The MTA is conducting an evaluation of its handling of the storm and will make it public within weeks, Mr. Prendergast said. The agency's independent inspector general is also investigating. Among the areas where the agency is considering changes: its system of alert levels and its communication with customers during storms. He said that, too, was poor. 

Throughout the hearing, Mr. Prendergast, who has been in his current job for just more than a year, was generally contrite, though he angered members by not giving definitive answers to some of their questions. He did grow testy at times, raising his voice at one point to defend a manager that Council Member  Letitia James of Brooklyn thought should be fired.

"We failed during the blizzard and this is an apology on our part due to that failure," he said. 

For Ms. Quinn, that term could be applied to the hearing. "Today was an abject failure," she said when it was over.

Mr. Prendergast said if there was any lack of preparation for the hearing, it's because the MTA was busy getting ready for two other storms.

"It's important that we have a dialogue with the City Council," he told reporters. "We think it's more important that we provide service 24 hours a day, seven days a week as the next storms face us."

 Write to  Andrew Grossman at andrew.grossman@wsj.com 