Target-date funds, which suffered a black eye in the market crash, are looking better these days. 

Read the complete Investing in Funds report. 

During the bear market of 2007-09, target-date funds designed for investors retiring in 2010 lost about 37% on average, according to  Morningstar Inc.,
MORN


-0.43
%




 blindsiding some soon-to-be-retirees. These funds were taken to task by government officials, lawmakers and investors for what some said were overly aggressive allocations to stocks and for failing to clearly explain their strategies and risks.

"Some investors didn't realize they could lose money," says  Robyn Credico, a senior consultant at employee-benefit consulting firm Towers Watson. 

The stock market's rebound from its early-2009 low has propelled most of these funds back into positive territory, even for some investors who bought at the market's 2007 high, prompting some in the industry to say concerns about the funds' asset allocations were overdone. 

Despite the improved performance and the fact that some fund providers have taken steps to reduce volatility in their portfolios, some industry watchers say target-date products may still be too risky for those in or near retirement.

Target-date funds typically comprise cash, stocks and bonds in a portfolio that becomes more conservative as the retirement date nears. In existence for more than 10 years, they became significantly more popular when the Pension Protection Act of 2006 allowed them to become a qualified default investment option in various retirement plans.

Advocates of target-date funds say they help prevent investors from making poor investment decisions. "Most participants naively construct their portfolios and often make mistakes," such as loading up on company stock or buying no equities, says  Jean Young, senior research analyst for Vanguard Group's Vanguard Center for Retirement Research.

But many say the allocations the fund companies picked weren't so great, either. Several of the 2010 funds were launched during the equities rally earlier in the decade, which may have made stocks look more attractive to the managers designing the funds, says Morningstar senior mutual-fund analyst  Greg Carlson. The typical 2010 fund had a stock weighting of 54% at the end of September 2007; that weighting has since declined to about 46%, he says.

In addition, many of the funds' nonequity securities, such as high-yield bonds, dropped almost as much or more than stocks during the bear market.

Worst off were those who bailed out after suffering losses in their 2010 funds, only to miss the market's recovery. "Some people can't retire because of the money they lost," says  Ron Surz, president of Target Date Solutions, a consulting firm that designs target-date funds. 

After the market crash, government officials and lawmakers promised new disclosure rules to make target-date funds more understandable to investors. But an initial proposal from Washington, aimed at forcing fund providers to show what their funds' asset allocations would look like at the retirement date, was generally criticized as not doing enough to educate investors about the risks associated with those investments. 

Mr. Surz says most target-date funds are still too risky, especially for investors in or near retirement. He says those funds should be "entirely in safe inflation-protected assets," such as Treasury inflation-protected securities, or TIPS.

But others say the funds' diversification and equities tilt, which hurt performance in 2008 and early 2009, is what helped fuel the rebound during the bull market. "The funds did what they were supposed to do," says  Pamela Hess, director of retirement research at consulting firm Aon Hewitt, a unit of Aon Corp.

Target-date 2010 funds averaged a gain of 4.94% from Oct. 9, 2007 (the peak before the market crash) through April 27, 2011, according to Morningstar. The Standard & Poor's 500-stock index declined a cumulative 5.57%, while the MSCI EAFE index of international stocks lost 15.93% over the same period.

The three largest year-2010 funds,  Fidelity Freedom 2010, T. Rowe Price Retirement 2010 and  Vanguard Target Retirement 2010, are all up this year, with returns ranging from 5.5% to 6.3%, according to Morningstar.  Jerome Clark, portfolio manager of T. Rowe Price Retirement Funds, says that "2008 wasn't a fun year for anyone, but the long-term success of the [Retirement 2010] fund should be the focus for investors." 

Many target-fund managers defend their stock exposure, saying it mitigates the risk that investors will run out of money before they die. Still, several funds, such as  AllianceBernstein 2010 Retirement Strategy and  MFS Lifetime 2010, have added alternative investments such as real-estate investment trusts, commodities and TIPS into their target-date funds to hedge against inflation and reduce their correlation with the equity markets. Others have cut their equity exposure. 

 Most agree that more education is key. "Target-date funds are complicated investments that vary widely in risk and cost, yet most people aren't given all the facts," says Democratic Sen. Herb Kohl of Wisconsin, chairman of the Senate Special Committee on Aging. He is pushing for target-date fund managers to become fiduciaries in order for their funds to qualify as a default option in retirement plans.

 Ms. Dagher is a reporter for Dow Jones Newswires in New York. Email her at veronica.dagher@dowjones.com. 