The first time was something else. The second time is, well, something.

When the Miami Heat visited the Knicks in December, Madison Square Garden was fanatically focused. It was LeBron James' first New York sleepover since his decision to spurn Manhattan, New Jersey, Cleveland and good taste for the neon tropics of South Florida.

At the time, the Knicks were playing their noisiest basketball in a decade. The city was still high on the vapors of a strangely exhilarating last-second loss to the Celtics. For the Heat, the Garden—a crypt for most of the 21st century—buzzed like Frazier-Ali. Spike was there. Drake was there. Even a Jonas brother was there. Harpo Jonas.

Weirdly, the Knicks were not there, at least not in the second half. 

Mr. James posted an emphatic triple-double as the Heat thwapped the Knicks 113-91.

Now it's time for a reprise. The Heat return to the Garden Thursday, but the mood is different. It's a big game, but not an It Game. It feels like getting a prime lunch table at the Four Seasons Grill Room—at 3 p.m.

Both teams have been wobbly lately. The Heat, though 31-13, are a fickle machine. They started a pedestrian 9-8, then reeled off 19 of 20. But lately they've been banged up (Mr. James missed two games with a bad ankle, Chris Bosh is still nursing an ankle, and Dwyane Wade is suffering from migraines) and recently lost four in a row.

Sadly for their haters, the Heat have proven to be formidable. But they resemble a pretty sports car. When perfectly aligned, they purr. 

If there's a slight bump, they rattle. It remains to be seen if they have the tenacity to beat the Assisted Living All-Stars up in Boston, who have shown they can play through pain and missing bodies.

"I don't think they can get by Boston," the Los Angeles-based motivational speaker Phil Jackson said recently, a comment that would have made more of a stir if Mr. Jackson (whose own team was thumped by Miami on Christmas) didn't make needling comments like that 300 times a season.

And the Knicks? After a soaring early winter, they lost altitude and backslid into Same Old Knicks-type torpor. Besides a sweet thump of San Antonio at the Garden, January has been mostly a hangover. There were ugly losses to Sacramento and Phoenix and a dreadful swing through Texas and Oklahoma. The six-game futility streak was snapped Monday against Washington—though entering Wednesday night's game at Philly, the Wizards haven't won a road game since the Zachary Taylor administration.

The Knicks are treading water at 23-21, good enough for the sixth playoff seed in the Eastern Conference, which after Boston, Miami and Chicago becomes a truck stop flea market. It's a significant improvement on recent seasons, but that good news is starting to feel like old news.

It's time for these Knicks to fully announce themselves. Are they the brewing storm of mid-December, led by MVP Amar'e Stoudemire and lifted by surprises like Landry Fields, Wilson Chandler and Raymond Felton? Or was that just a passing comet that still desperately needs a infusion of Carmelo Anthony?

Thursday's game won't have the electricity of the first Miami showdown. LeBron and the SchadenHeat have made their first pass through the NBA; everyone's gotten their angriest boos out of the way. 

But it's still a night for a statement. These Knicks just haven't figured out what to say.