MUMBAI -- The promoters of Shalimar Paints, a Mumbai-based paint manufacturing company, are looking to divest a part of their stake, according to two people familiar with the development.

The company has appointed investment bank Avendus Capital Pvt. Ltd. to scout for suitable buyers. 

"The talks are still in preliminary stages," said the person with direct knowledge of the development. "They are looking for either a strategic player or a private equity firm. The company needs money for capacity expansion and business development."

An e-mail questionnaire sent to Shalimar Paints on Monday went unanswered. Sandeep Sarda, executive director and chief executive officer of Shalimar Paints, when contacted over the phone, said: "We do not comment on such things." 

The promoters of the paint company are the Ratan Jindal Group and the Jhunjhunwala Group, a Hong-Kong based non-resident Indian group with interests in real estate and hospitality. At the end of March 2010, the promoters held a 62.8% stake in the company.

India's paint industry is estimated to be 190 billion rupees ($4.23 billion), with expected volume growth of 13% to 15%, the fastest in Asia-Pacific, according to a Standard Chartered Securities (India) Ltd. report in January.

Demand for industrial paints is expected to grow at a healthy pace backed by growth in sectors such as automobiles, consumer durables, and infrastructure spending on roads, ports and power plants.

Compared to Asian Paints Ltd., the leading player with a market share of 51.7% according to sales, Shalimar has a market share of just 3.2%. The other leading players are Kansai Nerolac Paints Ltd., Berger Paints India Ltd., Akzo Nobel India Ltd. There are around 2,000 unorganized firms, according to the Indian Paint Association, an industry body.

Attracted by the high growth in the sector, global majors such as Sherwin-Williams Co., Nippon Paint Co. Ltd. and Jotun Paints have also set up shop.

There are not many private equity investments in the paints sector. Nalanda Capital, a Singapore-based private equity fund, invested around 211.3 million rupees ($4.7 million) in Berger Paints in September 2008, and made a follow-on investment in August 2009 of approximately 350 million rupees ($7.8 million).

Hetal Gandhi, managing director at Mumbai-based private equity firm Tano India Advisors Pvt. Ltd., said: "The growing demand and subsequent investment in infrastructure and real estate will make paint companies an attractive investment." He added that there is no capital entry barrier in the sector as it's more of a brand and distribution business. 

"There could be interest from global players," he said.

Shalimar is looking to expand capacities at the existing manufacturing plants by around 25%, according to a company presentation to shareholders in March. It has three plants with an installed capacity of 57,000 tons per annum and is in the process of setting up fourth plant with a capacity of 18,000 tons in Chennai. Also within the industrial paints segment, it is looking to expand product offerings to other niche segments and is looking for technological tie-ups with international firms.

"The industry is currently going through input cost inflation environment with prices of key inputs like titanium dioxide on an uptrend," said Gautam Duggad, an analyst with Prabhudas Lilladher Pvt. Ltd. 

"Also, there is a constant need for capacity expansion for paints manufacturer given the high annual growth rate of the industry in terms of volumes." Like many other equity analysts, Mr. Duggad does not track Shalimar, which has a market cap of 1.09 billion rupees ($24 million), which is below the threshold size for many analysts.

It had reported sales of 1.10 billion rupees ($24.5 million) for the quarter ended Dec. 31, against 979.80 million rupees ($21.8 million) for same period in the previous year. The company booked a profit of 24.2 million rupees ($539,397), up 80.59% from the previous year.

According to half-yearly figures, as of Sept. 30, Shalimar had a debt of 1.13 billion rupees ($25 million), up by 21.37% from the same period in the previous year. Its cash on books declined to 84.5 million rupees ($1.88 million) from 212.5 million rupees ($4.74 million) on Sept. 30, 2009. According to Bloomberg data, as on March 31, 2010, its debt-to-equity ratio of 1.28.

Shalimar's stock price was down by 0.34% to close at 290 rupees ($6.46) a share on Thursday on the Bombay Stock Exchange, as the benchmark Sensex closed 1.4% down at 18,210 points.