BERLIN—European governments are considering ways to reduce the debt burdens of struggling euro-zone countries such as Greece through bond buybacks, as part of broader measures aimed at ending the crisis of confidence in Europe's common currency.

The buyback ideas being discussed would allow Greece or other indebted countries to borrow money from Europe's bailout fund, and use it to buy up their own bonds at depressed prices from investors or from the European Central Bank, said senior European officials.

Such buybacks would allow countries to reduce their total debt burdens by paying less than the face value of their bonds. Officials say the trades' voluntary nature would avoid unsettling investors with debt defaults or a forced restructuring of bonds. Debt buybacks could be an "elegant" way to help the euro's weakest members repair their finances, European officials said.

But agreement on the idea, and on other proposals to boost the bailout fund's firepower and increase its flexibility, depends on indebted countries offering something to Germany and other financially strong countries in return, these officials said. If the bond-buying idea is agreed upon, it may not come into effect immediately, they said.

Germany, which would have to increase its financial support for the bailout fund to facilitate an expansion in its activities, is linking its consent to other countries' willingness to adopt tough economic overhauls, said officials in Chancellor Angela Merkel's government.

Berlin wants euro-zone members, as well as European Union countries that don't use the euro, to sign up to a program to increase economic competitiveness. Among other ideas, Germany is pushing for countries to raise retirement ages, to scrap policies that link wages and pensions to inflation, to adopt laws or constitutional amendments requiring balanced budgets, and to harmonize aspects of their tax systems.

Such changes would mimic German policy overhauls in the past decade, which have helped turn the country from a stagnant economy with mass unemployment into the Continent's economic powerhouse again. Similar changes in other countries would boost economic growth and bring public debts in the euro zone back under control, German officials argue.

A program of German-inspired overhauls would also make it easier for Ms. Merkel to persuade German voters, and her own coalition's lawmakers, to swallow a bigger German commitment to Europe's bailout mechanism.

Ms. Merkel faces a struggle to sell more-generous euro-zone aid to her coalition. Her junior partners, the Free Democrats, are opposed to putting more German taxpayer money on the table, and many lawmakers in the chancellor's own Christian Democratic Union are also wary of angering voters. The coalition is already struggling in opinion polls ahead of a string of regional elections in coming months.

Despite opposition from the Free Democrats, Ms. Merkel's finance minister, Wolfgang Schäuble, said last week that he supports strengthening the main bailout fund, the European Financial Stability Facility, so it can lend as much as €440 billion ($592 billion) to struggling countries as originally intended when the entity was created last summer. The EFSF's true lending capacity is currently far lower.

The discussions about bond buybacks show Germany is also responding to calls from ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet, among other European leaders, to make the EFSF more flexible. 

At present, the fund can offer only last-ditch loans to countries facing insolvency.

The ECB stands to benefit from letting the EFSF finance bond buybacks, since governments on the euro zone's troubled fringe could then take their own bonds off of the central bank's balance sheet. 

The ECB's purchases of government bonds, which totaled €76 billion through last week, have saved Portugal, among others, from a worse battering in financial markets. But they have prompted fears inside the ECB—and criticism from Germany—that the bank could lose its cherished independence from national governments.

While many EU policy makers are pushing for a quick consensus to expand the EFSF, Germany has made it clear that it doesn't expect any decisions until March—and that it will agree to boost the bailout fund only in return for other countries' commitment to economic overhauls.

Berlin also wants the package of changes to include a detailed agreement on how the euro zone's permanent bailout arrangement, the European Stability Mechanism, will work when it replaces the temporary EFSF in 2013.

 Write to  Marcus Walker at marcus.walker@wsj.com, Costas Paris at costas.paris@dowjones.com and Alkman Granitsas at alkman.granitsas@dowjones.com 