The Federal Bureau of Investigation on Wednesday asked the administrator of an Internet game to hand over records of communications by Jared Loughner, following a Wall Street Journal article describing disturbing messages the accused shooter wrote over a three-month period last year.

In an interview, David McVittie, the administrator of the Web game Earth Empires, said he was contacted by the FBI, which requested the files, including 131 messages that Mr. Loughner wrote. Mr. Loughner is accused of the Jan. 8 shooting in Tucson, Ariz., that left six dead and 14 wounded, including Democratic Rep. Gabrielle Giffords.

Mr. McVittie said he might make the files available to the public after he releases them to federal authorities. An FBI spokesman declined to comment, citing the continuing investigation into Mr. Loughner. 

The postings, a sampling of which appeared in The Wall Street Journal Wednesday, are from an online forum in which roughly 50 gamers banter with each other about the game, life and other topics. 

Posts by Mr. Loughner viewed by the Journal and dating from between April and June 2010, paint a picture of a disturbed young man who expressed strongly misogynist sentiments, wrote about rape and suicide, and often surprised other gamers with his incoherent rants and provocative questions. 

On April 24, for instance, Mr. Loughner titled an online thread: "Would you hit a Handy Cap Child/Adult?" He wrote: "This is a very interesting question."

Among the postings is one in which Mr. Loughner appears to compare the possibility of prison or suicide with having a career or a job. 

While the posts don't mention Ms. Giffords or signs that Mr. Loughner planned the attack, the messages could help to provide understanding of his mental state and motivations. In them, he talks of frustrations around losing his job, battling with authorities at his college and being turned down by women. 

He also expresses an abiding anger, at one point asking, "Does anyone have aggression 24/7?"

Mr. McVittie, the administrator, has been among the tight-knit community associated with Earth Empires struggling to make sense of the shooting in its aftermath. Mr. McVittie said the game had also seen two suicides of its members over the years, which provoked similar questioning.

"Looking back, everyone had the same kind of reaction: How could we have helped? What could we have done differently to make sure this didn't happen?" Mr. McVittie said. 

Mr. Loughner's online interactions with other gamers in discussion groups underscore the strong social dimension of Internet games. Players often band together in groups, typically called clans or guilds, because certain in-game objectives—raiding a castle for loot, for example—can only be accomplished through cooperation with others.

The relationships that players form through hours of cooperating and communicating online can turn into online support groups. Guilds have been known to stage online funerals when a guild member died in real life.

Alex Montanaro, a friend of Mr. Loughner in real life and in gaming forums, said Mr. Loughner generally was more interested in the social outlet the forums provided than in playing the game itself.

In one of his last posts before he stopped participating in the forums, on June 4, Mr. Loughner posted a spreadsheet that appeared to compare in bold letters "Suicide to Prison and Career/Job."

Under the "Suicide" heading, he wrote "any second" for dozens of lines.

—Nick Wingfield contributed to this article.

 Write to  Alexandra Berzon at alexandra.berzon@wsj.com and John R. Emshwiller at john.emshwiller@wsj.com 