BANGALORE –  iGATE Corp. Thursday said it fired some senior executives at recently acquired  Patni Computer Systems Ltd. and recast its board as it fast tries to justify its highly leveraged $1.22 billion acquisition of the laggard outsourcing pioneer. 

iGATE also said it will keep Patni listed in India and the U.S. and run it as a separate company for now. 

"We have separated out many of the individuals [at Patni] because we don't believe their roles are at an executive level or because we believe that their performance has been too patchy," the founder of iGATE said at a press briefing that marked the deal's completion. 

Phaneesh Murthy, who is also chief executive of Bangalore-based iGATE, said the senior executive team at Patni had been pared down to nine people from 22 people earlier. 

"Senior executive departures at Patni are motivated by us," he said. 

Patni's stock on Indian exchanges has fallen 15.3% since January when iGATE and Apax Partners LLP gained majority control of the Indian outsourcing company. 

Patni in the first quarter of its fiscal year missed analysts' expectations and reported a 20.4% decline in net profit as costs rose faster than revenue and it paid more taxes in the January-March period. 

Revenue grew just 10.4% to $190.3 million from a year earlier. 

Patni, despite its pioneer status in India's outsourcing industry, has been trailing later entrants, which includes  Infosys Technologies Ltd. and Tata Consultancy Services Ltd. The company, unlike the top two companies in the industry, hasn't been able to cash in on the demand resurgence post the recession in late 2008 that had led to spending cut backs. 

iGATE also recast Patni's board. Mr. Murthy will replace  Jeya Kumar as chief executive of Patni. Mr. Kumar, along with the current chief financial officer,  Surjeet Singh, will step down at the end of May. 

Mr. Murthy didn't say if Mr. Kumar and Mr. Singh left on their own accord. 

Jeya Kumar didn't respond to a query, while Mr. Singh was unreachable for a comment. 

  Jai Pathak was named chairman, replacing founder  Narendra Patni, while  Shashank Singh, head of Apax Partners in India, has been named a director. Founders Gajendra and  Ashok Patni had earlier resigned from their posts as directors. 

Mr. Murthy said the sales teams of iGATE and Patni will jointly bid for orders. 

"We believe there are a number of cross-selling opportunities across the 360 clients of iGATE and Patni," he said. 

Mr. Murthy expects the combined entity's operating margin to improve by six percentage points to about 25% over the next 24 months as the company can now bid for large orders worth between $75 million to $100 million. 

iGATE and Apax Partners together own around 82.5% in Patni, although Mr. Murthy said plans were to pare the stake down to 75% in a year. 

Patni is listed both in the U.S. and in India while iGATE is listed only in the U.S. He said ultimately, there will be only one listing in the U.S., but didn't elaborate. 

Mr. Murthy said iGATE's current debt is around $770 million. "It's needed for a growth company like this [iGATE-Patni]," he added. 

 Write to  Rumman Ahmed at rumman.ahmed@dowjones.com 