 The Decemberists, 'The King Is Dead,' Tuesday 

In the past, songwriter Colin Meloy has steered his band the Decemberists through challenging conceptual waters, using intricate rock suites to sing about nautical quests and ghostly characters. On the new "The King Is Dead," he intentionally avoids excess. Critics have praised its homey Americana touch and R.E.M.-like jangle, as in the song "Down by the Water," the band's highest-charting radio single to date.

  Q&A With Colin Meloy  

 Art Deco Weekend 2011, Miami Beach, Friday-Sunday 

This annual festival grew out of preservationist efforts in the 1970s which helped turn Ocean Drive from a seedy, geriatric strip into the current haven for buff rollerbladers and hot rods, albeit one with revitalized Art Deco buildings. Now Art Deco Weekend is a celebration of the whole movement, with guided tours, films, lectures, a Classic Car Fest and a parade. This year's featured events are a furniture exhibition and a fashion show with gowns inspired by the architecture.

 'Kidz Bop 19,' Tuesday 

Since 2001, the Kidz Bop concept—children covering the latest pop hits by the likes of Lady Gaga or Usher—has spawned a buzzing website, videogames and an "American Idol"-style talent contest. But at the core of the franchise is an old-fashioned business: selling CDs, mainly by marketing them to kids on TV. Record label Razor & Tie expects "Kidz Bop 19" to be first volume in the series to debut at No. 1 on the Billboard 200 albums chart (albeit in a relatively light week for new releases).

Number of albums, in millions, sold in the 18-volume Kidz Bop series

 'Sex With Strangers,' Chicago, starts previews Thursday 

"Sex With Strangers," a light drama by Laura Eason starting previews at the Steppenwolf Theatre Company in Chicago, centers on a hot-shot alpha-male writer whose online journal is an Internet sensation, thanks to the sexual exploits he chronicles there. His relationship with an older woman, a struggling novelist, forms the crux of the story, with their romance buckling as she digs deeper into his virtual and real-world pasts. The play was first performed on a skeletal set in a 100-seat studio space, part of a 2009 repertory of new work, and now runs as a full production. Steppenwolf announced this week that another play it developed, "Detroit" by Lisa D'Amour, is headed to Broadway in early fall.

—John Jurgensen, Monika Anderson, Ellen Gamerman