Jared Lee Loughner was charged in the shooting of Arizona Rep. Gabrielle Giffords and 19 others in Tucson Saturday. Among the six people killed were a federal judge and a nine-year-old girl. One of Giffords's doctors said the path of the bullet, from the back left to the front left of her head, may have been high enough to miss key brain centers controlling speech, vision and cognition, but remained cautious. Doctors on Thursday said Giffords was opening her eyes and moving her arms and legs. The 40-year-old is among a handful of swing-district Democrats remaining after the 2010 Republican wave.

Federal prosecutors are assembling a case that portrays the 22-year-old Loughner as a man with psychological problems who was nonetheless capable of plotting an assassination. A trove of 131 online-forum postings from April to June 2010 reviewed by the Journal paint a picture of a disturbed youth trying to impress his peers and struggling to find a purpose to his life. Loughner was assigned two federal public defenders, including Judy Clarke, who represented "Unabomber" Theodore Kaczynski and Sept. 11 conspirator Zacarias Moussaoui. 

Obama called on Americans to resist the temptation to assign blame for a shooting rampage that may never fully be explained, but to emerge from the tragedy a more thoughtful, civil nation. The president highlighted the short life of nine-year-old Christina Taylor Green, her view "undimmed by the cynicism or vitriol'' of adults, and said, "I want us to live up to her expectations. I want our democracy to be as good as she imagined it."

Cities, hospitals, schools and other public borrowers are scrambling to refinance tens of billions of dollars of debt this year, with the market for municipal bonds tumbling, another sign that the once-safe market is under duress.

The EPA revoked a key permit for one of the largest proposed mountaintop-removal coal-mining projects in Appalachia, drawing cheers from environmentalists and protests from business groups worried their projects could be next. 

The White House will announce as soon as this month the creation of Obama's re-election campaign, officials involved in the planning said. After a disastrous midterm election for his party, Mr. Obama recently has been seeking to re-establish himself as a unifying figure who can appeal to independent voters. Now, some Democratic strategists close to the White House fear the return of Mr. Obama as a candidate could harm the repositioning effort.

Tunisia's President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali fled the North African country, stepping aside after a month of popular protests against his 23-year rule that swelled Friday into the country's largest mass demonstration in memory. Prime Minister Mohammed Ghannouchi said he had temporarily assumed power. Word that Tunisia's entrenched leader had fallen sent shockwaves across the Middle East. 

Secretary of State Clinton wrapped up a tour of the Persian Gulf region by blasting Arab governments for corruption and stalled political change, and warned that extremist groups were exploiting the lack of democracy to promote radical agendas. 

Gallons of renewable motor fuels to be in use annually by 2022, according to a U.S. government mandate. Of this, 16 billion gallons are to be biofuels made from cellulosic feedstocks—a feature of the $5.8 billion deal DuPont struck for Denmark's Danisco this week.

Percentage of its food that Haiti imported in 2009, with 71% of it provided as food aid by the U.S. government. In 1986, Haiti produced about 80% of its own food.

Approximate number of Facebook page views in 2010. That's 10% of all page views by U.S. Internet users, making Facebook the top U.S. Web property.

Yards per rush Auburn kept Oregon to in its 22-19 victory in the national-championship college football game Monday night. In the regular season, Oregon averaged 6.1 yards per rush. 

Assets of the five largest U.S. banks as a percentage of all U.S. financial firms' assets.

 The biggest banks keep getting bigger. As of the third quarter of 2010, the top five U.S. commercial and investment banks—Bank of America, J.P. Morgan Chase, Citigroup, Wells Fargo and Goldman Sachs—had assets totaling $8.6 trillion, or 13.3% of all the assets held by U.S. financial firms, according to data provider Capital IQ and the Federal Reserve. That's up from 11.8% three years earlier, when the financial crisis hit. As a share of annual economic output, the top banks' assets add up to 58%, compared with 54% three years earlier. Bankers say big is good, allowing them to compete globally and provide services to customers at the lowest cost. Critics say it gives the banks too much political power, allowing them to scuttle reforms that could avert or mitigate the next financial crisis. 

—Mark Whitehouse

Sources: USDA (renewable fuels); Partners in Health, Robert F. Kennedy Center for Justice and Human Rights (Haiti); comScore (Facebook); NCAA (Auburn vs. Oregon).

Defense Secretary Gates concluded an Asian trip with a speech in Tokyo in which he said a strong alliance between Tokyo and Washington is vital to Asian security. He also met with Chinese President Hu to mend U.S.-Chinese relations, hours after Beijing conducted the first test flight of its new stealth fighter. 

Germany reported its fastest economic expansion since reunification, but its leaders remain divided over whether to boost Europe's bailout fund for euro-zone countries, which stands at around $580 billion. Other European leaders say the fund might prove too small if the region's debt crisis spreads to Spain. Portugal carried out a pair of government-bond auctions, but the high interest rates demanded by investors sustained concerns that the country could be next in line for a bailout, after Greece and Ireland. 

Lebanon's government collapsed when 11 Hezbollah-led politicians quit Prime Minister Saad Hariri's regime in opposition to a tribunal investigating the killing of his father, a former premier. Those politicians said they would block Mr. Hariri, who was in Washington at the time, from leading the next administration, limiting the prospects of the U.S.'s primary ally there. 

Ford set the Detroit auto show abuzz on its opening day Monday, disclosing plans to hire 7,000 workers in the U.S. this year and underscoring the shift in fortunes for the industry, especially those of Ford, GM and Chrysler. GM said it wanted pay for union-represented workers to be tied to employees' performance and the company's financial health, a big change in auto-worker compensation. 

Alcoa swung to a profit amid rising demand and prices for aluminum, and the momentum is expected to continue. The company unofficially kicked off the fourth-quarter earnings season Monday. While some businesses should see a modest boost this year from new tax-law depreciation changes, big profit gains are largely behind many industries. 

BP unveiled a share-swap agreement with Rosneft, the state-controlled Russian oil firm, that will give the Russian company a 5% stake in BP and allow the British oil giant to jointly explore and develop parts of the Russian Arctic. 

Retailers saw their best holiday season since the start of the recession, but a loss of momentum in December stoked concerns about the strength of the recovery in the new year. 

AMD forced out CEO Dirk Meyer, just as the chip maker's turnaround appeared to be gaining traction. The company's board had been concerned for nearly a year that Mr. Meyer wasn't doing enough to get the chip maker into newer gadgets. 

Evidence of tightening global food supplies grew as the U.S. cut its estimates for harvests of key crops due to bad weather and raised some demand forecasts, adding to food-price worries. Prices of corn, soybeans and wheat jumped, continuing the broad rally in commodity prices that began in June. Meanwhile, U.S. futures regulators moved to curb speculative trading in more than two dozen commodities.

The insider-trading inquiry could widen, as big payments to some consultants at an "expert network" firm indicate they may have talked with dozens of hedge funds. 

China launched trading in the yuan in the U.S. for the first time, in a move to let it become an international currency used for trade and investment. The yuan's offshore market began in Hong Kong last year. Also opening a potentially lucrative market to outsiders, Beijing said it would make it easier for foreigners to invest in the private-equity sector.

Stocks rose for a seventh consecutive week, and the euro posted its biggest weekly gain against the dollar—3.6%—since May 2009 as euro-zone debt worries eased. The Dow industrials added 1% for the week to 11787.38, the highest close since June 25, 2008. Treasury prices declined, lifting the 10-year note's yield to 3.334%.