One of the Federal Reserve's top officials offered an upbeat assessment of the U.S. economy's ability to weather the recent rise in oil prices, saying that the recovery is gaining momentum and policy makers so far see no reason to curb their efforts to stimulate growth.

"We may be much closer to establishing a virtuous circle in which rising demand generates more rapid income and employment growth, which in turn bolsters confidence and leads to further increases in spending," Federal Reserve Bank of New York President William Dudley said Monday at a gathering at New York University's Stern School of Business. But he suggested the economy probably has a long way to grow before inflation becomes a problem.

The comments from Mr. Dudley, who is vice chairman of the Fed committee that sets short-term interest rates, come at a time when recent reports have shown stronger consumer spending, rising manufacturing demand and improved confidence. The Commerce Department reported Monday that personal income rose a full percentage point in January from December, as the cut in Social Security taxes boosted paychecks. Consumer spending grew a muted 0.2%—likely the temporary effect of a bout of cold weather.

The missing piece has been stronger jobs growth. But improved labor-market indicators, such as a drop in the number of people filing for unemployment claims, suggest "that employment growth will increase considerably more rapidly in the coming months," said Mr. Dudley. Economists surveyed by Dow Jones expect Friday's report to show the economy added 200,000 jobs in February, as hiring rebounded after January's snowstorms.

Still, it would take a substantial rise in employment for inflation to become a problem, Mr. Dudley said. He estimated that the unemployment rate would have to slip down to between 6% and 7% before workers could demand the kind of wage increases that would fuel worrisome rises in prices. That is higher than the level of unemployment that has sparked inflation in the past, but still well below recent levels. Economists estimate the unemployment rate edged up to 9.1% in February from 9% in January.

 The money from the tax cuts mostly goes to rich people, who save it. Meanwhile, stagnant hourly wages and government cutbacks eviscerate the incomes of others. Under these circumstances, why should anyone expect consumption to grow very much? 

—Lawrence Beck

Mr. Dudley noted, though, that the recent increase in energy and other commodity prices merits greater vigilance.

Unrest in the Middle East and North Africa has pushed oil prices higher this year, and recently those increases have begun to show up in the price of gasoline. The Energy Information Administration reported that regular gasoline averaged $3.38 a gallon at the pump Monday, up from $3.19 a week earlier. As it cuts into Americans' ability to buy other items, the increase in fuel costs could slow the economy.

Commodity prices could also create higher inflation, Mr. Dudley said, if they start to feed through into higher prices for other items. But he said that it was also important that the Fed not overreact to the recent price increases, recognizing that some of them are likely to be temporary and that commodities represent a relatively small part of overall U.S. inflation measures.

Through January, at least, inflation remained tame. The Commerce Department said that its "core" index of consumer prices, which excludes food and energy, rose 0.1% from a month earlier, putting it up just 0.8% compared with a year earlier. That's below the Fed's informal inflation target of just under 2%. Overall prices, including food and energy, rose 0.3% on the month, and were up 1.2% compared to a year earlier.

 Write to  Justin Lahart at justin.lahart@wsj.com 