TOKYO—Bank of Japan Gov. Masaaki Shirakawa said Friday that the central bank's purchases of Japanese government bonds should be for supplying funds to financial firms, not for monetizing the government's debt. 

"Government bond purchases should be a method of fund provision," Mr. Shirakawa told a parliamentary committee. "If they are aimed at fiscal financing, risk premiums may increase and the issuance of government bonds may be affected negatively." 

If the market views that the central bank is helping with the government's spending, it could lower the credibility of Japan's sovereign debt and may in turn drive bond yields higher, which means higher issuing costs for the government. 

The comments came in response to a lawmaker's question about whether the BOJ is willing to increase its outright purchases of JGBs to help absorb a reported issue of quake reconstruction bonds. 

Japan's central bank currently buys ¥1.8 trillion ($22 billion) of long-term JGBs every month from financial firms as part of its regular market operations. 

The bank's hands are tied by the so-called banknote rule—which limits the BOJ's long-term JGB buying to the amount of banknotes in circulation. But the central bank still has capacity of around ¥20 trillion to purchase long-term bonds, according to the bank's latest account data. 

The BOJ chief said that the current regular purchases of JGBs are meant for providing enough banknotes and liquidity for economic growth, and that buying reconstruction bonds outside of the banknote rule may be interpreted as fiscal financing. 

Yet, under its ¥10 trillion emergency asset-purchase facility, the central bank buys a small portion of government debt that is not subject to the self-imposed rule. The bank said it will buy a total of ¥2 trillion of JGBs and ¥3 trillion of treasury discount bills via the program. 

Meanwhile, Mr. Shirakawa again showed reluctance to underwrite reconstruction bonds, saying "if the BOJ takes a measure which many other global central banks haven't implemented, it would spread a wrong message to overseas." 

Last week, the Sankei newspaper reported that the government is planning to issue more than ¥10 trillion in disaster reconstruction bonds to be bought directly and in full by the central bank. 

"It's important to protect basic confidence in the currency and financial infrastructure," Mr. Shirakawa said. 

 Write to  Megumi Fujikawa at megumi.fujikawa@dowjones.net 