SEOUL—South Korea's National Pension Service plans to jointly establish private equity funds with local conglomerates to invest hundreds of billions of won in overseas resources and energy assets, as the world's fourth largest pension fund seeks to diversify its portfolio to secure stable returns.

The NPS, which manages more than 300 trillion won ($267.1 billion) in assets as the administrator of the national pension scheme, is seeking to establish four separate private equity funds with the SK Group, GS Group, telecommunications firm  KT Corp. and Samsung C&T Corp., two NPS officials said Tuesday.

The plan is subject to the approval of a fund committee run by the nation's welfare ministry. 

"The fund's plan was to sign memorandums of understanding with the conglomerates soon, but the welfare ministry said the planned investment is considered to be new business and asked it to get the approval from the committee," one of the officials told The Wall Street Journal. 

Each of the four private equity funds is expected to invest hundreds of billions of won, the official said, without specifying the expected size of the funds.

The fund's planned investment also includes new growth areas such as the green business, the official said. 

The establishment of such funds would be the latest in a series of overseas investments by NPS, which has been seeking to diversify its asset portfolio that is heavily weighted toward domestic bonds. As of the end of October, 68.4% of the fund's assets were held in local bonds.

In June 2010, the South Korean government said the fund aims to grow its assets under management to about 488 trillion won by the end of 2015 and to increase its overseas exposure to more than 20% by then. 

The NPS has been increasing its exposure to alternative investments, which include infrastructure and real estate assets. The fund last year acquired a 51% stake in a French shopping mall for €217 million and the Sony Center in Berlin for 850 billion won. It also purchased  HSBC Holdings PLC's office tower in London's Canary Wharf for £772.5 million and two other large London office buildings for a combined £268 million in 2009. 

The NPS also entrusted a total of $1.1 billion to three different firms last year to invest in overseas real estate assets. 

The fund also partnered with Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. to acquire a 23.44% stake in Colonial Pipeline Co., the largest refined-products pipeline in North America, from  Chevron Corp.
CVX


1.00
%




 A person familiar with the situation told the Wall Street Journal in October that the deal is valued at nearly $1 billion, though how much NPS invested wasn't disclosed.

 Write to  Se Young Lee at vincent.lee@dowjones.com and Kanga Kong at kanga.kong@dowjones.com 