SINGAPORE—The island nation ended a year of record economic growth with a 6.9% annualized expansion in the fourth quarter, which slightly trailed analysts' estimates but marked a rebound from a slump in the prior three months.

Singapore's economy, considered a bellwether for Southeast Asia, stayed on course in the October-December period to become the second-fastest-growing economy in the world, after Qatar.

The expansion followed a revised contraction of 18.9% in the third quarter, the Ministry of Trade and Industry said Monday. The growth was slower than expected. The median forecast in a Dow Jones Newswires poll of 11 economists was for a 9.2% expansion.

Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong revealed Friday in his New Year's address that Singapore's gross domestic product grew 14.7% in 2010, the fastest growth pace in the city's 45-year history since independence. GDP contracted 1.3% in 2009.

The fourth-quarter rebound capped a strong year for the small, trade-dependent economy, which roared back from a downturn in 2009, when the global financial crisis sent world-wide trade into a tailspin. Last year's recovery, powered by strong demand in China, started to stoke inflationary pressures, prompting the central bank to tighten policy by guiding the Singapore dollar higher.

Singapore's property prices have risen dramatically following a slump in early 2009. The small moderation in Singapore prices in the fourth quarter follows government moves in August and November to curb speculative activity in the housing market. 

Figures from Singapore's Urban Redevelopment Authority released Monday show private-home prices rose 2.7% in the fourth quarter from the previous three months, slowing from the third quarter's 2.9% rise. 

In 2011, inflation across the region will pose a major challenge to Asian policy makers, economists say. The Monetary Authority of Singapore is likely to wait for more data and keep a close eye on inflation ahead of its next review of monetary policy in April.

"April is a long time away and a lot will happen between now and then. But it's clear that inflation will be a much bigger focus for the MAS," said Credit Suisse economist  Robert Prior-Wandesforde after the data were released.

The central bank said in October it would steepen and widen the local dollar's trading band while continuing to seek a "modest and gradual appreciation." The MAS, which uses exchange rates rather than interest rates as its main monetary policy tool because foreign trade dwarfs the island's small domestic economy, guides the Singapore dollar against a basket of currencies within an undisclosed band. The U.S. dollar fell 8.5% against its Singapore counterpart in 2010.

Singapore's central bank predicts inflation will average between 2% and 3%% this year. Consumer prices rose 3.8% in November, the fastest pace in 22 months.

Mr. Lee reiterated the government's 2011 GDP growth forecast of between 4% and 6% in his New Year message Friday.

"We should rejoice in this exceptional performance, but please remember that it is also the result of special circumstances, and so is unlikely to be repeated soon," Mr. Lee said.

The prime minister flagged concerns about the weakness in the U.S. economy and the sovereign debt crisis in Europe but said that "hopefully Asia will continue to do well despite the weakness in developed countries, and create a favorable regional environment for Singapore."

Economists said the likely economic recovery in the U.S., Singapore's biggest trading partner, will help the nation's industry in the new year.

"There is increasing confidence that the global economy is on track and the U.S. growth prospects are improving. That should support Singapore's economy. Also, the tourism sector should get a boost from stronger regional economies," said  David Cohen, director of Asian economic forecasting at Action Economics in Singapore.

Singapore's fourth-quarter GDP rose 12.5% from a year earlier, compared with a 13.4% rise tipped by 12 analysts who gave year-to-year estimates in the Dow Jones survey.

Output in the manufacturing sector increased 28.2% in the fourth quarter from a year earlier, compared with a 13.8% expansion in the previous quarter. Service-sector output grew 8.8%, while the construction sector contracted 1.2% after growing 7.1% in the previous three-month period.

 Write to  Gaurav Raghuvanshi at gaurav.raghuvanshi@dowjones.com 