The Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Sloan School of Management made online applications mandatory in the 1990s—one of the first schools to do so. But only recently has the school eliminated paper from the admissions process.

Starting with admissions for the class of 2013, all of the expected 5,000 applications to the business school will be reviewed on  Apple Inc.
AAPL


-0.04
%




's iPad tablet devices. IPads were purchased for all 15 admissions team members at an approximate cost of $9,500; the school believes it will save $10,000 a year in paper costs, says  Rod Garcia, director of M.B.A. admissions.

The iPads should also streamline admissions, says Mr. Garcia. Paper applications were often misplaced or needed to be shipped to admissions staffers who travel worldwide to interview applicants. "With the old system, you could see the applications stacked on the floor and the windowsill," Mr. Garcia says. "And it was hard to find them."

Why are traditional letters of recommendation no longer accepted at the University of Notre Dame's Mendoza College of Business? "All the letters of recommendation began to sound the same," explains  Brian Lohr, director of admissions at the school.

This past fall, Notre Dame began requiring that applicants use the more quantitative Personal Potential Index (PPI) offered by the Educational Testing Service, the developer of the Graduate Record Exam, or GRE.

For the PPI score, which has been part of the GRE since 2009, two to five recommenders grade students' creativity, communication and resilience on five different levels, from "below average" to "truly exceptional," worth one to five points. 

Recommenders can also give optional written feedback.

Mr. Lohr says that in the past unless an admissions letter contained negative feedback, it wasn't much use in evaluating an applicant. He adds that a recommender's poor writing skills could also unfairly impact a candidate's chances of admission.

The PPI score report can be sent at no additional expense for those taking the GRE. Graduate Management Admission Test, or GMAT, takers must pay an additional $10.

Beginning in fall 2011, Columbia Business School will offer a three-year program for those seeking a dual degree in law and business, a fast-track alternative to the school's four-year program.

Open to about 20 students, the new program was created in response to increasing demand from students who are reluctant to take four years off from the workplace, says  Amir Ziv, vice dean of the business school. "They can get back to work without losing a year of income," Mr. Ziv says.

The three-year degree cuts the number of semesters students must spend at the business school from three to two, increases the number of credits required each semester and offers more classes and electives that count toward both degrees.

There's also fewer elective classes and extracurricular activities. Three-year students also may complete coursework during the program's second summer.

Based on current tuition rates, three-year students will pay at least $200,000 in overall tuition by the time they complete the degree, about the same as what four-year students pay.

—Diana Middleton