Individuals looking to put some money to work right now should consider buying Indian stocks. 

The Bombay Stock Exchange's benchmark Sensex index has fallen nearly 10% so far this year, making it 10% cheaper than it was just 10 weeks ago.

This is as good a time as any to put some cash into stock mutual funds, in which professional money managers buy stocks on your behalf. Given below are some funds to choose from, depending on your goals. 

I gave preference to funds which have low expense ratios, have at least a three-year performance record with the same manager or team of managers, which kept up or beat the Sensex or the S&P CNX Nifty index in three and five-year periods but also annually in the last few years. 

I also favored funds which lost less than the broad market in 2008, when the Sensex fell around 52%. One thousand rupees ($22.20) invested in a fund which lost 40% in 2008 but gained 90% in 2009 would be worth 1,140 rupees ($25.30) at the end of 2009, whereas in a fund which lost 50% one year and gained 110% the next year, it would be worth only 1,050 rupees ($23.30). 

 Tax Saving Funds: If you haven't already made your tax deductible investments, consider putting some money into "equity-linked saving scheme" funds. Investments of up to 100,000 rupees ($2,212) in these can be deducted from your taxable income. 

These funds can be more attractive than some guaranteed tax-saving investments like say National Savings Certificates, whose interest is taxable as income. In equity-linked saving schemes your money is locked for three years, but capital gains are tax free. 

Some good options include Fidelity Tax Advantage and HDFC Taxsaver fund, which have gained around 15.6% and 12.3% annually over the past five years through Thursday, according to fund research firm Value Research Pvt. These funds have more than half of their money invested in very large Indian companies, which have done well in recent months. 

You can also consider Franklin India Taxshield, one of the oldest funds in this category. It lost less than the Sensex in 2008, and has returned 11.6% annually over the five years through Thursday. 

It's a good idea to split money among two or three fund managers because some work better than others depending on the market. 

 Funds for growth: Non tax-saving funds don't have a lock-in period, but ideally you should plan on not withdrawing your money for one to three years at least. This helps average out price swings in the stock market. 

 Large-company funds: Investors with a moderate risk appetite can put around two-thirds of their total stock allocation in funds which invest in large company stocks. These typically lose less value than small company stocks in periods of uncertainty, because they are better placed to survive an economic downturn. 

Consider buying index-tracking funds like the UTI Master Index, which aims to provide the returns of the Sensex post fees, and which gained 11% annually for the five years through Thursday, or the Franklin India Index  NSE Nifty, which tracks the performance of the CNX Nifty Index and was up nearly 11.3% for the five-year period. The Sensex gained 11.2% during this period. 

Index funds have among the lowest expense ratios of 1% or less, and don't carry the risk of the fund manager making a wrong stock bet. 

Another option is the HDFC Index Sensex Plus, which also charges 1% but tries to beat the Sensex by putting 10% to 20% of its portfolio in non-Sensex stocks. This fund lost less than the Sensex in the 2008 downturn, therefore its five-year return through Thursday is a healthy 13.5%. 

Among non-index funds, analysts recommend the Franklin India Bluechip fund, which buys stocks of large Indian companies and has gained an average of 14.3% annually over the last five years. Mumbai financial adviser  Vishal Dhawan likes that the fund has a "fairly stable fund management team." 

However, this fund charges a higher fee than index funds of around 1.83% annually, according to Value Research.

If you already own tax-saving funds, consider them to be a part of your large company allocation.

 The In-Between funds: Conservative investors can consider buying funds that invest mainly in stocks of companies which pay a portion of their profits to shareholders as "dividends." Such funds use "dividend yield" or "equity income" in their names, and they tend to fare better in down markets because investors like the safety of their income.

"These typically make sense for someone who does not want too much volatility," says Dhruva Chatterji, senior research analyst at fund research firm Morningstar India Pvt. However, in bull markets these funds could fall behind peers. 

The UTI Dividend Yield fund has gained 16.5% annually for the five years through Thursday. It has a sizeable allocation to government-owned and energy-related companies which pay regular dividends, like Oil & Gas Corporation Ltd.

The Templeton Equity Income invests a portion of its money in foreign stocks, thus providing additional diversification to investors. The fund is less than five years old, and has gained 10% annually for three years through Thursday, versus around 5% for the Sensex. 

 Mid to Small company funds: These funds will be slightly more volatile than large company stocks, but in periods of economic boom, they often perform better. Consider allocating 10% to 30% of your stock investments to these. 

For medium-sized companies, you can choose from funds like the HDFC Mid-Cap Opportunities fund or DSP BlackRock Small and Mid Cap fund, both of which have yet to complete five years. They are up 13% and 12% respectively over the three years through Thursday. 

 T  ips on buying funds: Most young investors should choose the "growth" options in these funds, in which dividends are reinvested. 

Also, instead of buying these funds in one go, consider putting some money into them periodically, say once a month. This way, you can catch and ups and downs of the stock market and average out your purchase price. Your bank can offer this facility called systematic investment plans or SIPs. 

Write to Ms. Anand at shefali.anand@wsj.com, or follow her @shefalianand.