MUMBAI—Bangladesh's government said it would probe Grameen Bank for possible misappropriation of aid funds, more than a month after a documentary film alleged that the microfinance provider illegally diverted funds in the 1990s.

  Lamiya Morshed, executive director at the Yunus Centre, a resource center for Grameen group's nonprofit businesses, said the bank hadn't received any official correspondence about the probe. 

"We welcome a review and, as long as it's legal and fair, we will be fully supportive," Ms. Morshed said. "We want and hope to get back to our business of serving the poor."

The documentary, which premiered on the Norwegian State TV Channel NRK on Nov. 30, raised doubts about where aid money raised in Norway and given to the bank had gone. 

Grameen Bank denied the allegations in a statement last month, calling them "a total fabrication and baseless." 

Following the telecast, Norwegian Minister for Environment and International Development Erik Solheim asked the agency responsible for development cooperation to prepare a report on its transactions with Grameen Bank. The report absolved Grameen Bank of any wrongdoing. 

In a news release in December, Mr Solheim said, "According to the report, there is no indication that Norwegian funds have been used for unintended purposes, or that Grameen Bank has engaged in corrupt practices or embezzled funds."

Despite the vindication, Grameen Bank, which was founded by 2006 Nobel Peace Prize winner Muhammad Yunus, finds itself in trouble with Bangladesh's government. The government has created a committee to review the bank's financial transactions and its dealings with sister organizations. 

While industry insiders say the Grameen investigation may just be another way of targeting microfinance institutions, Finance Secretary Mohammad Tareque has denied the government was planning to suspend the bank's operations or take control of it. 

"We have only constituted a review committee to look into the issues raised by the film," Mr. Tareque said. "The review is well within the legal framework of the country."

The five members of the review committee, chaired by  A.K.M Monowaruddin Ahmed, a professor of economics at Dhaka University, were told about their task Tuesday night and have three months to present a report on their findings. 

"The committee will focus on all activities of Grameen Bank since the time it was established—its transfer of funds, transactions with other arms," Prof. Ahmed said.

Prof. Ahmed said while the committee is an independent body, it would consult with other arms of the government—such as the Micro Credit Regulatory Authority, a body set up by the government to regulate the microfinance industry—to help better examine the activities of the bank. 

  M. Mosharrof Hossain, chairman of the Credit and Development Forum, an industry body in Bangladesh, said the current situation in the country isn't conducive to microfinance. 

"The Grameen Bank investigations show that the government is just targeting microfinance institutions unnecessarily," said Mr Hossain. 

Last November, the Micro Credit Regulatory Authority issued a circular asking microfinance providers to cap their interest rates at 27%, which would mean a cap of 13.5% on the flat rates they offer to borrowers. 

"We ourselves borrow from commercial banks which charge us 12.5% to 13% flat rates," Mr. Hossain said. "How can we function at a rate of 13.5%?"

Grameen Bank has been providing small loans to millions of poor people for several decades now.As of December, the bank had 8.34 million borrowers and 2,565 branches spread across 81,376 villages in Bangladesh. It has provided more than $10 billion in small loans to Bangladesh's poor—mostly women—to fund small-scale enterprises and children's education.

The tightening of controls on Bangladesh's microfinance institutions follows a similar crackdown on the industry in neighboring India. 

In October, the southern state of Andhra Pradesh, which is home to India's largest microfinance lenders and accounts for as much as 35% of the Indian industry, introduced an ordinance that required microfinance institutions to register all their members with the government and lower their interest rates.

 Write to  Arlene Chang at arlene.chang@wsj.com 