Some cities battered by the housing crisis may not fully recover for decades, and lenders in those places are likely to remain cautious for years, a study by the Mortgage Bankers Association concluded. 

The report said some hard-hit cities in California, Nevada and Arizona may not return to pre-bust housing price levels, adjusted for inflation, until 2030, citing data from Moodys.com.

The study was conducted by James R. Follain, a senior fellow of the Nelson A. Rockefeller Institute of Government, and was sponsored by the MBA's Research Institute for Housing in America. It analyzed the housing bust's impact on 82 metro areas in the middle of severe economic decline.

Some neighborhoods in declining cities, such as those plagued by vacant and foreclosed homes, may deteriorate so badly that home values in those neighborhoods will be depressed for many years, Mr. Follain said. As a result, buyers and lenders are likely to remain wary, he said.

The study found that Stockton, Modesto, Vallejo and Salinas in California, as well as Cape Coral-Fort Myers and Port St. Lucie in Florida, were among the metro areas with the largest price drops from 2006 through 2009. 

Stockton saw average home prices drop 75%, adjusted for inflation, while Modesto and Cape Coral suffered declines of 73% and 60%, respectively.

Most of the cities on the list were victims of the housing crisis, a change from prior years when cities in decline were mostly old manufacturing hubs such as Buffalo, N.Y. and Cleveland.

"The housing crisis leads to a completely different list with declines that surpass the competition for the worst housing declines in the U.S. since 1980," the report said.

New Orleans topped the list of declining U.S. cities by population mainly because of the devastation wrought by Hurricane Katrina in August 2005. New Orleans's population was 1.3 million in 2005 prior to Katrina but declined to 992,000 in the aftermath.

The report, titled "A Study of Real Estate Markets in Declining Cities," also lists the Rust Belt cities Detroit-Livonia-Dearborn and Warren-Troy-Farmington Hills, Mich., as among the areas suffering the largest price drops.Prices were off 33% in Detroit and 28% in Warren during the 2006-2009 period.