BEIJING—Defense Secretary Robert Gates said North Korea must halt nuclear and missile tests before the U.S. will consider a return to international talks, saying North Korea will be able to strike the U.S. with a missile in five years.

Mr. Gates said he discussed in meetings here with Chinese President Hu Jintao the importance of North Korea demonstrating they were willing to take "concrete measures." 

"Rhetoric is not enough," Mr. Gates said Tuesday. "There needs to be concrete action by the North to demonstrate they are truly serious about negotiation and engagement." 

North Korea has called for the U.S. to resume the so-called six-party talks, which also include China, South Korea, Japan and Russia, aimed at curbing Pyongyang's nuclear-weapons programs. U.S. officials have resisted returning to talks until North Korea shows it is willing to take steps to end its nuclear-weapons program.

On Tuesday, Mr. Gates called on North Korea to announce and follow a moratorium on further nuclear or missile tests. His comments were the most specific so far on what steps the Obama administration wants to see from North Korea. U.S. officials hadn't previously spelled out what steps Pyongyang would have to take. 

U.S. officials are anxious for China to continue to help lower tensions on the Korean peninsula. Mr. Gates said the message he delivered in Beijing was that the status quo had changed on the peninsula. 

He cited what he said was Pyongyang's ability to pose a direct threat to the U.S. and a shift in attitude in South Korea toward its neighbor.

North Korean attacks on the South in the past year have killed 50 people, hardening the line in Seoul. Mr. Gates said South Korea is unlikely to let further provocations go unanswered.

Mr. Gates also said he believed North Korea would have intercontinental ballistic missiles that will pose a direct threat to the U.S. within five years.

"I don't think it is an immediate threat, no, on the other hand I do think it is a five-year threat," Mr. Gates told reporters.

He said he didn't believe North Korea would have huge numbers of missiles in five years, but they would have a limited capability to strike the U.S. in that time frame. 

The Pentagon, in a report to Congress in April, was vague about the estimated pace of North Korean missile development. Top defense officials have predicted even more aggressive timetables than Mr. Gates did Tuesday. In 2009, Gen. James Cartwright, the vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, predicted North Korean would have missiles that could reach the U.S. within three years.

Defense officials said last month that Beijing pressured Pyongyang not to respond, as it had threatened, to a series of South Korean military exercises. In recent days, Mr. Gates has praised the role played by China.

"All of the evidence I have seen suggests that the Chinese used their influence with Pyongyang to be restrained in response to any South Korean exercise activity," Mr. Gates said.

Mr. Hu is due to travel to Washington next week. Mr. Gates said he expected President Barack Obama and the Chinese president to further discuss North Korea.

—Adam Entous in Washington contributed to this article.