DAVOS, Switzerland—U.K. Prime Minister David Cameron on Friday defended the government's aggressive fiscal tightening and rejected criticism that the austerity measures are putting the economic recovery at risk. 

Speaking at the annual meeting of World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, Mr. Cameron said the government's first priority is to "kill off the specter of massive sovereign debts." 

"Those who argue that dealing with our deficit and promoting growth are somehow alternatives, are wrong. You cannot put off the first in order to promote second," he said. 

The government's plan to cut the U.K.'s huge budget deficit has faced renewed scrutiny this week in the wake of gross domestic product data, which surprisingly showed the economy shrank by 0.5% in the fourth quarter of 2010. 

Opposition lawmakers have questioned the government's growth strategy and have argued that the economy is still too fragile to withstand the fiscal consolidation, which will see the government make £81 billion ($129.02 billion) in budget cuts by 2015. 

Responding to questions after the speech, Mr. Cameron said it is vital to the U.K.'s national interest that the euro zone overcome its problems with sovereign and bank debt. "I want the euro zone to succeed," he said, noting that over 40% of the U.K.'s exports go to the euro zone. Mr. Cameron also called upon European regulators to make sure that this year's round of bank stress tests are more credible than last year's. 

In a speech due later Friday, Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne will say that while the path to economic recovery will be difficult, they have no intention of changing course—a line they have emphasized since Tuesday's GDP data. 

Mr. Osborne will use the GDP figures to illustrate how "acute" the challenge of achieving sustainable growth is in the U.K., and why it strengthens the case for cutting the deficit and rebalancing the economy. 

Mr. Cameron said the government is already making progress, with the country's triple-A credit rating affirmed and market interest rates falling. 

"All this has happened not in spite of our plan to cut the deficit, but because of it. That's why we must stick to the course we have set out," he will say. 

Mr. Osborne will describe the ambition of his 2011 budget—to be delivered on March 23—as turning the tide on "the forces of stagnation." 

"And the guiding principle as I put the budget together will be: the future favors the bold," he will say. 

However, the Trades Union Congress—the U.K.'s umbrella organization for labor groups—said Friday it would continue its campaign against the austerity measures. The group, which is organizing a demonstration against the cuts in London on March 26, said the government's agenda is damaging the economy and public services. 

The TUC hosted a meeting of union officials earlier Friday to discuss a co-ordinated response to the government's plans and issues facing public sector workers like the pay freeze, job cuts and attacks on pensions. 

"No-one is talking about a general strike, but of course these attacks on our members could well give rise to industrial action around specific disputes," Brendan Barber, the general secretary of the TUC, said in a statement after the meeting. 

—Nicholas Winning in London contributed to this article.

 Write to  Geoffrey T. Smith at geoffrey.smith@dowjones.com and Ainsley Thomson at ainsley.thomson@dowjones.com 