Chefs have a new approach to grilling this season, and it's a far cry from the bacon-topped Kobe beef burgers and Berkshire pork ribs that have ruled for the past several years. Chefs are discovering ways to transfer the magic of grilling—the sight of fire, the delicious smells wafting in the summer air—to the seasonal ingredients they love.

If there's one dish that captures this year's style, it's the grilled Caesar salad. It defies convention—who would have thought that delicate, leafy greens taste so delicious with a char on them? It's cheap compared to beef or pork, for which we'll pay nearly 8% more this year than last year, according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture. And, like any great grilling dish, it's ultra-easy. 

This season, chefs everywhere are playing with their grill menus, seeming to compete over who can put the weirdest things on the grates. Sarah Stegner at Chicago's Prairie Fire grills pea tendrils; restaurants including BLT Steak in Los Angeles grill watermelon. At Chez Papa Resto in San Francisco, chef Steven Rojas turns yogurt into a gel using a special calcium-based gelatin, grills it to give it a smoky taste, and then purées it to "turn it back into its original consistency," the chef says. 

Although grilled yogurt is unlikely to catch on at the backyard grill, grilled salad is another matter. Chefs everywhere are using lettuces, including gem and iceberg, that kiss the grill for a few seconds and emerge having gained a whole new dimension. Grilled dessert is also huge, from grilled strawberries at Artisan in Paso Robles, Calif. (chef Chris Kobayashi has also been known to grill fruit cobbler), to a grilled chocolate torte at Panzano in Denver.

When cooking for friends at home, David Myers of Comme Ça in Los Angeles and Las Vegas brushes fava bean pods with grapeseed oil, sake and sea salt, then grills them until they are well-charred. He dumps them in a pile on the table and invites guests to open them with their hands. Any cook who has ever labored through a pile of fresh favas—"all the work of shelling them, blanching them, peeling them and cooking them," Mr. Myers moans—will appreciate the shuck-for-your-supper approach. 

You could invest a lot of time making the perfect grilled paella—a worthwhile enterprise, to be sure—in an effort to achieve socarrat, the crispy rice crust that forms, if you're lucky, at the bottom of the pan. But grill a rice ball according to chef Tadashi Ono's recipe in his book "The Japanese Grill," and you'll be eating a ball of socarrat in minutes. Crispy and umami-rich, it's hard to believe it's nothing more than rice, water and soy sauce.

The trick to putting a good sear on lettuces and watermelon while keeping the produce crisp and cool is getting the grill hot enough. On a charcoal grill, the secret is to catch the coals at their white-hottest moment. On a gas grill, use the infra-red burner or sear-plate if the grill has one; if not, fire all burners and keep the hood down. The optimal temperature is above 600 degrees. 

The following recipes are delicious, but perhaps the best thing about them is how liberating it is to learn that just about anything can be grilled. You won't have to come indoors all summer.

Chefs around the country are grilling fresh favas—some as simply as just piling the beans, still in pods, on the grill and serving them with salt. David Myers brushes his with his all-purpose grill baste of olive oil, sake and salt, so eaters' fingers will carry the flavor onto the favas. 

 From David Myers of Comme Ça in Los Angeles and Las Vegas. Prep time: 8 minutes. Serves about 4. 

Mix ¼ cup of grapeseed oil with 1 ounce of sake and brush onto a pile of 24 fresh fava bean pods, then sprinkle generously with coarse sea salt.

Lay them over high heat and grill on one side until medium-charred, then flip and cook the same way on the other side (about 5 minutes total).

 Remove with tongs and deposit in the middle of a newspaper-lined table.

Instruct guests to remove beans from pods, then peel beans with their hands. Offer bowls of coarse salt and hand wipes.

Chef Phil Deffina recently created this dish as a main course for vegetarians, but meat eaters will also appreciate this transformative treatment of a classic summer fruit. 

 From Phil Deffina, Highpoint Bistro & Bar in New York. Prep time: 5 minutes (with 4 hours marinating time). Serves 1. 

Carve a 1½-inch-thick slice from the center of a seedless watermelon and marinate in 3 tablespoons of white balsamic vinegar for at least 4 hours, or overnight. 

Before grilling, season with 1 teaspoon sugar and a generous amount of ground black pepper (the chef uses a massive amount—a teaspoon each of ground black pepper, pink peppercorns and grains of paradise). 

 Grill over direct high heat for about 3 minutes on one side. The watermelon should turn bright red and become caramelized on the grilled side. 

The chef serves the steak on a salad of shaved jicama, blanched asparagus tips, radishes, tarragon, chervil and olive oil, salt and pepper.

Grilled salads are hitting restaurant menus everywhere. This classic grilled Caesar is a delicious and easy introduction to the technique. Master this, then experiment with iceberg and gem lettuce. 

 From Elise Wiggins of Panzano in Denver. Prep time: 10 minutes. Serves 4. 

Slice 2 hearts of well-chilled romaine down the middle, keeping the core at the bottom intact. 

Brush cut sides with olive oil and season with salt and pepper. 

Heat a grill to as hot as it can get, at least 600 degrees. 

Place romaine, cut-side down, onto the hottest part of the grill and cook for ideally no more than 5 to 10 seconds, until a char is achieved (be careful not to overcook and wilt the lettuce). 

Remove from grill. Slice each half of romaine lengthwise, to create two pieces, and cut off the bottom core, so the leaves separate. Loosen and plate leaves. 

Make the dressing: In a small blender, blend 1 teaspoon chopped garlic, 1 teaspoon Dijon mustard, 2 egg yolks, 4 anchovy filets, 1 tablespoon lemon juice, a splash Worcestershire sauce and cracked black pepper. Add 4 tablespoons olive oil and whisk. 

Drizzle over lettuce. Sprinkle with grated parmesan cheese to taste and toss. 

In Japan, yaki onigiri are a classic treat. Shaping the rice into well-packed pyramids takes some practice, but once you master it, it's an easy way to transform rice, water and soy sauce into more than the sum of its parts. 

 Adapted from Tadashi Ono and Harris Salat's "The Japanese Grill" (Ten Speed Press). Prep time: 40 minutes. Serves 4. 

Make the rice: Place 2 cups Japanese short-grain rice in a large bowl, fill with cold water, swish around bowl with hands and drain. Repeat 3 more times, until the rice is visible through the water. The whole process should take no longer than 3 minutes. 

Cover the rice with a clean kitchen towel and allow to rest, in the strainer, for 15 minutes.

Place the rice in a saucepan, add 2 cups water and bring to a boil. Cover and lower heat to medium, cook for 10 minutes then remove from heat and let sit, covered, for 10 more minutes.

While rice is still warm, scoop one cup of rice into a small, rounded bowl (such as a cereal bowl). Jiggle the bowl in a flat, circular motion, until the rice forms a ball of its own. This motion packs the rice so it holds together. 

Wet your hands and place the rice ball into your cupped palms. Squeeze, flip and turn the rice ball several times to form it into a pyramid shape. Continue with remaining rice. 

Heat the grill to medium. Grill the pyramids on one side for 3 minutes, turn to the opposite sides and grill for 3 minutes more. Be careful not to burn the rice. 

Measure ¼ cup soy sauce into a bowl and brush the pyramids with soy sauce for 2 more minutes, flipping every 30 seconds and brushing on more soy sauce after each turn. The onigiri are done when they are crispy and well-caramelized.

Many fruits benefit from the kiss of the grill, but chef Chris Kobayashi pushes the envelope by grilling delicate strawberries, which become sweeter and more intense.

 From Chris Kobayashi of Artisan in Paso Robles, Calif. Prep time: 1 minute. 

If using small strawberries, keep them whole and sear on both sides over high heat for about 45 seconds total. If they are large, cut them in half lengthwise and brush lightly with a neutral-tasting olive oil, then sear over high heat, cut-side down, for 45 seconds. 

Berries should be lightly charred. Serve with ice cream or with a wedge of triple-cream cheese, such as brie, Camembert or Mt. Tam.

If you don't want to turn indoors, complete the braising step in a saucepan on the grill. Grilling the kale makes it meaty and satisfying. 

 From Andrea Reusing of Lantern in Chapel Hill, N.C. Prep time: 30 minutes. Serves 6. 

Wash and dry 2 to 3 bunches (about 50 stems) of black kale (also called cavolo nero, Tuscan or dinosaur kale) and toss with 4 tablespoons olive oil and a sprinkling of Kosher salt. 

Working in batches over high heat, quickly grill kale by spreading it in an even layer. Wait for the kale to wilt and become charred, 1 to 2 minutes, before flipping the whole batch. Cook for about 20 seconds longer, then remove. 

Peel and slice 1 yellow onion into ¼-inch disks, drizzle with 1 teaspoon olive oil and grill until soft and golden, about 5 minutes on each side. 

Back at the stovetop, heat a heavy pot and add 1 tablespoon olive oil, 4 large cloves garlic, sliced lengthwise. Cook until fragrant and light gold. 

Stir in one 14.5-ounce can of whole tomatoes, diced, or, when in season, two large ripe tomatoes, dice, add salt to taste, then the kale and onions. 

Toss with tongs, then cover and cook over medium-low heat for 4 to 5 minutes, until kale is completely wilted and tomatoes have created a brothy sauce. Season with salt and pepper to taste.

 Write to  Katy McLaughlin at katy.mclaughlin@wsj.com 