If you haven't already made bookings for your upcoming summer vacation, it's not too late to start. 

Amid the plethora of holiday packages available, our inclination would be to choose the cheapest but travel experts say those might not always be the best. Ready-made packages have some drawbacks, such as lack of flexibility, so it might be worth spending some extra money to get a more customized holiday. "It's the experience that you want," said Alisha Wadia, senior travel researcher at Lonely Planet's India magazine. 

Be it within India or abroad, following some tips can help you figure out the best plan for your holiday, and get the best deal for your money.





 Do-It-Yourself or holiday package? 

This is the first question to ask yourself. If you have a lot of travel experience, want flexibility while traveling and are going to well-traveled destinations, then you're probably best off making your own plan. "If you're going to just one place…you don't need a travel agent to do that for you," said Ms. Wadia, referring to travel-friendly destinations like Singapore or European countries where official tourism Web sites offer plenty of reliable information. 

Of course, this means a lot of time is spent looking up the cheapest flights and hotels – and figuring out what to do when you get there. 

Holiday packages work for people who want convenience, or who want to go to many cities in a short period of time. The typical package cost covers flights, visas, accommodation, some sightseeing and - in some cases - even most meals. They make more sense if you are traveling abroad for the first time, are traveling with children, or simply want some support structure.



 Which is cheaper? 

There's no definitive answer on whether do-it-yourself holidays are cheaper than holiday packages or vice versa, partly because the itineraries for the same destination might be different. 

For instance, if you're traveling as part of a pre-packaged group tour, then you may have to visit places you have no interest in, say one too many museums or temples. If you go on your own, you may chose to skip that and head to a local park instead – which has the added benefit of being free. 

Tour operators can often give cheaper deals for flights and hotels, because they book in bulk. That's what Rohit Talwar, a bank executive in Gurgaon, noticed while planning a nine-night visit to Malaysia for this month. He decided to book the trip, which included a two-night cruise, with a Delhi-based tour operator. "Self-planning...was very expensive," said Mr. Talwar. 



 Hidden charges 

To choose among many available options, be sure to ask for what is not included in the packaged holiday's advertised price. 

Mr. Talwar, for instance, had to pay an additional fee for traveling in the peak season, which includes the months of May and June. An increase in fuel surcharges and airport taxes are other charges to look out for in advance, said Karan Anand, head of relationships at travel company Cox and Kings Ltd., in an emailed note. 

Karl Dantas, chief executive of Bombay Travels Pvt. in Mumbai, says that while companies sometimes say children can travel "free" with accompanying adults, this may not include taxes which can be quite high. So, he suggests to always check the "terms and conditions (that) apply."

Also, pay attention to your itinerary. For a 12-night trip to Europe, if your tour operator puts you on a time-consuming, indirect flight, which reaches at an inconvenient time, you could miss out on the first day of your holiday. Mr. Dantas said to ask yourself: "How many days and nights do I actually get in those countries?" 

Finally, check cancellation charges. 



 Beyond costs 

Readymade group travel holidays may not work for everyone. 

They often have a very hectic schedule aimed at cramming in a lot of sites in a short span of time. Travelers on some European tours, for instance, have days that can start as early as 5 am and end no earlier than 10 pm. A lot of time is likely to be spent just traveling from one site to another. 

If your group is a large one, you might end up wasting a lot of time waiting to get everyone together to board your coach or go to the toilet, for instance. Finally, tour operators -- even for holidays abroad-- often include "shopping" stops on the itinerary to encourage tourists to spend their money in souvenir shops with which they have tie-ups. Not only are these often expensive, they are also a waste of time for uninterested passengers. 

"That's a racket run all over the world, including in India," said Mr. Dantas. 



 Tailormade packages 

To avoid some of the hassles of readymade packages but still get guidance and convenience, ask travel agents for a customized holiday. 

Most tour operators provide that, even for two people. Of course, the smaller your group, the more expensive it will be. But these packages can provide you a lot of flexibility.

For instance, you can get a package which includes flights, hotels and local travel, but that leaves you some freedom in planning your own itineraries. The travel operator might provide you with some general guidelines on the city you're visiting but leave the rest of it to you. 

"More and more people are looking...for a customized holiday," said Ms. Wadia of Lonely Planet. 

Even then, it's a good idea to know in advance what to expect and what to do. "Invest time to study the location that you're going to," said Mr. Dantas. 

Happy Holidays!

 Write to  Shefali Anand at shefali.anand@wsj.com and follow her on Twitter @shefalianand.  