This summer, viewers of movies like "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides," "Super 8" and "Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows—Part 2" won't just see explosions, creature attacks and other bone-jarring scenes on screen. At 50 specially equipped theaters, they will be able to feel actors' movements right in their seats.

In the latest attempt to make moviegoers feel like they are part of the action,  D-Box Technologies Inc.,
DBO


-1.54
%




 a Montreal-based maker of custom-designed seats, is introducing physical motion to the movie-viewing experience.

Motions range from being pitched forward, backward and side to side, to experiencing a momentary freefall when a character, say, leaps off a cliff. Seat-side controls let squeamish viewers dial down the intensity level of the experience—which on the highest setting can reach up to two times the acceleration caused by gravity.

The introduction of gyrating seats is the latest step in movie theaters' ever-escalating battle to offer audiences an experience that can't easily be replicated at home—and to get them to spend more money in the process. For the pleasure of feeling Vin Diesel thump Dwayne "The Rock" Johnson, D-Box adds an $8 premium to ticket prices, which is split between the studio, the theater and D-Box. That extra fee is on top of any surcharges for 3-D screenings. 

Even though global box-office receipts reached a record $31.8 billion last year, that surge was driven by rising prices, including premium-priced 3-D tickets . Attendance continues to drop at movie theaters as they compete with new online and mobile entertainment options.

To counter this downward trend, movie studios and theater owners are trying to lure back audiences with measures like installing high-end restaurants, jumbo-sized 3-D IMAX screens and digital projectors. But just as sophisticated audio systems have made home theaters sound more like their commercial counterparts, 3-D viewing is now available in living rooms, thanks to the latest generation of televisions. Smell-o-vision, intended to introduce an olfactory experience to the cinema, was introduced to great fanfare in the 1960s but never lived up to expectations. 

D-Box President and Chief Executive  Claude McMaster sees motion as the "natural evolution" of the theatrical experience. 

"People are never sure about introducing new technologies," he said in an interview. In the early days of cinema, some moviegoers were hesitant to watch films with sound, he noted. Now, he added, "we watch movies with surround sound."

For now, D-Box's reach is limited. The company has 70 installations across the world, with 50 screens in the U.S.—none of them with the two largest domestic movie-theater chains,  Regal Entertainment Group
RGC


-2.04
%




 and AMC Entertainment Holdings Inc. But the company aims to expand to 200 locations a year from now and to 1,000 locations within the next four years. D-Box isn't yet profitable but hopes to be in 12 to 18 months.

Hollywood studio executives say they are viewing the technology as a low-risk way to charge extra to willing theater patrons.

"It's a periphery business for the moment, but as they grow their network, we're interested in pairing with them for additional titles," said  Jeff Goldstein, the executive vice president for domestic distribution at Warner Bros. Pictures. To date,  Time Warner Inc.
TWX


0.62
%




's Warner Bros. has worked with D-Box on 11 films, including this July's "Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows—Part 2," which will play at 68 to 70 D-Box locations domestically.

Started as a speaker company in 1992, D-Box began in 2001 making motion-equipped seats for home viewers and videogamers, inspired by people who put speakers next to their chairs to feel the pulse of thump of the soundtrack. Each chair originally cost $30,000, which was reduced to $10,000 around 2005. The company also began making sophisticated seats for flight simulators and other industrial-training equipment.

The company entered the theatrical business in April of 2009 with a motion-coded version of "Fast & Furious" that played in only two theaters. The latest installment in the same series, "Fast Five," was released last week in some D-Box-equipped theaters. The company now has deals with several Hollywood studios

  Guy Marcoux, D-Box's vice president of marketing, said that it took 600 hours to program seats for "Fast Five." Engineers go through movies frame-by-frame to create a "motion track"—analagous to a soundtrack—that controls the seat.

Although D-Box is based in Canada, it has a research-and-development office in Burbank, Calif., where four engineers work to program each of the seat's three motors to move the viewer along with the movie. 

For complex scenes—for example, a character racing away from an explosion in a car while simultaneously being shot at—a single frame could feature multiple motions simultaneously, and the D-Box chair would jar the viewer in all the appropriate directions.

"We're about refinement," said Mr. Marcoux. "What we do is not random." 

 Write to  Michelle Kung at michelle.kung@wsj.com 