SAN'A, Yemen—Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, making an unannounced visit here, pledged to broaden the U.S. relationship with Yemen beyond the fight against al Qaeda.

The aim, she said, is to forge a strategic partnership focused on economic and social development. 

But Mrs. Clinton stressed during meetings here on Tuesday with officials in government and the private sector that Washington expects President Ali Abdullah Saleh, as part of this new relationship, to pursue political changes in a bid to stabilize his country and unify Yemenis against Islamic extremism.

Mrs. Clinton indicated that the Obama administration is concerned about recent moves by Yemen's ruling party to remove term limits that now affect Mr. Saleh, who is supposed to finish his second and final presidential term in 2013.

The secretary of state also specifically expressed Washington's hopes that Yemen's political factions will agree to terms for inclusive and transparent parliamentary elections. 

"Over the long run, Yemen's economic and political development and its security are deeply intertwined," Mrs. Clinton told a town-hall meeting of Yemeni politicians, students and businessmen at a San'a hotel. "We will support whatever agreement Yemen's political parties reach together as they negotiate electoral reform."

U.S. officials increasingly view Yemen country as a critical front in the Obama administration's war against al Qaeda. Yemen has become a training base for al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, the terrorist organization that has launched at least two major plots against the U.S. in recent years.

The U.S. has significantly increased its military operations in Yemen, largely through the training of local security forces. The U.S. has also launched missile strikes against al Qaeda targets in Yemen.

Mrs. Clinton said she made the trip to assure Yemen that the U.S. wasn't focused solely on counterterrorism operations, but is also seeking to help the country develop. Washington raised its development aid last year to around $130 million, from $17 million in 2008. She said the U.S. would continue to increase assistance in the coming years and was working with Arab and European states to establish an investment fund for Yemen. 

"We are committed to a balanced approach towards Yemen, which includes social, economic and political assistance," Mrs. Clinton said. 

Mrs. Clinton is the first U.S. secretary of state to visit Yemen since James Baker in 1990. 

Mrs. Clinton arrived amid heightened political tensions in the wake of a Jan. 1 parliamentary vote that was pushed through by Mr. Saleh's party and began the process of abolishing constitutional limits on his leadership. The vote was held despite protests from the country's political opposition and urging from Washington to delay it.

Mrs. Clinton held more than three hours of talks with Mr. Saleh at his presidential palace, focusing on the counterterrorism fight, as well as on economic and political overhauls.

U.S. officials said Mr. Saleh stressed that he was a committed partner in the fight against al Qaeda, despite some recent differences over tactics. Mrs. Clinton, meanwhile, told the Yemeni leader that he needed to adopt an inclusive process in governing. "He was told he shouldn't be jamming things down people's throat," a senior U.S. official said. Mr. Saleh declined to speak to reporters following the meeting.

Tensions over Yemen's political situation were evident during Mrs. Clinton's meetings with opposition politicians and civil-society leaders. At the town hall held at the Sana'a hotel, an attorney and political activist told Mrs. Clinton that Mr. Saleh's dominance was one of the reasons extremism had taken hold in Yemen.

"Singular rule actually helps to strengthen that terrorism," said Sakhr Ahmed Al-Wajeeh, chairman of the group, Parliamentarians Against Corruption.

Mrs. Clinton responded that she had pressed Mr. Saleh's government to continue a political dialogue with Yemen's opposition. 

Previous political reconciliation talks between Mr. Saleh and an umbrella group of opposition parties, begun under international pressure, were hindered by distrust from both sides, according to negotiators. Mr. Saleh called off the talks in the fall.

This month, his party pushed through a raft of constitutional changes that ignore opposition demands to adopt a proportional representative system and move away from the strong presidential system that Mr. Saleh presides over.

"Passing the ruling party amendments means the end of democracy in Yemen," said Hasan Zaid, the general secretary of the opposition Haq Party. "The international community, including the United States, need to put more pressure on the ruling party before it's too late."

Yemen has increasingly become a front-line state in the international battle against al Qaeda. In 2009, a Nigerian student attempted to detonate a bomb on a U.S. airliner flying into Detroit on Christmas Day. The man had been trained in munitions at an al Qaeda camp in Yemen, according to U.S. officials.

Last year, al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula again attempted to bomb airliners flying to the U.S. This time, the terrorist group used bombs shipped through international freight carriers.

A U.S.-born Muslim cleric, Anwar al-Alwaki, is accused by the U.S. government of playing a central role in promoting these plots and of recruiting extremists to al Qaeda in the Arab Peninsula's cause through his sermons broadcast over the Internet.

Mr. Saleh's government has also been fighting an insurgency in northern Yemen led by Shiite rebels, called the Houthis, though a cease-fire has held since the middle of last year. Southern political leaders continue to call for either greater autonomy of independence from San'a.

Mrs. Clinton also pressed the case of Yemen's women during her meetings, particularly the issue of child brides. Yemen allows girls to be married as young as eight years old. Mrs. Clinton said the San'a government should due more to make sure these girls are educated and have a choice about their future lives.

"Their lost potential cost their families, their communities and their countries," Mrs. Clinton told the town hall.

 Write to  Jay Solomon at jay.solomon@wsj.com and Margaret Coker at margaret.coker@wsj.com 