 European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet defended his hard-line stance on fiscal policy and inflation, saying budget austerity and vigilance in the face of rising energy and commodity prices are the best path to economic recovery. In an interview with The Wall Street Journal, Trichet warned inflation pressures in the euro zone must be watched closely, and urged central bankers everywhere to ensure that higher energy and food prices don't gain a foothold in the global economy.  

 Portuguese voters re-elected Aníbal Cavaco Silva to a second presidential term, in a message that they want political stability as the country tries to extricate itself from the European sovereign debt crisis. 

 Ireland's Green Party pulled out of the government, a move that will hasten elections scheduled for March 11 and bring down the curtain on one of the most crisis-racked administrations in Ireland's history. 

 U.K. Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg said there is a "strong case" to separate retail banking from high-risk investment banking in order to insulate the U.K. economy from the banks' liabilities. 

The U.K. Financial Services Authority said Neil Rollins, a former manager at waste-industry firm PM Onboard, was sentenced to 27 months in prison and fined £197,001 ($3153,300) for insider dealing and money laundering. He was found guilty in November of five counts of insider dealing and four counts of money laundering after he traded on the basis of information he got as a senior executive.

 Heavy snowfall and higher prices hit U.K. retail sales in December, with food stores recording the sharpest drop on record, statistics said. Retail-sales volumes fell 0.8% on the month and were flat compared with December 2009—the weakest ever annual recording for the month since records began in 1998. Separate data from the Council of Mortgage Lenders showed U.K. gross mortgage lending grew at a slower pace in December, and by the smallest amount for the final month of the year since 2000, while figures from the Bank of England showed bank lending to U.K. businesses rose in November for the first time since February 2010, but may have fallen again in December.  

 U.K. Prime Minister David Cameron's chief media adviser resigned amid pressure stemming from lawsuits and investigations into reporting tactics deployed at the tabloid newspaper he once edited. Andy Coulson's resignation is a blow to Cameron, who has stood by him despite several years of damaging headlines about his work at the News of the World. 

 German business confidence reached a new all-time high in January, the research institute Ifo said, caused mainly by a renewed surge of optimism among exporters. It's the ninth consecutive rise in the index and appears to be consistent with forecasts of another year of robust growth in Europe's largest economy, which expanded at its fastest pace in 20 years in 2010.  

 Europe's longest-ruling president, Belarus's Alexander Lukashenko, took office for a fourth term, facing threatened Western sanctions for his disputed, violence-tainted re-election and unexpected pressure from Russia.  

 President Barack Obama will appeal to the U.S. for political unity in his State of the Union address Tuesday night as he turns his attention to the tasks of job creation and deficit reduction. In a videotaped message emailed to Democratic organizers, Obama laid out the main themes of his address, which will be delivered to a Republican-controlled House and a Democratic Senate struggling for comity.  

An unidentified banker at Wall Street firm Morgan Stanley allegedly leaked details of a merger involving Advanced Micro Devices in 2006, according to a court filing in a closely watched insider-trading case. 

Haiti's government is locked in an increasingly bitter standoff with the international community and opposition politicians over the results of the country's recent presidential elections, a dispute that could affect aid to the earthquake-stricken country. 

 For Chinese citizens following President Hu Jintao's visit to the U.S., the message from the Communist Party is loud and clear: The world's dominant power is finally treating China as an equal, and Hu, who steps down as Communist Party chief next year, is the man to thank. 

 Japan's new trade and industry minister said in an interview the government will seek further reduction in the nation's corporate tax rate even after a planned 5% cut is implemented.Banri Kaieda, who also oversees energy policy, said after winning a major contract to build a nuclear power plant in Vietnam recently, Japan will now focus on Turkey and Jordan as the next targets for sales of nuclear power plants.  

 A bus slammed into an oil tanker in southern Pakistan before dawn Sunday, setting off a blazing inferno that gutted both vehicles and killed 32 people, police said. The accident reportedly occurred because the bus driver fell asleep and lost control of his vehicle, said the local police chief in Jamshoro district where the accident took place.  

 Afghan lawmakers and President Hamid Karzai moved closer to resolving the constitutional crisis over his order to delay the legislature's opening, though a tentative compromise worked out over the weekend could still unravel. 

 The U.S. military is drawing up plans to sharply expand a network of village security forces across Afghanistan, a program U.S. officials say could be a cost-effective way to make up for shortages in the regular army and police in rural areas. 

 Talks between global powers and Iran aimed at containing Tehran's nuclear program broke down Saturday, and the two sides set no future date for any further dialogue.  

A flurry of morning bombs killed 10 people and wounded 34 around Baghdad on Sunday, police said, in what one Iraqi official called an attempt to undermine security ahead of a much anticipated meeting of Arab heads of state in two months. The attacks appear to be a mixture of roadside bombings, suicide bombers and car bombs.

 An Israeli inquiry commission defended the actions of the country's troops during last year's deadly raid on a Gaza-bound protest flotilla sailing from Turkey, finding in a report that Israel had not violated international law. While offering some criticism of the way the takeover was planned, the commission's conclusions exonerated the government, the military and individual soldiers of wrongdoing.  

Power demand in Saudi Arabia, the Arab world's largest economy, is expected to triple by 2032, the president of the King Abdullah Atomic and Renewable Energy City said. The top oil exporter is eyeing alternatives like nuclear power with various partners to meet its growing demand, Hashim Yamani said at an industry event. 

Malaysia's navy was holding seven Somali pirates, who were apprehended in the second dramatic commando raid within hours on ships near the African coast, authorities said. 

 In Egypt, an al-Qaeda-linked group in Gaza was behind the New Year's Day suicide bombing that killed at least 21 Christians and wounded about a hundred outside a church in the Mediterranean port city of Alexandria, the country's top security official said. 

 In Ivory Coast, the government of presidential aspirant Alassane Ouattara over the weekend moved to squeeze off funding to his rival, Laurent Gbagbo, ousting a key banker and calling for a month-long suspension of cocoa and coffee exports.  

 The first official tally from southern Sudan's referendum on independence showed voters were nearly unanimous in their desire to separate from the North. 