BASEL, Switzerland—Central bankers should "closely monitor" global capital flows because they can be a source of instability, particularly for emerging economies, European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet said Monday. 

Mr. Trichet, speaking as the chairman of the Global Economy Meeting, said central bankers gathering in Basel Sunday and Monday did not discuss particular solutions on how to better regulate capital flows. He declined to comment on speculation that struggling Portugal will soon become the third euro-zone nation to seek an international bailout. 

Mr. Trichet said global economic growth has been stronger than expected, but warned that rising inflation has become a threat to some emerging economies amid sharp increases in food and energy prices. 

"Capital inflows are an issue which is pertinent on a global level," Mr. Trichet said. "In emerging countries, we have the information that there are short-term inflows of capital. This is explainable due to strong growth, but sometimes it is a matter for concern." 

The warning comes as several emerging countries are experiencing abrupt short-term inflows of cash from investors in search of higher yields as interest rates in the developed world are at record lows. 

Capital inflows, in turn, have driven up emerging market currencies, prompting countries such as Thailand, Brazil, Indonesia, and most recently Chile, either to slap levies on capital inflows or to intervene on the foreign exchange market to hold down the value of their currencies. 

The issue of capital controls is also one of the key items on France's agenda as head of the Group of 20 industrialized and developing nations this year. The French government has said that erratic capital flows can create currency volatility and is pushing the G-20 to look into ways to better regulate them. It has suggested the International Monetary Fund could be given more oversight of global capital flows. 

Asked whether the Global Economy Meeting of central bankers supported France's drive for a global coordination of capital flows, Mr. Trichet said "we did not discuss the G-20 agenda", but added that central bankers consider capital flows an "important issue." 

Mr. Trichet urged all central banks to be wary of rising inflation, and to adjust their monetary policy stance, if needed, to preserve price stability. He stressed that he was speaking in general terms, and not on behalf of the ECB that is due to decide on interest rates Thursday. 

"Inflationary threats are ... some kind of general feature in the emerging world," he warned, adding that inflation is less of an issue in advanced economies. Rising prices of food and oil must be monitored closely as they can contribute to the increase in global inflation, Mr. Trichet said. 