 Cambridge, Mass. 

Over the years, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology has had a hand in developing a lot of things that are part of our everyday life (radar, the first real-time computer, the first artificial limbs, the Technicolor film process, better ways of tracking weather systems, the transistor, strobe photography), as well as some other gizmos that seem more like weird science. "Our students are recognizable for their nerd-pride culture," said John Durant, director of the MIT Museum, and probably they have been recognizable that way since the institution was founded 150 years ago. MIT, incorporated as an engineering school just days before the Civil War broke out, is now celebrating its sesquicentennial with a variety of campus events, including the museum's year-long exhibition of 150 representative objects from its history.

MIT Museum  Through Dec. 31 

Titled "MIT 150," it was put together by Deborah G. Douglas, curator of science and technology at the museum, but hundreds of students and faculty members suggested items that somehow encapsulate the work or culture of the school. Here's one object on display that, for some, describes that culture: a 1972 Hewlett- Packard pocket-size calculator. This was not developed at MIT or by anyone associated with MIT, but was included because it quickly replaced the slide rules (remember them?) that so many of its students and teachers regularly used. "There was always a clicking sound wherever you'd go, as people were using slide rules, and then there was this moment when that sound all stopped," Mr. Durant said.

There are displays of all sorts. One is a grainy, black-and-white video of Winston Churchill, in a 1949 convocation speech, thanking the school for developing radar and helping to save "my country." Churchill also called on scientists to examine the ethical aspects of the things they are creating. (He probably had the atomic bomb in mind, which was not an MIT invention.) 

Sometimes, one damned thing leads to another. A problem that the military found during World War II in its use of radar was that "they couldn't see the planes because of the clouds," Ms. Douglas said. "Then, after the war, a lightbulb went off in someone's mind: 'Wait a minute, we're seeing the weather.'" A display of a 1960-63 device by MIT Prof. Spiro Geotis that used radar waves to identify the size and location of hailstones, along with postcards from viewers of a local TV station reporting on the quantity, size and time of specific hailstorms, suggests MIT's contribution to the science of meteorology.

Even though MIT is associated with science and technology, it also has shown an interest in various forms of music and the visual arts. A number of the displays in this area focus on the technologically experimental, such as William Parker's 1972 plasma sculptures, Stephen Benton's 1985 digital holography and Lawrence Stabile's 1971-74 analog music synthesizer. "There are no divisions here between art and technology and design," Mr. Durant said. "Our media lab has artists, engineers and scientists working side by side, doing collaborative projects."

Some of the displays are apt to have value only to MIT alums—such as a class ring (the brass rat design, they say, is distinctive), a recording of a Grateful Dead concert on campus in 1970 (takes you back, man), copies of the student newspaper and detritus reflecting the "tradition" of dropping a piano onto the street from the top of a dormitory to find out how loud the sound was when the instrument landed.

Other displays suggest odd efforts to apply scientific rigor where it may not belong—the 1930s Perfect Cup of Coffee Research project (funded by food industry groups) and the 1956 Strain Gage Denture Tenderometer to objectively measure food texture)—or where it might not be wanted: In 1962 Ernesto Blanco, a mechanical- engineering professor, developed the Stair-Climbing Wheelchair, "and he is still looking for a company to produce it," Mr. Durant said. "The problem with it is the cost of making the wheelchair and the fact that it's a fairly hairy experience getting up the stairs in this thing, particularly frightening to older people who presumably would be using it."

Perhaps an unintended effect of this exhibition, especially where the displays are examples of once-new technology, is discovering how dated these advances may now seem to us. "What looks the most quaint is technology that is just 15 or 20 years old, things within our own memory," Mr. Durant said. That first real-time computer, the Whirlwind (1947-53), "looks almost like a work of art, and I would argue that it is a work of art with its own aesthetic. It's an extraordinarily beautiful piece of functional excellence." 

"MIT 150" looks back at a century and a half of experimentation and achievement at this private institution of research and education. But, to Mr. Durant, it also looks ahead to many more years in which things will be attempted—some successfully, others not—and the results may not be apparent for years to come. (That big Whirlwind computer eventually led to the mainframes, laptops and smartphones we all seem to find indispensable.) "If you want to invent a better future," he noted, "you need to make space for places like this."

 Mr. Grant is the author of "The Business of Being an Artist" (Allworth). 