ORLANDO—As thousands of home builders and suppliers gather this week for their annual meeting—where they show off the latest in everything from high-performance appliances to custom-built gazebos—one question weighs heavily on the minds of many conventioneers: Who is going to pay for construction of the next generation of new American homes?

Even though sales of new homes have been deeply depressed since the housing crash hit four years ago, new homes are still needed in certain areas, including regions that weren't subject to rampant overbuilding during the boom. According to U.S. Census estimates, about 1.25 million new households were formed in 2010, and that could be repeated in 2011.

"The good news for home builders is there are large regional disparities" in where new housing is needed, says  Troy Davig, senior economist with Barclays Capital. "Where there are job gains, there is some demand for new homes."

Banks, however, still crippled by billions of dollars in soured construction loans, aren't eager to ramp up lending to the sector anytime soon. That isn't such a problem for the nation's big publicly traded builders, which are sitting on large cash reserves and making money raising equity on public capital markets. But small private home builders are confronted with a bleak reality. If banks aren't lending and they are too small to tap the capital markets, what do they do?

  Rick Mandell, a consultant with Aspen Portfolio Strategies Inc., thinks he has the answer. On Thursday, Mr. Mandell will appear on a panel here at the International Builders' Show, put on by the National Association of Home Builders, and urge builders to connect with sources on private institutional capital to get homes built. 

His message: Private builders need to learn how to pitch their projects to financiers as if they were traditional investments with promised internal rates of return and healthy profit margins. In other words, builders should go to hedge funds, private-equity firms, university endowments and state pension funds for their construction loans. 

Most private builders learned their trade in an industry where small and regional banks made construction loans based on existing market demand and on the quality of the location of the project. In the future, says Mr. Mandell, private institutional investors will replace those small banks, and they will care more about projected returns. 

"The builders have to look at a deal on the basis of an unleveraged yield," he says. "If you're an institutional investor, you can either put your money in stocks, or buildings, or housing, and say, what kind of return am I going to get?"

Mr. Mandell grew up as the son of a small family-run home-builder, Greater Construction, based in Winter Park, just outside downtown Orlando. He says that none of the 14,000 homes that his father's company built in Central Florida would be possible to build today, given the lack of available financing from small and regional banks, and that small builders need a quick education on how to court private capital. Private-equity funds have in the last year begun in earnest to invest in land holdings jettisoned by failed banks or troubled builders, but so far there are only a few examples of private institutional capital paying for home construction.

One transaction often cited is a $10.5 million deal earlier year between Shea Homes, one of the nation's largest private builders, and hedge fund Angelo Gordon & Co. to build 300-some homes in the Pacific Northwest. As builders enter the next cycle, Mr. Mandell says, they need to court these types of investors.

"Once we partner on one of these deals, the challenge is to make sure the private builders understand the expectations of an institutional partner," said  John Gaghan, who runs a $100 million fund that invests in new home construction, out of the Philadelphia office of Grosvenor, a 350-year-old British investment firm that specializes in real estate. "They're sometimes not used to the level of information sharing, the setting of expectations for cash projections... Walking them through all this is tough for some of these guys."

Mr. Mandell is expected to get a large crowd, although not as large as he might have had at past IBS meetings. Convention organizers say registered attendance at this year's show is lingering at around 50,000 conventioneers, roughly the same as last year's turnout but far below attendance received during the peak of the housing boom when attendance tipped 100,000. And the event is less glitzy than in years past. In 2006, retired Gen. Colin Powell gave the keynote address. This year, it is former MAD-TV comedian Frank Caliendo, famous for his wacky impressions. 

The role of small private builders is crucial going forward: a NAHB study released this year showed that the share of new-home sales by the largest 10 builders nationwide fell in 2009 to 23.9% from 27% a year earlier. The new-home industry, which became highly concentrated in the hands of public companies during the housing boom, is becoming less so.

The NAHB says this is because the country's big builders are still busy unwinding their investments in overheated markets like Las Vegas, Southern California and South Florida, where land holdings, once fought over fiercely, have become a big liability as home prices have plummeted by as much as 40%. Smaller builders, the NAHB says, are well-positioned to step in and take advantage of their expertise and presence in scattered local markets that never experienced much of the housing bubble. 

  Thomas C. Farrell, who heads  Bank of America's
BAC


0.65
%




 Home Builder Division, which invests in private building companies, also struck an optimistic tone. 

"I'm a big believer that capital will return to the market, it's just a matter of patience. People are impatient because we've been in this for four or five years now, but it's just a risk-and-reward situation," he said. "What will need to happen is, private home builders will need to be prepared to put more equity in from day one."

 Write to  Robbie Whelan at robbie.whelan @wsj.com 