The mutual-fund industry on Monday presented a plan to backstop money-market funds, acknowledging that the funds could pose major risks during a market panic even though they aim to keep their values steady.

The Investment Company Institute, a trade group, presented regulators with a proposal that would form a liquidity bank to help stabilize money funds during a market rout.

But the proposal wouldn't prevent a fund from "breaking the buck," or falling below its $1 share price, as the $62 billion Reserve Primary fund did in September 2008 when its holdings of Lehman Brothers debt plunged.

Those losses prompted investors to flee many other money funds, contributing to a temporary freeze in the credit markets that ended only after the U.S. government bailed out the industry.

The ICI's proposed bank wouldn't backstop a fund that collapsed on its own. Instead, it would seek to prevent the damage from spreading to other funds by buying securities from any funds facing a wave of investor redemptions, the ICI said.

To get the bank started, firms offering "prime money funds," which invest in corporate and other debt, would contribute money, and each prime money fund would pay ongoing fees of 0.03% of assets.

But critics question whether such a bank could be big enough to backstop several funds at once. "Everyone likes the idea until someone else runs to tap the facility," said  Barry Weiss, director of research at Arrowhead Credit Research Corp. "What you're really creating is window-dressing" to reassure the public, he said.

Others worry that the liquidity bank might give portfolio managers an incentive to take bigger risks. If the fees paid into the facility aren't somehow adjusted based on fund risks, "you have every incentive to be the riskiest guy out there," said  William Birdthistle, assistant professor of law at Chicago-Kent College of Law.

Before the 2008 collapse, investors generally considered money funds as safe as cash. But, since then, the industry has seen its assets shrink to $2.8 trillion from $3.5 trillion in August 2008.

Monday's proposal came on the last day for the public to weigh in on money-fund overhaul proposals laid out by the President's Working Group on Financial Markets. The Securities and Exchange Commission in November requested comments on the working group's report, which said new SEC money-fund regulations issued a year ago didn't go far enough to reduce the funds' risks.

The President's Working Group report, released in October, discussed a number of significant overhaul options without endorsing any of them. One option would be to require funds to let their share prices float with the market, like other mutual funds, instead of being pegged at $1 a share. Further changes should be aimed at reducing money funds' vulnerability to runs, the report said.

The industry already is struggling with near-zero interest rates and tough competition from banks. Fund firms are waiving a significant chunk of money-fund fees to compete.

If a fund faced a liquidity crunch, the bank could buy high-quality securities from the fund's portfolio, giving the fund the cash it needs to meet investor redemptions.

Some corporate investors, academics and fund-industry veterans say money funds should consider abandoning the stable $1 share price in favor of a floating share price, which would show investors the true market value of fund holdings each day.

A December survey by Institutional Cash Distributors, a money-fund mart, found that corporate treasurers were most supportive of a two-tiered system allowing for both stable $1 and floating-share-price money funds, which might offer higher yields, said  Jeff Jellison, ICD's chief executive, North America.

Others say that requiring all money funds to abandon the stable $1 share price is the best solution. "It's almost impossible to experience a run on any investment vehicle whose valuation floats," said Prof. Birdthistle. "There's no incentive to get to the door first."

The ICI acknowledged that the liquidity bank would take some time to reach critical mass. "It's not going to spring fully armed, able to meet an open-ended liquidity crisis on day one," said  Paul Stevens, ICI president and chief executive. 

The asset-based participation fee of 0.03% is "partly driven by the economics of the industry right now," but could increase if business conditions improve, added ICI general counsel  Karrie McMillan.

 Write to  Eleanor Laise at eleanor.laise@wsj.com 