PHILADELPHIA—The Philadelphia Catholic Archdiocese placed on administrative leave 21 priests accused of sexual abuse of minors, weeks after a grand jury criticized the diocese for failing to remove priests who face credible abuse charges.

The action is one of the largest the Philadelphia diocese has taken in the abuse scandal, which has gripped the diocese for the past decade. 

The diocese said Tuesday it acted after an initial examination of the substance of allegations against the priests and the process by which the allegations were reviewed. The diocese said it would conduct further investigations to determine the priests' status.

"I wish to express again my sorrow for the sexual abuse of minors committed by any members of the church, especially clergy," Cardinal Justin Rigali, the archbishop of Philadelphia, said in a statement. "I am truly sorry for the harm done to the victims of sexual abuse, as well as to the members of our community who suffer as a result of this great evil and crime." 

A grand jury last month criticized the diocese for allowing 37 priests to continue in roles in which they were around children, despite "substantial evidence of abuse."

The diocese hired a former prosecutor to review the cases, ultimately deciding to remove 21 of the priests.

The diocese said eight of the 37 priests wouldn't be subject to administrative leave because an initial investigation found no further investigation was warranted. Others had already been placed on leave or haven't been in active ministry. 

Allegations of priest abuse came to light in Philadelphia nearly a decade ago, in the wake of a similar scandal in Boston. 

In 2005, a prior grand jury issued a scathing report detailing numerous cases of abuse allegations against Philadelphia-area priests dating back decades—as well as efforts by their superiors to conceal the acts—but was powerless to bring criminal charges due to the expiration of statutes of limitations. 

 Write to  Peter Loftus at peter.loftus@dowjones.com 