TOKYO—Japan's current-account surplus shrank for the first time in three months in November as high prices for iron ore and natural gas pushed up import costs and the strong yen hobbled export growth.

Spotlighting a burden that weighs on Japan's corporate sector, the Ministry of Finance reported Wednesday that the surplus fell 15.7% from a year earlier to 926.2 billion yen ($11.1 billion) largely because businesses in the resource-poor country had to fork out more money for the commodities they bring in. In October the surplus grew 2.9% from a year earlier.

The data showed that the surplus from goods and services dropped 63.6% to 160.4 billion yen in November. The trade surplus was 259.7 billion yen, down 46.6% from a year earlier, as imports grew 15.7% to 4.886 trillion yen while exports rose 9.3% to 5.146 trillion yen.

With infrastructure investment and demand for durable goods booming in emerging economies, prices of resources such as iron ore and coal soared in 2010. Despite a stronger yen, the value of imports of iron ore was up 82.9% in November from a year earlier and the value of imports of liquefied natural gas was up 17.8%, the finance ministry said.

For a country that heavily relies on commodities from overseas, rising commodity price are like a tax increase, said Dai-ichi Life Research Institute senior economist  Toshihiro Nagahama.

While the strong yen failed to provide much assistance to importers, it did play a role in helping to slow export growth as consumers overseas increasingly spurn Japanese products in favor of lower-priced goods from South Korea and other nations.

"Exports to Asia and the U.S. lost momentum, and though the strong yen on a whole isn't uniformly bad it did weigh on exports and eat into overseas income brought back to Japan," said  Hirokata Kusaba, a senior economist at Mizuho Research Institute.

A finance ministry official who briefed reporters on the data said it wasn't clear how much of an impact the strong yen had on import growth.

While November's current account data appear gloomy, most economists expect the surplus to eventually start to rise again.

RBS Securities' chief economist  Junko Nishioka said Japan's competitiveness in value-added products such as industrial machinery should keep supporting the country's exports, limiting further declines in the current account surplus in the coming months.

Also Wednesday, separate data from the Bank of Japan showed lending by banks, excluding credit unions, fell 2.1% in December from a year earlier, the 13th straight month of declines and a continuing sign of the nation's deflating economy.

While some year-end funding demand, such as from businesses looking to pay winter bonuses to employees, was seen in December, it wasn't enough to drive up the need for loans, a BOJ official said, because companies maintained ample cash on hand.

For 2010 as a whole, bank lending was down 1.9% from the year before—the first decline in five years. That compares with a 2.2% rise in 2009, when the financial crisis led businesses to shift their fund-raising methods to bank borrowing from bond issuance.

—Megumi Fujikawa, Kosaku Narioka and Andrew Monahan contributed to this article.

 Write to  Kazuhiro Shimamura at kazuhiro.shimamura@dowjones.com 