It doesn't qualify as a grand bargain, but the latest European efforts to draw a line under the sovereign-debt crisis went further than the market had expected. 

Perhaps spurred by last week's alarming rise in peripheral government-bond yields, euro-zone leaders agreed over the weekend to expand the size of the euro area's bailout facilities to €440 billion ($611.7 billion) from €260 billion now. They also lowered the interest rate by one percentage point, extended the maturity of emergency loans to Greece and allowed the new European stability mechanism to buy bonds in primary markets.

While welcome, the measures are unlikely to prove a definitive solution. They address only near-term liquidity concerns rather than trickier issues over solvency. There remains no credible plan for the recapitalization of the banking system or a clear mechanism to handle possible future sovereign defaults. Nothing in this plan is likely to change the market's view that Greece's and Ireland's debt is unsustainable or that Portugal will also soon need a bailout.

In an ideal world, European leaders would have given the bailout fund wider powers to buy stakes in banks and purchase government bonds in secondary markets. But this was specifically rejected—to the frustration of European Central Bank President  Jean Claude Trichet. It means the ECB will be forced to continue taking more of this solvency risk onto its own balance sheet via its liquidity operations. 

Questions over solvency are unlikely to go away, particularly if the latest stress tests aren't seen to be tough enough. Failure to agree on a deal to lower Ireland's bailout interest rate due to a row over its low corporate-tax rate adds to the uncertainty. Until the market knows who will bear the ultimate costs of clearing up Europe's debt mess, governments and banks will pay the price in higher borrowing costs. But to get an answer, the market may need to apply yet more pressure.

 Write to  Simon Nixon at simon.nixon@wsj.com 