REYNOLDS, Ind.—Two meetings in recent days in this Midwestern state showed the predicament facing Sen. Richard Lugar, a six-term Republican with a centrist profile, as he runs for re-election next year.

When Mr. Lugar came to this farming town of 500 people Saturday to build bridges with a local tea-party group, he found mostly skepticism. 

"You seem to feel you're somehow indispensable in Washington," Bob Callahan, 65, a retired salesman from Monticello, told the senator at meeting in an elementary-school gym. He compared Mr. Lugar to the professional football quarterback Brett Favre, saying: "There's nothing sadder than an athlete that doesn't know when to get out."

Eighty miles south in Indianapolis about 40 people huddled Friday with FreedomWorks, a group based in Washington, D.C., that helps coordinate tea-party groups across the U.S. On the agenda, in a closed-door meeting in a hotel ballroom, was how to unify behind a Republican to challenge Mr. Lugar in next year's primary. "Our knuckles are going to get bloody," said Monica Boyer, 35, a secretary and mother of four with Hoosiers for Conservative Senate.

Tea-party groups have decided their main Republican target in the next election is Mr. Lugar, a 78-year-old foreign policy specialist who, along with Orrin Hatch of Utah, is his party's longest-serving senator. Tea-party groups also may become active in Republican primaries to unseat Mr. Hatch and Sen. Olympia Snowe of Maine

Indiana activists were upset with Mr. Lugar's vote for the Troubled Asset Relief Program, which pumped billions of dollars into ailing financial institutions during the financial crisis of 2008, his support for President Barack Obama's Supreme Court nominees and his willingness to work with Democrats. Another point of tension: Mr. Lugar's role in working with Mr. Obama to shepherd the New Start nuclear arms treaty with Russia through the Senate late last year.

In last year's primary for Indiana's other Senate seat, tea-party leaders split among four candidates. Now-Sen. Dan Coats, a former U.S. senator and lobbyist, won. He's too establishment, activists said

 Elsewhere last year, several Senate candidates backed by a portion of the tea-party movement failed, including Christine O'Donnell in Delaware and Sharron Angle in Nevada. Taking a lesson from those experiences, FreedomWorks and some others in Indiana want a formal tea-party caucus this summer to vet candidates and unify behind an anti-Lugar nominee.

Republican challengers to Mr. Lugar include Indiana state Treasurer Richard Mourdock. Another favorite of conservatives, state Sen. Mike Delph, may also run. 

Sal Russo, the GOP strategist behind the Tea Party Express, which put millions of dollars behind candidates in Republican primaries last year, said in an interview he would spend money in Indiana in 2012.

Mr. Lugar had a campaign war chest of $2.4 million as of Dec. 31. His office released a poll late last year saying that about two-thirds of the state approved of his job performance. His campaign office did not release internal polls of his standing among GOP primary voters. 

Democrats hope a contentious primary could create an opening. The party did not run a candidate against Mr. Lugar in 2006, and no Democrat has stepped forward so far for the 2012 race.

In Reynolds, Mr. Lugar attended an event sponsored by the White County Tea Party Patriots. He told the group that government spending must be cut, aligning himself with the top tea-party priority. But he cautioned against a government shutdown, which could result if budget negotiations between the two parties fail. 

 "We really, in a responsible way, have to keep our government going. But we have to do so with a very substantial budget change," Mr. Lugar said.

He said the U.S. didn't have the money to take a role in the conflict in Libya, which he said also bordered on being unconstitutional because American involvement was not authorized by Congress. It was one of the few times he found agreement with the audience.

The 70 or so in attendance mostly grilled Mr. Lugar on other matters: his views on concealed handguns (he opposes them) and the United Nations (he wants the U.S. to remain a member).

In an interview, Mr. Lugar said there were "really vivid contrasts" between his views and those of some in the audience. 

"Ultimately voters have to make decisions based on usually someone with whom they do not agree 100%," he said.

 Write to  Danny Yadron at danny.yadron@wsj.com 