Before Monday night's game, Timofey Mozgov, the rookie center who has not played more than five minutes in his last 23 games and failed to make an appearance in the last eight, stepped off the Madison Square Garden court after warmups and had a brief talk with the Knicks coaches.

"They told me to keep working and keep smiling," Mr. Mozgov said.

The smiling part might be harder than the working part. The Knicks' rotation is hard to break into these days. For now, it stands at nine players and can go as low as eight. The Knicks have played more players than their opponent in only one of their last 27 games. 

Forward Anthony Randolph has played just once in the last 15 games, rookie Andy Rautins has played once in the last 16 and sharpshooter Roger Mason Jr. has played once in the last nine. 

This week, Knicks coach Mike D'Antoni said his team is "still searching for what's best for us," but "the biggest thing to not tinker with is minutes. We have a rotation that we like and guys are sort of settled into certain minutes." 

So what of the castoffs? Some are unhappy. 

"I took less money to come here and obviously I was told I was going to have a very significant role and play significant minutes," Mr. Mason said. "It's frustrating because it's not what I was told."

Mr. Mason said he "could have played pretty much anywhere" for his salary, which is around $1.4 million, but chose the Knicks for the opportunity it afforded him. He said he never got his opportunity. 

In the rotation, for now, is guard Bill Walker, who caught a break when Danilo Gallinari missed six games with a knee injury. He's played well enough to see action in 12 straight games after staying on the bench for seven of 13 games in December. Mr. Walker said the tight rotation keeps the players on edge. He said Mr. D'Antoni doesn't explicitly tell people when they are back in the rotation, and it's not clear until he actually tells them they are in the game. 

"You've got to be ready for that. You you could be on a stretch where you aren't playing and all of the sudden, you're down there laughing [on the bench] and the next minute you're on the court," Mr. Walker said.

Mr. D'Antoni said last week that it would be tough for players such as Mr. Randolph, center Eddy Curry and the injured Kelenna Azubuike to break into the rotation now. He guesses that it takes 20 games to adapt to the pace of the Knicks offense and that the Knicks, in the heat of the playoff chase, simply can't afford to take that long to experiment.

"It's not a good feeling [to be out of this rotation]," Mr. Walker said. "You want to play, of course, but I think you just have to put your feelings aside. You just have to keep focused because [the opportunity] most definitely comes around again.'' 

But for now, the only experimenting is with the starting lineup, which has seen mixing and matching over the past few weeks. Nine players have started this season, but the main debate currently is whether forward Wilson Chandler or center Ronny Turiaf should be in the starting lineup.

Mr. D'Antoni said this week the team will stop tinkering with the starting lineup "when we're really good, when injuries don't happen, when people don't go through slumps, stuff like that, and I don't know if you ever do." 

Mr. D'Antoni said that the starting lineup isn't particularly important because Mr. Turiaf will play 20 to 25 minutes and Mr. Chandler will play 30 to 35 minutes regardless.

The main issue for the Knicks' rotation as currently constructed is the lack of depth it highlights. Forward Amar'e Stoudemire plays 37 minutes a game, 18th-most in the NBA, and point guard Raymond Felton plays 41, eighth-most. 

Few big men have been available to spell Mr Stoudemire, and the undersized Mr. Chandler, just 6-foot-7, has been forced to guard some of the game's biggest power forwards. 

Team president Donnie Walsh said it would be nice to add a backup point guard, but that is not a priority. Toney Douglas is both spelling Mr. Felton at point guard and playing backup shooting guard, a role which puts him at 23 minutes a night. Forward Shawne Williams spends time at nearly every position on the floor during his 16 minutes a night, including guarding big men.

But the clear priority is adding another big man to bolster the frontcourt.

"We could use another big man, that's for sure,'' Mr. Walsh said. "I usually have four [centers and forwards] and we have three on this team." 

Mr. Walsh said that doesn't include Mr. Curry and Mr. Randolph because they haven't played. Mr. Curry hasn't dressed this season and Mr. Randolph is likely to be traded. 

 Write to  Kevin Clark at kevin.clark@wsj.com 