  Q: In my search for a used late model BMW 328i wagon I came across a number of "used" 2011 models with 5,000 or less miles. Should I be especially cautious around such vehicles, where the owners dumped their cars back to the dealer after only a couple of months? How do you think this wagon compares with a comparable Volvo and Audi wagons of similar vintage?  

— Tim Silvestre, Los Angeles 

A: The 328i wagon is at the top of my list of favorite cars, so I understand why you're on a quest to find the right one. I have also been suspicious of used cars with so few miles. The early turn-in could be due to a flaw that the dealer hopes you won't notice. But it could be the result of a quirk in the car or its previous owner. I know people who have traded cars because they just didn't like them as much as they thought they would. The seats are uncomfortable, the ride is too firm or the engine is too noisy. You'd be surprised how many people buy cars without test-driving them. Do find a qualified mechanic to check out any used car you are about to buy. Also take a long test drive to make sure the car doesn't have annoying traits that could eventually drive you mad. 

  Q: I'm looking for a recommendation for my daughter, a 24 -year-old nursing student. I'd like to buy a used vehicle. Priorities are reliability, safety and able to negotiate the winters in western Pennsylvania. Her priorities would be something fashionable. Lower priorities would be power and gas mileage. The vehicle will sit outside and be used for an average of less than 10 miles a day. She will occasionally drive through mountains to visit home.  

— Charles Harvey, Altoona, Pa. 

A: An all-wheel-drive car is probably your best bet. Models that come to mind include the Subaru Impreza and Outback, Ford Taurus and Fusion and all-wheel-drive versions of the Volkswagen Passat. These cars handle better than SUVs and generally cost less to operate. They have the traction to get your daughter through those snowstorms that seem to come out of nowhere along Routes 80 and 78, and the Pennsylvania Turnpike. Just make sure it has good tires with a deep tread.

  Q: I have a 2001 Honda Odyssey with 108,000, in good condition. When I asked my mechanic to use synthetic oil for my next oil change, he said it's not worth it because the car has plenty of miles. Is this true?  

— Roger Mercado, Marco Island, Fla. 

A: Synthetic motor oil reminds me of the debate over organic foods because while it is quantifiably "better" than conventional oil, I'm not sure it is worth the extra money. It is often meant to last 10,000 miles or more between changes, but I can't bring myself to leave oil in my engine for that long. If you want to try synthetic oil, you should. Your vehicle's mileage shouldn't matter, and your mechanic may be trying to save you money, since synthetic is expensive.

  Q: I have run-flat PAX tires that I dislike—the ride is very bumpy. I have heard they wear poorly, repairs are costly and each tire weighs 100 pounds. If I buy new Honda rims and tires would I get a better ride and mileage? Would handling be improved as well? Should I opt for 16-inch or 17-inch rims and tires?   

— Nick DiBuono, Marlborough, Mass. 

A: I have heard a lot of complaints about run-flat tires and about the PAX-style run-flat tires in particular. You will probably be happier with conventional wheels and tires, though you'll need to buy a spare and find a place to store it. If you choose a 16-inch wheel, the corresponding tire will have a taller sidewall and probably a softer, more comfy ride. The tires will tend to be less-pricey. 

—Email mecar@wsj.com