NEW DELHI – India's inflation rate fell slightly in April, but still the central bank remains uncomfortable with the reading, fueling expectations it will continue to tighten monetary policy. 

The wholesale price index rose 8.66% from a year earlier, slower than a provisional 9.04% increase in March as prices of most commodities hovered at elevated levels. 

The reading was above market expectations of an 8.50% increase, according to the median estimate in a poll of 15 economists. 

The government also raised February's inflation reading to 9.54% from a provisional 8.31%. 

The data highlight persistent price pressures in the economy that are fueling expectations of more monetary tightening by the Reserve Bank of India at its June 16 rate-setting meeting to rein in demand and cool inflationary expectations. 

RBI Governor D. Subbarao said the April reading was "high" and reiterated that inflation must be brought down even at the cost of hurting short-term growth. 

"The tradeoff between growth and inflation can be exploited below a threshold level of inflation, but above (it), there is no tradeoff to exploit," he said at a conference in Mumbai. The threshold level of inflation is about 5%, he added. 

RBI Deputy Governor Subir Gokarn, speaking at a separate conference, said price pressures may not ease sharply anytime soon as inflation is increasingly getting generalized. 

"Even though some growth risks are emerging, inflation risks are far more significant," Mr. Gokarn said. "High inflation is inimical to sustained growth." 

Mr. Subbarao and Mr. Gokarn's comments underscore the central bank's discomfort with high inflation, which could prompt it to raise policy rates more. 

Strong expansion in the economy will likely give the RBI confidence to maintain its tightening stance without worrying about growth. 

The mounting inflationary pressure is likely to persist in the near term as many expect the government may allow oil retailers to increase diesel and cooking fuel prices after they raised gasoline prices over the weekend. 

Gasoline prices are now linked to global crude oil prices, but the government continues to subsidize diesel and cooking gas to shield consumers from global price shocks. Raising fuel prices will help the government manage its gaping fiscal deficit, which is increasingly under pressure as high global crude oil prices push up the cost of its subsidies. 

Indranil Pan, chief economist at Kotak Mahindra Bank, said higher gasoline prices and a possible increase in the price of diesel may increase the inflation rate by 0.70-0.75 percentage point "and there may be a second-round effect of the pass-through." 

Government bonds turned lower following the WPI data on firming expectations of at least a 0.25 percentage point rate hike next month. The most traded 7.80% bond due in 2021 fell to 96.75 rupees ($2.16) from 97.02 rupees before the announcement. It closed at 96.80 rupees Monday, compared with 96.85 rupees Friday. 

The RBI has raised its lending rate by 2.50 percentage points since March 2010 in its prolonged battle to tame prices. 

Economists expect another 0.75-1.0 percentage point of increases by next March. 

 Write to  Anant Vijay Kala at anant.kala@dowjones.com 