On Wednesday night, Doveman, a k a Thomas Bartlett, will once again turn (Le) Poisson Rouge into a cozy salon. He and his gifted friends will perform in a variety of configurations, ranging from piano accompaniment by Mr. Bartlett to full-band support with unorthodox instrumentation. If past performances are any indication, Mr. Bartlett will create an environment so relaxed it will seem like anyone could join in onstage—as long as they sing as well as, say, Norah Jones or play guitar as well as Annie Clark.

This week's gathering will be the third in a series dubbed "The Burgundy Stain Sessions," in honor of a Bartlett composition. In January Mr. Bartlett, a 26-year-old Harlem resident, was joined by Ms. Clark, Glen Hansard, Nico Muhly and Beth Orton. A month later Justin Bond, Ms. Jones and Steve Salett were among his guests. This week, David Thomas Broughton, Elysian Fields, Dawn Landes, Tegan & Sara and Martha Wainwright will join Mr. Bartlett onstage. With the audience on all sides, the performers will play in the round. All the better for Mr. Bartlett to bark out instructions.

"I'm a born curator," he said over coffee in TriBeCa last week. "It's kind of a dream situation when your friends trust you to the extent you can boss them around." Many of the friends who have joined him at (Le) Poisson Rouge appeared on his 2009 album, "The Conformist," a lovely work that blends folk and chamber music effortlessly.

At this point in his young career, Mr. Bartlett is better known as a sideman, having worked with Antony and the Johnsons, David Byrne, Bebel Gilberto, the National and Yoko Ono, among others. His skills attest to the high level of competence among the young New York-based musicians who cross easily between the pop and classical scenes. Last week at the Ecstatic Music Festival at Merkin Hall, for example, Mr. Bartlett opened the program with a short set of his original folk-based compositions backed by a string quartet. He then shifted into chamber mode to support violist Nadia Sirota, who played works by Missy Mazzoli, Mr. Muhly and Owen Pallett. In the former instance, Mr. Bartlett used the piano as a platform for his fragile melodies, never once overburdening the songs. Behind Ms. Sirota, he played the more harmonically complex pieces with characteristic élan.

At (Le) Poisson Rouge in February, he was the ringmaster, guiding the backing band on how to support the vocalists. "Sam, get your fiddle out," he said to his childhood friend Sam Amidon. "Come in on the A flat," he instructed Doug Wieselman, who was playing bass clarinet. "I don't even have a set list," he said to the audience, as he reached for an ever-present glass of red wine. "I'm making it up as we go." When it all worked, it did so wonderfully well.

Mr. Bartlett discovered pop in his early teens while studying classical piano in London: So consumed by the classical repertoire was he that when his brother recommended they go see Van Morrison and Elvis Costello perform, he hadn't heard of either. But soon Nick Cave, Nick Drake and Tom Waits became influences, as did Cat Power's "The Covers Record," and Rufus Wainwright's debut album with string arrangements by Van Dyke Parks. 

Almost from the moment he arrived at Columbia University to study classical piano, he fell in with an accomplished group of local musicians. He liked the work of guitarist Marc Ribot and keyboardist John Medeski, both of whom played with Chocolate Genius, the working name for Marc Anthony Thompson's projects. Thus when Mr. Thompson played at Joe's Pub, the then-18-year-old Mr. Bartlett attended and afterward approached him. "I said, 'I want to play keyboards for you,'" he remembered. "I gave him my number. And he called."

Mr. Bartlett supported Mr. Thompson at his next Joe's Pub gig. "That show was huge for me," he recalled. "Every connection, with at most three steps of separation, came from that show. David Byrne was in the audience, and he introduced me to Bebel Gilberto. [Drummer] Dougie Bowne was there, and he introduced me to Pat Dillett, my producer. I met Miho [Hatori], Yuka [Honda] and Sean [Lennon] through Marc," he said, referencing three former members of Cibo Matto. Mr. Bartlett has worked with Mr. Lennon's band, the Ghost of a Saber Tooth Tiger, and Ms. Honda's If by Yes.

Mr. Bartlett said he's committed to doing at least three more "Burgundy Stain Sessions" through June. "And hopefully forever," he added.