From Yogi Berra to Goose Gossage to Tino Martinez, retired Yankees are everywhere around New York's spring training, living examples of the much-venerated 'Yankee way' of doing business.

That link to the past means that when a current player like Jorge Posada falls on his sword for the good of the team, he does so amid constant reminders of fellow players who endured these situations before in Yankee pinstripes—without complaining, without rocking the boat.

As Posada gives up catching for a full-time DH role, one old teammate and friend stands out. Bernie Williams was perhaps the most recent Yankee icon to willingly and quietly accept a demotion, when in 2006 he was deposited in right field after 15 years manning Yankee Stadium's prestigious center field. 

Williams was in Yankee camp this week working with the team's younger players, and he recalled why he accepted the changes quietly, saying he was following a precedent set long before.

"Obviously, this whole organization has taken a lot of pride in breeding guys who think of doing things for the benefit of the team. There are not a lot of individual goals," Williams said.

"For me, it was definitely a little bit frustrating, but when you look at the big picture, and you look at it as far as this is what's best for the team, and you're still part of the team—it's not like they're trading you, or sending you down or releasing you," Williams said.

These first few weeks of spring training have been an odd time for Posada, who was good enough to be the starting catcher for 15 years but isn't even considered viable as a backup at this point.

He's not likely to catch in all but the most dire situations, and he understands that. It's not hard to tell that this isn't what Posada wants, but like Williams before him, what the team needs is what he will do. 

"I'm clear, man. I'm clear with what's going on," Posada said. "I understand what's going on, and I'm looking forward to DHing. I really am. I want to have a good year, and I'm looking forward to all the positives that I can contribute, and I want to concentrate on that. If the team wants me to be a DH, I have to be a DH."

Becoming a DH means figuring out what to do between innings, staying sharp, and keeping the body warmed up through 45-minute layoffs. Day by day, Posada gets closer to understanding how to handle that odd challenge. But he now has another one to tackle. While he can't put on a catcher's mitt, the team wants Posada to pick up a first baseman's glove and get ready to back up Mark Teixeira at first.

That could be seen as an indignity—his longtime team won't let him near his original position but decides he needs to learn a new one at 38—but Posada seems to relish the opportunity to feel a part of the flow of the game again. He seemed thrilled to play the field this week, even in a meaningless spring training game.

"I was loose and involved," Posada said. "I'm not going to be out there too much, you know? So it's good to be out there."

Posada has hit well enough in spring training thus far. Despite playing 140-plus games at catcher for 15 years—plus an entire season's worth of playoff games—Posada has been a virtual lock for a .275 average and 20 home runs. As a DH, without catching to wear Posada down, Williams thinks even more offense is possible from his fellow Puerto Rico native.

"I think it's probably going to be easier on him," Williams said. "He's going to have his legs fresh, and I think he's going to be able to focus more on his offensive game and get a lot of important hits."

Even if Posada can master DHing and prove his value, this may be his swan song in pinstripes, just as that final transition year was for Williams. Posada's four year, $52 million deal is up after this season. He refuses to talk retirement at this point.

"I can't think like that. I can't think of an end. Obviously if I feel good, I want to keep going," Posada said. 

Yet even if he hits well, the Yankees may not want him back.

That's the part that tripped up Williams. After he was a good soldier and handled the move away from center, the Yankees wanted only to offer Williams a minor-league contract for 2007. Williams chose not to return to the Yankees, and he didn't come back into the fold until the final game at Yankee Stadium in September of 2008—when he was greeted with thunderous applause by the Yankee fans.

After spending his entire adult life with the organization that drafted him in 1990, Posada can't imagine playing anywhere else.

"I really can't," Posada said, looking down at his feet. "After the year, it would be really tough to look somewhere else. We'll see. If I want to play, I would like to stay here." 

For the moment, he'll accept his new role quietly, without complaining, just as his predecessors did before him. He isn't the first longtime Yankee to face a situation like this, and he won't be the last.