Qatar's Foreign Ministry has officially recognized the Benghazi-based Interim Transitional National Council as the "sole legitimate representative of the Libyan people," making the small Gulf Arab nation the first country in the Middle East to formally switch its alliance away from Col. Moammar Gadhafi to the Libyan opposition, according to Qatari officials.

Since the antigovernment protests in Tunisia back in December, Qatar has been leading the region in its support for a wave of popular uprisings, through its government-financed al-Jazeera news channel and through humanitarian and other aid missions. 

In the Libya conflict, Qatar has financed medical relief shipments to the besieged city of Misrata, as well as Benghazi, and committed fighter jets to enforce the United Nations-backed no-fly zone.

The Qatari state-run news agency, citing a Foreign Ministry official, said the country decided to give diplomatic recognition to the opposition government based in east Libya stemming "from the conviction that the Council, including all of its representatives in various areas in Libya, has practically become the representative of Libya and its people, adding that it also stems from the acceptance attached by the Libyan people to the Council."

Qatar becomes the second country, after France, to extend formal recognition to the eastern Libyan government.

The U.S. has resisted formal recognition of the rebel government. U.S. ambassador to Libya Gene Cretz said Friday that the issue of recognition is "under advisement" in Washington, but that "it runs into several legal questions, several questions of international law."

Mr. Cretz stressed that the lack of recognition hasn't "prevented us from doing the things that we need to do with respect to showing our very, very strong support for the council." The U.S. has named an envoy to the rebel council, and Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has met with rebel officials.

The U.N. hasn't yet recognized the man Col. Gadhafi appointed as new U.N. ambassador, Ali Treki, after Libyan diplomats in New York sided with the rebels. Mr. Treki must present his credentials in person to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in New York, but the U.S. has denied him an entry visa. 

U.N. diplomats say they hadn't previously heard of a requirement that credentials be presented in New York.

Libyan officials in Tripoli have complained that the U.N. and U.S. are violating Vienna Convention protocols that govern diplomatic relations by denying their envoy a visa and not allowing representatives of Tripoli's choice to attend U.N. meetings.

Meanwhile, the diplomats who broke with Col. Gadhafi have attended public Security Council meetings as the de-facto representatives—though their credentials, too, have yet be formalized.

—Keith Johnson and Joe Lauria contributed to this article.



 Write to  Margaret Coker at margaret.coker@wsj.com 