WASHINGTON—President Barack Obama will urge Congress on Tuesday to throw its support behind the retouched trade agreement with South Korea, urging lawmakers to put aside partisanship to improve the country's competitiveness. 

"This agreement has unprecedented support from business and labor; Democrats and Republicans, and I ask this Congress to pass it as soon as possible,"Mr. Obama will say, according to a copy of his remarks released by the White House an hour before he is set to begin the address. 

In order for Congress to take up the pact, the president will have to officially send it to Capitol Hill for lawmakers to consider, something he is expected to do shortly. 

Trade is considered one of the few areas where the White House can work together with the newly Republican-led House, and also forms a big part of its job-creation agenda. The administration hopes the South Korea deal will generate over $10 billion in exports and support tens of thousands of jobs. 

Earlier Tuesday, House Ways and Means Chairman Dave Camp (R., Mich.) called for Obama to seek congressional approval within six months for all three trade agreements he inherited from the previous administration, including those with Colombia and Panama. 

"This deadline isn't being driven by politics or posturing, it is driven by the need to create jobs for American workers," said Mr. Camp during a committee hearing. 

With a deal reached with South Korea late last year to finally conclude those talks, trade supporters had been hopeful that Mr. Obama would lay out a timetable to complete ongoing negotiations with Colombia and Panama. Following the breakthrough on the South Korea deal, a senior administration official said there could be a decision on when to submit all three pacts early this year. 

Mr. Obama used last year's address to announce a plan to double exports over the next five years, and so far is on track to achieve that goal. 

Exports are up nearly 17% on the year through November, ahead of the 15% annual gains that will be needed. 

Mr. Obama will highlight the progress made in his address, noting recent export deals signed with India and China. 

But trade advocates say the free trade agreements will be necessary to keep up the pace and reach the target, and believe the prospects of passage have improved markedly now that Republicans have taken over the House. 

Business representatives called for quick passage of the South Korea, Colombia and Panama trade deals at Tuesday's hearing, warning that the U.S. is losing competitiveness as those countries move forward on trade pacts with the European Union and others. 

They also urged the Obama administration to expand trade elsewhere, including its effort to create a free trade bloc in the Asia-Pacific region. 

However, Rep. Sander Levin, (D., Mich.), the top Democrat on the committee, defended his party's efforts to improve the terms of the deals, citing the breakthrough last month in the South Korea deal to secure more access for U.S. auto exports. 

Mr. Levin said more work is needed on the other two deals before they should be approved, though he expressed optimism that the needed changes can be made. 

"We believe that each trade agreement should be considered on its own merit, not lumped together where key issues are ignored, as some would be willing to do," he said. 

Pick the words that you think best complete the president's sentences.

Review the main topics and words used in President Obama's address this year and compare with 2009 and 2010. 

U.S. Trade Representative Ron Kirk said Friday he remains committed to working with Colombia and Panama to "successfully address the issues remaining" on those deals. Kirk said this month that he hopes for a vote on the South Korea agreement by July 1, which is the date that a trade agreement signed between South Korea and the European Union goes into effect. 

Mr. Levin said Panama still needs to approve tax and labor measures, but he sees "the prospect of successfully addressing" those concerns. Having just returned from Colombia, he said he believes the new administration of President Juan Manuel Santos presents an opportunity to address U.S. concerns about workers' rights in that country. 

However, business representatives testifying Tuesday expressed frustration at the lack of progress. 

"As competitors race to negotiate barrier-reducing trade agreements for their companies, the United States is frozen by the widespread misperception in Congress that trade agreements are harmful to the U.S. economy," said Roy Paulson, president of safety equipment maker Paulson Manufacturing Corp., who sits on the board of directors of the National Association of Manufacturers. 

Mr. Paulson praised the administration for pursuing the Trans-Pacific Partnership, saying it could pave the way for a larger free trade zone spanning the fast-growing Asia-Pacific region. 

Mr. Kirk said Friday he hopes to "substantially complete" the Trans-Pacific Partnership by the time Obama hosts the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation meeting in Honolulu in November. The trade bloc would bring together four countries that already have free-trade deals with the U.S.--Singapore, Chile, Australia and Peru--as well as New Zealand, Malaysia, Brunei and Vietnam. 

 Write to  Tom Barkley at tom.barkley@dowjones.com and Corey Boles at corey.boles@dowjones.com 