In 1984, the Democratic Party nominee for vice president was Geraldine Ferraro, the first woman to appear on the presidential ballot for a major political party.

Ms. Ferraro, who died Saturday at age 75 of multiple myeloma, wasn't much help that year to the Democratic ticket, headed by Minnesota senator Walter Mondale. The Democrats went down to defeat in 49 of 50 states, including Ms. Ferraro's native New York. And she failed to garner a larger women's vote than President Carter had four years earlier.

Her confident campaigning set a precedent that a woman could credibly campaign for one of the highest offices in the land. But it was a quarter century before women would once again mount White House runs.

In the 2008 election, Ms. Ferraro was a senior fundraiser in Hillary Clinton's campaign for the Democratic nomination. But Ms. Ferraro resigned after being quoted attributing his popularity to the press's infatuation with the idea of a black man running for high office.

"If he was a woman -- of any color -- he would not be in this position," Ms. Ferraro said.

It was a typically brash if puzzling remark from Ms. Ferraro, whose nomination for vice-president was inspired at least as much by her gender as by her accomplishments in three terms in Congress.

Geraldine Anne Ferraro was born in Newburgh, N.Y., where her father ran a restaurant and a bar called the Roxy Club. When Ms. Ferraro was 9, her father died of a heart attack shortly after he was indicted for running a numbers racket at a five-and-dime store he also owned.

The family relocated to the Bronx, where her mother worked as a seamstress, sewing beads and sequins on fancy dresses. Ms. Ferraro skipped grades in school, attended college on a scholarship, and then studied law at night while teaching elementary school. She married John Zaccaro, a realtor, and raised three kids in Kew Gardens, Queens, while practicing law part-time.

  More photos and interactive graphics  

Ms. Ferraro started out in public service as an assistant district attorney in Queens, N.Y., appointed in 1974 by her cousin, district attorney Nicholas Ferraro. She helped set up a special victims bureau and concentrated on sex crimes and violence against children and the elderly. She had a hard-nosed reputation.

In 1978, she won election to Congress, running under the slogan "Finally, a tough Democrat." The White House took a special interest in the race, sending the President's mother, Lillian Carter, to campaign alongside Ms. Ferraro.

In Congress, she was a protégé of House Speaker Tip O'Neill and exercised increasing influence in the party while being reelected in 1980 and 1982. She was deputy national chairman of President Carter's reelection committee in 1980, and served on the House Budget Committee. In 1984, she was named to head the platform committee for the Democratic National Convention.

Her selection as vice-presidential nominee was meant as a game-changer in an election where the Democrats lagged badly. President Ronald Reagan was well ahead in the polls. 

Ms. Ferraro proved a game campaigner, and duked it out with Vice President George Bush in a debate remembered most strongly for a remark Mr. Bush's wife, Barbara, made in the days leading up to it. Asked to describe Ms. Ferraro, Ms. Bush said, "I can't say it, but it rhymes with 'rich.'"

But sex proved less of an issue in the election than Ms. Ferraro's personal finances, including her husband's tax returns. Mr. Zaccaro was eventually sentenced to community service for misstating his personal wealth when applying for a loan. 

On election day, voters went for the Republican ticket by a 59-41 percent spread, including 55 percent of female voters, and a 525 – 13 electoral vote margin, the largest in history.

Although out of Congress, Ms. Ferraro campaigned for female Democratic candidates, and in 1992 attempted to engineer a political comeback by challenging Republican Senator Alfonse D'Amato. She lost in the primary. Later, she floated campaigns for mayor of New York City and governor of New York state, but found little traction. She officially retired from politics in 1998.

Ms. Ferraro worked as cohost of CNN's "Crossfire" and continued to be in demand as a political commentator, and took a visible role in the 2008 Presidential election. While supporting Ms. Clinton's campaign (she eventually endorsed Mr. Obama), Ms. Ferraro criticized press scrutiny of the Republican nominee for Vice-President, Sarah Palin, the first woman on a presidential ticket since herself. 

"I want her to do well," Ms. Ferraro said of Ms. Palin, on an interview on NBC's "Today." "I think when a woman stands up there, it's important for little girls to see someone there who can stand toe to toe with the guy who's been in the Senate for 38 years and running for vice president."

Addressing a symposium on women and the Constitution in 2008, she added, "Every time a woman runs, women win."

 Write to  Stephen Miller at stephen.miller@wsj.com 