Fake fur is in such bad taste. And that's just what I love about it. As Diana Vreeland once said, "never fear being vulgar, just boring." Well, fear no more. The breed once reserved for ladies of the night is on the backs of stylish girls from the Rue Saint-Honoré to Madison Avenue. 

It's not like they can't afford the real thing—fakeness is a status symbol in itself, a wink among confident taste makers. In step with fashion's love of contradiction, the faux du jour isn't meant to look real, really—aping Chewbacca more than Russian sable.



So just who is leading this game-changing charge? For starters, Karl Lagerfeld went whole hog (or shall I say teddy bear) on the Chanel runways last fall, with head-to-toe looks of shaggy polar bear-esque pile. Alber Elbaz followed suit with his brilliant Lanvin for H&M collaboration, which flew out of stores faster than you could say "mink" (though not before Tory Burch snatched up a specimen). At French luxury house Nina Ricci, artistic director Peter Copping cut cropped jackets and lined cardigans with the stuff for his fall collection. He could have used anything, but "there is something cooler about the way it looks," he said. "It still looks imitation, which I kind of like. It offsets things a little for me." For his 2011 pre-fall collection, Mr. Copping will continue the trope. "I wanted to create a piece that looked fur-like but wasn't," he said. The influencer of all influencers, Pheobe Philo is also onto the idea. Her pre-fall collection for Céline (hitting stores this June) will include a curly coat of wool fashioned to resemble fur. She'll also offer shearling, fox and other less imaginary creatures. 

And although the idea feels very now, there is precedent for such cheap chicness. Style pioneers such as Blondie and Kate Moss have long been fans of the faux. In mid-century Paris, créateurs like Courrèges and Cardin took advantage of the newfangled synthetic fur, cutting boxy jackets in unnatural, almost blinding brights. And in the 1980s and '90s, rule-bending fashion forces like Thierry Mugler, Sonia Rykiel, Comme des Garçons and Yohji Yamamoto played make-believe to incredibly sophisticated ends.

And although wearing faux has always been cruelty-free, now more than ever, it's about making a splash. "It feels like an art movement even," said Patricia Mears, a curator at the Fashion Institute of Technology. "Designers are challenging the eye on what is real and what is fake," she said, citing the influence of Miuccia Prada's Fall 2007 collection, which included lamb's wool dyed bright orange and green, resembling Austin Powers's car upholstery. It's not surprising, then, that Ms. Prada, along with other designers known as much for their wit as their sartorial skills (Isaac Mizrahi and Scott Sternberg, to name two) have also made colorful wares in real pelage. But my favorite pelts were the ones dyed bright to look as fake as a Muppet. Peter Som's turquoise tie-dye mink stole my heart and Ms. Prada's "Sesame Street" fur stoles for spring are already cult classics.

It's official, the Fraggle look is all the rage, and I'm loving every minute of it. My Asos faux fur mittens go anywhere I do—and are even more fetching with my curly lamb jacket. And my Old Navy "shearling" boots carried me through the recent Manhattan snowfests in style. What a breath of fresh air the resurgence of faux has been, proving a sense of humor is as valuable (stylistically at least) as a flagrant display of wealth. Or, as Mrs. Vreeland might have said, "Too much good taste would be boring." And we wouldn't want that, would we?

—Ms. Goodman is a freelance fashion editor and brand consultant in New York.