An American who converted to Islam and married an Algerian man pleaded guilty Tuesday to a terrorism conspiracy charge in U.S. court in Philadelphia.

Jamie Paulin-Ramirez of Leadville, Colo., who was charged with one count of conspiracy to provide material support to terrorists in an indictment filed last April, faces as long as 15 years in prison.

Prosecutors said Ms. Paulin-Ramirez, 32 years old, traveled with her husband and young son in September 2009 to Europe, where she planned to train with jihadists. They said she was recruited by another U.S. woman, Colleen R. LaRose, who was known on the Internet as "JihadJane" and who pleaded guilty last month in Philadelphia in connection with a plot to kill a Swedish cartoonist.

Ms. Paulin-Ramirez voluntarily returned with her son to the U.S. last year after she, her husband and others were detained in Ireland in March 2010 as part of an alleged global terrorism plot.

In April, she entered a not-guilty plea silently, in response to a request by her attorney, who was concerned the government could compare her voice to recordings it might have as part of its electronic evidence.

The government said in its change-of-plea memorandum, filed Tuesday in Philadelphia, that if the case went to trial, it would present "extensive" electronic evidence, as well as witness testimony, to prove her part in the scheme.

Ms. Paulin-Ramirez's lawyer, Jeremy Ibrahim, didn't immediately respond to messages Tuesday seeking comment.

"Today's guilty plea by Jamie Ramirez, coupled with that of Colleen LaRose last month, underscores the evolving nature of the terrorist threat we face," said Todd Hinnen, acting assistant attorney general for National Security, in a statement.

Ms. LaRose of Pennsburg, Pa., pleaded guilty to all four counts against her in the terrorism conspiracy. In doing so, she admitted to federal prosecutors' accusations that she "worked obsessively on her computer" to recruit people to wage violent jihad in Europe and South Asia, and that she agreed to murder the cartoonist, whose drawing of the Prophet Muhammad had offended some Muslims.

 Write to  Vanessa O'Connell at vanessa.o'connell@wsj.com 