It's striking how often children's books are turned into franchises after the deaths of their creators. Laurent de Brunhoff made a career from perpetuating the "Babar" books conceived by his father, Jean. New picture books featuring Curious George continue to appear, illustrated by various artists "in the style of H.A. Rey," although Rey himself died in 1977. And now John Bemelmans Marciano has generated a third wholly original "Madeline" story to sit on the nursery bookshelf beside those by his grandfather, Ludwig Bemelmans. For "Madeline at the White House" (Viking Children's Books, 48 pages, $17.99), Mr. Marciano has folded together ideas and images from Bemelmans's unfinished works to create a familiar- feeling picture book that is lovely to look at, if rather odd to read aloud.

As ever, the principal character is a sturdy-hearted redhead who lives with a nun, Miss Clavel, and 11 other girls in "an old house in Paris that is covered with vines." In this story, Miss Clavel brings her charges to springtime Washington to cheer up the lonely First Daughter. Mr. Marciano delightfully echoes his grandfather's manner of illustration with exuberant black lines that create space and form for dollops of watercolor. And like his forebear, he is no prisoner of strict poetic meter, e.g.: "The White House Easter celebration / Is the most fun festival in the nation." For all its visual sumptuousness, though, "Madeline at the White House" is oddly unsatisfying: Events simply happen to the children rather than being generated by them.

It seems that a fez-wearing magician-rabbit has stowed away in Madeline's suitcase, and on the night after the White House Easter Egg Roll he conjures "something awesome: A magic tide of cherry blossom!" Madeline, the rabbit and the president's daughter are swept up on a beautiful pink foam, out of the White House, past the Lincoln Memorial and over the Capitol. They're back at dawn, and Madeline catches the return flight to Paris. The author has sound historical reasons for this storyline—in an afterword, he explains that Ludwig Bemelmans had hoped to collaborate on a "Madeline" book with Jackie Kennedy and that his grand father was working on a book about a magician when he died in 1962. But for many young readers the effect is likely to fall somewhere short of magical.

It's not magic but dreams that influence a child in "Harry & Hopper" (Feiwel and Friends, 32 pages, $16.99), a bittersweet picture book about loss by Margaret Wild. Australian illustrator Freya Blackwood's charcoal drawings of Harry and his beloved dog, Hopper, look light and hasty, as though the two of them are leaving ghostly afterimages of themselves in the air as they move. It's a kind of visual foreshadowing, for, as we read: "One afternoon when Harry came home from school, there was no Hopper waiting by the gate. No glad yelping. No loving lick of the tongue." Harry's father explains that there's been an accident and that Hopper is dead. Harry is stricken; he dreads going to his own bed, where every night he and his dog had "gazed at each other, their eyes gleaming with mischief and delight." Instead, he falls asleep on the sofa but soon wakes to a sound from outside. Hopper! The two friends rush outdoors for a joyful romp in the moonlight. The next morning, Harry wonders: Was it a dream? Hopper returns the next night, but he isn't "quite as solid, or quite as warm." As time progresses, Hopper recedes until he is just a wraith and Harry finally can say goodbye. The subject makes this an atypical bedtime read, but there will be comfort in it for any child who has lost someone he loves.

On to the jollier topic of wild creatures and the great outdoors, with "Snow Rabbit, Spring Rabbit: A Book of Changing Seasons" (Knopf, 24 pages, $15.99). It's well-trod terrain, but Korean artist Il Sung Na's marvelous illustrations lift this simple picture book from the realm of the ho-hum. "When snow falls to the ground and all the trees are bare, everyone knows it's winter . . . including the rabbit," the story begins. This rabbit, a plump, white, pink-cheeked fellow, becomes a child's guide to animal behavior when cold weather sets in. "Some fly away from the cold," we read, as a "V" of geese flies across a golden sky. "Some have a long, cozy sleep where they live," the text goes on to say, as we see the rabbit peeping into a cave filled with snoozing bears. Mr. Na's drawings have a delicious iridescent quality: Whether he is drawing rocks or a squirrel's fur, every surface is stippled and curlicued in a way that will draw in even the very youngest children.

The Spanish illustrator Carmen Segovia has created a beautifully spare winter landscape of white, red, blue, black and gray for "Brownie Groundhog and the February Fox" (Sterling Children's Books, 24 pages, $14.95), by Susan Blackaby. When Brownie steps out of her snug den into the "sweet, cold" air one February day, she is annoyed to see her shadow. "Shadows mean more winter, and more winter means waiting. Wait, wait, wait," she complains, stamping her foot. "Phooey!" Overhearing her little outburst, a hungry fox pounces: "Hold still," he pants, "I'm trying to eat you for breakfast." It's a tense moment for readers ages 4 to 9. But both author and illustrator deftly play down the bloodthirsty implications. The quick- thinking Brownie tells the fox not to be silly; it's too late for breakfast. Soon he has missed lunch, and by suppertime the erstwhile predator finds himself tied to a tree enjoying "a tasty tip of soaky toast" dipped in cocoa and fed to him not by his prey—but by a friend.

—Mrs. Gurdon's reviews of children's books appear regularly in the books pages of the Weekend Journal.