BERLIN—Germany's controversial ex-defense minister Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg plagiarized swathes of his doctoral thesis "intentionally," according to the university that awarded him his doctorate.

The finding by a panel of University of Bayreuth academics is a further blow to the reputation of Mr. zu Guttenberg, who was Germany's most popular politician, and was increasingly seen as a likely heir to Chancellor Angela Merkel, until the plagiarism scandal forced him to resign in March.

The charismatic 39-year-old politician, a conservative aristocrat from Bavaria, still has legions of fans in Germany who hope he will make a political comeback. The university's ruling is likely to make that more difficult, observers in Germany said.

Mr. zu Guttenberg has insisted that he didn't mean to copy passages by other authors, and that he failed to attribute such passages properly only by accident. The university panel categorically rejected his explanation in a report partially released on Friday.

"Mr. zu Guttenberg … crudely abused and intentionally deluded the standards of sound academic practice," the academics wrote in their report. Mr. zu Guttenberg's 475-page thesis on constitutional development in the U.S. and European Union was rife with instances of "intentional academic misconduct," the report says.

The university had already temporarily suspended Mr. zu Guttenberg's doctorate title during its review, and is expected to strip him permanently of his doctorate when it releases its full report on Wednesday.

Doctorates are keenly sought by members of Germany's political and business elite as a sign of seriousness and intellectual clout. Mr. zu Guttenberg's faux pas has raised questions here about how many other politicians may have taken short cuts to academic honors.

Mr. zu Guttenberg's thesis received the highest grade of "summa cum laude" from the university in 2007 and he went on to become the country's most popular politician while serving as economics and then defense minister under Chancellor Merkel.

This February a Bremen law professor discovered that sections of the dissertation matched passages of previously published articles. German newspapers and bloggers pored over the thesis, eventually pinpointing scores of passages that appeared to have been brazenly lifted from other sources without attribution.

Mr. zu Guttenberg initially defended his work and Ms. Merkel stood by him, loath to losing a key draw for conservative voters. But eventually media pressure and the evidence against him became too great. On March 1 Mr. zu Guttenberg said he was withdrawing from politics because the scrutiny had made it impossible to adequately perform his ministerial duties.

 Write to  Patrick McGroarty at patrick.mcgroarty@dowjones.com 