  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.,
GS


0.97
%




 seeking to beat back criticism that it abused its muscle and trading savvy to put its own interests ahead of clients, agreed to release details on how and where the Wall Street giant makes its money.

In a 63-page report released Tuesday, Goldman says that for the first time in its 142-year-history, it will start disclosing how much revenue comes from the firm's own trading and investing. 

The reporting change, which comes after an eight-month review and a bruising lawsuit against the firm by the Securities and Exchange Commission, will begin with Goldman's fourth-quarter results later this month. The firm's power and motives have been repeatedly questioned since the financial crisis erupted, in part because Goldman weathered the mess far better than most banks and securities firms.

But the 39 changes set to be adopted by Goldman don't include an overhaul of its operations or management, as some of the company's harshest critics demanded. For example, some corporate-governance experts have said Goldman Chairman and Chief Executive Lloyd C. Blankfein should step aside or at least give up his post as chairman. Mr. Blankfein's future isn't addressed in the report, but the company has said investors and clients support him.

Other changes include procedures to make sure the firm doesn't take advantage of clients, even accidentally. Thousands of Goldman clients will be put into a "matrix" that defines each client's level of "sophistication." That process will determine which types of transactions are most "suitable" for the client. Those wanting to breach those limits will need special approval from Goldman. 

The firm also moved to reduce some of the power of its trading desks, which became the dominant force inside Goldman in recent years. Traders have been blamed for creating some of the most toxic securities in the financial crisis. Goldman traders created the collateralized debt obligation called Abacus 2007-AC1, leading to the SEC lawsuit last April. 

"Our history of good performance through the crisis became a liability as people wondered how we performed so well and whether we'd received favorable treatment from well-placed alumni," Mr. Blankfein told about 470 of the firm's partners at a Stamford, Conn., hotel where the report was presented Monday. "This was not only a poor place to be, it was a dangerous place to be."

Some Goldman executives predicted that the changes will help heal its battered reputation with clients and the general public. U.S. regulators were notified about the findings.

The review by the company's Business Standards Committee was launched in May, shortly after Goldman was accused of fraud by the SEC. In July, Goldman reached a $550 million settlement with the SEC.

In the report, Goldman said it is taking steps to reduce the firm's exposure to potential conflicts of interest. From now on, traders and brokers will be barred for 30 days from writing anything "expressing a view" about a deal or client for which Goldman is the underwriter. But those employees still will be allowed to communicate orally about the company's deals. Goldman critics are likely to call that provision a hollow victory.

"Let's hope that this is more substance over form," said Charles Elson, director of the John L. Weinberg Center for Corporate Governance at the University of Delaware. "The question is, are they changing the culture, or is it a forum to respond to public concerns? If there is a substantive change, that's great."

In an interview, Michael Evans, who led the 17-person committee and is a Goldman vice chairman, said the process leading up to the report included heated debate inside the firm and input from hundreds of clients. One Goldman partner said the financial-reporting changes were particularly controversial because some Goldman executives are worried that the firm will be left at a competitive disadvantage to rivals like J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. and Morgan Stanley that don't provide a similar breakdown of revenue when they report results. 

"This gets to the whole issue of transparency and disclosure," said Mr. Evans, Goldman's top executive in Asia. "It's how we present ourselves to the market and to shareholders." 

Goldman traditionally has been aloof and seemingly impermeable to outside criticism. The firm lost few clients as a result of the Abacus suit and scrutiny of the firm's behavior before and during the crisis. But executives were surprised by a client survey that showed anger and mistrust toward Goldman. "It is not an initiative to get back to where we were, but an initiative to elevate the standards of the firm," Mr. Blankfein said, according to a person who attended Monday's meeting. "You should take any breach of these standards very seriously. This firm has one reputation: yours."

As part of the financial-reporting changes, Goldman will now report revenue in four business groups, instead of three. Most importantly, revenue from trading done on behalf of clients will be separated from revenue generated by Goldman's own holdings of stock, bonds, real estate and other investments. The change is in part an effort to dispel suspicions that Goldman trades on information it gets from clients and investment-banking deals.

In another move to make its operations more transparent, Goldman plans to publish a simplified balance sheet, in addition to the balance sheet it already files to meet accounting standards. The new format will classify the firm's assets by business unit, including cash and liquid securities, and Goldman's funding of hedge funds and derivatives clients. The goal is to make it clearer what business Goldman conducts on behalf of its clients and what are its own investments. The changes also affect how it discloses holdings of securities and loans held in the firm's own investment account and private-equity funds.

From now on, structured-finance deals like Abacus will be pieced together by Goldman's investment bankers, not traders. Goldman executives want such deals to come from the longtime relationships with clients that bankers are meant to prioritize over short-term trading gains. In the Abacus deal, a Goldman trader created the CDO partly to help a hedge-fund client bet against the housing market. As part of the settlement, Goldman said it made mistakes in its handling of the deal.

It will take 15 to 18 months to implement the changes in the report, said Mr. Evans, who will oversee the effort. A permanent version of the committee will be led by Goldman President and Chief Operating Officer Gary D. Cohn. Since Mr. Blankfein announced the panel's creation in May, it has held 17 meetings involving 130 partners and managing directors, said one partner involved in the process.

 Write to  Liz Rappaport at liz.rappaport@wsj.com 