You might expect a Nokia executive to tell us the mobile industry will change the world. But  Rich Green, chief technology officer at Nokia, makes a compelling case. "If you can change Egypt with 140 characters written on a four inch screen," he says, "what can you do with a PC substitute in one out of every four hands?" The revolution in mobile technology is just one form of disruption that will change profoundly the way the world does business in the future. But in all its varying guises, disruption was the number one rated topic by the Tech Leader Group.

If you need evidence of how the television landscape has been transformed by new technology, look no further than pay-TV operator BSkyB's viewing figures for the first episode of the hit U.S. series Boardwalk Empire. Of the total 1.9 million viewers, just 26% watched the first transmission live, with the remainder viewing by time-shifted recording, second showing, or online. News Corp, which owns Dow Jones &Co, the publisher of The Wall Street Journal, has a 39.1% stake in BSkyB.

"Sky has embraced digital as an opportunity rather than a threat," says BSkyB's director of product development, Brian Lenz. "Clearly when you're first to innovate, you need to be prepared to invest and take risks . . .our subscription business model encourages us to do this. The other way to monetize innovation is to offer it on a bonus basis, such as being able to access our programs out of home. 

"Digital innovation can be trickier in the free-to-air world. If your business is built only around advertising and big linear audiences, having those audiences fragment to new platforms and devices can be challenging. 

"High definition is another example where up-front costs aren't necessarily rewarded with new audiences or revenue streams. As a subscription business, we don't really mind where the customer accesses Sky content, whether it's during linear broadcast, online, via an Xbox or through an iPad. We just want them to access Sky content." 

Over at the licence-funded BBC, commercial imperatives and inhibitors may be absent, but the drive to innovate is just as strong, with initiatives such as the iPlayer and a growing online archive. "We are in the business of telling great stories," says the BBC's director of digital media, Ralph Rivera. 

"And it is part of our remit to get our stories out to as many people as possible. Within the BBC the shareholder equals the licence fee payer equals the viewer, which gives an opportunity to maximize shareholder value by maximizing the viewer's experience through the use of whatever technology is available. The dilemma of turning analogue dollars into digital dimes does not apply. 

"That said, one of the things that we shouldn't lose sight of is that linear TV continues to grow. We can talk about the impact of disruptive technology but the fact is that linear TV is doing very well." Chief among Mr Rivera's challenges is to bridge the divide between search, social media and editorial curation. "If you're strong in algorithmic search and social search it's more difficult to bring in strong editorial curation," he says.

"There are so many types of disruption that often you only realize it's ongoing or occurred in the rear view mirror," Mr. Green says. "We are on the verge of an accelerating series of discontinuities." In the case of mobile technology, he believes it will ultimately prove disruptive enough to re-invent not just business, but the world as we know it. 

  Chris Dedicoat, president of European Markets for Cisco, says: "New technologies will challenge existing business orthodoxies and organizations will need to evolve their business models in order to achieve sustainable and profitable growth." 

The disruption to some industries has already been felt. The media industry has seen a massive outflow of revenue through challenges from the likes of e-commerce giant Craigslist. According to the Newspaper Association of America, advertising revenues for U.S. newspapers peaked in 2005 at $47.4 billion (€32.7 billion) after almost unbroken growth from 1950. Within five years the value was slashed to just $22.8 billion, less than half, and it continues to fall. But even more significant challenges lie ahead. According to a recent McKinsey analysis, the fundamentals of business itself are challenged. The precept that the users of a service are the ones who pay for it has been shattered by  Google. Business school orthodoxies of strategic planning cycles are threatened when the rate of change of technology means market-shifting changes take place within a typical strategic plan.

Indeed, Google's mobile operating system, Android has, within only a couple of years, disrupted the industry landscape to such an extent that the world's largest handset maker, Nokia, was forced to seek an alliance with  Microsoft
MSFT


0.33
%




 to survive in the very market that it once ruled. One beneficiary of this change has been the Chinese telecom manufacturer Huawei. According to  Tim Watkins, vice president of Western Europe for Huawei: "The main disrupter will be speed-to-market of new innovations. Duration of product life cycles will likely change the game substantially and those businesses which can adapt and retire non-relevant products and services quickly will prevail," he says. This point is echoed by  Dirk van den Berg, president of Delft University. 

"Business orthodoxies will be challenged by modern communication technologies, further outsourcing and subdivision of production, access to much larger markets, and dropping technology costs. This will result in increased innovation rates and shorter product cycles." The common thread that runs through all this change is that so much of modern enterprise is now digitized that there is a need to re-examine how all the data generated interacts with the world around us. With decreasing product cycles, increasing global competition, and mutating business strategies the ability to get business information in real time from vast amounts of data becomes a key business tool, says  Oliver Bussmann, chief information officer of SAP.

  Dr. Michael Lynch, the co-founder and chief executive of Autonomy, says there is not only a quantitative shift in the nature of business information but also a qualitative shift, with layers of metadata, such as geo-data, becoming increasingly significant. 

"For the first 50 years or so the IT industry has been about defining real world problems very rigidly and laying them out in a database. But the real world doesn't work like that," says Dr. Lynch. "What we are seeing is an explosion of human-friendly information on the little machines we carry about in our pockets – an iPhone is all about little bits of video and audio and text."

Dr. Lynch's proposition is founded on meaning-based computing. "We are about to enter a period of extreme disruption again," he says. "The whole way things are done is going to change. There's always a difference in the technology world between positioning, where someone realizes that something is a good idea, and the reality of being able to do it. Now, technology has caught up with dealing with the real world.

"In social media at the moment, there's a lot of positioning going on. But the reality is to do with the scale of the information and the rate it's growing. You have to use technology that can actually understand meaning, which is very difficult for social media. The word 'wicked', for example, could appear in three different Tweets with a different meaning each time. The simplest way of explaining why this is so important is that all the changes in the history of IT have so far been about the T. What we are talking about is the first change of the I."

See the full Tech Council report.

