The 87 new Republican lawmakers who will be sworn in Wednesday represent the biggest GOP class in decades, and many are eager to show they're revolutionaries eager to turn the Capitol upside down.

But this group is marked by another notable feature: Many are novice politicians with significant experience in industries they will now help regulate. This real-world experience, in the long run, may prove a more enduring feature of the new House majority.

Rep. Michael Grimm of New York will regulate Wall Street almost a decade after he went undercover to bust rogue traders. Rep. Steve Fincher brings years as a farmer in western Tennessee to his new post on the Agriculture Committee. Rep. Tim Griffin of Arkansas will sit on a committee that investigated his hiring as a U.S. attorney during a scandal that dominated Washington for months in 2007. And Rep. Bill Flores, who spent three decades in the oil and gas industry in Texas, will soon help oversee drilling in the Gulf of Mexico.

"My background will be very helpful," Mr. Flores said of his appointment to the Natural Resources Committee.

Voters chafing at what they saw as Democratic overreach into the economy picked a slew of candidates who promised to champion the interests of business.

See the average age of the House of Representatives and the Senate, from 1949 to 2011.

Take a look at Republican lawmakers who are taking the reins of key House committees.

Mr. Flores said he ran for Congress, in part, because he was angry that Democrats passed legislation to set limits on carbon emissions. He wants to see the Obama administration allow new oil and gas wells in the Gulf of Mexico. He said it was "incredibly naive" to put natural resources off limits.

At the same time, the experience opens members to criticism from Democrats who say they're too cozy with their former industries. Rep. Steve Stivers of Ohio was tagged by his Democratic opponent during the campaign as "bank lobbyist Steve Stivers," a reference to his former job as an executive for Chicago's Bank One Corp. Democrats reprised the attack when he was awarded a seat on the Financial Services Committee.

"Republicans have put the foxes in charge of the henhouse so they can make sure the special interests are protected," said Jesse Ferguson, a spokesman for the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee.

The freshman class is full of firebrands brimming for a fight. Many have vowed to repeal the health-care law, and a large number favor a national sales tax over the current tax code.

Others have promised to vote against a measure expected in the spring to raise the federal limit for borrowing, even though the White House has said that failure to do so would send markets into a tailspin.

More incoming Republicans requested seats on the relatively powerless Budget Committee than the all-powerful Appropriations panel, according to leadership staff, evidence that spending taxpayer money doesn't have the allure it once had.

Some freshmen will sit on committees that oversee policies they know from their pre-Congress work lives.

"It's fair to say that many of us were sent here or ran on a platform of reducing government spending," said Arkansas's Mr. Griffin. "We need to demonstrate we can make tough choices."

The class isn't all outsiders. New Hampshire Rep. Charlie Bass was swept out on an anti-Republican wave in 2006 and swept back in again last year amid a more favorable environment. New Mexico Rep. Steve Pearce also returns after leaving Congress to pursue a Senate bid two years ago.

Some of the new members come to Congress with years of legislative experience at the statehouse level—a more typical resume for new members that isn't as prevalent in this class. Diane Black's experience in the Tennessee state Senate helped her score a seat on the powerful tax-writing Ways and Means Committee.

But many will call on careers outside politics to inform their work on Capitol Hill.

Mr. Grimm, a former FBI agent, spent two years undercover as a hedge-fund manager in New York. He had a corner office in a Manhattan high-rise with a view of the Statue of Liberty.

"I really lived the life of a hedge-fund guy," he said.

He wore a wire under his clothes to collect information that eventually led to the successful prosecution of more than 50 traders and other financial professionals.

The experience made him more sympathetic to Wall Street, not less, he says. As a member of Congress, and member of the House Financial Services Committee, he wants to streamline regulations that govern financial markets. He's studying the Dodd-Frank bill that revamped those rules.

The rules, he says, don't matter as much as their enforcement, because criminals will just figure out how to break them.

And the New Yorker, who represents Staten Island and parts of Brooklyn, doesn't like watching his hometown industry get demonized.

"Most of them are hard-working, good, honest people," he said.