As India has emerged as an economic world power, it has started to produce literature with striking similarities to the writing in America during the industrializing dawn of the 20th century. Aravind Adiga's "The White Tiger" (2008) recalls the seething and retaliatory class resentment of Upton Sinclair. The Mumbai mean streets in Vikram Chandra's "Sacred Games" (2007) could have come straight from Herbert Asbury's novelistic "Gangs of New York." And now Bharati Mukherjee's "Miss New India" echoes Theodore Dreiser's "Sister Carrie"—it's about a young provincial woman who seeks her fortune in the big city. 

Ms. Mukherjee's upwardly mobile heroine is 19-year-old Anjali Bose, who comes from a tight-knit Bengali backwater town. Anjali, living at home, is on track for an arranged marriage, but when her father backs the marital candidacy of a monstrous man who rapes her on their first outing, she runs away to Bangalore, the Silicon Valley of the Asian subcontinent.

 By Bharati Mukherjee  Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 328 pages, $25

Anjali finds room and board in a Raj-era estate where King Edward VII supposedly once dined. But to Anjali and the other bright-eyed "freshers" in Bangalore, the house is an absurd, cobwebbed relic. The future for them is in information technology, and the ultimate goal is "to be one of the people being waited on in upscale shops."

The liveliest scenes of "Miss New India" follow Anjali's training at a customer-support call center. She is assigned the name Janey Busey from Rock City, Ill., and told to hone her accent and colloquialisms to mollify testy American callers, but it turns out that Anjali is too brash for such work. She falls in with a dubious modeling agent called "the Bengali Svengali" and with female friends in a seamy underworld.

But here Ms. Mukherjee loses the courage of her convictions. Instead of a naturalistic portrayal of a dangerous passage through Bangalore, "Miss New India" turns into "The Perils of Pauline." Every time Anjali gets into trouble, she is rescued by a dashing newspaper columnist called "Mr. GG," who admires her "halogen smile" and finds plenty to enjoy about her body as well. Ms. Mukherjee has convincingly set her book in a rapidly modernizing metropolis, but the oddly antique plot ends up making "Sister Carrie" seem more modern than ever.