If you're in the finance industry, there's a simple way to make your clients a lot happier: speak English.

Read the complete Investing in Funds report. 

Too often, when an adviser or some other pro talks to an investor, the result is glazed eyes and shuffling feet. And "finglish" is to blame, says  Scott West, head of consulting at Invesco Van Kampen Consulting, a unit of fund manager Invesco Ltd. There's too big of a gap between financial jargon and what normal people speak.

"You've basically got a language problem," Mr. West says.

Invesco just completed a survey of 800 investors to find out which words and techniques work best, and which don't. The results were loud and clear: Investors hate jargon and technical language.

Finance people may talk about "equities," "fixed income" and "asset allocation." Normal people talk about stocks, bonds and diversification. When Invesco tested the phrase "institutional-quality money management," one focus-group member asked why prison inmates were handling the money.

Oh, and that grating buzzword "solutions" is all played out, Invesco found. People just want to hear your strategy. 

But financial pros need to do more than just speak plainly, says Mr. West. The survey found some other key elements to successful communication.

 Be positive. Stop it with the "fear-based communications," Mr. West says. Customers don't want to be "scared into buying investments…. Instead they want a realistic, optimistic tone." Don't tell them they'll end up in the poorhouse if they don't buy a product. Balance the downside with the upside.

 Be plausible. Don't try to sell them the moon. After the past decade, and especially the past few years, they're not buying. These days, they're more interested in a "comfortable" retirement than a "dream" one.

Similarly, the term "financial security" was better received than "financial freedom," by 85% to 15%. In the late 1990s, a majority were dreaming of "financial freedom."

 Offer personalized benefits. Turns out customers don't want to hear big-picture economic forecasts or other predictions. By a thumping 60% to 16%, investors are far more interested in hearing about what a company or adviser can do for them.

  William Lutz, professor emeritus at Rutgers University and a co-author of the Securities and Exchange Commission's Plain English Handbook for the finance industry, concurs with the advice. "Put yourself in the other person's place," he urges. "I don't think financial people do that." Too often, he says, "what they're trying to do is impress, not to communicate."

 Mr. Arends is a personal-finance columnist for The Wall Street Journal. Email him at brett.arends@wsj.com. 