 Kay S. Hymowitz writing in the Winter 2011 issue of City Journal: 



"[C]alm and collected" are not the words that come to mind to describe the feminist response to the governor from Alaska [Sarah Palin]. The young feminist Jessica Grose, writing on the popular website Jezebel just after the Republican convention, was—well, we'll let her describe it: "When Palin spoke on Wednesday night, my head almost exploded from the incandescent anger boiling in my skull. . . . What I feel for her privately could be described as violent, nay, murderous, rage." 

However excessive their frothing, feminists had good reason to be in panic mode. Palin may have lost her bid to become vice president; she may have failed to appeal to such prominent conservatives as Peggy Noonan, George Will, and Karl Rove, as well as to lesser right-of-center mortals like this writer; but by leading a wave of new conservative women into the fray, she has changed feminism forever. In fact, this new generation of conservative politicas—having caught, skinned, and gutted liberal feminism as if it were one of Palin's Alaskan salmon—is transforming the very meaning of a women's movement. 

Not that the new crowd of right-wing women were ever explicitly hostile to feminism. On the contrary, they often embraced it, and for liberal feminists, that was precisely the problem. Breaking ranks with most of the conservative female political players who had come before, Palin eagerly paid homage to the movement. She gave thanks for being able to "stand . . . on the shoulders of women who had won hard-fought battles for things like equal pay and equal access."But liberal feminists were troubled by much more than conservative women's wanting to crash the party. What threatened feminism as we knew it was the Palinites' fundamental beliefs about the nature of the American social contract.

For one thing, the Palinites had little interest in women's issues, conventionally understood. The newcomers weren't talking about child care, parental leave, equal-pay initiatives, or any other issue on the familiar agenda. They were talking about government debt and patronage, about TARP and bailouts and excessive regulation. The Palinites have introduced an unfamiliar thought into American politics: maybe a trillion-dollar deficit is a woman's issue. 