CAIRO—At 10 p.m. on Tuesday, the day of mass protests that thrust Egypt into turmoil, about two dozen people on a package tour organized for University of California, Berkeley alumni landed at Cairo Airport. 

The graying group of Cal Bears—most of whom had graduated in the 1960s, when the campus was a hotbed of student activism and the site of regular clashes with police—was told upon arrival that Egypt's biggest demonstrations in decades were building and that their hotel was in the thick of the action.

"Everybody on the bus said, 'We're used to tear gas, we're used to protest. We went to Berkeley in the 1960s,' " said Robert Sproul, class of 1969, a retired ad executive who is now the vice president for alumni development at Berkeley's Boalt Law School.

Egypt's tourism industry has grappled with disarray as travelers have attempted to flee. Foreign governments have sent planes to pick up their nationals as the turmoil on the ground has turned fatal—with the death toll reportedly now surpassing 100 amid a weekend of clashes between protesters and security forces.

On Wednesday and Thursday, however, the Berkeley tour group stuck to its itinerary, visiting historic mosques and the Egyptian Museum, with its rich collection of Pharaonic artifacts.

On Friday morning, a day when opposition groups had called for a so-called day of rage, Mr. Sproul's group visited the pyramids. By early afternoon, much of the city was consumed by clashes. They returned to their hotel, the Semiramis Intercontinental, which towers above the city's central Tahrir Square. Dozens of protests around the city were converging there.

The group discussed whether to venture back out. Most chose to stay in the safety of their hotel rooms. One proposed relocating to a safer hotel in the suburbs. 

Mr. Sproul wasn't having it. 

"There was no way I was going to give up my front-row seat on the revolution to sit in a mall in the suburbs and wait for a plane out of here," said Mr. Sproul, who sits on the board of Save the Redwoods and speaks wistfully of his desire to see U.S. youths protest income inequality and "unjust wars" in Iraq and Afghanistan. 

"I still have the fire in my belly," said Mr. Sproul, who traveled to Cairo with a book called "When that Rough God Goes Riding—Listening to Jim Morrison," an analysis of the lyrics of the former Doors lead singer. "I get upset about things. There's a lot of injustice still." 

Three others, all non-Berkeley grads, said they would join him. They included Susie Maloney, a Texan nuclear physicist who had worked for Los Alamos, the government nuclear laboratory, and later for Lockheed Martin, a major government weapons maker. Frank Swofford, a former assistant secretary of the Navy in charge of arms procurement, also went out for a look.

Unlike Mr. Sproul, Mr. Swofford said he wasn't much for demonstrations back in the day. "We were more law-and-order types." During the protests of the 1960s, he said, he often "wondered what the heck is this all about?"

Outside, the four approached the 26th of July Bridge, where police were battling protesters with tear gas and rubber bullets. The protesters' goal: Take Tahrir Square, just outside the group's hotel. "Before we even stepped off the curb, we see the tear gas and all the carryings on," said Ms. Maloney. 

The four approached the police lines and took some photos before being shooed away. They watched the rest of the drama from their hotel balconies. 

Tom Maser was among those who decided to stay in the hotel. "It's not our business, it's not our fight," he said. "What's going on here today is much more serious, much more dangerous for the people...than what we went through in the '60s."

Mr. Maser said he enrolled in UC Berkeley in 1960, and "finally finished" a decade later with a degree from San Jose State in 1969. In those years he said he was teargassed on multiple occasions. Now, he had his 13-year-old grandson in tow.

"His mother would have shot me had I gone out there," said Mr. Maser. He added: "I hadn't smelled tear gas for a long time."

On Friday night, protesters overpowered the country's internal security forces. The army deployed in the streets of Cairo for the first time in a quarter century.

The following morning, Mr. Sproul strolled through Tahrir Square, littered with charred shells of cars and debris. Protestors remained there, amid the tanks, continuing to demand Mr. Mubarak's ouster.

A young Egyptian protester, Abdel Fahim, approached Mr. Sproul holding a stolen shield ripped off from riot police and waving a U.S.-manufactured tear gas canister. "This is the freedom you bring," he told Mr. Sproul.

"The American people are different than the American government, just like here," Mr. Sproul shot back.

But as protestors began to mass nearby shouting angry slogans, Mr. Sproul decided to play it safe. "Once you've been in a few riots, you learn, stay clear of the thick of it," he said. "Because crowds can work themselves up into a frenzy and bad things can happen." 

 Write to  Charles Levinson at charles.levinson@wsj.com 