BANGKOK—Former Thai leader Thaksin Shinawatra's lawyers Monday said they have filed a petition to the International Criminal Court in the Netherlands to investigate the way Thailand's security forces suppressed massive street protests in the Thai capital last year. The move could embarrass the country's army-backed government and further fray nerves in a country still coming to terms with the extent of last May's violence, in which 91 people were killed and hundreds more injured.

It's unclear whether the court will accept the petition; Thailand isn't one of the 144 members of the International Criminal Court at the Hague. Some analysts portrayed the petition as a way to seek to invigorate a fresh round of antigovernment protests in Bangkok or otherwise generate publicity for Mr. Thaksin, a former prime minister deposed in a 2006 coup.

The petitioners, though, argue that the ICC can still launch an inquiry because they say Thailand's current Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva is a British citizen, and Britain is a member of the court. Mr. Abhisit, who was born in Britain, where his parents were working as doctors, Monday told reporters he holds Thai nationality. Officials in his office said separately that he holds no current ties to Britain, and that when he studied at Oxford University, he did so as an overseas student.

A spokeswoman at the ICC said the court generally doesn't comment on individual petitions.

Acting on behalf of the opposition United Front for Democracy Against Dictatorship, or UDD, Mr. Thaksin's lawyer Robert Amsterdam drew parallels between the antigovernment protests in Bangkok last May and the current unrest in Egypt, where street protesters are rallying against the government of President Hosni Mubarak.

"We can see they are reading from the same script," Mr. Amsterdam said in a videoconference call from Tokyo. "This case represents a historic opportunity for international justice to confront governments who deploy their militaries to use violence against their own citizens."

The International Criminal Court was established in 2002 as a permanent tribunal to prosecute human-rights violations and war crimes when national judicial systems are unable or unwilling to investigate these crimes. So far, the court has indicted 16 people from northern Uganda, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African Republic, the Darfur region of Sudan and Kenya.

The UDD's efforts to add Thailand's government to that list is partly an attempt to highlight the lack of progress of Thai investigations into last year's violence. Mr. Abhisit's government created an independent commission to examine the causes of the bloodshed, but its members have complained that police and army officials have been slow to cooperate. Officials at the security services couldn't immediately be reached for comment.

Thailand's equivalent to the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation, meanwhile, is still investigating the military's role in the bloody crackdown.

"We are appealing to international justice to put an end to Thai impunity," said UDD leader Thida Thawornseth, the wife of detained protest leader Weng Tojirakarn, who is one of 19 activists being held on terrorism charges.

Thai government officials didn't immediately respond to requests for comment on the petition filed with the ICC. Mr. Thaksin, a powerful businessman who now lives overseas to avoid imprisonment on a 2008 corruption conviction, also couldn't be reached for comment. He has previously denied any wrongdoing.

Last year's protests triggered the worst political violence Thailand has seen in decades. Funded in part by populist-minded Mr. Thaksin, demonstrators garbed in red massed in Bangkok to press for new elections and urge Thailand's armed forces and powerful elites to give up their political roles here. Tens of thousands of "Red Shirt" protesters attended the rallies which lasted for more than two months and turned the city's commercial hub into a city-within-a-city, protected by sharpened-bamboo stockades and rubber tires.

As the demonstrations dragged on, they became increasingly violent, and the army began to take a more active role in pinning down the protesters. Some neighborhoods were cordoned off with razor wire and designated live-fire zones before the protests were finally broken up on May 19 amid bitter street clashes. During the aftermath, arsonists set shopping malls and the country's stock-exchange headquarters on fire.

The impact of the clashes continues to roil the country. Some opposition activists castigate local authorities for quickly prosecuting protest leaders while allegedly dragging their heels on the investigation in the military's role in the bloodshed. Red Shirt protesters still regularly take to the streets of Bangkok in preparation for new elections, which Thailand's constitution states must be called by the end of this year. Recent weeks have seen a pick-up in protests.

Mr. Abhisit has indicated that a fresh vote could be held as soon as the first half of this year, and his government has outlined a series of new, populist-style spending plans to win over Mr. Thaksin's supporters.

