The New Jersey Supreme Court said it needs more evidence of how reductions in the state's budget have affected public schools before deciding on a legal challenge to the cuts, according to an order released Thursday.

A court-appointed special master will hold a hearing Tuesday to determine whether a cut of roughly $1 billion in state subsidies to local school districts prevented the state from delivering "thorough and efficient" public education, as required in the state constitution. A decision could affect state spending in the upcoming budget.

An urban-education advocate had challenged Gov.  Chris Christie's cuts in the budget for this school year, saying the governor broke with a previous court order to keep school funding at certain levels.

The court heard oral arguments in the case earlier this month, part of the long-running Abbott v. Burke fight over school funding. Lawyers from the state attorney general's office argued that New Jersey was forced to make cuts of roughly $1 billion, depending on what funding is counted, because the recession squeezed tax collections and other revenue. The advocate, Newark-based Education Law Center, said the state was not providing enough money to deliver a constitutionally sufficient education.

The court appointed Bergen County Judge  Peter Doyne to appear in the role of special master. Judge Doyne also served as special master when the court in 2009 approved a new formula to calculate how much money was necessary for children's education.

The formula, developed under former Gov.  Jon Corzine, sends more money to districts with students with special needs, higher poverty or poor English skills. But the court said the state had to spend what the formula required for three years while the new system was evaluated.

In its order Thursday, the court said the state must prove that the current level of funding—more than $10 billion in local subsidies—is sufficient and that it cannot simply make comparisons between districts' funding.

Mr. Christie's budget for 2010-11, passed by the Legislature last June, reduced state subsidies by up to 5% of each school district's budget. That meant dozens of wealthier towns that rely less on the state saw basic funding completely wiped out, while urban districts saw the most dollars cut. 

Some school districts blame state budget cuts for teacher layoffs, higher fees and curriculum cuts.

Local school subsidies consume more than a third of the state's $29.4 billion budget, which is funded primarily through sales and income taxes.

The Supreme Court's decision could force the state to spend more money, upending the highly political budget process midstream. Judge Doyne must deliver his report by Mar. 31, more than a month after Mr. Christie's budget proposal is due.

The Legislature holds department-level hearings throughout the spring and must pass a budget before July 1. The ruling could also affect school budgets, which are voted on in late April and are based on the proposed state budget.

 Write to  Lisa Fleisher at lisa.fleisher@wsj.com 