  Research In Motion Ltd. warned of slack sales for its BlackBerry smartphones in the current quarter, sending its shares plunging.

The warning, just a month after the company reported earnings and gave a weak short-term outlook, is fresh evidence that RIM is struggling to compete with  Apple Inc.
AAPL


0.78
%




 and other smartphone makers, especially in the U.S. market.

The revision comes after a lackluster debut of the company's PlayBook tablet. The device went on sale earlier this month after delays and tepid reviews. But RIM said Thursday that early PlayBook sales were in line with its targets, which it didn't disclose.

The quarterly shortfall, RIM said, was mainly due to lower shipments of its BlackBerry phones and a greater reliance on sales of cheaper devices. The company is losing ground as new products are being delayed until later this year while RIM develops models with touchscreens and tries to shift to a new operating system.

"Yes this is a transition," said co-Chief Executive  Jim Balsillie in a conference call. "All things being equal, we would like this stuff to be earlier, but when you look at the performance of the Playbook….nobody doubts the absolute performance of that machine."

But Mr. Balsillie said he remains upbeat about RIM's outlook. "We have this company straight in the middle of the whole tablet mobile computing space," the executive said. 

"And we absolutely have a whole next generation of smartphones, so strategically we feel fantastic," he said, "Operationally, I don't like the fact that this stuff is pushed out so you have this transition."

The warning came at the same time one rival,  Motorola Mobility Holdings Inc.,
MMI


-1.43
%




 reported surging sales of new smartphones built on  Google Inc.'s Android software, such as the Motorola Atrix 4G.

Motorola said Thursday its revenue from mobile devices jumped 30% to $2.1 billion in the March quarter. The company said it shipped 4.1 million smartphones—up from 2.3 million a year earlier—as well as 250,000 of its Xoom tablets, which debuted Feb. 24.

  Sanjay Jha, Motorola's chief executive, said the Xoom's "reception has been very positive" and he expects smartphone shipments in the second quarter to increase from the first quarter.

RIM's warning comes just ahead of an annual conference for BlackBerry developers and customers next week in Orlando, Fla. RIM executives said Thursday they will provide more details on their product strategy at the event.

The Canadian company's shares fell $6.19 to $50.39 in after-hours trading. Before the news, the stock had gained 1.8% to $56.59 at 4 p.m. on the Nasdaq Stock Market.

For the quarter ending in May, RIM said it now expects per-share earnings of $1.30 to $1.37, down from the $1.47 to $1.55 projected last month. RIM also said it expects shipments of BlackBerry phones for the quarter to be at the lower end of the range of 13.5 million to 14.5 million it forecast in March. 

The company said the lower shipments and a shift to lower-priced models will result in revenue slightly below the $5.2 billion to $5.6 billion estimated forecast in late March. 

RIM said it expects to achieve full-year earnings per share of about $7.50, anticipating "strong revenue growth" in the third and fourth quarters of the fiscal year. In March, it forecast it full year earnings would be in excess of that target.

 Write to  Ben Dummett at Ben.Dummett@dowjones.com and Roger Cheng at roger.cheng@dowjones.com 