NEW DELHI—India's Communist party, struggling to maintain its once revolutionary appeal as the country modernizes and voters demand economic improvements, suffered two big electoral defeats Friday and lost its 34-year grip on power in the large state of West Bengal.

The All India Trinamool Congress party, led by rising political star Mamata Banerjee, soundly defeated a coalition led by the Communist Party of India (Marxist), delivering a major blow to the Left Front alliance that has been a fixture in West Bengal since 1977.

Ms. Banerjee, a fiery and mercurial politician known for colorful outbursts at her political opponents, has spent her career trying to oust the communists from power. She will become the state's next chief minister and will gain significant clout in New Delhi, where her party is a key ally of Prime Minister Manmohan Singh's ruling Congress party.

"This is a victory for democracy, a victory of the people," Ms. Banerjee told supporters at a victory rally outside her house in Kolkata Friday afternoon, adding that the results came after a "long struggle."

West Bengal is among four Indian states and one federal territory that announced election results Friday. The contests are, in part, a referendum on the Congress party amid a wave of corruption scandals and economic challenges including high commodity prices. The results offered some good news for Mr. Singh. Congress and its allies are expected to win a landslide in the northeastern state of Assam and a narrower win over another Communist-led coalition in the southern state of Kerala. 

  Highlights: State Election Results 

  Jayalalithaa to Take Helm in Tamil Nadu  

  For Singh, Victory Brings a Force to Reckon With  

  West Bengal Through the Crystal Ball  

  Rekindling Bengal's Economic Prospects  

  India Inc. Cheers Didi  

  'We Became Too Bourgeois'  

  Markets Cheer Strong Congress Showing  

  India Shares Rise on Election Results  

Congress did suffer one major setback in the southern state of Tamil Nadu, where its regional ally, the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam, lost and a rival party led by former actress J. Jayalalithaa came to power. The DMK is at the center of a criminal investigation into alleged graft in a 2008 government sale of mobile phone spectrum, a fact that political analysts said swayed voters.

The elections come as India's economic-growth engine has shown signs of sputtering. Mr. Singh's chief economic adviser recently lowered his estimate for gross domestic-product growth in the fiscal year ending next March to 8.5% from 9%. The central bank, reacting to 9% inflation, recently hiked interest rates more than expected, a move that could further hamper growth.

In West Bengal, the Trinamool Congress win amounted to a dramatic voter rebuke of 34 years of communist rule. The state, which has a population of more than 90 million, faces mounting economic challenges, with labor unrest and controversy over availability of land for factories—dynamics that have deterred industry from making investments there. 

The state is struggling to address high poverty and a crushing debt burden. The capital of Kolkata was ranked last out of 17 major Indian cities for ease of doing business, according to a recent World Bank report. Though West Bengal has a proud heritage, having produced great Indian cultural and intellectual icons including literary giant Rabindranath Tagore and Nobel Prize-winning economist Amartya Sen, it is increasingly regarded as one of India's economic backwaters, a region that has missed out on an era of industrialization and modernization.

The Left Front swept to power in West Bengal in 1977 behind Jyoti Basu, who led the state for 23 years. During the tenure of Mr. Basu, who died last year, the party enacted radical land reforms and created local democratic institutions to be governed by villagers and farmers, an experiment that was replicated throughout India. 

But over the time voters have grown more impatient with the state's sagging economic fortunes, while the appeal of Cold War-era Marxist slogans for peasant empowerment and the party's red hammer-and-sickle flag have faded. Following Friday's electoral defeats, the Communists now only rule in the small northeastern state of Tripura. 

In a statement, the CPI(M) acknowledged a "big defeat" in West Bengal, but added, "This will, by no means, make the Left policies and programmes irrelevant for the country." 

Ms. Banerjee, 56, known to her supporters as "Didi," or "Big Sister," began her career in the Congress party but broke off to form the Trinamool ("grassroots") Congress in 1998. She has a reputation for high drama—she once wrapped a shawl around her neck at a rally and threatened to hang herself to protest the Congress party's deals with the Communists. She eschews the ostentation favored by many other Indian politicians and is renowned for leading a simple life in Kolkata. According to her official party biography, she has painted some 5,000 paintings.

In 2008 she spearheaded a protest by farmers against the state government's acquisition of their land for an automotive plant to be built by Tata Motors. Tata relocated the plant—which produces the Nano mini-car—to the western state of Gujarat. That gave her a reputation in some quarters as an anti-development politician. 

But at dozens of rallies in the lead-up to last month's voting, sporting her trademark look of a simple sari and sandals, she promised voters major strides in development, including turning the tea-growing Darjeeling region into the "Switzerland of the East."

She recruited some well-known supporters from the business world and, in a sign that industry is cautiously embracing her, India Inc. welcomed her victory. "I believe the new government will work with industry to gain the trust," said S. Gopalakrishnan, vice president of the Confederation of Indian Industry.

Her election may also change the dynamics of national politics. Ms. Banerjee has been serving as the national railways minister, a post she is expected to relinquish. She may now, however, push for more Cabinet seats in New Delhi given the new power of her party. She said in a television interview that any discussion about Cabinet posts will come later. 

She could also use her increased clout to push back hard on Congress party reform proposals she disagrees with. She's had a much different stance from senior Congress leaders on the best way to enact land acquisition reform, which has lately become a hot-button legislative priority. 

"The trend was clear for the last two or three years that West Bengal was heading for change," said Kaberi Chakrabarti, a professor of political science at Calcutta University, noting that the Trinamool had a strong showing in the 2009 national parliamentary elections. She said the results were "more of an anti-left vote" than a sign of huge voter confidence in Ms. Banjeree's agenda.

—Megha Bahree in Mumbai contributed to this article.

 Write to  Amol Sharma at amol.sharma@wsj.com 