TOKYO—Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan said he wants to begin talks with the country's opposition parties on raising the nation's consumption tax, a divisive issue that threatens to erode the government's already low approval rating. 

Mr. Kan's willingness to delve into the thorny issue is a reflection of the toll that heavy debt issuance in recent years has taken on Japan's fiscal health. History suggests that the government's approval rating, already scraping near the 20% level, won't be helped by a bid to raise the 5% consumption, or sales, tax. 

"It is clear to everyone that we must debate a tax overhaul—including the consumption tax—from the perspective of the social security system and the necessary resources required," Mr. Kan said in his New Year's address Tuesday. "I would like to open nonpartisan consultations involving the ruling and opposition parties at the earliest date on social security and financing issues, and by around June, I want to offer a direction." 

The prime minister didn't offer any olive branch to the opposition in his speech. With a massive revenue gap at more than 50% of annual government spending and the need to increase funding for retirement and health-care entitlement programs, many government officials say there is little choice but to raise taxes. 

Social-security spending is estimated to reach a record 28.708 trillion yen ($351 billion) in a recently unveiled national budget for the next fiscal year beginning April, accounting for nearly a third of the whole budget. The amount is 5.3% larger than the current fiscal year. 

Japan's government can borrow to fund social-security programs, but with its debt now nearly twice the nation's annual economic output, pressure is mounting on the government to raise the consumption tax, which officials say tends to bring in relatively stable revenue even during economic downturns. 

It is unclear whether Mr. Kan can hold onto power long enough to see his plans through. The opposition, sensing a chance to bring down the government, has grown increasingly uncooperative, especially as it faces regional elections in the spring. 

After Mr. Kan's news conference, Sadakazu Tanigaki, head of the largest opposition group, the Liberal Democratic Party, demanded that the government first make clear its own tax plan, the Nikkei reported. The Social Democratic Party signaled it will oppose any increases in the sales tax, while New Komeito indicated it may join nonpartisan tax discussions. 

Mr. Kan failed last summer to rally support for higher taxes. Soon after he became prime minister in early June, he unexpectedly proposed that the current 5% consumption tax be raised to 10% in stages, and called for discussions on the matter. 

But opposition lawmakers and even some ruling party politicians opposed the idea. Legislators' enthusiasm toward tax increases also waned after the ruling Democratic Party suffered a crushing defeat in July's upper house elections, which many analysts say was caused by Mr. Kan's tax plan. 

Raising the consumption tax has never been easy for Japan's policy makers. In 1989, Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita saw his public approval rating sink when his LDP government introduced the tax at a 3% rate. In 1998, the ruling party lost an upper house election after Ryutaro Hashimoto's LDP-led coalition government raised the rate to the current 5%. 

 Write to  Takashi Nakamichi at takashi.nakamichi@dowjones.com 