The police officer best known for cracking the Zodiac killer copycat case 15 years ago has been named to work as an expert on the House Homeland Security Committee in Washington, marking the first such appointment for a New York City Police Department officer, The Wall Street Journal has learned.

  Joseph Herbert, a 53-year-old NYPD inspector who heads the department's Intelligence Operations and Analysis Section, has been chosen to work as a counterterrorism fellow on the Homeland Security Committee chaired by Long Island Republican  Peter King.

It is common for congressional committees to borrow staff from federal agencies, but Mr. King said he did not know of a prior instance where a local police official was assigned to such a committee. 

"As far as I know it's the first time something like this has been done, and I know it's a first for this committee,'' said Mr. King.

The committee has oversight of the Department of Homeland Security, which was created after the 2001 terror attacks. In the years since, the committee has seen a number of disputes over how federal aid for counterterrorism programs is distributed. New York Mayor  Michael Bloomberg has long argued the city has been shortchanged by federal spending formulas that don't take into account the risks the city faces of future attacks. 

"I think he will bring a sense of on-the-ground reality to give us firsthand knowledge as to what the threat is to local governments,'' the lawmaker said. "Probably the best thing about it is, he will be there to tell us if something sounds good on paper, but in reality it works differently.''

Mr. Herbert joined the NYPD in January 1981 and worked his way up all the ranks from patrol officer to inspector. He has been awarded 72 police medals in his career.

As a homicide detective in 1996 Mr. Herbert, who had previously been assigned to the Zodiac killer task force, recognized the handwriting on a confession written by a man who shot his half-sister as being similar to the handwriting used in the notes sent to police by the city's so-called Zodiac killer, who murdered three random victims and shot four others between 1990 and 1993.

The appointment of Mr. Herbert by Mr. King is also a nod to the effectiveness of the NYPD's counterterrorism program, which was created in 2002.

"If he had been here last year with the Times Square bombing we would have gotten much faster information than we did from the Department of Homeland Security,'' said Mr. King.

 Write to  Sean Gardiner at sean.gardiner@wsj.com and Devlin Barrett at devlin.barrett@wsj.com 