Every summer, thousands of cruise-ship tourists disembark at Skagway, Alaska, and take in "The Days of '98 Show." This long-running production depicts the rise and fall of Jefferson "Soapy" Smith, a real-life con man who made his living fleecing the prospectors who passed through Skagway in the late 19th century on their way to Canada's Yukon Territory—and the gold they hoped to find there.

Tourists who dip further into local lore may also encounter the name of George Carmack, the prospector who in 1896 filed the claim that touched off the Yukon Gold Rush. They are unlikely to hear anything about Charlie Siringo, a Pinkerton detective whose activities were largely confined to the Lower 48. But Siringo's memoirs do mention one case that brought him to Alaska. Eventually it brought writer Howard Blum there too, panning for narrative gold. "The Floor of Heaven" is the result.

Mr. Blum, a former New York Times reporter, specializes in nonfiction tales rooted in historical events. His previous book, "American Lightning" (2008), concerned the 1910 bombing of the Los Angeles Times Building during a labor dispute and traced the intertwining stories of three figures (including the attorney Clarence Darrow) at the center of events. 

The author takes a similar approach in "The Floor of Heaven," following detective Siringo, prospector Carmack and con man Smith on their separate paths to Alaska. He then brings them together for a climactic 1898 confrontation in Skagway Harbor—a confrontation that, alas, may have never happened. Indeed, the dubious climax of "The Floor of Heaven" undermines the credibility of an otherwise entertaining story.

There is no doubt that all three of Mr. Blum's main subjects led fascinating lives. George Washington Carmack was born in California in 1860, the son of a frustrated '49er. He and a few partners found gold near the Klondike River in Aug. 16, 1896, but word of their discovery did not get out until the spring of 1897, at which point Carmack became famous. Soapy Smith was among the many Americans who pricked up their ears when they heard the Yukon news. Born in Georgia in 1860, Smith was a gambler and a grifter who by 1897 had worn out his welcome in a succession of Wild West boomtowns, so he decided to go north and set up shop in Skagway.

Charlie Siringo also found gold in Alaska, but he didn't get to keep it. Born in Texas in 1855, Siringo was an ex-cowboy turned undercover operative for the Pinkerton agency. In 1895 he spent six months in Alaska tracking two thieves who had taken $10,000 in gold from a mine near Juneau. He cracked the case, retrieved the gold and sent the crooks to prison. But in Mr. Blum's telling the case didn't end there. Three years later, Siringo learned that one of the thieves had broken out of the penitentiary. So the detective headed back to Alaska to recapture the escaped convict.

 By Howard Blum  Crown, 420 pages, $26

Mr. Blum skillfully intercuts these plotlines, building momentum toward his big finish. His prose at times grows overripe, as when he describes a desperado "groaning for mercy, his gushing wounds spilling a river of wet, red blood into the sandy Texas street." But ripeness is all when it comes to Wild West sagas, so few readers will mind. More annoying is the author's tendency to leave his chronology vague: It is often hard to know the year when events occur. In any case, the plotlines converge in Alaska in 1898, and everything falls neatly into place, perhaps too neatly.

As Mr. Blum has it, Soapy Smith plots to rob Carmack of his gold, only to be foiled by Siringo and Inspector Zachary Taylor Wood of the North-West Mounted Police. The Pinkerton detective and the Mountie are escorting Carmack from the Klondike to Skagway, where they face down Smith and his gang. A tense moment ensues, but the timely arrival of Carmack's Indian friends forces Smith to back down. Eventually Carmack sails off to Seattle with his gold; Smith is gunned down by vigilantes; and Siringo tracks down the escaped thief and returns him to prison.

What is Mr. Blum's evidence for this climactic robbery attempt? "I set out to tell a story, to write a narrative history," he writes. "Therefore, I don't feel it would serve much heuristic purpose to list the hundreds of books and articles I consulted as I put this story together." Instead he lists the main sources for each of his 43 chapters, leaving readers to guess which book, article or archive was the source for a plot point or line of dialogue. Mr. Blum invites "the interested reader" to delve more deeply into the books he highlights.

OK, let's delve. First, concerning a relatively minor detail: Per Mr. Blum, Siringo was in deep mourning for his deceased first wife, Mamie, when he first went to Alaska. "Charlie missed Mamie every day," Mr. Blum writes. "He had agreed to take the case and go to Alaska for one reason: to forget." But according to "Charlie Siringo's West" (2005) by Howard R. Lamar—prominently cited by Mr. Blum in his list of sources—Siringo had recently remarried when he took the Alaska case. Mr. Lamar, for his part, says that Siringo was reluctant to accept the job because "he did not want to leave his new wife." It is unclear where Mr. Blum got his mourning theory. 

More important, Mr. Blum's big finish—the attempted robbery in Skagway Harbor—cannot be found in the books he cites for those chapters. To judge by a Google Books search through digitalized, full-text versions of the books, neither Siringo in his memoirs nor Mr. Lamar in his biography of the detective makes any reference to George Carmack or Soapy Smith. The Smith biographer whom Mr. Blum cites as his mainstay—Jeff Smith, Soapy's great-grandson—does not connect his con-man subject to any incident involving Siringo. Nor does James Albert Johnson make any reference to Smith or Siringo in his 1990 biography of Carmack.

An 1898 robbery attempt is described in detail in at least one article that Mr. Blum lists, from the Royal Canadian Mounted Police Quarterly. But this article, "Badman of Skagway Meets Insp. Wood," portrays Soapy Smith's intended victim as Inspector Wood rather than Carmack. (Wood was delivering Canadian government gold from the Yukon to Vancouver.) Carmack goes unmentioned in the article, as does Siringo.

This is no mere quibble. Without this robbery episode, Mr. Blum's central figures would never cross paths, and his carefully structured plot would fall apart. So what is his source? He never says. It might be one of the archives he consulted, which include Carmack's papers at the University of Washington (although James Albert Johnson consulted those papers too, while writing his Carmack biography, and apparently did not find the robbery attempt); or it might be another article he mentions: "Skagway Terror," from a 1957 edition of a pulp magazine called "Fury: Exciting True Adventures for Men," which is not available to read online.

Alternatively, Mr. Blum's source might be some other book or article that he does not mention. But that would be bizarre. Mr. Blum has supposedly uncovered an intensely dramatic episode involving three historical figures. One would expect him to trumpet that feat rather than bury his source. 

The mystery deepens for readers who delve into the autobiographical oeuvre of Charlie Siringo. Why would Siringo leave the 1898 Skagway incident out while devoting space to less dramatic anecdotes? Moreover, Siringo's memoirs "A Cowboy Detective" (1912) and "Riata and Spurs" (1927) place the detective elsewhere in 1898, and they make no reference to any hunt for an escaped convict in Alaska.

Mr. Blum explains that, in constructing his narrative, he had to choose among inconsistent accounts, some of which were not trustworthy. "I knew what I was getting into," he writes. "Yarns and tall tales are the stuff that has helped keep the Wild West and the far north alive in our imagination. In fact, these sources were my inspiration, too: I hoped to pay tribute to this proudly inflated yet iconic heritage." Fair enough, but Mr. Blum seems to want to have it both ways. He says that "The Floor of Heaven" was inspired in part by yarns and tall tales, but he also emphasizes its historical accuracy.

"This is a true story," Mr. Blum asserts, and no wonder: There is a large market for compelling historical narratives that can be billed as true stories, and Hollywood producers have already acquired the rights to "The Floor of Heaven." Filmmakers are usually allowed to take a few liberties in the service of art, hence the phrase "based on a true story." But nonfiction authors are held to a more rigorous standard.

Mr. Blum's title, by the way, is taken from the line in a scene from "The Merchant of Venice" where Lorenzo invites Jessica to admire the starry sky: "Look, how the floor of heaven is thick inlaid with patterns of bright gold." An attempt to suss out Mr. Blum's sources brings to mind a different scene and a different line from the same play, when Bassanio tells Antonio: "His reasons are as two grains of wheat hid in two bushels of chaff: you shall seek all day ere you find them, and when you have them, they are not worth the search." 

—Mr. Lewis is a writer in Ojai, Calif.