JERUSALEM—Israel's navy seized a freighter off the country's Mediterranean coast Tuesday, saying it was delivering a large quantity of weapons from Syria with the potential to give Palestinian militants in the Gaza Strip new strike capabilities against Israeli targets.

Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said he ordered the takeover after receiving intelligence about the shipment. "The only certain thing is the source of the weaponry was Iran, and there was a Syrian relay station as well," he said.

Images released by the military showed that naval commandos met no resistance while boarding and inspecting the Victoria 200 miles offshore. Col. Avital Leibovitch, an Israeli military spokeswoman, said at least three shipping containers of weapons had been found and that hundreds of other crates would be inspected after the vessel is escorted into the Israeli port of Ashdod.

Col. Leibovitch said an initial check found as many as four shore-to-sea Chinese-made C-704 missiles with Persian-language documents describing the weapons' technical specifications. She said the missiles had a range of 20 miles and would have given militants the ability to hit vessels off Gaza, hampering Israel's ability to patrol the territory's Mediterranean coastline.

"It is a strategic weapon,'' she said. "It was never in Gaza before."

The freighter had sailed from the Syrian port of Latakia and stopped in Mersin, Turkey, before heading toward Alexandria in Egypt, the military said. There was no sign that Turkey or Egypt was involved in the arms shipment, it added.

Militants in Gaza, a coastal enclave ruled by the Islamist group Hamas, use a network of tunnels to smuggle weapons from Egypt. Israeli officials say weapons smuggling from Egypt has increased since late January, when a popular uprising against President Hosni Mubarak prompted the government there to withdraw some police forces away from the Gaza border.

Israel maintains a land and naval blockade of Gaza to isolate Hamas, which is hostile to Israel and backed by Syria and Iran. 

The Victoria is a German-owned freighter that is operated by a French company and sailing under the Liberian flag, the military said. The Israeli army said the weapons, which also included mortars, were concealed in crates listed in the ship's manifest as carrying lentil and cotton.

In November 2009, Israeli commandos seized the Francop, a freighter the Israeli military said was carrying hundreds of tons of Iranian arms, including rockets, to Lebanon's Hezbollah militia, which is also hostile to the Jewish state.

—Joshua Mitnick contributed to this article.

 Write to  Richard Boudreaux at richard.boudreaux@wsj.com 