SYDNEY—Australia's leading economists and traders were left in a conundrum Friday after the government's statistics agency said data from areas affected by the country's devastating floods won't be used in certain government reports for the time being. 

The decision by the Australian Bureau of Statistics comes as most of Queensland state remains a natural disaster zone and flooding worsens in other eastern states. Given the impact on its operations and data collection, the bureau made the decision to suspend data collection until Jan. 31 in affected areas, while adding the release of some data may be delayed by up to two weeks. 

A spokesman for the bureau said delays weren't likely for major economic indicators but couldn't rule out the possibility. Next week's heavily watched producer price and consumer price indexes will be released on time, on Monday and Tuesday respectively, he added. 

The delays come as economists and investors try to keep a wary eye on Australian inflation. Prices have been rising as a global commodities boom revs up Australia's minerals-dependent economy, leading to forecasts that Australia's central bank will continue to raise interest rates. 

Economists in the country were taken aback by the possibility of delays or insufficient data collection, with traders noting unreliable data would likely give an advantage to larger research firms with big-enough economics departments to gauge the impact of the floods before that impact is released in official government data. 

"You can be sure the [Australian dollar] will get belted around when these numbers come out. It's just going to add to the volatility," said Annette Beacher, head of research with TD Securities in Singapore. 

The statistics bureau, which added it will continue to provide updates on its website should further delays occur, said it will adapt statistical methods to take account of the additional loss of source data wherever needed. 

"After this time, the situation will be assessed twice weekly to determine whether normal data collection activities can resume in these areas," the ABS said. "The suspension of activity means that there is likely to be a significant level of under-reporting in ABS surveys that are in the field during this time."

Still, economists were concerned that the ABS' decision would exaggerate market reactions on upcoming data as the unreliability of the figures cast a cloud of uncertainty on results. 

Bank of America-Merrill Lynch and Australia & New Zealand Banking Group Ltd. have said the rebuilding costs from the floods could reach as much as 20 billion Australian dollars (US$19.7 billion), with a hit to coal mining and agricultural revenue likely to reach more than A$5 billion, according to analysts. 

"Clearly, the data is going to be even harder to read in the months ahead, not only as a result of how the likes of spending, employment, production and prices will be affected in the aftermath of the floods, but also actual data collection difficulties," said David de Garis, senior economist with National Australia Bank. 

—David Rogers contributed to this article. 