ISTANBUL—One day after Brazil and Poland raised their key interest rates, Turkey's central bank on Thursday took the opposite tack and cut. The move underlined the different strategies that emerging-market policy makers are taking as they grapple with rapid growth and volatile investment flows.

The Turkish central bank cut its policy interest rate by a quarter of a percentage point to a record low of 6.25%, surprising markets, which had expected the bank to sit tight after cutting the rate by a half-point last month. 

The Turkish lira fell 2.3% to $1.584 after the bank's decision Thursday.

Despite Turkey's near 8% growth expected to be reported for 2010, the bank has embarked on a complex policy of cutting interest rates—to curb the inflow of speculative investment—while raising reserve requirements for commercial banks to rein in an expanding consumer-credit boom. 

The Turkish move appeared to be in stark contrast to other emerging markets, which have started raising their key interest rates to head off inflationary pressures, while damping consumer demand. 

Analysts said the central banks are effectively choosing different ways to tighten monetary policy, analysts say. That is because the scale of the increased reserve requirements that Turkey was implementing—with more expected Friday—meant that overall, Turkey's central bank was actually tightening monetary policy.

"The decisions show monetary policy is tightening in increasingly different ways across the emerging markets," said Neil Shearing, emerging-markets economist at Capital Economics in London. "Turkey has been creative while Brazil has been more traditional; it's all a question of managing inflation and inflows of capital." 

On Wednesday, Brazil raised its benchmark rate a half-point to 11.25%, and said that would likely mark the beginning of a new cycle of monetary tightening. Poland's central bank governor Marek Belka signaled more cuts would follow his bank's quarter-point rise to 3.75% on Wednesday. 

And in Russia, First Deputy Central Bank Chairman Alexei Ulyukayev on Thursday said he now sees inflation as a higher risk than slowing growth, increasing the chance that the Russian central bank will raise interest rates next week, too.

Brazil and Poland are reacting to rising price pressures and inflation rates already above their central bank targets.

Turkey, by contrast, appears to have chosen its mix of apparently conflicting tools because it is less threatened by inflation than it is by an inundation of speculative investment flows that are financing a ballooning current-account deficit—a mismatch of imports and exports that has led to the Turkish economy's undoing in the past. Inflation is currently at a record low of 6.4% year-on-year in December.

Low interest rates in major economies such as the U.S., the U.K. and the euro zone have pushed investors to search for higher returns elsewhere in the past year, sending capital flooding into fast-growing emerging markets like Turkey. These money flows tend to pump up asset prices but threaten to dry up quickly due to their short-term nature if risk sentiments shift, potentially triggering a crisis in their wake.

Turkey's economy is particularly exposed to these speculative inflows, which finance a rising proportion of its mushrooming current-account deficit. 

That deficit more than tripled in November versus a year ago to a hit a record $5.9 billion as imports outpaced exports by a factor of 10, according to Turkey's official statistics agency Turkstat. 

Turkish policy makers insisted Thursday that "additional measures" would be taken to limit credit expansion, stressing that: "The net effect of the measures which have been taken or are envisaged under the new policy is tightening." 

 Write to  Joe Parkinson at joe.parkinson@dowjones.com 