For the next 10 weeks, prosecutors will battle Galleon Group founder  Raj Rajaratnam in courtroom 17B in lower Manhattan. But they will win or lose the insider-trading case in a nearby "war room."

That is a nondescript conference room in the Manhattan federal courthouse, lined with boxes of evidence and a snack-strewn table, where three prosecutors will strategize, likely long into the night, preparing for the next day's hearing.

Seventeen months after bringing charges in the largest insider-trading case in decades, the pressure is on the U.S. to prove its case against Mr. Rajaratnam. The trio of prosecutors, who sometimes lunch over Cuban sandwiches near the courthouse, are Manhattan U.S. Attorney  Preet Bharara's go-to team for insider-trading cases. 

Two of the prosecutors— Jonathan Streeter and  Reed Brodsky—have won convictions in the three insider-trading cases that have gone to trial in recent years in Manhattan. 

The trial of Mr. Rajaratnam got under way Tuesday with the beginning of jury selection. Over the next day or so, the government and a defense team from Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLP will assemble a 12-member jury to decide the fate of Mr. Rajaratnam, who could face more than 20 years in prison if he is convicted on all 14 charges of criminal securities fraud and conspiracy.

Mr. Streeter, a 43-year-old avid water-skier who will deliver the opening statement in the case, is "unflappable," said former prosecutor  Marc Mukasey, who worked with him at the U.S. attorney's office until 2005. Mr. Brodsky, 41, a former Wilmer Hale lawyer who colleagues describe as more demonstrative, will deliver the closing arguments.

  Andrew Michaelson, who is on loan from the Securities and Exchange Commission as a "special assistant" U.S. attorney, has been involved in the case since 2007 and will join Messrs. Brodsky and Streeter on the trial team. Mr. Michaelson, a 35-year-old senior SEC counsel, will assist in interviewing and cross-examining witnesses, people close to the situation say. 

The Manhattan U.S. attorney's office declined to comment, as did Messrs. Streeter, Brodsky and Michaelson.

Prosecutors have faced criticism for their handling of the Galleon case and investigation, which could introduce tension in the courtroom between the two sides. 

John Dowd, Mr. Rajaratnam's lead attorney, attempted to persuade the judge overseeing the Galleon case to throw out wiretap evidence, asserting the government left out details about a cooperating witness's history and was dishonest when applying to a judge for the wiretaps.

U.S. District Judge  Richard Holwell, who is overseeing the case, criticized the government for "glaring" omissions in its applications but allowed the recordings to be admitted as evidence. 

More broadly, prosecutors have been successful in recent years in insider-trading trials held in Manhattan federal court. Mr. Streeter, deputy chief of the criminal division, won a conviction in a 2009 insider-trading case, in which the government's success hinged on the testimony of a cooperating witness whose credibility was under attack by the defense.

The case involved insider-trading charges against former Ernst & Young lawyer James Gansman, who the government said had tipped a Pennsylvania broker, with whom he had had a romantic relationship, on pending corporate takeovers.

Mr. Gansman's lawyer, Barry Bohrer, questioned the credibility of the witness, who he said had offered "several versions of the truth by the time she pulled onto the witness stand." Mr. Streeter convinced the jury that the witness finally was telling the truth, Mr. Bohrer said, telling them that the witness wouldn't let everything go up in smoke by telling a false story here. 

"He had a good rapport with the jury," Mr. Bohrer said. 

Mr. Dowd is expected to argue that the information passed to his client was part of a "mosaic" of research, rather than inside information, that was assembled by the hedge fund as a normal part of doing business, lawyers say.

This will mark the second major insider-trading case to go to trial in which the defense has made such an argument.

The first case was an October 2010 trial, led by Mr. Brodsky and another prosecutor, of Joseph Contorinis, a former fund manager at Jeffries Group Inc. accused by prosecutors of participating in an insider-trading scheme that involved $7 million in illicit profits. 

In that case, Mr. Contorinis's lawyer argued that some of the data described as inside information by the government were already known or not material. Mr. Brodsky convinced the jury otherwise. 

In February 2008, Mr. Brodsky also won a conviction in an insider-trading case against Hafiz Muhammad Zubair Naseem, a former Credit Suisse Group investment banker who was charged with tipping off a Pakistani investment banker about pending mergers.

In that case, which hinged on circumstantial evidence, Mr. Brodsky continued to uncover new leads and witnesses even after the trial had begun, a former colleague says. 

The case against Mr. Rajaratnam grew out of an SEC investigation into alleged insider trading at Galleon. 

The criminal investigation got traction after Mr. Michaelson turned up a piece of evidence in 2007 that ultimately led to the charges against Mr. Rajaratnam. 

 Write to  Susan Pulliam at susan.pulliam@wsj.com and Chad Bray at chad.bray@dowjones.com 