I received an email over the weekend from the college-age son of a friend who wanted advice on breaking into journalism. If I had any advice, it would be to do something else for a while, develop an area of expertise. Journalism loves experts, whether real or imagined, probably because the craft seems so amorphous. I came to it in my late 20s from the New York City Department of Correction where I'd risen to the evanescent rank of "Acting Director of Public Affairs." Nonetheless, newspapers and magazines assumed I had to be an experienced hand at crime and incarceration, and I landed a few early assignments.

Another piece of advice would be to read good books, if for no other reason that if you're going to be writing all day you should have fun doing so. My hunch is that the masters, even those who descended into drink or worse, derived some sustenance, some spiritual reprieve from a felicitous turn of phrase. 

And if I had to suggest just one book to read? Based on the pithy philosophical insights in this column you probably think I'm going to say "The Brothers Karamazov." Or because of its transparent fascination with status and wealth "The Great Gatsby." But no. My favorite book, and one I've been thinking a lot about lately, because I need to buy a baby gift, is "One Fish Two Fish Red Fish Blue Fish" by Dr. Seuss.

For those who haven't picked it up in a while, and I heartily encourage you to do so, it's about a lot more than fish. It's also about a Zans who opens cans, a Gox who likes to box, and a Yink who likes to drink. Indeed, "He likes to wink and drink pink ink."

I know what you're thinking. With all the great books in the Western literary canon what kind of fool and moron am I that I'd pick a book that asks: "Why are they sad and glad and bad? I do not know. Go ask your dad." And if I'm so keen on Dr. Seuss what about "Horton Hatches the Egg?" Or "Scrambled Eggs Super?" Or "Yertle the Turtle."

I'll return to one or more of these titles momentarily, but I decided to traipse over to Barnes & Noble to see how or even if Dr. Seuss books are selling these days. I also searched their Amazon rankings but came away suspicious. "One Fish Two Fish" is ranked 1,067th in books, beating "The Cat In the Hat" by almost a thousand places. That's as it should be. However, I have the feeling that the cat is the more popular book in most households. I'd never have let that cat into my house. He was an operator. He broke things. I got in more than enough trouble breaking TV sets and light fixtures while playing ball in my bedroom with my brothers. We didn't need anybody's help.

But Dr. Seuss is still selling. Indeed, one of the first books I spotted as I entered Barnes & Noble, not far from another page-turner, Keith Richards's "Life," was the "Party Edition" of "One Fish." It boasted a gold rather than the iconic eye-popping yellow cover. I'm not sure what I think of this. Actually, I know what I think. I hate it. It should be removed from the store's shelves immediately. Would someone take Picasso's Demoiselles d'Avignon and tint it blue? Of course not.

Ditto the "One Fish" "Nursery" version I stumbled upon in the children's book section. The nursery version? The original is already nursery enough. How much more simplistic can you get than, "Black fish, blue fish, old fish, new fish?" And the multicolored plastic fish it has running on a track along the top? So what if they're safe, sturdy and nontoxic. They're also sacrilegious.

"Dr. Seuss is always one of our great sellers," reported Alissa Nigro, one of Barnes & Noble's booksellers. Indeed, she confided she loves the author so much that her voice teacher bought her "Oh, the Places You'll Go!" when she graduated from Tufts. Ms. Nigro suggested several titles for further reading—"Fox in Socks," "Ten Apples Up On Top," and "There's a Wocket in My Pocket."

I'd personally also recommend "Thidwick the Big-Hearted Moose," an early work, to anybody who's ever had a bad roommate. Not to give the plot away, but a bear, a bobcat, a turtle, a hole-boring woodpecker and a swarm of 362 bees move into the moose's antlers, not one offering to split the rent. 

"Horton Hatches the Egg" always brings tears to my eyes at the unrepentant selfishness of Mayzie, the avian who abandons her egg to poor Horton whiles she parties in Palm Beach. Finally, there's the "Grinch Who Stole Christmas." Utterly apart from the story's moving message about the holiday season, you get to watch great writing in action. For instance, after the misanthropic Grinch sends Cindy Lou Who back to bed with a cup of water and a lie, he burglarizes her family blind. "Then he did the same thing to the other Whos' houses leaving crumbs much too small for the other Whos' mouses!"

I can see Dr. Seuss smiling, scratching his head, and saying to himself, "Not bad! Not bad!"

So why then is "One Fish Two Fish" the greatest of them all? 

Because of its chorus, its buoyant, life-affirming, eternal message. Indeed, my wife and I once hired an artist to stencil it in our foyer: "Today is gone. Today was fun. Tomorrow is another one. Every day, from here to there, funny things are everywhere."

Unfortunately, the artist ran off with our cash and never painted the hall. Which somehow proves Dr. Seuss's point.

— ralph.gardner@wsj.com 