It's time to shut up about Rex Ryan shutting up.

Never going to happen. Rex Ryan isn't going to hear your shushing and fretting and suddenly transform into a mumbly Robert DeNiro. (Ever read an interview with Mr. DeNiro? Brilliant actor; loquacious as a soup spoon.)

But Mr. Ryan? He's Robert DeNiro on Sodium Pentathol, 16 Red Bulls, and maybe a Four Loko. He's a gusher, an emoter, a playoff-bound Big Top. He's the Motor Mouth in Magic Khakis—a 24/7 Barbara Walters Special, permanently ready for his close-up.

With Mr. Ryan, there's no such thing as a Need to Know Basis. Everybody Needs to Know, All the Time.

Of course, now we're the City That Knows Way Too Much. As a rookie head coach last season, Mr. Ryan's cockiness played well as he took an overachieving, afterthought team within a half of the Super Bowl.

But Mr. Ryan supersized the act in Year Two, as if he felt he had to fill the New Meadowlands Stadium with his own swagger. The Jets agreed to a Nicole Richie treatment on the HBO series "Hard Knocks," and soon we learned that a microdose of Mr. Ryan goes an awfully long way.

Still, Rex kept being Rex. He openly touted his team for the Super Bowl. He kept nothing close to his sweater vest. Even in bleak moments (a December stomping from New England, various, uh, off-field distractions) he maintained his brashness. In a town that loves to daunt, he was undaunted.

Now, with the 11-5 Jets on their way to play Indianapolis in the first round of the postseason, there are calls for Mr. Ryan to find his inner Tony Dungy. Jets skeptics (Jets-tics?) are worn down by the Super Bowl chatter and the coach's ranting about a "personal" quest to beat Peyton Manning after losing to the Colts in the playoffs last year. They'd like to see Magic Khakis tone it down.

Forget it. Expecting Rex Ryan to tone it down is like expecting Bill Belichick to show up at the podium in Foxborough, cup a hand under his armpit, and start flapping an elbow.

As repetitive as it gets, there's method to Mr. Ryan's madness. Not long ago, the Jets were the much-mocked sports stepbrother in town, with a tormented fan base and history of comical heartbreak. The Giants used to send the Jets out to fetch the dry cleaning.

It took a human disco ball like Mr. Ryan to correct that imbalance. It might not have been the most courteous approach, but it successfully grabbed the spotlight. For the past several months, the Jets have easily been the biggest sports story in town—for better and worse, but mostly for better. Winning alone wouldn't have done this. It's heresy to say so, but the chaos burnished the intrigue.

Join Jason Gay and Nando Di Fino for a live chat on the NFL playoffs at noon ET Thursday. Send your questions in advance to sports@wsj.com.

There is something predictably New York about Rex Ryan fatigue. This is a city that loves to celebrate a big mouth, goad it to talk, and then, at the first sign of trouble, smack it in the lip, without any sense of self-awareness. That's what we do here. There are signs on all of the bridges.

The blowback surely doesn't surprise Mr. Ryan; he knew the risk. Football fans love to crow about the game's modern accoutrements—instant replays and so on—but every once in a while, an NFL personality gets a little noisy and we all turn into 17th century villagers.

The high road is a beautiful thing, but it can also can be pretty boring. Win, lose or obnoxious, Rex Ryan is never boring. 