KAMPALA, Uganda—Ugandan security forces fired at protesters in the capital and battled thousands of demonstrators who had turned out to welcome veteran opposition leader Kizza Besigye back from Kenya. 

The police beat supporters of Mr. Besigye who had gathered along the highway to the airport in an effort to disperse them and ease the flow of traffic, which was jammed for hours after the opposition leader's arrival, witnesses said. 

One person was killed when Ugandan security forces fired at the protesters in the capital, Kampala, said Fred Opolot, head of Uganda's state-run media center.

At least 23 people were injured in Thursday's violence, the Uganda Red Cross Society said.

Ugandan opposition supporters hurled stones at a car carrying Nigerian President Goodluck Jonathan as he visited Uganda to attend President Yoweri Museveni's swearing-in ceremony, a government spokesman said Thursday. Mr. Jonathan was among several African leaders visiting Uganda for Mr. Museveni's inauguration for a fourth term following disputed Feb. 18 elections. 

Mr. Besigye, who had sought treatment in Kenya for injuries suffered during his recent arrest, has rejected the election results, saying they were rigged in favor of the incumbent, and called for new elections. He has threatened to lead protests to oust Mr. Museveni. On Thursday, his Forum for Democratic Change ran a parallel inauguration ceremony for him in Kampala. 

Mr. Besigye has been repeatedly arrested in recent weeks for leading protests against high food and fuel prices. He suffered damage to his eyesight when police doused him with tear gas and pepper spray while detaining him late last month.

In his inaugural speech, Mr. Museveni pledged relief from the high prices. The government will study ways to stabilize food prices for urban dwellers and secure cheaper oil supplies, he said.

As he spoke, police officers and soldiers fired live rounds, rubber bullets and tear gas at supporters of Mr. Besigye who had gathered along the 25-mile highway to the airport to welcome the opposition leader home, officials and witnesses said. 

"There is a lot of firing at the crowds—it's terrible," said Anne Mugisha, deputy foreign secretary of the Forum For Democratic Change.

Police stopped Mr. Besigye about 15 miles outside the capital as he made his way to Kampala in a convoy of about a dozen vehicles, accompanied by thousands of supporters on foot. The police spokesman in charge of Kampala, Ibin Senkumbi, said the convoy was stopped to allow foreign leaders who had attended Mr. Museveni's swearing-in access to the airport.

Police spokeswoman Judith Nabakoba said the police "fired in the air" to disperse rowdy crowds who were "impeding traffic" on the busy highway to the airport. 

The standoff degenerated into a riot as supporters threw stones at security forces and police beat people up and fired at them in an attempt to disperse the crowd. At least one person was shot during the fracas, Ms. Nabakoba said.

Clashes also broke out near the venue of the opposition's scheduled parallel inauguration ceremony, causing widespread pandemonium in downtown Kampala. Mr. Besigye addressed the ceremony briefly before being driven to his home in the suburb of Kasangati, according to party officials. Mr. Besigye appealed to supporters to continue with the protests against steep food- and fuel-price increases.

An official of Mr. Besigye's party quoted him as saying that "the world now knows who the exact leader of Uganda is" after his welcome overshadowed the president's swearing-in ceremony.