  General Motors Co.
GM


-1.16
%




 tripled its profit in the first quarter, helped by stronger demand but mostly because the auto maker made money off the sale of its stakes in two former subsidiaries. 

Without those asset sales, GM's earnings disappointed investors and highlighted difficulties in its core North American operations and other units around the world. 

GM's income rose to $3.2 billion, or $1.77 a share, from $865 million or 55 cents a share, lifted by $1.5 billion in gains on sale of holdings in Delphi Automotive LLP and Ally Financial. Without those gains, its earnings before interest and taxes rose 18% to $2 billion, and North American profit climbed just 8% to $1.3 billion, less than analysts had expected. Revenue increased 15%, to $36.2 billion, from $31.5 billion.

"We are making steady progress, but there is more work to do," Chairman and Chief Executive  Daniel Akerson said on a conference call Thursday.

The auto maker expressed optimism about the rest of 2011, saying it expects a rise in operating profit for the full year. A gain would build on the $4.7 billion that GM made in 2010, its most profitable year since 1999.

Mr. Akerson, however, said "intensive cost cutting" is essential to ensure the future profit growth as rising commodity costs push up the prices GM is paying for finished parts and materials. The company also plans to pare incentive spending for the rest of the year. High discounts early in the year were one of the problems that hurt its North American profits.

Chief Financial Officer,  Daniel Ammann, said GM's forecast factors in high fuel prices, now at more than $4 a gallon in most of the United States. High gas prices tend to drive down sales of high-margin pickup trucks and sport-utility vehicles.

Even though consumers are downsizing their purchases, he said, many are opting for smaller SUVs, rather than cars, and those who are switching to cars are paying more for them. "It isn't all about people moving from large SUVs into cars," Mr. Ammann said.

In North America, GM had the benefit of rising demand. Truck production in the first quarter increased 18%, and car production 16%. Higher production lifts revenues because auto companies book revenue when a vehicle leaves the factory.

But steep discounts offered in January and February eroded its margins. Lower pricing cut its operating profit by $300 million, the company said. Including its special gains, GM's profit per vehicle in North America was $3,687; without them, it made just $1,653 per vehicle.  Ford Motor Co.
F


-0.51
%




 made about $2,806 a vehicle in North America in the first quarter.

GM shares were off 2.3%, or 77 cents, to $32.27 in recent New York Stock Exchange trading.

"A decent quarter but short of the upside we were looking for," Citibank analyst  Itay Michaeli said in a note.

 Track the performances of 150 companies as they report and compare their results with analyst estimates. Sort by date and industry.

The earnings report comes as the U.S. government looks to sell more of its stake in GM this summer. The auto maker returned to the public stock market with a $23.1 billion initial public offering in November. The U.S. government now owns 26.5% of GM, down from 61% after a $49.5 billion bailout of the car maker.

In briefing investors last fall, GM said the improving U.S. economy would boost its North American business, and forecast strong growth in fast-growing emerging markets including China. 

In the first quarter, GM's international operations unit, which includes China, India and Russia, posted a big drop in operating profit, to $480 million from $908 million. GM's Chinese joint venture with SAIC Motor Corp. saw its new-car sales jump 32% in the first quarter to 310,00 vehicles, but a second partnership, involving SAIC and two other companies, had a 3% decline to 376,000.

Mr. Ammann said growth in China has cooled off recently compared to an unusually strong quarter a year ago. "The China growth rate is at 10% to 15%, down from the 40% to 50% we've been seeing," he said.

In South America, a source of solid profits in the past, profits declined significantly in South America—to $90 million from $265 million a year ago. South America was hurt by fewer sales in Brazil and about $300 million of additional costs, including the hiring of 2,000 workers in Brazil.

GM again lost money in Europe, although the loss fell to $390 million from $477 million in the first quarter of 2010. Mr. Ammann said the company hopes to break even on an operating basis this year.

Despite GM's challenges, the company's earnings come as part of a broader revival in Detroit. Ford last month reported a robust first quarter, and Chrysler Group LLC on Monday said it produced a small profit, its first since exiting bankruptcy two years ago. GM's overall earnings, including the proceeds of its asset sales, topped those of Ford, which had first-quarter income of $2.6 billion.

The three Detroit auto makers are profitable even as gasoline prices have climbed sharply, a stark turnaround from the past when they made little or no money on cars and got most of their profits from big trucks and sports-utility vehicles. As part of their restructurings, all have lowered their fixed cost so that they can sell smaller vehicles profitably if rising gas prices dent demand for trucks.

In April, GM's U.S. sales surged 27%, helped by strong sales of passenger cars like the Chevrolet Cruze compact and an increase in sales to rental and corporate fleets.

 Write to  Sharon Terlep at sharon.terlep@wsj.com 