This season cop drama "Southland" had to kill off one of its most beloved characters (actor Kevin Alejandro had to leave for "True Blood"). So, in the last three minutes of the episode, Det. Nate Moretta says a friendly hello to a group of Hispanic gang members. They turn into an angry mob and beat him to death.

Don't expect bagpipes and a funeral procession. 

"Southland," whose season-three finale airs Tuesday, is one of a dwindling number of cop shows that can be called "gritty." Cops sometimes hit suspects. Kidnapped little girls wind up murdered; patrolmen pop pills. 

Police shows these days veer more toward techno-levity: CBS's "NCIS" and "CSI" win top ratings with guy banter, videogame-like labs and an easily digestible crime each week. The bad guy usually ends up behind bars.

The success of these shows has spawned more. In 2009 the highest-rated new show on TV was "NCIS: Los Angeles" starring rapper LL Cool J. In 2010 CBS launched "Hawaii: Five-0," a splashy reboot of the original. Detectives take on terrorism and murder, but still have time to surf. 

That's prompted some network executives to proclaim darker cop dramas dead on arrival. The current slate of pilots in development includes plenty of crime-fighting but few cops, and fewer of the species embodied by "Kojak" in the 1970s, "Hill Street Blues" in the 1980s, and "Homicide: Life on the Streets" and "NYPD Blue" in the 1990s. Then came cable shows like FX's "The Shield" and HBO's "The Wire." 

Recently, network shows that tried to tap into this same type of realism have faltered. ABC's "Detroit 1-8-7," shot amid the burned-out buildings of that city, isn't assured of a second season. Executive producer Jason Richman says that although ABC has deemed some topics "too dark," the show's fans "aren't telling us to make it lighter or fluffier." 

Fox's "The Chicago Code," from "Shield" creator Shawn Ryan, about a female police superintendent who takes on corrupt politicians, debuted last month to strong reviews but tepid ratings of just under nine million viewers, Nielsen Co. says.

"Law & Order: Special Victims Unit" is in its 12th season and trying to lure back its audience with guest stars like Jeremy Irons, Jennifer Love Hewitt and John Stamos. Last May then-NBC Entertainment chief Jeff Gaspin said the network canceled the original "Law & Order" in part because it was too dark. USA's "Law & Order: Criminal Intent" ends this year. 

"Southland" shoots on location in L.A. as cops solve crimes and deal with personal demons. Car scenes are shot using a small digital camera in the back seat, making viewers feel like they're on a shaky ride-along. 

"Southland" premiered on NBC in 2009, but the network quickly cancelled it when ratings didn't take off right away. TNT picked it up and aired new episodes, but hasn't decided whether to renew it.

Actor Michael Cudlitz, who plays Officer John Cooper, says he understands the big-tent appeal of the lighter cop shows, but there are some places they can't go. "Who doesn't want to watch LL Cool J solve some crimes? But he's not going to talk about how his father raped and murdered a 16-year-old." 

 Write to  Amy Chozick at amy.chozick@wsj.com 