A rare larnyx transplant has restored the voice of a California woman unable to speak on her own for more than a decade.

Only one other successful larynx, or voice box, transplant has been documented, in 1998, say doctors who treated the woman at UC Davis Health System in Sacramento. They say the latest procedure, which included the transplant of a thyroid and trachea, was more ambitious. 

Before the October surgery, 52-year-old Brenda Charett Jensen could speak only through an electronic device that produced a robotic voice. Just 13 days later, the Modesto woman could speak on her own again. 

The voice is her own and not that of the organ donor. Her doctors say that is because its unique timbre resides in the palate, tongue, lips and sinuses, and the voice box simply vibrates to facilitate sound, akin to the reed on a clarinet.

"After 12 years of putting up with a lot of humiliation and teasing for sounding like a robot, when this opportunity came up I felt it was very much worth it," said Ms. Jensen. She added: "To me I sound raspy and gurgly in the morning, but when I hear myself on the answering machine or other people's phone recordings, it sounds pretty good."

The larynx is one of the body's most complicated organs to transplant, the doctors said. Blood vessels and nerves connecting it to the rest of the body are minuscule, and the larnyx is involved in closely coordinated functions including breathing, swallowing and speaking. 

"The larynx is one of the most complex neuromuscular organs in the body," said Peter Belafsky, associate professor of otolaryngology at UC Davis and one of the doctors on the transplant team. "This is significantly more complicated than transplanting a larger organ, such as the kidney or heart, that does not rely on reconstruction of the neural network." 

The surgery may not be easy to replicate, said larynx experts, because Ms. Jensen was unusually well-suited to the procedure. She already takes medicines to suppress the immune system because she received a kidney and pancreas transplant four years ago. 

To ward off rejection of new organs, transplant patients typically need to take a lifetime course of immunosuppressants, which can be toxic and block the body's ability to fight disease. The vast majority of patients with compromised or removed larynxes suffer from cancer. Immunosuppressant drugs could allow the cancer to return, which is too great a risk given that the larynx isn't a vital organ, said experts. 

"A lifetime of immunosuppressants when you can live without an organ is not ethical," said Dr. Belafsky.

That concern was a major factor in the long lag between successful larnyx transplants.

Ms. Jensen lost the use of her larynx after repeatedly trying to pull out a breathing tube while she was sedated for treatment of renal failure, Dr. Belafsky said.

The surgery could have more far-reaching implications if transplants could be performed without the lifetime use of such drugs or if immunosuppressants continue to improve. "It's very exciting, and as we learn more, the opportunity for this to expand really exists," said Lee Akst, assistant professor at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine's department of otolaryngology.

The team of surgeons at UC Davis was able to hook up more nerves and arteries to the transplanted organ than in the previous surgery, performed at the Cleveland Clinic, the UC Davis doctors said. That is in part because of advances in microscope technology that allowed them to perform 10 hours of the 18-hour operation under a microscope.

UC Davis funded most of Ms. Jensen's hospital costs, and most members of the transplant team donated their time. 

An important test of the advance the UC Davis team has made will come months down the road, when doctors hope to remove the tracheotomy tube through which Ms. Jensen largely still breathes. The Cleveland Clinic's patient still breathes through such a tube.

Douglas Hicks, a Cleveland Clinic voice expert and a member of the team that did the 1998 transplant, said his team never intended to remove the patient's tracheotomy tube, cautious about keeping the newly transplanted tissue free of air flow to prevent disease. The Cleveland Clinic's surgery also involved parts of the trachea and thyroid.

Gregory Farwell, the lead surgeon on the UC Davis team, said they have elected to use a different approach and are hopeful their patient's nerve function will be good enough to allow removal of the tube. 

"Time will tell—that's the test of any transplant," said Dr. Hicks. "What is advancing is that the more we deal with problems with the voice box, we learn that the voice is a critical part of who we are. It is not a small thing, and individuals who lose that feel a real loss."

 Write to  Avery Johnson at avery.johnson@WSJ.com 