This promises to be another big year for Danish movies. In February, director Susanne Bier's drama, "In a Better World," won the Oscar for best foreign film, and this month Lars von Trier's latest, "Melancholia," will premier at Cannes. Both films come out of Zentropa, the production company set up by Mr. von Trier and Danish film producer Peter Aalbæk Jensen. 

Founded in 1992, Zentropa predates Denmark's famous "Dogme 95" movement, whose manifesto tried to ban artificiality from cinema, and is still going strong some six years after the movement petered out. Booming Copenhagen has managed to become Scandinavia's most dynamic and laid-back capital—its prosperity seems to check its pretentions. I wasn't surprised, then, to find a distinct lack of corporate amenities at Zentropa's suburban Copenhagen headquarters. 

"This is my office," says Mr. Jensen, 55 years old, pointing at an old sofa in the far-right corner of a former military barracks. The center of the room is given over to a pile of band equipment, always in wait for a jam session to begin. "I play the drums, and I only employ lawyers who can play a musical instrument," he says. "We're a silly little company in a silly little country," he says, and Zentropa needs "soft and tender guys representing us in legal matters." 

"Silly" is probably not a word most people would use to describe Zentropa—a name attached to films like Mr. von Trier's "Breaking the Waves" and "Dancer in the Dark," both of which won prizes at Cannes, and "Italian for Beginners," an international hit comedy, directed by Lone Scherfig. "Italian for Beginners" is set in Hvidovre, the same Copenhagen suburb that is home to Zentropa.

Hvidovre "is a really crappy suburb with a lot of social problems," says Mr. Jensen, a self-described communist and a relentless naysayer. I can see how his combination of gentle clownishness and fierce curmudgeonliness would have a muse-like effect on the people he works with. "Nobody wants to be out here." He said he was sure Zentropa's move to Hvidore in 1997 was a good idea, because "everybody was against it."

As it happens, the nearness to what he calls "ordinary people" has had an effect on his movies, which have come to be known for capturing aspects of everyday life.

Next week, Mr. Jensen will make his nearly annual journey to the extraordinary setting of the Cannes Film Festival. "It's fantastic," he says of the festival, which he says is like "a high-school reunion" for people like himself, complemented with "lots of good food and good wine."

He is willing to play his part. "Even though I'm a communist," he says. "I wear a tuxedo there." Then it's back to work at Hvidovre, and to the even more humble surroundings of his home in the countryside. 

"I'm a pig farmer," he says. "I like to be together with pigs—real pigs—instead of the swine that I meet in the film business." 

At home he tends not to watch his own movies. "I only see American action films," he says. "The more violent, the better. I'm sitting all day producing art-house movies—come on! I want to be entertained."

In 1710, Sweden defeated Denmark at the Battle of Helsingborg, and the Danish Crown lost its last bid for land on the Scandinavian Peninsula. These days, daytripping Danes arrive in Sweden with shopping rather than war on their minds, looking for bargains in everything from tennis shoes to summer houses. Meanwhile, Swedes take the 20-minute commute to Copenhagen over the decade-old Oresund Bridge, looking for higher wages during the week and cheaper alcohol on the weekends. 

"The trains are always full," says Jacob Fabricius, the Danish director of the Malmö Konsthall, one of Sweden's most important contemporary art institutions, who commutes himself from Copenhagen.

This month, the Konsthall will open Sweden's first major show about innovative Danish artist Poul Gernes (1925-96), who spent his last decades living in southern Sweden. The exhibition has its origins at Hamburg's Deichtorhallen, and it says something about Danish-Swedish relations that it took some Germans to convince the Swedes of a great Dane in their midst.

Noma, Copenhagen's celebrated eatery, was named best restaurant in the world for a second year in a row last month, but in Copenhagen, diners are all abuzz about Geist, Bo Bech's new restaurant.

Mr. Bech, 39, is known for his Michelin-star restaurant at the city's premier furniture store, Paustian, and for his Gordon Ramsay-like turn on Danish TV. He closed down Restaurant Paustian last year, and has transplanted its famous dishes to Geist.

Until I ate at Geist, I had never tasted—or even imagined tasting—langoustine tail flavored with smoldering pine needles or crème brûlée made with beets. I also didn't know that such refined food could be served in such laid-back surroundings. There are no table clothes at Geist, and the waiters' ordinary T-shirts tend to reveal extraordinary tattoos.

 Next week,  Sam Leith in London. 