LONDON—European stock markets fell, led by auto makers, as disappointing earnings from blue-chip companies and renewed worries about European sovereign debt discouraged investors. 

Concerns about potential retaliatory attacks following al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden's killing weighed on investor confidence, erasing euphoria inspired by the news of his death. 

The Stoxx Europe 600 closed down 0.5% at 282.43 and Germany's DAX index fell 0.4% to 7500.70, while France's CAC-40 index was off 0.3% at 4096.84. The losses in all three indexes ended eight-session winning streaks.

The U.K.'s FTSE 100 index closed up 0.2% at 6082.88.

Auto manufacturers led the losses as investors took profits following recent gains. The sector has performed better than the broader market recently. 

German car makers were hit particularly hard. Daimler and  BMW fell 1.6% and 1.7% respectively. German truck maker and engineering firm MAN fell 0.6%. Investors appeared unimpressed with news that the group's incoming orders increased 26% in the first quarter.

  Christian Stocker, equity strategist at UniCredit, said rising raw-material costs and interest-rate increases in Asia are weighing on the sector. 

"The tightening moves are negative for autos, because it increases the costs for consumers in those key markets—increasing lending costs and therefore decreasing momentum in demand for new cars, particularly for the more expensive luxury cars from Germany," he said.

Deutsche Bank fell 2.1% in response to news that U.S. authorities sued the lender and a mortgage subsidiary, allegiing that they repeatedly lied about the quality of mortgages to be included in a government insurance program.

 Uninspiring and poorly received corporate earnings added pressure on the European market.  Hannover Re, one of the five largest reinsurers worldwide, fell 1%. It said first-quarter net profit fell by two-thirds as it was hit by high claims costs from natural catastrophes, prompting it to lower its full-year earnings target. 

  Swiss Life fell 4.9% after it reported a 13% slump in first-quarter premium income, while saying its capital position weakened due to higher interest rates on capital markets. 

German retailer Metro shares lost 2.2% after it reported a first-quarter net loss. 

In France, shares of oil group  Total SA slipped 0.7%.  France Telecom SA fell 0.6% after the carrier reported first-quarter earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization that slightly missed expectations. 

In London, shares of  Man Group leaped 3.3% after the hedge-fund manager said it raised $1.5 billion from the successful launch of an open-ended fund in Japan.

Miners posted losses.  Randgold Resources Ltd. declined 4.7% as precious-metals prices fell. BHP Billiton shed 1.5% and  Kazakhmys stumbled 3.4%.

Markets in London were closed on Monday and last Friday for holidays

Renewed worries about the European sovereign-debt crisis, especially in relation to Greece, continue to hurt sentiment. On Monday, European Central Bank Vice President  Vitor Constancio said restructuring Greek debt isn't an option, renewing doubts over the euro zone's ability to manage its trouble spots. 

Meanwhile, traders digested stronger-than-expected euro-zone producer price inflation. Factory-gate prices in the region posted their sharpest annual gain in two-and-a-half years in March, adding weight to expectations that the European Central bank might tighten monetary policy in June or July. ING said it expects an increase in interest rates of 0.25 percentage point in July, but that the risks are skewed toward a move in June.

In the foreign-exchange market, the euro took a breather against the dollar after the single currency rebounded Monday following a brief drop in the wake of bin Laden's death. Trading was thin due to the holiday in Japan. 

Around the European close, the single currency was fetching $1.4822 against the greenback, from $1.4831 late Monday in New York, and the dollar was at ¥80.85, compared with ¥81.24. 







