A host of Indian investment banks are looking at overseas expansion as a way out of the intense competition from foreign rivals at home, which keeps the local players largely confined to the debt capital markets. 

Some of the globe-trotters include SBI Capital Markets Ltd., JM Financial Ltd., IDFC Capital Ltd., Kotak Mahindra Capital Co. Ltd. and Axis Bank Ltd. 

Foreign banks, with their large balance sheets, have elbowed out Indian counterparts, especially from the equity markets, as the local firms don't have the financial clout or access to overseas investors. The rivalry also has put the squeeze on bank fees. 

Reserve Bank of India rules don't allow acquisition financing by local banks, limiting their participation in high-stake mergers and acquisitions completed here. But that hasn't stopped them from benefiting from the spurt in cross-border M&A opportunities involving Indian companies. 

SBI Caps awaits local regulatory approval to open a branch in Singapore. The U.S. Securities ad Exchange Commission has approved IDFC Capital's plan to open an office in New York. Kotak Capital and Axis Bank are looking at expanding overseas, but have not applied for licenses. While these plans go forward, some experts suggest that it's going to be difficult to set up base abroad, and run a profitable business. 

But Indian banks may not have a choice. 

Back home, foreign banks such as JP Morgan,  Deutsche Bank AG, Citibank NA,  Bank of America
BAC


2.86
%




 Merrill Lynch,  Morgan Stanley
MS


-0.03
%




 and Barclays Capital top the charts with their strong equity capital market and M&A advisory. 

There are no homegrown investment banks among the top 10 deal makers in 2010, according to data provider Dealogic. 

Commercial lenders State Bank of India,  ICICI Bank Ltd., Axis Bank and Kotak Mahindra Bank Ltd. are in the top 10 by the virtue of their loans and debt capital market deals. 

SBI Caps, promoted by State Bank of India, is a participant in every debt funding but faces constraints on lending money to overseas companies. 

Last year, when Bharti Airtel Ltd., India's largest telecom company by users, acquired Kuwait-based Zain Telecom's African assets, parent SBI was the leader in financing the rupee borrowing. But SBI Caps couldn't be part of the debt syndication with overseas banks because of the limited balance sheet exposure it has overseas. 

Apart from aiming to resolve this issue, operations overseas will derisk SBI's "goodwill" from the high-risk investment banking business, said S. Vishvanathan, managing director and chief executive of SBI Caps. 

These capital-raising branches will be separate from the larger network of SBI's bank branches, which now has 150 offices in 32 countries. 

SBI Caps already has an office in London, and obtained Securities and Exchange Board of India approval to open the Singapore office. 

The merchant banker hopes a foreign office will increase access to low-cost funds overseas, and build "relationships with international investors", Vishvanathan said. 

"With these offices, we can compete with the banks abroad and do the same that they are doing at much less cost," he said during a recent interview. 

SBI Caps next wants to open an office in New York as part of its effort to "follows Indian companies" in their global expansion. 

But Indian banks will face challenges in building infrastructure and balance sheets, apart from attracting talent, said  Joydeep Sengupta, senior partner, McKinsey and Co. Asia. 

"You have to separate banking needs and advisory needs," he said. "The ability to fund overseas requirements will come by creating overseas balance sheets. It is much more challenging to do advisory overseas unless it's closely linked to the balance sheet business." 

That is why Kotak Mahindra Capital plans to take a different path, through alliances. Though the company ended its relationship with Goldman Sachs (Mauritius), a subsidiary of Goldman Sachs Group Inc., in 2006 after a 14-year partnership, its tie-ups have helped it get seven mandates for 2011, although not many deals have seen closures. 

Some of the deals include  GCA Savvian Group Corp.
2174


-3.68
%




 in Japan and Renaissance Capital for Russia/CIS and sub-Saharan Africa, said Falguni Nayar, managing director and CEO, Kotak Mahindra Capital. 

Kotak Mahindra Capital--which has "informal relationships" with  Banco Santander SA in Spain and Latin America, and  Evercore Partners Inc.
EVR


0.09
%




 in the U.S.--also has offices in London, Mauritius and New York, and "will look at a Singapore office going forward." 

McKinsey's Sengupta said alliances are a better way of gaining access to overseas markets, but even that takes time. 

"At this point of time, the channel is tiny and it will grow going forward," he said. 

Other Indian players are not far behind. 

"With muted equity market activity in India, our focus will be to reach out to global clients and help them access home markets," said  Tapasije Mishra, managing director and group CEO of IDFC Capital, whose New York branch will open in three months. 

Companies such as JM Financial and Axis Bank have not spelled out their expansion plans, but sources say they have plans brewing. 

Another reason for the overseas expansion is the shrinking of fees in domestic deals. While domestic investment banks earn advisory fees on in-bound and out-bound deals, fees from equity issues and lending have been diminishing in the last few years. 

"The size of the deals is relatively small, and with the over-banked situation there is huge competition for the investment banking business in India. Therefore, fee income is not attractive at all,"  V.K. Bansal, chairman of Morgan Stanley India, said in a recent interview. "Ultimately, some of the banks (may) have to close their operations in India or we may see some consolidation in the industry." 

The increasing number of cross-border deals makes an overseas presence necessary, said  Robin Roy, associate director, financial services, PricewaterhouseCoopers. 

"It makes sense for them to remain close to the heart of action where either clients are raising resources, or clients have their operations," he said. "This trend is also in line with what foreign banks did when they came to India a decade back." 

Then Merrill Lynch tied up with  Hemendra Kothari's DSP, Morgan Stanley with JM Financial, and Goldman Sachs (Mauritius) with Kotak Capital. 

- Joel Rebello and  Sneha Shah, of India's Mint newspaper, write for Deals India, and can be reached at +91-9971113266 or by email at sneha.s@livemint.com. 

-- Harini Subramani contributed to this article. 

Deals India, powered by Dow Jones Newswires, The Wall Street Journal and Mint, is a one-stop destination for investment professionals following deal flow, deals news, private-equity and venture-capital activity in India. 