BANGKOK—The Thai government has set national elections for July 3, after securing royal approval to dissolve Parliament on Tuesday, paving the way for what is expected to be a fiercely contested campaign pitting Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva's Democrat Party against supporters of ousted populist leader Thaksin Shinawatra.

"I believe a dissolution of Parliament provides a new beginning for the people," Mr. Abhisit said in a nationally televised address Monday evening. The vote, he said, represents "progress for Thailand and for an effective problem-solving process for the people and their families within the democratic system."

Government spokesman Panitan Wattanayagorn earlier told reporters that the polling date would be July 3.

Political analysts say the election will be among the most important this key Southeast Asian economy has ever faced, and could set the political tone in the country for years to come, determining whether it gets back on track after years of instability or possibly faces renewed unrest.

One big question is whether voters who previously cast ballots for Mr. Thaksin before he was overthrown in a military coup nearly five years ago will support Mr. Abhisit's more cautious, technocratic style of government.

The vote will be the first since mass demonstrations on the streets of Bangkok last year triggered clashes between security forces and opposition "Red Shirt" protesters, many of them supporters of Mr. Thaksin, who is now living overseas to avoid imprisonment on a corruption conviction he says was politically motivated. The rioting in 2010 killed 91 people, most of them protesters, in some of the worst political violence Thailand has seen in decades. 

The country remains sharply divided, with many in the Red Shirt camp and the main opposition For Thais Party accusing Thailand's powerful military leaders and civil servants of manipulating the country's judicial system to keep them out of power. Political analysts say neither Mr. Abhisit's Democrats nor the opposition For Thais Party is likely to win an absolute majority, and will have to depend on Thailand's unpredictable smaller political parties to help them form a coalition government.

 Mr. Abhisit and Mr. Thaksin have told The Wall Street Journal in separate interviews recently that they expected the elections to be closely fought. A survey of voters conducted the first week of May by Thailand's Assumption University showed 36% of respondents nationwide said they would vote for For Thais while 34% said they would vote for the Democrats.

Mr. Abhisit, a 46-year-old, British-educated economist, said he was calling the election several months before the end of his term in December to give Thai voters a chance to stop the country's political conflicts and enable a new government focus on strengthening Thailand's economy, an important global manufacturing and export hub.

Red Shirt leaders have said they will respect the outcome of the vote, although they have warned that a fresh wave of protests could break out if army leaders or other powerful conservative Thais prevent For Thais from forming a government. 

For Thais Party legislators control 186 seats in the outgoing Parliament with the Democrats holding 172. Early indications suggest the two main parties will focus on the economy as their main election issue. 

In January, Mr. Abhisit unveiled a series of welfare spending projects, including subsidies and inexpensive loans. In a televised ceremony, the prime minister unveiled the package he called "nine New Year's gifts for Thailand." The measures included enabling taxi drivers to secure loans to buy their own vehicles and allowing other disadvantaged Thais to contribute to a government fund that would make them eligible to receive social-security benefits.

The policies are directed at poorer Thais, who have tended to support Mr. Thaksin, a 61-year-old former telecom billionaire who is the only Thai leader ever to be re-elected or to complete a full term. 

Mr. Thaksin, meanwhile, has laid out changes to Thailand's corporate-tax rates and has promised large rises in the country's minimum wage to galvanize domestic consumer spending at a time when foreign investment is seeking cheaper locations.

 Write to  James Hookway at james.hookway@wsj.com 