 West Palm Beach, Fla.  

Theodora Bosanquet is one of those fascinatingly unimportant people privileged by chance to play a choice walk-on part in the history of literature. In 1896 Henry James developed a case of writer's cramp so severe that he was forced to start dictating his novels to a typist, a practice that he continued to the end of his life. Bosanquet, the last of James's secretaries, was a brisk, bright young woman with literary ambitions of her own (she became a critic) who published an illuminating memoir called "Henry James at Work" in which she told what it was like to take dictation from a great writer. While there was no question of her being romantically attracted to James—she appears to have preferred women—Bosanquet was clearly obsessed with him, so much so that she later claimed that he continued to dictate to her after he died.

So curious a creature could scarcely help but attract the posthumous attention of other writers of fiction, among them David Lodge and Cynthia Ozick. Now Michael Hollinger has joined their ranks, using Bosanquet's obsession with James as the inspiration for a three-character play called "Ghost-Writer" that was first performed by Philadelphia's Arden Theatre Company in September and has just received its regional premiere in West Palm Beach. Mr. Hollinger is best known as the author of "Opus," a 2006 play about the members of a string quartet that has been produced all over America in recent seasons. "Ghost-Writer" will more than likely share that happy fate, for it is a finely wrought piece of entertainment that does just what it sets out to do.

"Ghost-Writer" is set in Manhattan in 1919, and Bosanquet's fictional counterpart is Myra Babbage (Kate Eastwood Norris), a typist who takes dictation from Franklin Woolsey (J. Fred Shiffman), a haughty, unhappily married novelist with a deeply buried romantic streak. Though the high-strung Myra has a beau of her own, she is a young woman of sensibility. So, not at all surprisingly, she falls head over heels in love with Woolsey. The play begins shortly after his death, and we learn at the outset that Myra is fending off reporters. Why? Because it seems that Woolsey left behind the manuscript of an unfinished novel—and that Myra is finishing it, allegedly taking dictation from her deceased employer. Mrs. Woolsey (Lourelene Snedeker), alas, is not even slightly amused by Myra's presumption and threatens to burn the entire manuscript.

One of the most striking aspects of "Ghost-Writer" is the way in which Mr. Hollinger shows us how Myra identifies herself with Woolsey's work. It is also the saddest part of her story, for she comes to see herself not as a secretary but as a collaborator, speaking with desperate pride of how he trusted her to supply the punctuation in his novels. This may or may not be so: Myra assures us at the very beginning of the play that "everything I tell you is true," but anyone who claims to be taking dictation from a corpse is by definition an unreliable witness, and much of the tension in "Ghost-Writer" arises from this not-so-obvious fact.

 Florida Stage, Rinker Playhouse,  Kravis Center for the Performing Arts, 701 Okeechobee Blvd.,  West Palm Beach, Fla. 

 ($25-$50), 561-832-7469,  closes April 3 

Those who are familiar with James's ghost stories will see at once that this is a quintessentially Jamesian situation, so much so that one wonders why it never occurred to him to write about it. It is no insult to Mr. Hollinger to say that his handling of the situation is more conventional than anything that James would have been likely to write. (The denouement of "Ghost-Writer" is, in fact, reminiscent of Somerset Maugham, a no-nonsense writer who had no use for James's involuted ambiguities.) Still, that doesn't keep him from spinning an absorbing tale, or from putting words into Myra's mouth that are occasionally worthy of the master himself: "And at that moment I felt I could see to the center of him: a man who spent his days indoors, in a quiet room, inventing worlds reminiscent of this one; peopling them with persons like us; conjuring stories that let us all see into, under, through and beyond."

Florida Stage, which specializes in new plays, has done this one proud. Ms. Norris is rather too attractive to look quite right as Myra, who really ought to be as plain as a post, but her acting is squarely on the mark—she's so tightly wrapped that she quivers—and Mr. Shiffman and Ms. Snedeker nail their smaller parts. The staging, by Louis Tyrrell, is finely conceived and executed, and Kent Goetz has designed the "austerely furnished" apartment specified by Mr. Hollinger with perfect taste.

It's easy to imagine how Mr. Hollinger might have turned the dramatic screw a bit tighter. I admit to having been surprised by his decision to turn over his hole card right at the start instead of concealing the fact that Myra is taking (or says she's taking, or thinks she's taking) dictation from a dead man. But "Ghost-Writer" works marvelously well on its own straightforward terms, and you won't find it lacking in tension—or poignancy.

—Mr. Teachout, the Journal's drama critic, blogs about theater and the other arts at www.terryteachout.com. Write to him at tteachout@wsj.com.