For a man who took office saying he hoped to make central banking boring, Mervyn King is fast becoming one of the most controversial central bankers of our times. The governor of the Bank of England attracts both praise and opprobrium for his stance on banking reform and inflation. Unfortunately, all the praise seems to be for his views on banking reform and all the criticism for his perceived failure to tackle the U.K.'s above-target inflation. This seems to me entirely the wrong way around.

The conventional view of Mr. King's record resonates because the political and media establishment largely shares his belief—reiterated in a newspaper interview at the weekend—that bankers are generally greedy, cynical parasites who rip off their own customers. Meanwhile the accusation that Mr. King has lost the plot over inflation, now running at twice the Bank of England's 2% target, chimes with the belief that the BOE is conspiring with the government to inflate away the country's debts. 

In fact, it is Mr. King's handling of the inflation spike that deserves applause while his crusade against the banking system is potentially one of the biggest threats to the stability and health of the U.K. economy. That it should be this way around is hardly surprising given Mr. King is one of the world's most distinguished macro-economists who helped write the rule book for modern monetary policy but has never worked in a bank or the markets and gives the impression of having disdain for those who do.

Mr. King has certainly shown patience trying to explain the BOE's monetary policy in the face of a sometimes near-hysterical media onslaught. The BOE has repeatedly stressed the risks inflation will be either above or below target in two years are equally balanced, yet the focus is almost entirely on the risks to the upside. Those calling for immediate rate increases seem to ignore the fact that fourth quarter GDP was last week revised down to minus 0.6%, that the services sector appears to be faltering, retail sales are weak and house prices falling—and this before public spending cuts have started.

No central banker can feel comfortable with inflation running at 4%. But unless anyone seriously believes commodity prices are going to continue rising by 50% a year, VAT will keep going up 2% a year and sterling depreciating 20% a year, a sensible starting assumption is that this is a short-term spike. 

Of course, the BOE needs to be alert to rising inflation expectations and the risk these feed through to wage settlements, but so far there is little to suggest this is happening. Besides, even if short-term inflation expectations rise, it seems reasonable to expect they will quickly drop back again if inflation falls back below target as it did following the 2008 inflation spike.

Mr. King is too experienced a central banker to be panicked by claims that failing to raise rates now is damaging the BOE's credibility. The reason most of the world handed control of interest rates to independent central banks is precisely to avoid monetary policy-makers becoming slaves to public opinion. 

Many of those calling on the BOE to cool the economy with an interest rate rise are the same people who constantly warn that Chancellor George Osborne's austerity program is dooming the country to certain ruin. As Mr. King knows very well, the greatest risk to the BOE's credibility is a policy error—such as prematurely raising interest rates when the outlook is so uncertain.

That is what makes Mr. King's onslaught against the banks so worrying. In various recent public comments, he has spoken of his concern that borrowing rates for companies and households are still relatively high despite the BOE's ultra-low base rates, that credit growth is weak to non-existent and that the money supply has barely budged in two years despite the BOE pumping £200 billion into the economy via its program of quantitative easing.

Yet there is no great mystery about this lack of money and credit growth: as a string of bankers has warned in recent weeks, it is the direct result of the regulatory crusade against banks that Mr. King has led so vocally.

If the governor risks a policy error then it is surely here. No one doubts that in an economy such as the U.K. where banking- sector assets are the equivalent of more than 400% of GDP, it is vital that the banking system is made as safe as possible. But equally, it is very hard to see how the economy can recover when the banking system is unable to extend credit. 

The error is in failing to recognize that banking reform is path dependent: that one must start with the system one has and that decisions have real world consequences. Policy makers at the BOE and the Treasury express their surprise that the market is already forcing banks to comply with Basel III when the politicians had given them until 2019. But they should not be surprised: plenty of people warned this would happen.

There is some evidence the Treasury is waking up to the risks. It is investigating claims the BOE and Financial Services Authority are gold-plating bank liquidity rules to the detriment of bank lending and promising to bang heads together if true, according to someone familiar with Mr. Osborne's thinking. And while the Treasury is keen to play down speculation it won't implement the recommendations of the Independent Banking Commission if they prove too radical, nor will it commit to implementing whatever it proposes. What it will say is that once it decides its response, it will expect all U.K. policy makers to abide by its decision—including Mr. King.

But the Treasury may be naïve to think it could ignore the IBC's recommendations yet shut down the banking reform debate. And it may be similarly naïve to think Mr. King, who is due to take over responsibility for banking regulation in 2012, will end his crusade when he is two years from the end of his term. 

That suggests the banks should brace themselves for another couple of years of debilitating uncertainty at least until mounting evidence of a policy error forces Mr. King and his cheerleaders to think again. 

 Write to  Simon Nixon at simon.nixon@wsj.com 