 Japan Society  333 E. 47th St., (212) 832-1155  Through March 19  

A yakuza film is a marvel of narrative simplicity.

"A guy gets out of jail. He's been in a long time, 10 years. The world has changed. The upper management is screwing up. His best friend is sleeping with his girlfriend. It's pretty unpleasant. He goes berserk. And it ends with a bang."

That's how Samuel Jamier, the senior film programmer at Japan Society, summarizes the basics of the tough-guy genre, which once flourished in Japan. "It was a huge phenomenon of the postwar era," he said. "It was about dealing with defeat, being a man, reconstruction and endurance." 

As the genre evolved from the 1960s into later decades, it became about other things, too. The title of Japan Society's 15-film retrospective covers it all.

During the golden age of yakuza cinema, which originally was known as ninkyo eiga, or chivalry film, the central character was a man of honor who adhered to a strict moral code, despite being engaged in criminal activity. "Theater of Life: Hishakaku" (1963) is a template for much that followed it, making use of the plot dynamics described above, and distinguished by ceremonial kimonos, samurai swords and star-making performances. It's part of a Saturday marathon dubbed "Honor Amongst Ruffians Saturday Or: the Films You'll Never Ever Find on DVD... Ever." Mr. Jamier isn't joking. "Some of these films have been rusting in a corner," he said. "They don't get screened very often." The early-'60s fare includes "Blood of Revenge," set in 1907 Osaka, which made Koji Tsuruta the first yakuza film star. Mr. Jamier tracked down a 16mm print, which likely only gets played at one of the Toyko movie-houses dedicated to all-yakuza cinema.

The 1970s brought a new wave to the form, symbolized by Kinji Fukasaku's five-part epic "Battles Without Honor or Humanity." The series will spotlight Part 3 of the sequence, which tracks the complexities of mob warfare in the postwar era. It's not so chivalrous anymore, in fact the cumulative effect of watching the entire work feels like James Ellroy's bloody-minded novels crossed with the dynastic sweep of "The Godfather." Despite corruption within corruptions, double-crosses and an insane body count, the films still hang onto the genre's core. "Somehow, the main character, played by Bunta Sugawara, clings to those old values," Mr. Jamier said.

Another decade, and the yakuza film would fizzle. It became something that imaginative filmmakers might evoke, rather than the thing itself. That still left room for plenty of unusual and original work. Cult directors like Takashi Miike (who will be present for a Tuesday screening of his film "Dead or Alive") and Takeshi Kitano ("Outrage: The Way of the Modern Yakuza") bend it to their own twisted wills.

Perhaps the most unusual title in the series is "Ryuji," a 1983 film—making its international premiere—starring a young actor named Shoji Kaneko. The performer wrote the script and spent time running with a yakuza gang, preparing for the role of a gangster who tries to escape from the life. It was Mr. Kaneko's final act, as he died from cancer a week after filming was completed. "It's not just a film," Mr. Jamier said. "It's a little bit like the novel 'Leaving Las Vegas,' when the writer died shortly after writing it."

 Maysles Institute  343 Malcolm X Blvd. (212) 582-6050  Wednesday, Mar. 19

Anthony Mackie, presently onscreen helping Matt Damon defy destiny in the sci-fi romance "The Adjustment Bureau," had to make a few adjustments himself for his role in this 1970s-set drama. He chose a suit for his character that was a size too small, a useful tactic to access the emotional jam faced by a former Black Panther named Marcus, back home in Philadelphia where he reconnects with his ex-lover (Kerry Washington). She's swapped revolution for a law practice, but there's a lot of heavy history lurking in the shadows, darkening with the threat of violence. The Roots supply the soundtrack, with vocalist Tariq Trotter also taking the role of Bostic, Marcus's brother. First-time director Tanya Hamilton will be present for the March 19 screening.

 IFC Center  323 6th Ave., (212) 924-7771  Friday-March 17

Juliette Binoche won the best actress award at Cannes last year for her performance in this enigmatic and enchanting film. Iranian master Abbas Kiarostami's first effort made in the West, it's a lovers discourse between an English writer (opera singer William Shimell) and a French gallerist (Ms. Binoche) that unfolds (and refolds and unfolds again) in the romantic Tuscan village of Lucignano. The title is shared by the writer's book, which argues for the aesthetic value of reproductions, and doubles as a metaphor for the relationship. Is Ms. Binoche a chatty, lonely fangirl hijacking the aloof, self-important Brit's afternoon? Or, as hints accrue and a bit of role-playing turns abruptly serious, are they actually an old couple that has reunited? Or an imitation of one? Ms. Binoche's radiance and the director's cinematic gamesmanship make the puzzlements so pleasurable that a repeat viewing is mandated.

 92Y Tribeca  200 Hudson St., (212) 601-1000  Saturday

Remember the corner video store? Folklore has it that they still exist in odd pockets of Brooklyn. This double-bill is part of a new series that pays tribute to the eternal taste making savvy of video store clerks. It's called "Overdue," and is curated as if the films are part of an "employee picks" selection. The inaugural program looks back at the cinematic impact of Edward Furlong, "the patron saint of vaguely unwholesome, sleep-deprived adolescence." James Gray's 1994 dysfunctional family/Russian mob saga "Little Odessa," shot in Brighton Beach, finds Mr. Furlong playing baby brother to Tim Roth's prodigal son turned hit man. The same year saw the release of "Brainscan," with the mop-headed actor as an alienated suburban gorehound who finds that a new, gruesome interactive video game is a little too realistic. Genre fans recognize the film as the work of the great John Flynn, director of "Rolling Thunder," the classic post-Vietnam vigilante movie.

 Museum of Modern Art  11 W. 53rd St., (212) 708-9400  Thursday-March 16

Rust never sleeps, and neither does gentrification. This film, first shown in a sidebar of the 2010 New York Film Festival, clambers headlong into the junkyard culture of Willets Points, Queens. It was made by Véréna Paravel and J. P. Sniadecki, anthropologists from Harvard's Sensory Ethnography Lab, which seems to encourage projects at the extremes of human experience. (The lab also launched the sheep-herding epic "Sweetgrass"). The "foreign parts" here include not only the cars that are methodically disassembled to feed a cluster of garages, but also the laborers who do the work. The Third-World ethnic mix reflects the polyglot demographic of the borough, as the camera introduces neighborhood characters whose home-sweet-junkyard will soon become the site of a massive $3 billion commercial redevelopment.