Bangalore -- Three months after he quit as the India head of US-based venture capital firm BlueRun Ventures, Mumbai-based  Sasha Mirchandani has set up an early-stage fund to invest in start-ups. 

"The venture capital space is getting crowded," Mr. Mirchandani said, adding he has started KAE Capital with a $20 million corpus. "There is a bigger need of capital in the early-stage space."

In New Delhi,  Harish Gandhi last week moved from VC firm Canaan Partners, where he was an executive director, to join AIF Capital, a $450 million private equity fund. 

"As an investor, I want to broaden my horizon," Mr. Gandhi said. 

They are among a dozen investment managers who have exited venture capital firms in recent months to join rivals, private equity firms, or to start their own funds where they can go by their own investment strategy. India's robust economic growth provides the perfect backdrop for such transitions. The sector is at the cusp of maturing, as deal making has increased and many investments made in 2005-06 now edge closer to exits. Further, executive movement was cramped earlier because of the financial downturn of 2008-09, not many new funds were floated then, and deals were fewer. 

In a way, venture capitalists are mimicking the moves in the private-equity world. Over the past two years, several top executives --  Renuka Ramnath and  Ajay Relan, who were with ICICI Venture and Citi Venture Capital International, respectively, — quit established firms to start their own funds, drawn by the lure of being able to set their own rules in a high-returns sector. Several others switched firms. 

"The churn [among VCs] now is due to the increase in the deals activity," said Sreenivasulu  Srini Vudayagiri, investment director at Peepul Capital, a mid-market private equity firm that also looks at control-stake transactions and buyouts. Mr. Vudayagiri was a former venture capitalist.

He joined Peepul in October from Lightspeed Advisory Services India, where as managing director he was involved in deals such as the second-round investments in online tutoring company TutorVista and ItzCash Card Ltd, a pre-paid card company. 

Other venture capitalists who have made the transition in recent months include  Sachin Maheshwari, who has joined Zephyr Peacock Management from Draper Fisher Jurvetson India;  Sumir Chadha, K.P. Balaraj,  S.K. Jain and  Sandeep Singhal, who quit as founding partners of Sequoia Capital to start a new fund that will focus on publicly traded companies in India;  Rahul Khanna, founder and former director of early-stage investment firm Clearstone Venture Advisors, joined Canaan Partners as a managing director; and  Sanjay Nath and  Karthik Reddy, who left Mumbai Angels to start Blume Ventures, an angel investment firm.

"People have the expertise and want a bigger share of the pie, which they could get by going independent or joining a bigger fund," said  Kris Lakshmikanth, CEO and and chairman of Headhunters India Pvt. Ltd. 

Fund managers in venture capital firms do not get the huge financial incentives like those at private-equity firms.

"In the absence of a management fee and carry (in a VC firm), one is just an employee with a salary," said a fund manager with an early-stage firm, who did not want to be named. 

Investors in private-equity funds typically pay the fund managers a 2% fee for managing their committed capital, and a 20% outperformance fee, known as a carry, on returns over the initial capital. 

"In the absence of a carry of 20%, there is no incentive to be there (in a VC firm)," the fund manager said. 

  Sonal Agrawal, CEO at Accord Group India, an executive search firm, said with the economy having improved, "people are following what they believe in." 

That explanation fits 35-year-old Indus Khaitan, who quit as a general partner of Morpheus, a seed-stage incubator, to start a technology firm. 

"I am a techie and an entrepreneur, and like running a company from ground zero," Mr. Khaitan said, adding he wanted to get involved in the day-to-day running of the business. "I was getting bored." 