  (See Corrections & Amplifications item below.)  

One of the mixed pleasures of this job is that you're on the receiving end of a lot of public-relations pitches. On Monday morning alone they came from a debt-collection agency and a "green" investment forum in San Francisco, and for a "smart phone massage" by an expert aestheticism and "pore star," a partial knee-replacement surgery and a cute, chic sun hat offering 50+ UPF protection. 

Chances are I won't be able be able to give all of them the attention they deserve. But one alert came over the transom recently that I found myself powerless to resist. The esteemed Carlyle Hotel was touting a room redesigned by His Royal Highness the Prince and Duke of Salina—a noble, the email went on to explain, with a weakness for milkshakes that he required be delivered to his room promptly at noon and 3 p.m.

I probably should admit up front that I had no idea who His Royal Highness the Prince and Duke of Salina was. I also didn't have the opportunity to perform an Internet search of the dignitary before I reported to the Carlyle's lobby Monday afternoon.

But it was something of a relief to discover that neither  Erich Steinbock, the hotel's managing director, nor  Frederick Petry, its director of operations, who greeted me, knew significantly more about the prince's kingdom than I did. However, he's a four-month-a-year resident of the Carlyle, so they were obviously thoroughly versed in his needs and whims.

"He's a member of the Bourbon family," Mr. Steinbock, an Austrian who is knowledgeable about the Bourbons because they married the Habsburgs, stated confidently. But then the manager added somewhat more tentatively, "Salina is a small little island between Italy and North Africa. There's a fishing village on it and that's about it."

Frankly, I was slightly disappointed in the room, which rents to commoners for $1,300 a night when the prince is out of town, and the redesign. I mean, I'd be happy if I were visiting New York and this was the room I got. The 21st-floor accommodation also has a small, charming terrace with a spectacular view of Midtown; Mr. Steinbock said  Rod Stewart was photographed there for an album cover.

But for a prince…I'm not sure what I was expecting. A lot more ormolu, I suppose. Gilded mirrors. Heavy drapery. A scepter. Why not a small throne where he could receive his subjects? But the closest the accommodations seemed to come to acknowledging the prince's royal blood were pillowcases monogrammed with the initials JCB. However, Mr. Steinbock added that monogrammed pillowcases are actually a courtesy the Carlyle provides many regular guests, not just royalty.

I asked out of curiosity: How does the staff address the prince? Every once in a while I meet someone whom I discover after the fact is a royal. But in this egalitarian—and I use the term advisedly—day and age, nobility tends to play down its pedigree, the major exception being British lords who weren't born to greatness but were knighted after they made a killing in convenience stores or sandwich shops, or Eastern Europeans hawking products such as high-end cold creams.

"He insists on being addressed 'His Royal Highness,'" Mr. Steinbock said. "If all else fails, we address him as, 'Sir.'"

But back to the room, which was the purpose of my visit. The palate is what might be described as neutral, inoffensive, grand-hotel chic. "We went through this really elaborate process," Mr. Petry reported of him and His Royal Highness. "We were looking at swatches together."

"We reserved the right of approval," Mr. Steinbock added, lest the prince, a bachelor, decided on a whim that he wanted to hang, say, a mirror from the ceiling, or install a shag rug or a heart-shaped bathtub. "We wouldn't want to go too far out there."

But the Carlyle's managing director added that the response from less aristocratic guests has been positive. "People are starting to request the room," he said.

The prince's primary flights of fancy seem to be a four-poster canopy bed that's too big for the space (though in my own humble opinion you can never go wrong with a canopy bed) and matching Louis Vuitton toiletry bags in the small marble bathroom, which remain at the hotel year-round, allowing the prince to travel light. The Carlyle also stocks his room with his favorite pens and pencils when he's due to arrive, and brings out silver-framed photographs of his nieces and nephews. 

The prince, it turns out, works in finance and lives primarily in London rather than on his island in the Mediterranean. He's in his late 30s.

"Is that all he is?" Mr. Steinbock asked his colleague. "How do you know?"

"We talk about these things," Mr. Petry said.

The Carlyle is perhaps best known as President Kennedy's home away from home when he visited New York. (He's said to have snuck  Marilyn Monroe into the hotel the May night in 1962 she sang him that sultry "Happy Birthday" at Madison Square Garden.) 

And  Jacqueline Kennedy lived at the Carlyle for more than a year when she returned to New York after her husband's assassination. In more recent times, the Carlyle has served as the temporary residence of choice—one might go so far as to call it a rite of passage—for flush New Yorkers whose Fifth or Park Avenue residences are undergoing renovation.

"Either it's renovated or pipes breaking," Mr. Steinbock explained, as we boarded the elevator for the 31st floor and the two-bedroom suite where Mrs. Onassis decamped during the 1960s. (President Kennedy's former 34th-floor digs are now a private residence and off-limits.) "Or a dispute in the family. We have a couple of gentlemen who went through a divorce and they're still here. If you're a bachelor it's the place."

Mrs. Onassis's airy suite, which rents for $5,000 a night, was more like it, boasting some of the more splendid views of Central Park I've ever seen, not only from the living room but also from the loo. 

When we returned to the lobby, we encountered  Danny Harnett, a 67-year-old bellman who joined the staff at 18 and recalls glimpsing President Kennedy as he arrived for one of his visits. Mr. Harnett, of course, is also acquainted with the Prince of Salina.

"He's always in top gear," the bellman observed, adding that he appeared fit.

And extremely well groomed, rarely without a boutonnière, Mr. Steinbock added.

"He's always in a hurry," the manager confirmed. "We don't know where he goes to, but he rushes."

 Corrections & Amplifications 

Danny Harnett, a bellman at the Carlyle Hotel, is 67 years old. An earlier version of this column incorrectly said he was 63.

 Write to  Ralph Gardner at ralph.gardner@wsj.com 