BERLIN—Richard Strauss composed his penultimate opera "Die Liebe der Danae" in 1940, while reluctantly letting himself be used by the Nazis as a cultural treasure. This fact certainly postponed the work's premiere, which took place in Salzburg in 1952, three years after the composer's death. Performances quickly followed throughout Europe and just as quickly ceased. Certainly, the Nazi stigma has yet to wear off. (New York will only see its first staged performance this summer.) 

Now, for the first time in nearly 60 years, Danae can be seen in Berlin at the Deutsche Oper. The production, by the house's artistic director Kirsten Harms, is part of the opera's valuable rediscovery series, previous installments of which have included Ottorino Respighi's "Marie Victoire" and Richard Wagner's "Rienzi." The libretto by Josef Gregor is in a familiar Strauss vein: an at-times haphazard mash-up of the myth of Midas and of Jupiter's pursuit for the mortal Danae. The music glistens and soars. In the vocal writing too, there is much here to remind one of the virtuosic moments in "Der Rosenkavalier" and "Arabella." Two things, however, immediately set Danae apart from most of Strauss: the extensive role assigned to the chorus and wonderful writing for tenor voice. 

In the daunting title role, Strauss veteran Manuela Uhl did excellent work. In recent seasons, this ensemble member has sung Salome and the Empress (in "Die Frau ohne Schatten"). She outdid herself as Danae, projecting loud and clear in all registers, and riding the crest of her melismatic music impressively. Her Jupiter, the American baritone Mark Delavan, was the picture of accuracy and clarion force. Tenor Matthias Klink lent his gilded voice to Midas. Volume was at times an issue, but he owned the role with his alternately soft and heroic tones. Belgian tenor Thomas Blondelle won well-deserved ovations for his late evening entrance as a sly and charming Mercury. 

The estimable chorus of the Deutsche Oper was only half successful at navigating the clunky choral writing that threatens to upend the opera's first act. Conductor Andrew Litton fared better and mostly succeeded at trying to keep the large orchestra and vocal forces together. 

Ms. Harms's elegant production circumvented many of the dramaturgical problems posed by the outlandish libretto. There wasn't much on stage except for a piano that dangled perplexingly from the rafters, but this never felt like a bargain-basement production. And fortunately the work's financial themes were not treated too allegorically. 

In all, it was a fitting farewell for Ms. Harms, whose seven-year tenure in Berlin hasn't been without its rough patches. Her successor, Dietmar Schwarz, arrives next season from Theater Basel. 

 March 19, April 7 

  www.deutscheoperberlin.de  

