If there's a holy writ in finance and economics, it's the one that says monetary policy needs to be free of political interference. In other words, that central banks be independent. 

This dogma is ripe for reconsideration. 

Gordon Brown won near universal acclaim when, as the U.K.'s Chancellor of the Exchequer in 1997, he unchained interest rates from ministerial control. It was his first act in government. And, according to many, it was the best decision he made in the 13 years he held high office.

One of the few notable dissenters was Mr. Brown's immediate predecessor, outgoing Conservative finance minister Kenneth Clarke. Mr. Clarke argued elected politicians should have the last word on monetary policy. Sure, finance ministers need to pay due consideration to central bankers' advice—which Mr. Clarke frequently, and correctly, ignored during his tenure. But ultimately, it's the people directly answerable to voters who ought to be calling the shots. 

Mr. Clarke's arguments were quickly dismissed. The cast iron consensus was, and still is, that central bank freedom from the sort of short-termist populist policymaking to which politicians are vulnerable is the surest route to price stability and thus healthy economic growth. 

But that unanimity is now flaking at the edges. Mr. Clarke's dissent has gained substance as it's become apparent central banking technocrats are also prone to big mistakes with horrific economic consequences and yet are largely immune from democratic accountability.

Independent central banks, it was argued, would prevent a return to the rampant inflation of the 1970s. And up until the credit crunch, the consensus seemed right. Inflation had stayed pegged at or near historically low levels, while economic growth remained remarkably stable during the "Great Moderation" of the previous decade. Central bankers spent much of that time patting themselves on the back for doing such a great job.

But the financial crisis changed all that. It became obvious that those same independent central bankers had missed the most egregious private sector debt binge in history, encouraged through moral hazard wholesale financial sector recklessness and fuelled sequential asset bubbles.

In the wake of the bursting of the bubble, critics worry about central bankers' willingness to usurp powers to which they're not legally entitled, and, increasingly, about their ability to deliver price stability in the future.

In the U.S., the Federal Reserve's mission creep has rung alarm bells.

John Hussman, a fund manager, warned after the Fed's rescue of Bear Stearns that "unelected bureaucrats are committing public funds to facilitate private business transactions and selectively defend the holders of corporate securities." The Fed again overstepped the bounds by buying Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac securities as part of the first round of its quantitative easing policy, he argued.

By Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke's own admission, the purchases had "a fiscal component", a transaction that usurped Congress's powers and that was therefore unconstitutional, according to Mr. Hussman.

More recently, Philadelphia Fed President Charles Plosser noted the risks of the Fed's power grab: "Having crossed the Rubicon into fiscal policy and engaged in actions to use its balance sheet to support specific markets and firms, the Fed, I believe, is likely to come under pressure in the future to use its powers as a substitute for other fiscal decisions."

There's already a small but vocal core of Fed skeptics in Congress, led by Rep. Ron Paul, who heads the House Financial Services Subcommittee on Domestic Monetary Policy. As politicians become aware of just how far the Fed's reach has spread, more are bound to join in the campaign to clamp down on it.

On this side of the Atlantic, Governor Mervyn King all but admitted the Bank of England has unilaterally abandoned its official 2% inflation target in favor of lower unemployment. This has sparked outrage among savers and pensioners, who are being made to pay for the Bank's past mistakes as it engineers a transfer of wealth from them to borrowers and bankers. 

What's more, the Bank's singular failure at forecasting inflation correctly over even a few months has led some to question its ability or willingness to bring inflation down over the medium term of a couple of years. Politicians are taking note. 

Ironically, the coalition government is expanding the Bank's powers to include bank supervision and "macro-prudential" regulation. This is something it may well come to regret.

On the continent, the European Central Bank has been more sensitive to its most powerful critics—the Germans. Over recent weeks it has reiterated its strong commitment to maintaining euro-zone consumer prices growth at a little under 2%. The ECB will stick fast to this target even as it pursues other support measures to ensure the euro doesn't fall apart, according to its president, Jean-Claude Trichet. Mr. Trichet is aware of German nervousness over the potentially inflationary consequences of central bank support for peripheral Europe's bond markets. 

But chances are there will either be another sovereign crisis in the euro zone or inflation will run out of hand. In either case, the ECB will be a lightning rod for criticism.

To be sure, ruling governments can fire central bankers. But that's an enormous step to take. Politicians are terrified of the market turmoil such a move would incite. Economic circumstances would have to be pretty extreme before they pulled the trigger. So for now, independent central bankers' scope to do as they like remains huge.

But politicians won't forget they are vulnerable to the errors of these technocrats. In future, they're likely to scrape away at central bank independence wherever and however they can, tightening oversight here, establishing new rules there.

Which suggests the golden age for central bankers is probably over.

 Write to  Alen Mattich at alen.mattich@dowjones.com 