TOKYO—Three workers sustained the most serious radiation exposure yet confirmed at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear-power plant.

Meanwhile, restoring electricity to the control rooms and cooling systems resumed at the plant, which continued to emit smoke or steam at some locations. 

The workers were exposed to moderately high levels of radiation while laying cable at reactor No. 3 and came into contact with radioactive water on the ground, a government spokesman said. Two of the workers were sent to a hospital for treatment on their feet or legs. 

Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency officials said Thursday the three workers were exposed to 170,000 to 180,000 microsieverts of radiation, higher than any confirmed level of exposure sustained by workers previously. The two were dispatched to a hospital "in case they suffered severe radiation exposure," an agency official said. 

The government recently raised its maximum limit on exposure for workers in an emergency to 250,000 microsieverts. It sets a lower limit of 50,000 for workers and firefighters in general disaster work. A chest X-ray typically exposes a patient to around 100 microsieverts.

Two workers were slightly injured trying to restore electric cables, neither from radiation, on Wednesday.

But in a sign of gains being made in the fight to bring the reactors under control,  Tokyo Electric Power Co.
9501


0.14
%




, the plant's operator, said that it intended to restart the cooling system of reactor No. 3 as early as Friday to cool the reactor core. Until the system goes back online, Tepco plans to continue its operation to pump seawater into the reactor and the storage pool that holds spent fuel. 

Lighting was restored at the control room for reactor No. 1 Thursday morning, becoming the second one to go back into service, after the control center at reactor No. 3. 

"Restoring electricity to the cooling system is a first step" toward resolving the crisis, said Hiromitsu Ino, professor emeritus of the University of Tokyo. "But the persistent smoke indicates that Tepco has yet to have full control over fuel in the reactor core, which is creating heat and apparently igniting the plastic covering of various cables," said Prof. Ino, who is a member of a civic group opposed to nuclear-power development in Japan. 

The previously stable reactor No. 1 behaved erratically in the morning as strain in the reactor pressure vessel rose. High pressure could damage the vessel and result in the leakage of radioactive material into the containment vessel. That could raise the risk that radiation would leak outside the reactor. 

The government spokesman, Yukio Edano, said reactor No. 1 was the focus of attention but that there was no sign of new damage. Tepco was able to reduce the temperature and pressure inside the reactor, the nuclear-safety agency said. 

The Japanese government monitors radiation levels around the country. Track these measurements over time.

Efforts to revive the cooling system for the complex's six reactors have been fraught with setbacks. On Wednesday, reactor No. 5 suffered a pump breakdown. Tepco replaced the pump, and normal cooling operations resumed by Thursday afternoon. Work also was delayed Wednesday at reactor No. 3 because of black smoke. The nuclear-safety agency said it might have been caused by oil in a pump catching fire. 

At Reactor No. 2, where repair work has been hindered by periods of high radiation, workers continued their efforts to restore the lighting and control systems. 

What was believed to be steam was seen rising from reactors Nos. 1-4 Thursday morning, apparently vapor evaporating off storage pools. That was a possible sign that hosing operations from outside the buildings were yielding only limited results—adding urgency to restoring the plant's regular cooling systems to stabilize conditions. 

Using seawater to cool the reactors has raised concerns. Since March 12, the day after an earthquake and tsunami knocked out the cooling systems of the nuclear complex, Tepco has been flooding the containment vessels of reactors Nos. 1-3 in a stopgap attempt to cool the reactor cores and prevent a meltdown. But concerns have emerged that salt in the seawater could damage machinery, clog pipes and encrust fuel rods, making it difficult for them to cool. 

"We are aware of the harmful effects of using seawater," said Hidehiko Nishiyama, a spokesman for the nuclear-safety agency. "We need to anticipate the possible consequences and take appropriate action." 

People living outside a 30-kilometer radius of the plant may have been exposed to elevated levels of radioactive substances, a Nuclear Safety Commission of Japan estimate showed late Wednesday. 

In some parts of cities and towns more than 30 kilometers northwest and south of the Daiichi power station, people may have been exposed to a total of more than 100,000 microsieverts of radioactive iodine since the March 11 earthquake. 

The government hasn't instructed residents living outside a 30-kilometer radius of the nuclear power station to flee or stay indoors. The government said radiation exposure would be lowered to one-quarter to one-tenth if people stay indoors. 

 Write to  Mitsuru Obe at mitsuru.obe@dowjones.com and Kosaku Narioka at kosaku.narioka@dowjones.com 

 Write to  Mitsuru Obe at mitsuru.obe@dowjones.com and Kosaku Narioka at kosaku.narioka@dowjones.com 