Celebrity flameouts are great for the tabloids, tell-all television and YouTube. It seems no moment is too private to be recorded on someone's cellphone. But what do they mean for investors?

I was doubly dismayed by fashion designer  John Galliano's recent anti-Semitic tirades in a Paris bar. I would have been hard-pressed to identify Mr. Galliano before his recent and appalling notoriety. But until being fired March 1 for his ugly remarks, he was the creative head of Christian Dior, the iconic fashion house owned by LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton SA. And I'm an LVMH shareholder and have recommended the stock in this column several times.

I had a similar reaction to actor  Charlie Sheen's bizarre public attack on  Chuck Lorre, the executive producer of the hit  CBS
CBS.A


0.12
%




 sitcom "Two and a Half Men," even though I'm not a shareholder of CBS (which airs the show) or  Time Warner
TWX


0.70
%




 (whose Warner Bros. unit produces it). Mr. Sheen insisted on using a Hebrew version of the producer's name, giving his tirade an element of anti-Semitism. Production of the show was initially suspended, and then Mr. Sheen was fired from the sitcom this week after he participated in a series of outlandish TV appearances and generated a media circus. 

In today's world, few people are just celebrities—they also are brands. And often, as is the case in both of these examples, they indelibly are linked to publicly traded companies. 

I don't mean to minimize the ugly conduct at issue by focusing unduly on the business and investment impact. I find it deeply troubling that well into the 21st century, anti-Semitism is still raising its ugly head. But there it is, reminding everyone that the world will likely never be free from prejudice. To their credit, both LVMH and Warner Bros. moved quickly to condemn their stars' repellent behavior.

Mr. Galliano issued what seemed a heartfelt apology, pointing out that he himself had been a victim of discrimination (homophobia, presumably), saying he was seeking help for his "failures." (People close to Dior said the designer has been suffering from alcohol addiction.) He seems to have embarked on the well-worn path to redemption traced by other stars. Mr. Sheen, who filed a $100 million suit this week against Warner Bros. and Mr. Lorre, has so far shown no evidence of contrition.

Contrition or lack thereof aside, their respective contributions to LVMH, CBS and Warner Bros. are over for now. And so far, their departures have had little impact on shares. LVMH's American depositary receipts have held steady at about $31 since the Galliano outburst. Shares of Time Warner and CBS have also barely budged.

The question for investors is whether a top fashion designer and leading Hollywood star, however talented, are truly irreplaceable. And I think the answer is: They aren't. 

Christian Dior is long dead, and a succession of designers has nonetheless burnished Dior into a coveted global brand. Can anyone outside the fashion industry even remember the names of any of these people? LVMH Chief Executive  Bernard Arnault had bigger issues in mind this week as he announced the acquisition of luxury jeweler  Bulgari, another iconic brand. 

Similarly, hit television shows come and go. Whether "Two and a Half Men" can continue without Mr. Sheen is beside the point. CBS is capable of generating another hit, preferably starring someone a little more stable.

More broadly, the Galliano and Sheen episodes pose the question of whether anyone in business is irreplaceable.  Martha Stewart? The company survived her imprisonment for false statements.  Steve Jobs? The  Apple
AAPL


0.92
%




 founder seems to have done a good job of grooming managers who can function in his absence. 

Everyone is unique, and some are more talented than others. But generally speaking, I don't think anyone is irreplaceable. I never have made an investment decision simply because someone resigns, is fired or dies. Investors usually don't like change, but replacements for Messrs. Galliano and Sheen may even be better for the companies that employed them. The human race is endlessly regenerative, and talent, thank goodness, is in ample supply.

—James B. Stewart, a columnist for SmartMoney magazine and SmartMoney.com, writes weekly about his personal investing strategy. Unlike Dow Jones reporters, he may have positions in the stocks he writes about. For his past columns, see: www.smartmoney.com/commonsense.