LONDON— Ben Broadbent, senior economist at  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.,
GS


0.00
%




 was named Monday as arch-hawk  Andrew Sentance's replacement on the Bank of England's rate-setting Monetary Policy Committee. 

Mr. Broadbent, who is senior European economist at the U.S. investment bank, takes up his new role on June 1 after Mr. Sentance's four-and-a-half-year term on the committee comes to an end. 

Mr. Broadbent was appointed by the Chancellor of the Exchequer  George Osborne, who has the power to nominate four external members of the central bank's rate-setting body.

The economist's career will be pored over by investors searching for clues to his likely voting intentions as the BOE grapples with runaway inflation and patchy economic growth. His appointment may also draw scrutiny from opposition lawmakers, who are suspicious of investment bankers and will be keen to investigate whether the government has picked a candidate too sympathetic to its aims. 

Mr. Broadbent couldn't be reached for comment Monday. A spokeswoman at Goldman Sachs said he has resigned from the bank and is on leave. 

In an article in the Financial Times newspaper on Feb. 9, Mr. Broadbent displayed some of his predecessor's hawkish tone. Mr. Sentance is viewed as the most prominent hawk at the Bank of England, having voted for a rise in interest rates every month since June 2010. 

Mr. Broadbent wrote that the government is probably on the right course with its fiscal policy and said previous periods of fiscal consolidation coincided with economic growth, not recession. He added that a rise in commodity prices that the bank insists is probably temporary may in fact be part of a trend. And he said some of the bank's judgments have been "persistently wrong." 

Still, he also wrote that the MPC can't do much about some of the forces buffeting the economy and that it would be wrong to blame monetary-policy makers for the "years of famine" the U.K. faces in the aftermath of recession. 

In a Goldman Sachs research note published Sunday, Mr. Broadbent and colleagues wrote that there are "plenty of respectable arguments" for not raising interest rates now, although they added a rate increase probably wouldn't have as serious an impact on household finances as some suggest. 

  Simon Hayes, an economist at Barclays Capital, said Mr. Broadbent appears to be on the hawkish end of the spectrum but added that it is notoriously difficult to predict how new committee members will vote. 

  Howard Archer, chief European and U.K. economist at IHS Global Insight, said Goldman Sachs is forecasting a rate increase in May, which could hint that Mr. Broadbent favors such a move. But he added the bank also noted the importance of first-quarter gross domestic product figures to the rate forecast. 

Mr. Broadbent took up the role of senior European economist at Goldman Sachs in 2000 and was named a managing director of the bank in 2006. He is a former assistant professor at Columbia University and has worked at both the Bank of England and the U.K. Treasury. He was educated at Harvard University. 

Mr. Broadbent's appointment means the Monetary Policy Committee remains exclusively male. There have been only a handful of women on the MPC since it was formed in 1997, when the bank was given control of U.K. monetary policy. 

In a statement, the government said it would like to see a greater number of women apply for future appointments. Out of 27 applicants for Mr. Sentance's post, just one was female, the government said. 



—Alex Brittain and Ainsley Thomson contributed to this article.