For a time, Sean P. Means of the Salt Lake Tribune maintained a macabre list of unemployed American film critics on his blog, the Movie Cricket. He had to abandon it when it began to resemble a list of American film critics.

Film critics have suffered plenty of downs lately, from dwindling job opportunities at newspapers to the barbs at the Golden Globes last Sunday, when Ricky Gervais joked that members of the Hollywood Foreign Press Association were taking bribes. That's led to many recent declarations of the Death of Film Criticism. But this is a myth; we're actually living in a Golden Age of Film Criticism. More filmgoers are reading more good writing about more films, new and old, than ever before. They are also reading more bad writing, but there you go. Having lost the ability to speak, I've adopted the Internet as my own social network and am amazed almost daily by yet another extraordinary film critic.

These new critics are New Media to their bones. They exploit every available technical resource. Their essays employ streaming audio and video, dazzling links to citations and resources, and endless threads of comments. They say "frame grab" the way we used to say "publicity photo." When all was new and Voyager/Criterion was rolling out "hyperbooks" (CD-ROMs you could click around on), what would we have made of a critic like Matt Zoller Seitz, who today creates elaborate video essays demonstrating an awesome command of movie imagery on websites like Salon? 

Many of the best emerging critics exhibit an attribute I was already noticing in the 1960s. In their teens, they've already seen all the significant films, having apparently screened them in the womb. In the old days I called this the Doc Films Syndrome, because it was easy to find among the members of the University of Chicago's Doc Films, the nation's oldest film society. Today Dave Kehr is an authority for the New York Times, and Todd McCarthy is the leading critic in the trade publications. When I met them they were not old enough to vote and got into heated discussions of Otto Preminger's policy of not doing over-the-shoulder camera shots. When Preminger finally used one, they began vibrating so violently that I prepared cold compresses.

Some of Roger Ebert's favorite websites for film criticism:

On my blog I began in recent years to notice insightful comments by people who would mention in passing that they were from Egypt, India, Turkey, Mexico, South Korea, Taiwan, Bolivia, the Philippines. These writers apologized for English that would put the average American graduate student to shame. The Doc Films Syndrome apparently had spread globally by the trade winds, and by their early 20s, Wael Khairy of Cairo and Seongyong Cho of Seoul had seen every significant film ever made. I started a section of my blog called Our Far-Flung Correspondents to feature their work. Here in Chicago I met Ignatiy Vishnevetsky, born in Russia, who at the age of 12 decided to give Hollywood a rest while focusing on the work of his countryman Andrei Tarkovsky, known for films like "Solaris." 

The Web and HTML have been a godsend for film criticism. The best single film criticism site is arguably davidbordwell.net, featuring the Good Doctor Bordwell and his wife Kristin Thompson. Their names are known from their textbooks, studied in every film school in the world. But they are not users of the obscurantist gobbledygook employed by academics who, frankly, cannot really write. They communicate in prose as clear as running water. I suppose such textbook authors in their 60s are the poster children for Old Media, but Mr. Bordwell and Ms. Thompson are Exhibit A of Renewed Media. It is hard to simply write about the visual strategies of the Japanese master Yasujiro Ozu, so on a recent blog Mr. Bordwell used frame grabs to explain why Mr. Ozu is so deep while apparently so limited in his framing.

In 1966, when the founders of the National Society of Film Critics first gathered at Sardi's, films were not easily available. There were revival theaters in big cities, and there was the Museum of Modern Art. Many of us had made the pilgrimage to the Cinémathèque Française in Paris. Some taught film classes and rented 16-millimeter prints from New Yorker or Janus. But film writing often contained references to "phantom scenes"—scenes that were mistakenly remembered by the writers but alas, never existed. 

Home video changed all that. DVD made high-quality images available. Money was available for companies such as Criterion and Kino to pay for frame-by-frame restorations. Today we can see the work of Buster Keaton more clearly than he could in the last three decades of his life.

In the last year or two, the world's cinema has become even more available. It streams glitch-free in HD quality into big-screen TV sets. This instant, sitting right here, I can choose to watch virtually any film you can think of via Netflix, Amazon, Hulu, MUBI, the Asia/Pacific Film Archive, Google Video or Vimeo. At Europa Film Treasures, I can watch films none of us has heard of. In Seoul, Cairo, Mumbai and Manila, film critics are watching films we could only dream of seeing a few decades ago. And writing about them very well, too. 

 Corrections and Amplifications 

Mr. Ebert has never been a member of the New York Film Critics' Circle. A previous version of this article stated that he was a member.

—Mr. Ebert's public television program, "Ebert Presents at the Movies," premiered Friday.