BEIJING—One of China's biggest cities is finalizing plans for a new tax on high-end residential real estate, state media reported, a long-discussed measure to escalate the fight against rising property prices that have fueled frustration among the country's urban middle class.

The mayor of Chongqing, Huang Qifan, has recommended approval of the tax by the municipal legislature, and the Chinese Ministry of Finance has approved the tax in principle, the state-run Xinhua news agency reported Sunday. Legislative approval is generally a mere formality in China, suggesting the tax is likely to be adopted soon. Xinhua said the city could start collecting it by the end of March.

China currently levies a real-estate tax only on commercial properties. Discussion has intensified over the last year about adding a similar tax for residential property, as housing prices in many cities have continued to soar despite a series of other measures to rein them in. Advocates of the move argue that it could be a potent tool to curb speculation, but the property sector is a major component of China's economy and starting a new tax on such an vital industry has been both politically and technically complicated.

The Finance Ministry said in September that it aimed to launch trial versions of the tax on residential properties in selected cities before gradually expanding it to the rest of the country. Chinese media have reported that, in addition to Chongqing, Shanghai is also considering adopting such a tax in coming months, although no official announcement has been made.

How significant the planned taxes will be in practice remains unclear. Little information about the planned tax in Chongqing has been disclosed, such as at what value the tax will start to be assessed, exactly how the value will be determined, and what the tax rate will be. China lacks accurate data on house ownership, and enforcement of tax collection tends to be lax. Xinhua said the Chongqing municipal government "is rushing to draft a detailed regulation" for the tax. The report provided no further details.

Recent data show China's property prices posted their third consecutive month-on-month rise in November, underscoring the challenge Beijing faces in bringing real-estate prices under control amid mounting concern over broader inflation. Property prices in 70 of China's large and medium-sized cities rose 0.3% in November from October, following a 0.2% rise in October and a 0.5% gain in September.

The steady rise in prices has pushed housing in downtown areas of some cities out of reach of many urban residents, fueling growing public resentment that has caught the attention of China's leadership. The government adopted a series of measures last year to stabilize property prices: raising minimum down payment levels, increasing mortgage rates, and curbing lending for purchases of additional homes. It has also raised interest rates twice in recent months.

But officials have said overall their measures weren't implemented well enough last year, and vowed tougher steps.

Local media reports have said that the Chongqing tax may only be implemented on newly purchased homes, so it may not have such a big impact on people who already own multiple homes. Some of the reports, which haven't been confirmed, said the tax rate would be around 1%.

A new real estate tax could also be an alternative source of revenue for local governments, which have been heavily dependent on land sales for income. The dependence has incentivized governments to push up land prices, which has contributed to the lofty housing prices. But analysts have said the tax would have to be expanded to cover a larger base for it to be an effective source of revenue.

Analysts have also said that the government may be unwilling to issue all the details of the tax all at the same time as they want to collect feedback and reform the tax over time, which may impair its effectiveness against property speculation.

—Liu Li, Shen Hong and Esther Fung