The New York Times will begin charging readers for unlimited access to the paper's website March 28, an ambitious effort to get consumers to pay for digital news that the paper has long been giving away. 

Online readers will be able to read as many as 20 articles per month free. At that threshold, they will be offered one of several subscription plans: $15 a month for unlimited visits to the Times online and access to the Times's various apps for smartphones; $20 a month for the Times online and its app on  Apple Inc.
AAPL


0.88
%




's iPad; and for $35 a month, an "All Digital Access" package. 

Subscribers to the print edition will get full online and mobile privileges.

The Times began offering the packages on Thursday in Canada to "fine-tune the customer experience" before launching in the U.S. and the rest of the world,  Arthur Sulzberger Jr., chairman of  New York Times 
NYT


0.11
%




Co. and publisher of the Times, wrote in a letter to readers. 

The new offerings cap about two years of deliberations and planning that have evolved in response to the economic and technological changes upending the news industry. By and large, the industry has been reluctant to rope off a large amount of content online due to fears of losing readers and advertisers to countless other free options. 

Early last year, the Times settled on a "metered" pay model after some executives argued that a more closed site would stunt the website's rebounding online-advertising business, worth more than $100 million a year, according to people familiar with the matter. This system also used by  Pearson PLC's Financial Times, appealed to executives because of the potential to hold on to the roughly 85% of visitors who don't read enough stories to trigger the meter while generating subscription revenue from the 15% who represent the "heavy users."

The home page and all section fronts will remain free to browse for all users. The Times's financial-news blog DealBook also will be accessible without a digital subscription, DealBook editor Andrew Ross Sorkin wrote in a note to readers. 

Additionally, people who arrive through search engines, blogs and social-media sites like Facebook and Twitter won't for the most part be barred from viewing the link they click. Search engines and links from other sites account for half or more of the site's traffic in some months.

"We feel that by doing this, we are certainly remaining part of the open Web, that indeed we are protecting our traffic and we are protecting the ad inventory and the ad revenue we have come to enjoy," Times Co. chief executive  Janet Robinson said in an interview. 

Among print media companies, the Times has the largest share of the online market in terms of traffic, with a 3.85% share in February, according to Experian Hitwise. The steps the paper is taking to preserve that traffic have raised questions about how effective it can be in creating a meaningful subscription-revenue stream. Executives have said they have been working with the major search engines to limit the frequency of side-door visits so readers can't game the system. For example, visitors from  Google Inc.'s search engine will be limited to five articles a day, the company said. 

"We certainly can't predict how consumers will work around a metered model," Ms. Robinson said. "But certainly we will monitor this very carefully." 

NYTimes.com attracts more than 30 million unique visitors per month, according to comScore Inc. 

Like many publishers, the Times continues to grapple with declines in print advertising. The weak print-ad market has accelerated the need to find new sources of revenue beyond ads online, where publishers can't charge nearly as much as they do in print. Revenue from print advertising at New York Times Co.'s newspapers, which accounts for nearly 40% of total revenue, declined 7.2% in the fourth quarter, more than offsetting an 11.1% increase in digital revenues. 

Times Co. executives said research showed readers increasingly were willing to pay for access to the paper on a range of devices including Apple's iPhone and iPad. 

Apple, though, has emerged as a potential impediment to what the Times and other publishers want to do because its forthcoming subscription platform limits publishers' access to customer information. 

Ms. Robinson said that while the Times will sell the paper through Apple's platform, it has "the intention to own our consumer information" and that it is working with Apple on terms. "We will work very collaboratively with Apple and with other device manufacturers," she said. 

 Write to  Russell Adams at russell.adams@wsj.com 