Beginning with the very first concert, in 1973, at his annual Highlights in Jazz series, impresario Jack Kleinsinger gained a reputation for long-winded announcements and introductions. But after some complaints were voiced, Mr. Kleinsinger agreed to keep his talking points as brief as he could. "How do you like that?" he'd say. "That announcement was only two minutes!" 

Then last May, at the final show of the 2009-10 season, came the one announcement that no one wanted to hear: Highlights in Jazz, the longest-running jazz concert series in the history of New York, was calling it quits. The reason, Mr. Kleinsinger explained from the stage on that night, had nothing to do with his age (74) or health (good), but "economics." He had simply lost the means to raise the annual budget, approximately $40,000, which he traditionally had garnered through a combination of ticket sales, federal funding and tax deductible private donations. The same recessive economy had claimed the long-running JVC Jazz Festival , followed by its short-lived successor, the CareFusion Jazz Festival.

But in November, Mr. Kleinsinger made the announcement that Highlights in Jazz would return. He reported that he had found a private donor, and though he still doesn't expect to make a profit, he told the Journal that he will at least cover his losses. The first concert in the new four-program series, to be held Thursday night at the Tribeca Arts Center, is titled "Dynamic Duos" and will feature duets between guitarists Bucky Pizzarelli and Howard Alden, trombonist Wycliffe Gordon and bassist Jay Leonhart, and clarinetist Anat Cohen and pianist Rossano Sportiello. 

From the first Highlights shows, held at the Theater DeLys (later renamed for its owner, Lucille Lortel) in 1973, it was clear that Mr. Kleinsinger's personal hosting style, for better or worse, would become as much a part of the series' tradition as the music itself. Like Phil Schaap, the infamously verbose jazz scholar and DJ who served as the original sound engineer for Highlights in Jazz, Mr. Kleinsinger brought a fan's enthusiasm to his role that still drives the whole thing. Film critic Leonard Maltin once likened him to "Ed Sullivan on adrenaline." 

During the "final" concert, last May 13, Mr. Kleinsinger's speeches were longer than ever, and the show lasted three hours. Still, no one would have denied him what, at the time, appeared to be his last hurrah after 38 years, four different venues, exactly 300 shows—and writing checks to maybe 5,000 different musicians. At that show, he also told some old-sea stories. After a few successful shows at the DeLys, he said, Ms. Lortel declared that she didn't want jazz in her theater, and canceled their agreement. "I got back at her," Mr. Kleinsinger said. "I booked the tap dancer Baby Lawrence, and he went to work on her stage with his tap shoes and a 20-pound bag of sand!"

The entire "last" concert had an autobiographical arc to it. Among the musicians presented was the first jazzman Mr. Kleinsinger ever experienced playing live: 87-year-old clarinetist Sol Yaged, whom Mr. Kleinsinger heard at the old Stuyvesant Casino when he was 12. Also present was guitarist Gene Bertoncini, who played at both the first show in 1973 and the final show in May, and 16 times in between. 

There were, however, goodbyes to be said at that concert, though we didn't know it at the time. It was the last major New York appearance for the legendary pianist Dr. Billy Taylor, who died last week at 89. Mr. Taylor was the first artist whom Mr. Kleinsinger had ever presented in performance. "When I was 16," Mr. Kleingsinger said, "I somehow talked him into playing a free concert at my high school, and he gave a lecture, too!"

By 11 p.m., when the last notes were sounded in what was ostensibly the last Highlights in Jazz performance, the crowd thanked Mr. Kleinsinger for the opportunity to see Earl Fatha Hines, Gerry Mulligan, Zoot Sims, Al Cohn, Woody Herman, Doc Cheatham, Dizzy Gillespie, Pepper Adams, Maxine Sullivan, Sylvia Syms, Dicky Wells, Ruby Braff and hundreds of others through the years. 

Now, looking ahead to another Highlights in Jazz concert this week, one can't help but think about how satisfying it will be to sit in a room with 900 people who are able to recognize the Benny Goodman arrangement of "Memories of You" within the first three notes. Having lost and suddenly regained one of the best opportunities to hear live swing, traditional, and mainstream jazz, even Jack Kleinsinger's talky announcements will sound like music to our ears.