Mumbai--India's Bharti Enterprises Ltd is looking to sell a controlling stake in its mobile software development unit, Comviva Technologies Ltd, three people familiar with the matter said Thursday. 

The deal, if struck, would be the second big sellout in the Indian technology industry this year after the founding family of Patni Computers Ltd decided to sell their stake to U.S.-listed outsourcing firm iGate Corp. in a deal valued at up to $1.22 billion. 

"What's on the block is control, and the valuation for the firm [Comviva] as a whole would have to be at least $300 million to $400 million," one of the people, who asked not to be named, told Dow Jones Newswires.





For instance, listed peer OnMobile Global Ltd. has a market capitalization of about $317 million. 

Bharti has already appointed a merchant bank for the sale and has offered to sell Comviva to at least two potential buyers, though there are no formal bids or expressions of interests yet, two of the people said. They didn't name the potential buyers. 

Comviva, which was earlier called Bharti Telesoft, makes software that allows operators to provide services such as music and video on mobile phones, and sells to customers in more than 85 countries. 

Bharti Enterprises also owns Bharti Airtel Ltd, India's largest mobile phone operator by subscribers, which has traditionally been Comviva's main client.

Bharti Enterprises owns most of Comviva, but in 2005 private-equity fund Sequoia Capital and Cisco Systems Inc. bought an unspecified stake for $13.5 million. It wasn't immediately clear if Sequoia and Cisco would also seek to offload their stake if Bharti were to find a buyer for its stake. 

Bharti Enterprises and Sequoia Capital declined to comment, while executives at Cisco weren't immediately available. 

Analysts said the deal, if finalized, could mark the beginning of a wave of consolidation in the technology sector, where smaller firms have found it difficult to recover from the global economic slowdown because of their lack of scale and comparatively weaker pricing power. Telecom companies, globally, also have cut back on spending, and the sector has been among the last to recover from the credit crisis. 

