Arco Renz never seems to stop moving.

The 39-year-old choreographer has just arrived in Singapore, where he is preparing for the debut of Crack, a contemporary dance production commissioned by the Singapore Arts Festival, which opens Friday and runs until June 5. 

He will then take the show to Europe, before returning to Southeast Asia and then finishing off the tour in Australia.

His peripatetic youth has prepared him well for a life on the go. Mr. Renz, who was born to dancer parents in Germany, studied theater in Berlin and Paris before heading to Brussels to study dance. 

Although his artistic productions company, Kobalt Works, is based in Brussels, Mr. Renz spends much of his time in Asia. Crack, which is about how Cambodia is extracting itself from the shadow of the Khmer Rouge, features an entirely native cast drawn from the Phnom Penh-based Amrita Performing Arts.

Mr. Renz spoke to The Wall Street Journal about defining moments in his career and how he sees the contemporary dance scene in Asia.



I'm working with the first generation of Cambodian dancers trained in classical dance who are now exploring contemporary dance and what it can mean. 



I was working in theatre in Paris when I decided I wanted to be a choreographer. I realized that as an actor, I couldn't say what I want to say. I had studied dance since I was young but I started to choreograph in my 20s. [When choreographing], I experiment with taking the text away and saying things with the body. [My work is] about what you can say if words did not exist. 





I was invited to go to Performing Arts Research & Training Studios [in Brussels] to study with Anne Teresa De Keersmaeker. It was very experimental. I learnt a lot about the multiple relationships between dance and music, which can be very complex and structured and rich and yet also sensual and emotional. 



In 1994, I made my first trip to Asia when I went to visit India. It was a trip I had planned for a long time and it was very important in my development as a choreographer. I went to the Kathakali theatre in Kerala and saw this very long performance. It must have been four hours long. I was absolutely fascinated although I had no idea what it was about. What struck me most was the energy that the performers sent out. It got me wondering how the performer generates this energy. I went on to study Kathakali in India and other traditional performing art forms in Indonesia in order to try and understand how to communicate with such energy.



I don't know if you can say that there is one contemporary dance scene in Asia. It is completely different in Cambodia when you compare it to Indonesia. [But] what is important is that it defines itself differently from European contemporary dance. 



I've tried to study the history of Asia and understand Pol Pot and how the Cambodians are trying to deal with the trauma. But the present interests me more. Bodies have memories and when I work with dancers, you see the collective memory of the dance form. I get in touch with the history of the culture that has been transmitted to them by past generations. In such a project, I try not to analyze because the experience is very sensual.



Crack is about dialogue. I work with them [Amrita Performing Arts] as performers but also as people, so our dialogue is on an equal level. 

We're both dealing in unknown territory because although I've worked before in Asia, I had never been to Cambodia before I was approached [to do Crack]. 

I know very little about Cambodian dance and culture but they also did not know about contemporary dance. It was an important moment where two white pages met exactly. 

I honestly try not to think about life in terms of success or failure. 



Life is an ongoing process and I try not to be proud in success or dejected in failure. I'd rather think about life in terms of moments; some are difficult and some are enjoyable. 



I have been able to build a production structure in Belgium that allows me to do research and work with great people for 10 to 12 years. It has been an entirely enjoyable moment.