DUBLIN—Ireland's Green Party pulled out of the government Sunday, a move that will hasten elections scheduled for March 11 and bring down the curtain on one of the most crisis-racked administrations in Ireland's history.

The Greens, junior partner in the governing coalition, said they still would support legislation underpinning the €67.5 billion ($91.8 billion) international bailout arranged for Ireland last November.

But the early election could impact the fate of the rescue package. The main opposition parties voted against it, and have vowed to renegotiate parts of it—particularly the average 5.8% interest rate on the funds—if they form the next government.

The Greens' move delivered the coup de grace to a government that over the past week has spectacularly imploded in full view of a weary and apprehensive electorate.

In the past few days, six ministers resigned, a wide-ranging cabinet shuffle backfired, Prime Minister Brian Cowen stood down as leader of his party, Fianna Fail, and his junior partners quit. Mr. Cowen now has seven ministers in his cabinet to run 15 ministries.

"It is a circus, and it's embarrassing," said Elaine Byrne, lecturer in politics at Trinity College, Dublin. "The Irish people now just want to get this over with as soon as possible and have a new government."

See key dates in Ireland's economic crisis.

Fianna Fail, which dominated Irish politics for nearly 80 years, now is bracing itself for a defeat of historic proportions in elections that could be held as early as next month. A Sunday Independent/Quantum Research poll showed support for the party has fallen to a record low of 8%. That is a dire rating for a party that has loomed large in Irish politics since 1932 and has been in government for all but three of the last 20 years.

Tensions between Fianna Fail and the Greens have simmered since last fall, when the government was forced to ask for a bailout from the European Union and the International Monetary Fund to save the Irish banking system from collapse. Relations turned icy after Mr. Cowen's aborted cabinet shuffle last week, which critics saw as a ploy to enhance the prospects of younger Fianna Fail members in the coming election. 

"Our patience has reached an end," Green leader John Gormley told a news conference Sunday. He said Fianna Fail's leadership problem was too much of a distraction for the government, and an immediate election was needed.

Similar calls had been made over the weekend by opposition parties, who were outraged by Mr. Cowen's decision to step down as leader of Fianna Fail but stay on as prime minister. The center-right Fine Gael said it would pursue a vote of no confidence in Mr. Cowen's leadership. 

Yet the opposition says it will support the finance bill, which implements many of the tax and other changes set out in the 2011 austerity budget, but want it passed by Friday so an election can be called. Mr. Cowen has said it is impossible to adopt such complex legislation in the space of a week. Ireland's access to the EU-IMF bailout money is contingent on the bill being passed.

If it loses the next election, Fianna Fail will join the swelling ranks of Western political parties that have been punished by voters for their handling of the recession and financial crisis of the last two years.

Critics have accused the party and Mr. Cowen of exacerbating Ireland's economic woes by providing a blanket guarantee for all bank loans and deposits in September 2008, to the tune of €440 billion. Ministers were also attacked last fall for repeatedly denying that discussions were underway with the IMF and EU on a rescue package for Ireland.

"I would never vote for them, after what they've done to this country," said John Donnelly, a retiree, speaking outside Dublin's imposing Customs House. "All the bankers are living it up in Honolulu and we're stuck here, with this mess."

As things stand, center-right Fine Gael is expected to emerge as the largest party in the coming election, and will likely form a coalition government with Labour. A poll released by Red C research earlier this month gave Fine Gael 35% and Labour 21%, with Fianna Fail on equal pegging with the hard-left nationalist party Sinn Fein on 14%. The Greens have 4% and independents 12%.

Some commentators predict Fianna Fail may be heading for oblivion. "I don't see them returning to their dominant position for 15 to 20 years—if they ever return," said Theresa Reidy, a lecturer in politics at University College Cork. "They could also just fade away completely."

Observers said the removal of Mr. Cowen so late in the game was also unlikely to improve Fianna Fail's dire electoral prospects. "They're just rearranging the seats on the deck of the Titanic," said Trinity College's Dr. Byrne. 

—Ainsley Thomson  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Guy Chazan at guy.chazan@wsj.com and Quentin Fottrell at quentin.fottrell@dowjones.com 