As diagnoses of autism rise, a growing number of families are grappling with the worry and expense of finding treatment and special education for children with the complex developmental disorder. And many are pressing employers and legislators for help.

An estimated one in 110 children is diagnosed with autism in the U.S., and its prevalence is increasing for reasons that aren't well understood, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Average medical expenditures for those with autism-spectrum disorders exceed those without by $4,110 to $6,200 per year, the CDC states.

In response, at least 23 states, including Indiana, South Carolina, Arizona and Massachusetts, have passed laws in the last few years requiring state-regulated group health plans to include autism coverage, according to the National Council of State Legislatures, though many states have caps on the mandates. Most other states and Washington, D.C., have similar bills pending, according to Autism Speaks, an advocacy group. Only Oklahoma, Utah and Wyoming don't have bills requiring autism coverage on their agendas.

In addition, federal law now prohibits insurance companies from refusing to issue or renew health-insurance coverage for children because of pre-existing conditions, including autism.

The state laws don't apply to benefit plans employers fund themselves. Self-funded plans are regulated by a federal statute, the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, or ERISA. A growing number of self-funded companies, however, are providing more health benefits for autism, often in response to demands from employees or to harmonize with state laws, says  Judith Ursitti, regional director of state advocacy relations for Autism Speaks.

  Microsoft
MSFT


0.33
%




 offers comprehensive benefits for autism. And at least 20 other major companies with self-funded plans say they provide at least some coverage for treatment of autism -- most often speech and occupational therapy -- including  Home Depot,
HD


0.39
%




 consultant Deloitte & Touche and drug maker  Eli Lilly.
LLY


-1.74
%






"They are seeing this is a more mainstream thing to do, a competitive benefit that they need to provide for employees," Ms. Ursitti says.

  Terri Fields of Sunnyvale, Calif., says her husband's employer health plan is helping to cover applied behavior analysis therapy, which many advocates and medical groups regard as a standard treatment protocol, for their 7-year-old son. He was diagnosed with autism when he was 18 months old. A previous employer didn't cover it, and reimbursement for other therapies it did cover was difficult to obtain, she says. Some insurers consider ABA experimental or not medically necessary.

A sample therapy program of ABA can cost more than $60,000 per year, experts say.

Today, Ms. Fields's son is "progressing nicely now that he is getting optimal treatment," and the family is saving thousands of dollars a year.

Ms. Fields, a 42-year-old high-tech operations manager for a networking company, says the benefits from her husband's employer have made a huge difference. "It is saving money, the time and the emotional energy. It is [like] night and day and I can't put a dollar value on that."

For more information on autism and treatment, go to the site of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, cdc.gov, as well as autismspeaks.org.

—Email: mp.mcqueen@wsj.com 