BRUSSELS—European finance ministers debated Monday how to beef up their giant rescue fund for troubled euro-zone countries but ended the first day of a two-day meeting without reaching a firm resolution on how to do it, amid German reluctance to open the doors to more and bigger bailouts.

Germany's disinclination to speed ahead dovetails with what European diplomats describe as a momentary air of calm that has descended on the bloc's sovereign debt crisis. "Although the markets remain volatile, the latest developments are encouraging," said Jean-Claude Juncker, the Luxembourg prime minister and head of the group of euro-zone nations. 

That's because the depressed government bonds of troubled Portugal and Spain have had some relief over the past week, thanks in part to the European Central Bank's program of buying euro-zone debt on the secondary market. The ECB said Monday it had purchased €2.3 billion ($3.1 billion) worth from the middle of the first week in January to the middle of last week—a relatively high amount.

Spain on Monday also sold €6 billion of bonds through a syndicate of banks. It shelled out the highest rate of interest it's had to pay in about a decade, but the sale demonstrated Spain still can raise money.

Still, pressure has remained to amplify the rescue fund, just in case. On Monday, Mr. Juncker said governments would "speed up our preparations" for a bigger and more flexible bailout fund. 

For more than a week, policymakers on the Continent have floated ideas to give the fund more heft and signal that Europe has the wherewithal to help Spain and Portugal.

José Manuel Barroso, the president of the European Commission, the European Union's executive arm, suggested that the rescue fund could be "reinforced" and given the authority to take more aggressive steps; Belgian Finance Minister Didier Reynders said its size should be doubled.

Among the proposals discussed: using the fund to buy government bonds of troubled countries, thereby keeping down their borrowing costs, establishing a precautionary credit line that could be tapped before a country is in crisis, and cutting the interest rate on borrowings from the fund. 

None of the notions has captured the German imagination. In a radio interview before Monday's meeting, German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble said Mr. Barroso's proposal was "complicating the situation." As the euro-zone's largest economy, Germany is paying more than anyone else to finance the rescue of weaker euro-zone states like Greece and Ireland.

 Cutting Back: Germany Shoulders Burden 

The bailouts are deeply unpopular in Germany. The rescue fund took shape last May, after the European Union bailed out Greece with €110 billion. The fund was pegged at €750 billion, the bulk of which—€440 billion—was to come from a special financing vehicle called the European Financial Stability Facility formed by the countries that use the euro.

But it soon emerged that €440 billion doesn't mean €440 billion. That's the maximum amount of loan guarantees the euro-zone countries will make. But guarantees of those receiving aid must be excluded, and other restrictions proved necessary to ensure that the EFSF's bonds receive a triple-A rating.

All told, the EFSF could lend around €250 billion if Portugal or Spain—or others—needed help.

One way or another, increasing the so-called effective lending capacity of the EFSF will require the strongest euro-zone members—the six that have triple-A credit ratings—to assume more responsibility. (The EFSF has 16 members; Estonia, which became the 17th euro-zone nation on Jan. 1, hasn't yet signed up.) Germany, again, would take the largest share.

That is a hard sell with the German public, which is why discussions have focused on a way to bulk up the lending capacity while still leaving politicians plausibly able to claim that the fund isn't exceeding the mandate laid out in May.

Mr. Schäuble said last week he supports bringing the effective lending capacity up to €440 billion. But he faces opposition among his cabinet colleagues and in parliament, where the Free Democratic Party—junior partner in Chancellor Angela Merkel's coalition—is opposed to putting more German taxpayers' money at risk. 

The FDP and its leader, German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle, are struggling to halt a slide in opinion polls ahead of a string of regional elections this spring. And many lawmakers in Ms. Merkel's own party, the Christian Democratic Union, aren't keen on increasing the bailout fund. The chancellor has been more circumspect than Mr. Schäuble about the idea of boosting the fund's capacity and flexibility. 

The idea of letting the EFSF buy countries' bonds or lend them money without a full-blown austerity program is particularly unappealing for Ms. Merkel, who persuaded her reluctant party to accept the need for rescue loans by pointing to the tough fiscal-austerity conditions that would be attached to any aid. 

In return for Germany's support for a bigger bailout fund, Ms. Merkel and her finance minister want other euro-zone countries, particularly those that haven't yet applied for a full-blown bailout, to commit to extra budget austerity as well as to faster structural overhauls of their economies, including their labor markets, German officials say.

Spain sold its bonds through a syndicate of banks and paid an interest rate of 2.56 percentage points above low-risk German bonds, which were trading Monday at 3.04%. 

The government also cancelled a bond auction scheduled for Thursday, depicting it as necessary to avoid duplication. But analysts said selling bonds via banks, rather than by auction, was a cautious step that reduced the risks that the sale would be viewed as having gone badly.

—Marcus Walker contributed to this article.

 Write to  Charles Forelle at charles.forelle@wsj.com and Stephen Fidler at stephen.fidler@wsj.com 