Mundra Port and Special Economic Zone's investors reacted with concern to their company's winning bid for a long-term lease of a coal terminal in Australia. Its share has fallen by 10.4% to 129 rupees in the last three trading days compared with the 4% decline in the Bombay Stock Exchange's benchmark Sensex. 

On Tuesday, the company had announced that it was the successful bidder for a 99-year lease of Abbot Point X50 Coal Terminal in Australia. 

Mundra Port, a subsidiary of Adani Enterprises, would pay about Australian $2 billion for operating this terminal. That is 20% higher than the Queensland government's initial expectation.

The deal valuation may be one concern for investors. Bloomberg estimates suggest Mundra's enterprise value/earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization ratiofor fiscal 2012 is 15.4 times on a consolidated basis. 

B. Ravi, chief financial officer of Mundra Port, expects based on current estimates that Abbott Point would generate revenue of about A$160 million and an Ebitda of A$100 million in fiscal 2012, which ends June.

On that basis, the ratio works out to about 18 times. That appears a bit higher than Mundra's current valuation.

Another concern is funding the transaction. The exact details of financing would be clear next month, Mr. Ravi said.

But, assuming the entire acquisition is funded by debt at a cost of about 7% (Libor plus 1.9% percentage point), the total interest outgo works out to about A$126 million. That is higher than the estimated EBITDA for fiscal 2012. 

"Post-deal, the debt-to-equity ratio would increase to about 1.7:1 from 0.7:1 currently," Mr. Ravi said. Part-funding the acquisition through equity, either in Mundra Port or the terminal operation, could ease concerns on this front.

How will Mundra benefit from this deal? Its capacity will increase significantly. It will add 50 million tons of capacity to the current 130 million tons capacity of Mundra Port. Abbott Point terminal's current capacity of 21 million ton will increase to 50 million ton next month after an ongoing expansion program is completed. Eventually, it could go up to 80 million tons.

Getting users for its capacity should not be a problem, given the appetite for Australia's coal. Users for the 50 million ton capacity have been contracted under take-or-pay agreements, which assure revenue for Mundra Port. In fiscal 2011, the terminal is expected to have revenue of A$110 million and an EBITDA of A$59 million.

In a statement, Mundra has said that Abbott Point's EBITDA margin is expected to improve to 70% in fiscal 2016 from 54% in fiscal 2011. Abbott Point's current margin, however, is lower than that of Mundra Port (68% for the nine months ended December). 

But the acquisition will add to revenue growth. 

"Entire capacity has take-or-pay agreements and can add 21% and 18% to Mundra's revenues and EBITDA, respectively, in fiscal 2012," wrote analysts from Religare Capital Markets Ltd in a note.

The deal gives Mundra a boost on the capacity front. But an optimal financing structure is essential to minimize the impact on its balance sheet. Until more clarity emerges on the financing structure and the acquisition's impact on Mundra's margin, the deal overhang on the stock is likely to remain.