PARIS -- Greece's prime minister sought to allay investor concerns over the country's staggering debt burden Thursday, saying the country isn't in talks to restructure government debt held by private bondholders and will return to the bond markets this year if conditions allow.

Speaking in an interview with Dow Jones Newswires, Prime Minister George Papandreou said Greece's program of tough structural reforms and harsh fiscal austerity -- as demanded by its international lenders -- would ensure that Athens could repay its private creditors.

"We have no such [restructuring] talks going on. If we look at growth, at the fiscal consolidation, the reforms we're making and the fact we have the strong backing of the [European Financial Stability Facility], we believe will have no problem in paying back the debt," Mr. Papandreou said.

In May, Greece narrowly avoided default with the help of a €110 billion bailout from the European Union and the International Monetary Fund in exchange for imposing sweeping economic overhauls while also cutting its budget deficit from 15.4% of gross domestic product in 2009 to below 3% by 2014. 

However, renewed jitters over Greece's giant debt burden -- expected to hit 153% of GDP by the end of 2011 -- combined with recent reports that Greece was considering restructuring interest payments on the debt held by private investors -- have propelled yields on Greek bonds to their highest level since the country was rescued from the brink of default.

Earlier this week, the spread between 10-year Greek government bonds and their benchmark German counterparts -- a measure of credit risk -- reached a record high, with the yield on the 10-year Greek bond rising to 12.55%, compared with 2.82% for the 10-year bund.

 Cutting Back: Anatomy of Greece's Debt Crisis 

 The Big Interview With Greek Finance Minister George Papaconstantinou 

That unease in the markets, which has also hit other peripheral European issuers such as Portugal and Ireland, comes as Europe's leaders grapple with a host of complex issues in the face of the continent's widening debt crisis. 

At their last summit in December, European leaders agreed to put in place a permanent rescue mechanism for distressed euro-zone members. But as part of that bailout mechanism, EU leaders decided that private debt holders should shoulder part of the losses in the event of a sovereign debt restructuring after 2013.

Further, under terms agreed on by EU leaders, bonds issued by the euro area's planned permanent rescue mechanism to help those insolvent euro members would be senior to other euro-zone sovereign bonds, meaning that they would have to be paid back first.

In his remarks, Mr. Papandreou said those moves had deeply unsettled bond investors holding debt issued by fiscally weaker euro-zone governments. 

"What we saw as a reaction is that credit rating agencies analyzed this mechanism and felt the private debt holders could have a higher risk," he said. "This reflected on our countries, Greece, Portugal and other countries too."

But despite broad agreement on some of the key issues, Europe's leaders still remain far apart on many of the technical details that would underpin such a future bailout mechanism. 

One such issue has been the idea of a common debt instrument that would be issued jointly on behalf of the 17 countries who share Europe's single currency, and could be used to finance future bailouts.

The idea was rejected by EU leaders at their last summit, largely because of the objections of Germany and France -- who fear that such a common bond would push up their borrowing costs -- and despite support from other euro-zone members and even officials in the European Commission. 

Mr. Papandreou, who has been a strong advocate of the common bonds, wants to put the issue back on the agenda and will raise the matter with other European leaders in the weeks ahead -- setting him on a potential collision course with Berlin and Paris.

Such bonds could do more than just finance bailouts, he said, but could also go to boosting European growth and funding major infrastructure projects, he said.

"This will help competitiveness. Europe today is a Europe of 27, we are still integrating countries of central and Eastern Europe and of course southern Europe, as far as transportation, infrastructure and communications are concerned." 

The issue of moral hazard--that the weaker euro-zone countries would unjustly benefit from cheap financing--could be addressed by strict oversight of how such bonds are issued, he added. 

Greece is currently in talks with the EU and IMF to extend the repayment terms of its €110 billion loan -- an issue first floated publicly last October -- with a final agreement expected within weeks.

The country is hoping for similar repayment terms to those granted Ireland under a special €85 billion EU and IMF loan agreed in November. In effect, such an extension would give Greece and additional five to seven years to repay the debt owed under the bailout package. 

Last month, European finance ministers said they would consider prolonging the repayment period -- a signal to bond markets that Greece would be able to meet its heavy debt repayment schedule, including in the years 2014 and 2015 when it faces more than €150 billion in debt repayments. 

Extension of the EU-IMF loan repayment date will send a strong signal of confidence to financial markets, Mr. Papandreou said. This, as well as efforts by the euro-zone to improve its economic governance, could in turn help Greece regain access to bond markets, from which it has effectively been shut out for the past few months because of unsustainably high bond yields. 

"We want to get onto the markets as soon as possible. Obviously if markets are very volatile and risk-averse on Greece this will make it more difficult," Mr. Papandreou said. Asked whether Greece would issue longer-dated bonds as planned this year, he said: "Let's not rule it out."

—-- Alkman Granitsas in Athens contributed to this article.

 Write to  Nathalie Boschat at nathalie.boschat@dowjones.com 