NEW YORK—A Saudi man who the U.S. has said previously acted as Osama bin Laden's public-relations representative could be extradited "within the next few months" from the U.K. to face criminal charges in the 1998 bombing of U.S. embassies in Africa, according to a court filing.

The man, Khalid al-Fawwaz, a Saudi exile living in London, has fought extradition to the U.S. for more than a decade, seeking political asylum in the U.K. He has been charged by federal prosecutors in New York with conspiracy and other charges in connection with truck bombings outside U.S. embassies in Tanzania and Kenya that killed 224 people and injured thousands.

For a four-year period in the 1990s, Mr. al-Fawwaz ran the London office of the Advice and Reformation Committee, where U.S. officials have said he acted as Mr. bin Laden's public-relations man, according to the criminal indictment against him.

"He anticipates extradition from the United Kingdom to the United States within the next few months to face these charges," said David Kirby, a Vermont lawyer who hopes to represent Mr. al-Fawwaz when he is brought to the U.S. "Prompt appointment of counsel in this case will help him prepare for trial on these charges in the most expeditious manner."

In an April 30 letter, Mr. Kirby, a former federal prosecutor in Brooklyn, N.Y., and in Vermont, said he has been in contact with Mr. al-Fawwaz's U.K. lawyers for more than eight months. 

On Friday, U.S. District Judge Lewis A. Kaplan denied the request, saying Mr. al-Fawwaz can renew his request when he is brought to the U.S. and submits "a sufficient financial affidavit" showing that he can't afford to hire his own attorney.

The news comes just days after bin Laden, the al Qaeda leader, was killed Monday by U.S. Navy SEALs as they stormed a compound in Abbottabad, Pakistan.

Previously, Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani, the first former detainee of the prison in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, to be tried in a U.S. civilian court, was sentenced to life in prison in January after he was convicted of conspiracy in the 1998 embassy bombings.

Four others were convicted and received life sentences in a separate 2001 trial in New York stemming from the embassy bombings.

 Write to  Chad Bray at chad.bray@dowjones.com 