LONDON—The euro zone's economic recovery slowed in March, according to a survey of purchasing managers at manufacturers and service providers. 

Markit Economics Thursday said its composite Purchasing Managers Index for the currency area fell to 57.5 from 58.2 in February. A reading above 50 indicates private sector activity expanded. The PMI for the manufacturing sector fell to 57.7 from 59, while the PMI for services rose to 56.9 from 56.8. 

Markit said the PMIs for the first three months of the year indicate the economy grew by 0.8%, a pickup from the 0.3% rate of growth recorded in the fourth quarter of 2010 and the fastest expansion since the second quarter of last year. 

Businesses reported the sharpest increase in the cost of raw materials since July 2008, driven by higher oil prices. In response, manufacturers raised their prices at the fastest rate since the series began in 2002. 

"Firms reported increased success in passing rising costs on to customers, especially in manufacturing, where factory gate price inflation is far above anything seen previously over the history of the survey," said  Chris Williamson, Markit's chief economist. 

Combined with indications that the economic recovery has regained some momentum, the rise in prices makes it more likely that the European Central Bank will raise its key interest rate in April. 

"March's small fall in the euro-zone composite PMI does little to alter the view that the economy made a strong start to 2011 and that the ECB will push ahead with its planned interest rate hike in April," said  Ben May, an economist at Capital Economics. 

However, the surveys were largely completed before a massive earthquake hit Japan earlier this month, and that could yet hit growth in export-dependent economies such as Germany. 

"A further softening might be in the pipeline, but we doubt that the negative effect of the Japanese disaster will have the potential to derail the economic recovery in the euro zone," said  Ciara Corsa, an economist at UniCredit. 

Within the currency area, national economies diverged, with French growth picking up and German growth slowing. Although Markit didn't provide details for any but the two largest euro-zone economies, it said smaller nations facing fiscal problems grew more slowly. 

 Write to  Paul Hannon at paul.hannon@dowjones.com 