DUBAI—Moody's Investor Service Inc. downgraded Tunisia's sovereign rating by one notch Wednesday and changed the country's outlook to negative from stable, citing political instability caused by the toppling of the previous government. 

The Tunisian government's rating was cut to Baa2 from Baa3, Moody's said. "The current uncertainties about the economic and political consequences of the collapse of Tunisia's previous political regime are the main drivers for the decision to downgrade the government's bond ratings by one notch and assign a negative outlook," said  Aurelien Mali, Moody's lead sovereign analyst for Tunisia. 

Former Tunisian president Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali was forced to flee the country for Saudi Arabia on Friday after a month of protests against his authoritarian rule. A caretaker government has been formed pending presidential elections, due to take place within 60 days. But there have been more protests about the presence of ministers from Mr. Ben Ali's regime within the caretaker govenrment. 

Moody's said that a protracted political crisis could be especially damaging because of the economy's reliance on tourism and foreign direct investment. "The recent events will affect fiscal performance and real growth in 2011," the ratings agency said. 

However, in terms of the Tunisian government's debt payments, Moody's said the risk seems limited for now. It said there are only two international government-issued bonds, due in April and September of 2011, amounting to a total of $775 million. The government still holds $1.6 billion at the Central Bank of Tunisia as a result of the recent partial privatization of Tunisia Telecom. Official foreign reserves exceed $9 billion.

The risk of capital outflows is limited as the Tunisian dinar isn't convertible and capital controls are in place, Moody's said. 

Moody's also cut the central bank's rating by one level to Baa3 and changed its outlook to negative from stable. 

Standard & Poor's Rating Services and Fitch Ratings have already put Tunisian on watch for a possible downgrade. 