George Osborne may not care for the comparison, but there is one aspect in which the U.K. Chancellor's economic strategy resembles that of his Labour predecessor Gordon Brown: the extent to which it hinges on the vagaries of the U.K. housing market. Where Mr. Brown needed to keep inflating the housing bubble to ensure the booming economy generated enough tax revenues to fund his public spending splurge, Mr. Osborne needs to find ways to stop the housing market imploding to ensure that the U.K. doesn't sink into an economic slump that would see its sovereign debt position rapidly head in the direction of Ireland and Portugal.

For Mr. Osborne, the challenge is becoming urgent.

Of course, it's in no one's interests that house prices remain overvalued, and it makes no sense to try to pump more air into a bubble. On the other hand, a sudden slump in the housing market could have repercussions for both monetary and financial stability, as a result of both the impact on consumer confidence and the blow to bank balance sheets and lending. 

The latest figures show no let up in a steady slide that resumed in the middle of last year. Average prices are now about 20% below their peak in real terms and the latest Halifax survey showed house prices fell 1.4% in April, weaker than the 0.1% increase expected, leaving house prices down 3.7% year-on-year. Bank of England data show transaction levels are running at half the level in the years before the financial crisis, while the stock of mortgage lending continues to fall. 

The state of the housing market may not figure prominently in the Bank of England's latest Inflation Report, to be published Wednesday. But there's no doubt it is one of the biggest concerns facing the Monetary Policy Committee. Governor Mervyn King alluded to these anxieties last week when he warned "the economic consequences of high-level indebtedness would become more severe if rates were to rise," taken as a clear signal he is likely to continue voting to keep rates low for some time.

The question for policy makers is how bad the housing market is going to get. Is the current slowdown in activity simply a protracted period of adjustment to a more rational market in which the extreme leverage—the 125% loan-to-value mortgage deals and the reckless self-certified loans—of the boom years is gone?

If so, it is hard to argue the slump, while it may be challenging for policy makers, isn't a welcome and necessary correction. Or does the house price slide represent the start of something more sinister, reflecting something fundamentally broken in the mortgage market beyond the healing powers of loose monetary policy and time?

In an intriguing paper, MPC member David Miles recently argued it was most likely to be the former: the slump in housing activity represents a rational period of correction as first time buyers adjust to the need for higher deposits. Using a simple model, he shows that an increase in the size of required deposit from 5% to 10% may cause the average first time buyer to have to save for an extra four years, leading to a temporary slump in the number of first time buyers and a permanent fall in owner-occupiers. So far, the market's performance is consistent with that analysis, with the lack of steep falls in house prices suggesting homeowners still remain confident that first time buyers will return to the market when they have saved enough to buy at current prices. 

As Dr. Miles says, his analysis is hardly a benign prognosis. It also presents a challenge to policy makers since during this transition period homeowners with high loan to value (LTV) mortgages will struggle to refinance at low rates. But could the situation be worse than Dr. Miles supposes? After all, HSBC, which has up to $100 billion to lend globally, is barely extending any mortgages with LTVs above 60%; similarly. Lloyds Banking Group, one of the biggest lenders is extending few loans at LTVs above 70%. Advertized deals at higher LTVs carry punitive interest rates. This suggests Dr. Miles's period of adjustment to a new era of 10% deposits may be wishful thinking.

There are good reasons why banks won't lend at higher LTVs. First, they are routinely stress-tested to see how their balance sheets would cope with a 15% fall in house prices. So any loan with an LTV of 85% or more would show up under the tests as being in negative equity, triggering hefty provisions. Second, under the new Basel capital rules, mortgage risk-weights will be calculated on a sliding scale; the higher the LTV, the more capital banks must set aside. Lloyds estimates the return on equity from a 90% LTV mortgage will be one third that of a 70% LTV loan with the same interest rate. 

That suggests that under Dr. Miles's model it could be a lot more than four years before first time buyers re-enter the market—particularly worrying given the average age of a first time buyer without family help is now 38 according to the Council of Mortgage Lenders. At the same time, wages are failing to keep pace with rapidly rising living costs reflected in the current high inflation, so mortgage affordability ratios are going the wrong way for both buyers and lenders. With the prospect of spending cuts and public sector job losses yet to hit, the housing market is likely to face an anxious time over the next year, with little prospect of a safety net from the banks and new market entrants.

If so, it may take more than ultra-loose monetary policy to prevent a destabilizing slide in the housing market. The question is what, if anything, Mr. Osborne can do about it? Politically, it is hard for the government to be seen to be intervening, particularly given Prime Minister David Cameron's strictures on excessive lending pre-election. One idea doing the rounds in Whitehall is to establish a mortgage insurance scheme partly-paid for by the house builders to encourage the banks to offer higher LTV mortgages. 

Mr. Osborne needs to move quickly to implement such ideas if he is to avoid the housing market blowing a hole in his economic strategy—just as it did for Gordon Brown.

 Write to  Simon Nixon at simon.nixon@wsj.com 