TIRASPOL, Moldova—Past a checkpoint manned by fur-hatted Russian soldiers with assault rifles and across a bridge spanning the Dniester River, sprawls a throwback to the days of the Cold War.

Welcome to the self-proclaimed Pridnestrovian Moldavian Republic, a banana-shaped slice of the former Soviet Union struggling for its independence on the new front line between East and West.

No country in the world recognizes Transnistria—the territory's informal English name—as a sovereign state. But that hasn't stopped authorities in this breakaway part of Moldova from adopting the trappings of Soviet-style nationhood.

Tiny Transnistria has its own currency, the ruble; its own legislature, the Supreme Soviet; an army and its own Lenin look-alike president, Igor Smirnov, a 69-year-old one-time Communist Party apparatchik who has ruled for two decades.

This land with roughly 500,000 inhabitants that runs along Moldova's border with Ukraine "is the Russian empire's frontier," Mr. Smirnov told reporters on the eve of Independence Day celebrations here last year. "We have Slavic roots. We will always be with Russia."

On Friday, U.S. Vice President Joe Biden is to visit the Moldovan capital Chisinau, after a stop in Moscow earlier in the week. 

Among the items on his agenda: pushing for a settlement of the Transnistrian issue that will keep the territory within Moldova's borders.

For years, the frozen conflict over Transnistria's status languished, in a largely forgotten and impoverished corner of the continent. But as the European Union and North Atlantic Treaty Organization have rolled eastward, it is back in the spotlight.

European leaders have stepped up efforts to resolve the Transnistrian question as Moldova's new, pro-Western government has moved to integrate the country more closely with the EU. Finding a solution won't be easy. The standoff between authorities in Chisinau and Tiraspol has been largely peaceful, with no major violence since 1992, yet rapprochement has proved elusive, for reasons of geopolitics as well as deep differences in local identities.

"The two sides are too far apart. We see no possibility for talks on status," says Vladimir Yastrebchak, Transnistria's foreign minister. "The people who live here are the only ones who can decide their future."

Residents of Transnistria celebrate their Russian and Soviet heritage. Transnistria's official crest displays the hammer and sickle, red star and sheaves of wheat that once adorned emblems of the U.S.S.R. Statues of Soviet leader Vladimir Lenin dot public squares. Cyrillic remains the standard alphabet. 

Rattle-trap Lada sedans and ZiL trucks turned out by the Soviet Union's socialist manufacturing machine still ply streets here, mixing with the Audis and Mercedes of the region's new elite. Billboards feature photos of a smiling Mr. Smirnov meeting with Russian leaders.

"Our strength comes from our ties with Russia," proclaims a giant sign near a downtown square named for a Russian general, Alexander Suvorov, who helped drive Turkish forces from Moldova, known as Bessarabia at the time, in the 18th century.

Despite Transnistria's devotion to Russia, Moscow remains ambivalent. Russia has declined to recognize Transnistrian sovereignty. But it helps keep the territory afloat financially. And it hasn't withdrawn troops—remnants of the old Soviet Fourteenth Army—stationed here.

The soldiers guard a stockpile of outdated munitions left behind when the Soviet Union collapsed. Along with a detachment of peacekeepers, they also serve to prop up Mr. Smirnov's government, and give Moscow a say in Moldova's future.

Russia says its soldiers are necessary to protect the people of Transnistria, and Moscow supports a negotiated solution that would guarantee substantial autonomy for the region.

Transnistrians, who are predominantly of Russian and Ukrainian descent, take cultural cues from the East, in contrast with people in the rest of Moldova, most of whom have ethnic and linguistic ties to neighboring, non-Slavic Romania.

"There used to be empty fields with some tribes" before Russians arrived along the Dniester River, says Dmitriy Soin, a member of the Supreme Soviet. "When the Russians came, they brought civilization."

"Here, there is a history of Russian rule," says Vecheslav Semenov, 73, a retiree living in Tiraspol. "People's mentalities are different." Mr. Semenov was a model Soviet man. Born along the Volga River in the Russian heartland, he was educated in Leningrad before being sent to work in an electronics factory in Siberia, and then at one in Chisinau. After the Soviet Union's collapse and calls by Moldovan nationalists for the expulsion of Russians, he moved to Tiraspol. "There were no problems before perestroika and Gorbachev," Mr. Semenov says. 

Last week, when Mikhail Gorbachev, the Soviet Union's last leader, was awarded Russia's highest honor, Mr. Semenov says he turned off his television in disgust. "He's guilty of destroying the U.S.S.R. A lot of people feel this way, those of us who were abandoned here," he says.

It isn't just the old who feel a kinship with Russia. 

"You need to live here to be a Transnistrian. It's different if you aren't from here," says Anya Edinak, 19, who is studying math and physics at a university in Tiraspol. But many young people also say they don't see much of a future here. Viktor Zachiukovsky, 19, is about to start two years of compulsory military service. Once he is discharged, he plans to go to Ukraine, where he has relatives, to seek work.

"There are big economic problems here," he says. "It's hard to find a job, and even if you do, you can't earn enough money."

Moldovan Prime Minister Vlad Filat says he thinks the solution to the conflict lies in Chisinau's warming relations with the EU. If Moldova becomes more prosperous and Moldovans can travel more easily to the EU, it will make Moldovan citizenship more attractive to Transnistrians.

Mr. Smirnov's rivals in Transnistria are also focused on trying to modernize the territory. But it's hard to find anyone willing to say there is any alternative to full independence.

"We have a Russian soul," says Oleg Horjan, a Communist Party member of the Supreme Soviet who opposes Mr. Smirnov. The best long-term solution, he argues, would be to "recreate the unified structure of states and nations that was the U.S.S.R."

He adds: "The borders that have been drawn now, it's like vivisection. We should be together again."

 Write to  Gordon Fairclough at gordon.fairclough@wsj.com 