The White House and congressional Republicans clashed Thursday over raising the federal debt ceiling, setting up a showdown that will test how much either side is willing to budge on tax and spending issues.

The Obama administration and Republicans agreed that the consequences of inaction would be dire, but appeared far apart in their bargaining positions. The White House wants the ceiling increased with no strings attached, while Republicans are demanding big spending cuts in exchange for their vote. 

Each side said that if the limit wasn't raised, leading the U.S. to default on its debt obligations, the other side would be to blame.

Hitting the debt ceiling would leave the U.S. unable to borrow money to pay interest on what it already owes investors or to fund new spending. Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner said in a letter to Congress Thursday that even a short-term default could be "catastrophic." It would drive up interest rates and push down the stock market and housing prices, he said, while future government borrowing could be much more costly.

Mr. Geithner said that with a current debt level of $13.95 trillion, the U.S. could hit the $14.3 trillion limit as soon as March 31, but more likely at some point before May 16. He called for lawmakers to raise the ceiling to an unspecified level by the end of March. 

How high the limit might be increased is likely to be a key part of any negotiations. It was last raised in February, by $1.9 trillion, but previous increases have been smaller.

Some Republican leaders said they would support an increase in the debt limit only if it was part of a package of spending cuts. The federal government spent $1.3 trillion more than it brought in last year.

"I think it would be irresponsible to try to deal with the debt limit without taking corrective action so that we're not facing this each and every year," House Speaker John Boehner (R., Ohio) said.

With a potential vote still at least a month away, Republican leaders are reviewing past debt-limit votes to assess their options, aides said. Their goal is to package the politically difficult vote with spending reductions or an ironclad assurance of future cuts. In the 1980s Congress combined an increase in the debt ceiling with balanced-budget rules that set hard caps on the deficit.

Republicans already plan to cut spending by about $50 billion from the current levels as part of a package to fund the government after March 4. With the Treasury pushing for a vote to extend the debt ceiling around that time, Republicans hinted that the two measures together might provide an opportunity for both the White House and the GOP to get what they want.

House Budget Committee Chairman Paul Ryan (R., Wis.) said Republicans could approve only a small increase in the debt ceiling if they felt the White House wasn't moving quickly enough to rein in spending.

Illustrating the looming clash on spending, the Congressional Budget Office said Thursday that a major Republican priority—repealing last year's health care law—could increase the federal deficit "in the vicinity of $230 billion" through 2021. Republicans dismissed the numbers as faulty 

Treasury officials, at a briefing with reporters, said the debt ceiling should be addressed independently of negotiations on cuts, but didn't say the White House would rule out such talks. President Barack Obama will deliver a State of the Union address later this month and many expect him to use the speech to propose spending cuts. That will be followed in mid-February by the release of the White House's 2012 budget. 

A key question is whether Mr. Boehner will be able to deliver the votes of dozens of new House Republicans who have suggested they wouldn't vote to raise the debt ceiling in any circumstances. Many Republicans were elected on pledges to cut the federal debt.

The White House is hoping to avoid a repeat of a near disaster during the Clinton administration, when congressional Republicans refused to raise the debt ceiling and the Treasury was forced to take the controversial step of borrowing from federal pension funds to keep the government operating. 

Eventually the debt ceiling was raised, but only after the White House warned that it might stop mailing Social Security checks.

Treasury officials said that they had several emergency options they could employ to buy as much as an additional eight weeks. These could include suspending the sales of state- and local-government Treasury securities and suspending investments in federal pension funds, among other things. 

 Write to  Damian Paletta at damian.paletta@wsj.com 