JUPITER, Fla.—The disc is tucked somewhere inside Bobby Parnell's laptop bag. Or maybe it's at his parents' house in North Carolina. He's not really sure.

It contains a video clip of the signature moment of his rookie season, the night his fastball generated a "100 mph" reading on the scoreboard at Fenway Park. His former Mets teammate, John Maine, gave it to him the following day. But Parnell will not watch it.

"I don't want to think about it," he said.

Parnell, a 26-year-old reliever, is not ashamed of his raw arm strength. But he has little use for mementos that celebrate it. And he is wary of relying too heavily on it.

Failure has taught him better. Time has taught him this: When a major-league hitter knows a fastball is coming, and there is little movement on the pitch, power will not save him. Velocity is not an antidote for predictability.

That is why Parnell has focused primarily this spring on honing a pitch that will never approach triple digits on the radar gun. His slider has become the key to his future.

If Parnell can throw the slider for strikes, throw it in all counts and, in doing so, learn to trust it, he could well be the team's closer of the future. He would be a homegrown, low-budget successor to Francisco Rodriguez, who will earn $17.5 million in 2012 if his option vests.

But if his only viable off-speed pitch fails him, if he cannot continue to evolve as a pitcher, then a middle reliever is all he will likely be.

"The league knows who he is now, so they're all cheating on fastballs," Mets pitching coach Dan Warthen said. "He could throw his slider for a strike, get strike one and even put people away with it, because they're all going to be geared up."

The Mets were so impressed with Parnell as a reliever in 2009 that they converted him into a starter for the last two months of the season. But it was clear then that his off-speed repertoire was too limited for him to face the same hitters two or three times in a game.

In 60 appearances as a reliever that year, he had a 3.46 ERA. In eight starts, his ERA jumped to 7.46. He began last season in the bullpen at Triple-A Buffalo. And when he returned to the majors in late June, his command of his slower stuff was much better.

According to Inside Edge, a Minneapolis-based private scouting company, Parnell threw 62% of his off-speed pitches for strikes in 2010, a 5% increase from the previous year.

He still threw his fastball nearly 81% of the time. But the improvement in his slider, which he threw 18% of the time, made him less vulnerable.

"Before, I had to try to beat people with my fastball everyday, and if I didn't have that, I was up the creek," Parnell said. "Right now, I feel like having two good pitches and being comfortable with where they're at is going to take me a long way."

Comfort is essential. Parnell has not tinkered with the grip on his slider this spring. Rather, he has tried throwing it earlier in the count and when he is behind in the count, moments when he is tempted to revert back to the power pitch that got him here.

The more his confidence in the slider grows, the more effective the pitch will be. The better it becomes, the more he can trust it.

"If you're thinking this slider is awful and it's going to get hit, you're going to bounce it in the dirt every time," Parnell said. "If you feel like you can throw for a strike and get him to miss or weak contact, that's big, because you can throw it when you want to."

Parnell can still rely on the sheer strength of his arm when he needs to. That night at Fenway Park was not the first time Parnell threw a 100-mph pitch. And it will not be the last. Next time, it might even catch the hitter by surprise.

 Write to  Brian Costa at Brian.Costa@wsj.com 