Last year, Ólafur Ragnar Grímsson found himself at the center of a major political clash between Iceland, the U.K. and the Netherlands, a row that threw into question an international plan to bail out the country and cast doubt on Iceland's bid to join the European Union. But he has no regrets.

Almost exactly a year ago, Mr. Grímsson, who is serving his fourth four-year term as president of Iceland, controversially refused to sign a bill already passed by Parliament that would have reimbursed the U.K. and the Netherlands for rescuing depositors in a failed Icelandic bank. This was the second time he had used the presidential veto, a right exercised by none of his predecessors.

Icelanders demonstrated outside his residence, calling on him to block the reimbursement deal, under which the country would have had to pay £2.35 billion ($3.73 billion) to British and €1.32 billion ($1.77 billion) to Dutch customers of Icesave, the online unit of collapsed Icelandic bank Landsbanki.

"The people were appealing to the president…to put the Icesave decision to a referendum," he says.

Had the repayment plan authorized by Parliament gone ahead, Iceland would have made the repayments over 15 years at an interest rate of more than 5%. With an Icelandic population of just over 300,000, that would have come to almost $20,000 per person. These terms were "outrageous," Mr. Grímsson says.

He agreed to a referendum, and more than 90% voted against the deal. Under a new repayment scheme, drafted jointly with the U.K. and the Netherlands a month ago, Iceland would pay 47 billion krónur ($406 million). This compares with the 162 billion krónur in costs the country was facing under the previous deal. The rest will be covered by selling Landsbanki assets, according to estimates by the country's central bank.

"In the end it [the referendum] turned out to be a very good decision for our democracy, for the country, for our economic position and for our relationship with Great Britain, the Netherlands and the world," Mr. Grímsson told The Wall Street Journal in an interview in the dimly lit library of the presidential residence, across a lagoon from the capital, Reykjavik. 

From "a political science point of view and a constitutional point of view," the 67-year-old considers the decision the most important of his presidency. It saved Iceland's taxpayers a lot of money. 

Mr. Grímsson is reluctant to comment on the new terms of the Icesave deal and the chances of finally bringing the saga to a close. Parliament is currently examining the draft of the latest bill, and Mr. Grímsson expects a vote in the second half of this month or early next month. "I don't enter into the discussion. I respect the right of the Parliament to debate freely, undisturbed by the president," he says. 

If the deal gets the nod, it will improve Iceland's relations with the U.K. and the Netherlands and pave the way for its return to the international bond markets. It could also ease its financing situation, as Fitch Ratings has indicated it could lift its credit rating on the country if the issue is resolved. After the first Icesave deal was shot down, Fitch lowered Iceland's sovereign rating to junk status, making borrowing much more expensive

Mr. Grímsson, who holds a doctorate in economics and political science, slammed Fitch at the time and said the agency's ratings in general in the past two or three years had been completely wrong. Standard & Poor's and Moody's Investors Service maintained their investment-grade ratings on Icelandic government bonds.

Memories of last year's turmoil are still rather raw. Paul Myners, Britain's financial services minister at the time, warned that a "no" vote in the Icesave referendum could affect the U.K.'s support for Iceland's bid to join the EU.

 Mr. Grímsson says remarks by Britain's then-prime minister, Gordon Brown, did little to help the situation. "If Gordon Brown wants to be an honorable man, he should apologize for telling the world that Iceland is a bankrupt country," he says. Foreign companies subsequently stopped dealing with Icelandic counterparts, and the IMF was reported to have been considering withholding a portion of its bailout package. 

Back then, there was heated discussion of whether Iceland should sue the British government, according to Mr. Grímsson. "But now we're economically faring better than many European countries," he says with a smile. 

After being hit hard by the collapse of the country's three largest banks and a recession, Iceland is slowly returning to growth. Gross domestic product grew by a solid 1.2% in the third quarter last year—the first quarter of growth since the IMF-orchestrated bailout in October 2008. Iceland's "economy is much better positioned to regain its strength than many other countries," Mr. Grímsson says. For 2011, the IMF expects GDP to grow by 2%, after a 3% overall decline in 2010. 

"Clearly the devaluation of the Icelandic króna has helped our exporters," Mr. Grímsson says. The króna still is worth 30% less than in 2008. And with the clear advantages to having its own currency, Iceland's decision to apply for European Union membership is "hotly debated right now," he says. 

Mr. Grímsson says the main reason Iceland decided to apply for EU membership was that after the collapse of its banking system it seemed impossible in the long run for the country to keep its own currency. But since then, he says, "We've seen euro-zone countries moving from one crisis to another. That has changed the picture." It would "surely be possible," Mr. Grímsson argues, for Iceland to join the EU without adopting the euro, and cites Poland, "our friends in Denmark, or Great Britain" as examples. 

What could ultimately decide whether Iceland opts to join the EU is "the fishing issue," he says. 

With an economy now heavily dependent on fishing, Iceland wants to keep control of its fishing grounds. But membership of the bloc would grant the EU a degree of control, including over quotas. "There is no other country in the EU that has a similar situation," Mr. Grímsson says. 

During the Icesave protests, Mr. Grímsson recalls, "there were some protesters who came here. They were young, so my wife and I invited them in for hot chocolate and we had a long discussion about revolution in theory, globalization, and the nature of capitalism."

Asked to recommend an Icelandic book, Mr. Grímsson suggests "Independent People," a novel by Nobel laureate Halldór Laxness, published in two volumes in 1934 and 1935. It describes the struggle of poor Icelandic farmers in the early 20th century, eking out a living on isolated crofts on the barren island before eventually being released from their debt burden. The novel is one of the most famous examples of social realism in Icelandic fiction. It may well hint at the origins of Mr. Grímsson's philosophy. 

 Write to  Eyk Henning at eyk.henning@dowjones.com 