Under normal circumstances, it would probably be considered folly to interview a candidate running for president of a country for which you may have great affection but know next to nothing about its political system. Then again, if you're planning the focus of your meeting to be  James Joyce, you may be able to get away with it. 

The country in question is Ireland and the candidate  David Norris, a senator in the Seanad, the upper house of Parliament. Also a Joyce scholar and the first openly gay person elected to public office in Ireland, Mr. Norris was in New York this week to meet the Irish diaspora and to raise money for his campaign. 

"You can receive donations from abroad from Irish citizens," the 66-year-old senator explained.

After joining him over a Guinness stout (I had the beer; he stuck to tea) in the bar of the Fitzpatrick Hotel—an Irish outpost on East 56th Street where half the staff speaks with a brogue and a portrait of  Mary McAleese, Ireland's current president, hangs in the lobby—I think it's fair to say the senator is better rounded than the average politician in the U.S., where you're qualified as a renaissance man if you've made your bundle in widgets or on Wall Street and used it to bankroll your campaign. 

But on to Joyce. Among Mr. Norris's other achievements has been to preserve and enlarge the writer's memory by creating a one-man show based on Joyce's works—"Do You Hear What I Am Seeing"—and performing it around the world, including "in Beirut in the middle of a bombardment" and at Symphony Space on 95th Street, under ostensibly more serene circumstances. "I've been interested in Joyce since I was 8," Mr. Norris, a former lecturer at Trinity College in Dublin, explained. "I think it was the whiff of sulfur. Joyce and Wilde—they were almost contraband."

My reading of Joyce has been somewhat more, um, limited. In fact, I "read" "Ulysses" on tape while driving in my car. Which doesn't disqualify me from loving it, or from saying it's possible to find genius and beauty in the ordinary on every page, even on audio. For example: "Two shafts of soft daylight fell across the flagged floor from the high barbacans: and at the meeting of their rays a cloud of coalsmoke and fumes of fried grease floated, turning." 

Mr. Norris, who could more than hold his own against  Buck Mulligan, talks so fast and mellifluously that it's impossible to jot down much more than every other sentence. He launched into a story: "I had a very distinguished uncle—this is his ring—who was walking Phoenix Park with"...somebody, I didn't get who. "They were overheard and overtaken by a tall, seedily elegant man, the elderly James Joyce, who engaged them in fluent Italian and gave them tickets" to a movie house he was opening. 

I asked when the encounter occurred. The senator made it sound like yesterday. "1912," he said. "My father was born in 1895. I'm the child of withered loins."

Between "1912" and "my father was born" came probably several-hundred words of brilliant connective narrative tissue, and there were several-hundred more between "1895" and "I'm the child of withered loins." The heart was willing; the hand just couldn't keep up.

From there, Mr. Norris moved along to his work restoring a Dublin "slum" building on North Great George's Street to its former Georgian glory; his role in founding the James Joyce Centre at No. 35 North Great George's Street; the 1982 Joyce Centennial he organized; and a postage stamp he prevailed upon the nation to issue in the still-controversial writer's honor.

"I specialize in bringing justice in from the margins," he said. "There were few challenges greater than selling Joyce to an establishment in whose nostrils Joyce stunk."

All of this was by way of getting to Mr. Norris's qualifications to be president of Ireland, the election to be held next October. It's a largely ceremonial post but with certain notable powers, such as being able to refer legislation of dubious constitutionality to the country's Supreme Court. He cited among his achievements taking Ireland's law criminalizing homosexuality to the European Court of Human Rights in the 1980s, where he won after it was upheld by the Irish Supreme Court. The law was repealed in 1993.

Mr. Norris stopped short of suggesting his sexual orientation would be a boost to his campaign, but running as an independent—he currently represents the University of Dublin's constituency—he hopes to ride to victory on the Irish people's disaffection with politics and political parties in the wake of the calamitous effects of the economic recession. "It has made people distrust political people," he said. "The parties are not popular. I may be an academic; I may be a Joyce scholar; I may have a sense of humor, but I've always delivered." He meant election victories. First sent to office in 1987, he boasted that his "vote has always increased, and now it's perpendicular."

Reading between the lines of stories about him and the upcoming election in the Irish press, and actually just reading the lines themselves, his sexual orientation—"I've lived a depressingly dull social life; I never engaged in excess of any kind"—seems the least of his challenges. It sounds as if getting elected in Ireland without the backing of the established political parties, which may even be actively conspiring against you, is only slightly easier than doing so in the U.S. 

Nonetheless, the senator seems ebullient by temperament, preferring to focus on the positive. "There have been three opinion polls," he reported. "Each one puts me substantially ahead. And I'm ahead in the betting odds."

Like any shrewd American politician, he's focused on jobs, jobs, jobs, though the poet in him bragged that during a discussion with a professor at the Kennedy School of Government—Boston was his first stop on his tour—"I presented for his delectation a new definition of money. It's the symbolic representation of energy."

With that he launched into a brilliant-sounding disquisition on the history of commerce from the Paleolithic on, all of which I was by now too fatigued to record on paper.

Perhaps more significantly, he reported that six times in the last couple of months Dublin cabbies have refused to take his fare, calling it a contribution to his campaign. "I'm a wily old bird and I've been around the block," he said. "You may have noticed I quite like people. I've overcome my natural reticence."

 Write to  Ralph Gardner at ralph.gardner@wsj.com 