LOS ANGELES—A discarded box used to ship demolition chemicals, with a receipt attached, led law enforcement officials investigating last week's explosion near a Santa Monica synagogue directly to the suspect, according to a criminal complaint made public Tuesday.

Agents from the Federal Bureau of Investigation and local police officers arrested Ron Hirsch, 60 years old, Monday evening at a synagogue in Cleveland Heights, Ohio. 

Mr. Hirsch, who authorities suspect was behind the explosion last Thursday at the Chabad House in beachside Santa Monica, fled Southern California on a Greyhound bus on Thursday evening, about 12 hours after the device exploded, according to an affidavit prepared by FBI agent John Harker.

Synagogues in Los Angeles have been on alert since the explosion. A motive for Mr. Hirsch's alleged bombing remains unclear and law enforcement officials described Mr. Hirsch as a transient who frequented synagogues asking for charity.

Police initially labeled the blast a bombing, but within hours had changed their minds, calling it a freak accident involving construction materials. Upon further examination of the evidence, they changed their minds again, calling it an intentional act. 

New details about the 6 a.m. explosion and what evidence led police to quickly identify Mr. Hirsch as the primary suspect were disclosed in the complaint.

An "improvised projectile, consisting of a large steel pipe partially encased in concrete, weighing approximately 250 pounds" was placed in a plastic garbage can next to the Chabad House, according to the complaint.

When the device exploded, parts landed in the Chabad House and a large piece crashed through the roof of a neighboring house, above the bedroom of a 12-year-old child who was asleep at the time, according to the complaint. No one was injured in the blast.

Police found various supplies, including duct tape, steel re-bar, bags of cement and three empty bags of "demolition agent" nearby. Additionally, they quickly located a "torn and battered" box with a receipt from Constar Supply, a construction supply business in Clovis, Calif., still attached. The receipt was addressed to Mr. Hirsch at an address in Santa Monica and was for the purchase of three 11-pound containers of an unspecified demolition agent.

Investigators found the empty bags of that substance near the blast site, as well, the complaint says. A local police officer left a voicemail for Mr. Hirsch on Thursday morning using a phone number found on the receipt. Later that day, Mr. Hirsch allegedly checked his voicemail on that phone, according to the complaint. 

Hours later he boarded a bus using a ticket he purchased in cash and traveling under the alias "J. Fisher," according to Mr. Harker's narrative. 

Mr. Hirsch arrived in Denver on Friday and within a few hours had boarded a different bus with a ticket to New York. But he got off the bus at some point afterward, likely in Ohio, and was spotted Monday afternoon by a rabbi at a Cleveland Heights synagogue. The rabbi had recognized Mr. Hirsch from news reports about the Santa Monica explosion. Mr. Hirsch was arrested without incident, after telling law enforcement officials he had traveled to Ohio for "kidney surgery," according to the federal complaint.

He is expected to be transferred back to Los Angeles to face federal and local charges, FBI officials said on Tuesday. 

 Write to  Peter Sanders at peter.sanders@wsj.com 