LAS VEGAS—Several states with significant gambling markets are cutting funds for gambling-addiction programs, raising concerns that prevention and treatment of the problem will suffer.

The biggest cuts so far have come in Nevada, which has the most casinos of any state and a higher-than-average rate of addiction, according to studies. 

The state—slammed by the recession and housing bust—cut spending on gambling-addiction programs last year by more then half, to about $600,000 from $1.7 million a year earlier, according to Laurie Olson, a grants manager at the state Department of Health and Human Services. Gov. Brian Sandoval's budget plan through 2013 calls for the cut to become permanent; a recent Assembly bill would extend the cut for two more years. 

Some Nevada lawmakers have argued that such funding should be eliminated given the state's budget crisis and expected cuts to important services such as education.

The pool of money available to help gambling addicts has also been shrinking in other states with established gambling industries, including Missouri, Iowa, New York and Washington. In some places, like Nevada, the money is being grabbed by legislators to help bleeding budgets. In others, gambling-addiction funding is directly tied to gambling revenue, which has declined.

But the cuts aren't universal, and a number of states have been adding such funding as gambling expands. Nationwide, funding for gambling addiction was projected to increase to around $56 million this year from around $49 million in 2008, according to a survey last year by the Association of Problem Gambling Service Administrators. Most of those gains were due to two states that significantly expanded gambling, California and Pennsylvania. 

Experts say gambling addicts make up a very small percentage of people who gamble, but there have been signs of higher rates of addiction in places with easier access to casinos and other forms of gambling. 

The U.S. has an estimated 2.6 million pathological gamblers, who gamble compulsively to the extent that it has a negative impact on their job, relationships or other important aspects of their lives, according to the administrators' survey. 

Less than one-half of one percent—or 1 in 240—of those pathological gamblers are treated through state-funded programs, the survey found, compared with 1 in 14 people addicted to drugs or alcohol.

Advocates of the programs say they fear losing ground in addressing a disease that only in recent years has begun to be understood, attract public funds and develop a stable of trained providers.

"The general population still has very limited understanding that problem gambling is not a character weakness and not about money and greed," said Carol O'Hare, executive director of the Nevada Council on Problem Gambling. "It is a documentable mental-health diagnosis."

States facing cuts are scrambling to preserve programs that provide direct treatment such as addiction counseling, credit counseling, housing and group therapy for addicts, who often seek help only after they are destitute. 

Programs that provide prevention, education, outreach and training for counselors are taking the biggest cuts. As a result, fewer people are learning about the existence of the other services, officials at the states and nonprofits said. 

"Our treatment providers don't advertise or network," said Linda Graves, the problem-gambling program manager for the state of Washington, which is seeing funding fall alongside revenue from the state's card rooms. "Our budget can't address an influx" of new patients.

In the absence of public funds, state councils that provide advocacy and hot-line services and nonprofit agencies that offer treatment will likely become more dependent on direct funding from the gambling industry, another major source of funding. 

In Nevada, the funding decline has largely translated into the elimination of training and prevention programs. One casualty was a relatively new program to train dozens of counselors to become certified gambling-addiction specialists through a paid internship program. 

That had an immediate impact because the interns had already been providing nearly all the treatment in rural Nevada, according to Lana Henderson, director of the New Frontier Treatment Center. Ms. Henderson, who coordinates the program for rural Nevada, said her budget was cut to $22,000 for this year from $107,000 two years ago. 

In New York, gambling has expanded in recent years to include 12 casinos, in addition to horse racing and the lottery. Six years ago, the state began to ramp up funding for sessions in schools, community agencies and other venues to educate people on gambling addiction.

The funding—which comes from the state's general fund and isn't tied to gambling revenue—was to be increased to pay for 60 gambling-prevention specialists eventually. Instead, starting last year, funding for additional positions was cut; advocates expect the state will eliminate the program this year because of budget cuts.

The cutbacks in New York are especially problematic, advocates say, because the state is about to see the addition of several casinos, including a new casino at the Aqueduct Racetrack in Queens. Observers expect that casino to prove popular thanks to its location, yet its addition included no funds for gambling-addiction treatment.

 Write to  Alexandra Berzon at alexandra.berzon@wsj.com 