 The ECB stepped in with purchases of bonds issued by high-debt governments amid worries Europe's debt crisis is spreading to Portugal, after borrowing rates briefly hit euro-zone highs. Markets are focused on a debt auction by Portugal on Wednesday, amid concern Lisbon might soon lose access to capital markets and be forced to seek a bailout.  

 U.S. stocks fell on fears of another bailout of a euro-zone nation. Declines in Indonesia and India led Asian stocks lower.  

 The euro was slightly higher against the dollar, rebounding after hitting four-month lows, but nervousness about the euro-zone debt crisis still made investors reluctant to hold the currency.  

 China's trade surplus shrank for the second consecutive year in 2010, which could strengthen Beijing's case that it is gradually reducing imbalances that have hurt ties with trading partners. 

 China's auto sales rose 32% last year but will likely slow to 10% to 15% this year as incentives are withdrawn. Nissan's China sales rose 36%.  

 Research In Motion said it will filter BlackBerrys in Indonesia to comply with a government demand to block websites that contain pornography.  

 Ford introduced its first plug-in compact minivan, expanding its electric-vehicle lineup after rivals gained an edge in the market.  

 Patni Computer's founders agreed to sell control of the Indian outsourcing firm to iGate and Apax Partners in a deal with a potential value of $1.22 billion.  

 South Korea's Financial Supervisory Service will increase monitoring of foreign-capital flows.  

 Singapore's Mapletree Commercial Trust wants to raise up to $772 million through an IPO of a real-estate investment trust.  

 Credit Suisse will alter how it pays banker bonuses for 2010, taking into account shareholder criticism and more government involvement in the rewards.  

 Denmark's Danisco urged its shareholders to accept a $5.8 billion takeover bid from DuPont.  

 Global economic growth appears set to pick up in coming months, led by China, France, the U.S. and Japan, the OECD said.  

 The Chinese city of Wenzhou began a pilot program to let residents invest overseas directly.  

 President Obama led the U.S. in a moment of silence, gathering with staffers outside the White House to honor victims of the Saturday shooting in Arizona.  

 Hillary Clinton said an international campaign to slow Iran's suspected nuclear-weapons program was succeeding, the first senior Obama administration official to publicly make such a claim.  

European shoemakers said they will drop their call for an extension of tariffs on shoes from China and Vietnam, instead seeking strict monitoring of imports.

The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission said it will set up an office in China in a bid to reduce the number of dangerous products reaching the U.S. market.

 Pressure to allow expatriate Chinese dissidents to attend a memorial for a pro-democracy politician is emerging as a test of Hong Kong's struggle to maintain freedoms under Chinese rule.  

South Korea rebuffed a North proposal for talks but extended its own offer to discuss two military attacks blamed on Pyongyang and North Korea's nuclear program.

Floods spread to the northeastern Australian city of Toowoomba.