FLORHAM PARK, N.J.—The Jets' offensive linemen begin each day at 8 a.m. with their own version of "The Breakfast Club." 

In a meeting room here at the team's practice facility, Bill Callahan, the offensive line coach, lays out the plan for the rest of the day. His audience includes two Pro Bowl selections (left tackle D'Brickashaw Ferguson and center Nick Mangold), two established veterans (right guard Brandon Moore and right tackle Damien Woody), a first-year starter (left guard Matt Slauson) and several reserves. 

Mr. Callahan usually sticks to one topic at each of these meetings. Maybe he talks about goal-line situations, pass blocking or third-down pressure. The idea is to create building blocks over the course of the season, and this seems appropriate: The offensive line is all about laying a foundation.

Coach Rex Ryan refers to the group as his "bread and butter," a revealing description coming from someone who has shaped his reputation as one of the NFL's top defensive minds. But as a head coach, he has championed the "ground-and-pound" running game, and that figures to be important when the Jets (11-5) play the Indianapolis Colts (10-6) on Saturday night in a first-round playoff game at Lucas Oil Stadium.

Mr. Ryan said he wants the Jets to dominate the time of possession, in large part to keep Colts quarterback Peyton Manning off the field. The most obvious way to try to do that? Run the ball behind his stout offensive line and keep the clock moving. Mr. Ryan said he feels as if he has two fresh running backs in LaDainian Tomlinson and Shonn Greene, both of whom sat out last Sunday's victory over the Buffalo Bills. The pair helped the Jets produce the fourth-most rushing yards in the NFL this season.

The Jets also want to protect quarterback Mark Sanchez, who injured his throwing shoulder in a win over the Pittsburgh Steelers on Dec. 19. Mr. Sanchez has been playing with pain, and the Colts have a formidable pass rush led by defensive ends Robert Mathis and Dwight Freeney, who combined for 21 sacks during the regular season. Mr. Ryan has tried to replicate their speed at practice this week by having Jamaal Westerman and Shawn Crable, two members of the defensive scout team, line up offsides and jump the snap count. "We're cheating a little bit," Mr. Ryan said.

But whether the Jets are running or throwing, Mr. Ryan said he has confidence in his offensive line—a low-key group on a team full of loud talkers. And under Mr. Callahan, now in his third season, they are recognized as one of the best, if not the best, lines in the league.

"They're just tough guys, man," said Buffalo Bills safety Donte Whitner, who was teammates with Mr. Mangold at Ohio State. "They understand who to block, and they understand how to do it. They're especially relentless when they're running the ball."

Defensive tackle Trevor Pryce, a 14-year veteran, is deeply familiar with the Jets' offensive linemen. Before joining the Jets mid-season, he spent four-plus years as a member of the Baltimore Ravens and often matched up against Mr. Moore. By Mr. Pryce's own admission, it proved a Sisyphean task. He said he remembers thinking to himself, "I can't get past this guy."

Mr. Pryce assessed Mr. Moore as the best guard in the NFL, and he said he has always been struck by Mr. Moore's calm presence. That tends to be Kryptonite to defensive linemen and defensive ends, who want offensive linemen to "overreact, overthink and be overly aggressive," Mr. Pryce said. In those instances, it sometimes only takes one quick move to expose a seam between two linemen and create a direct path to the quarterback. The Jets' offensive line plays at such a high level, Mr. Pryce said, because each member approaches the game with that same poised, almost serene demeanor.

"I think your personalities have to mesh and kind of be the same," Mr. Pryce said. "And in that sense, they take their cue from Nick, who's the de facto leader. If you're a rah-rah, pump-your-fist offensive lineman, then all the linemen have to be like that. But our guys are pretty quiet. They don't want the spotlight on them. In either case, all five of them have to act the same or it's not going to work."

Along those lines, Mr. Callahan seldom has been described as a fire-and-brimstone coach. He is more professor than motivational speaker, and he delights in breaking down the play of his line into something close to a granular science. Everything his linemen do on the practice field is filmed and downloaded onto his computer, and he spends countless hours analyzing the footage. He looks for total cohesion, a row of 325-pound Rockettes whose moves are choreographed in minute detail. 

"I've never had a coach break down every step move like he does," said Robby Felix, a center on the practice squad.

Mr. Callahan, a former head coach at the University of Nebraska, teaches hundreds of sets and schemes. There is "post set," employed in passing situation; "bracer skips," a zone-blocking technique; and "pop and jab," which is used on run plays.

"What I think is important is the rate of improvement that a line has during the course of the season," Mr. Callahan said. "And how you measure that is through constant self-evaluation. You really need to watch yourself day in and day out."

At the same time, there is no substitute for repetition. Mr. Mangold and Mr. Ferguson have started 84 consecutive games, and Mr. Moore has started 105 straight. Each describes an almost telepathic bond between them. Mr. Slauson, in his first season as a starter, has overcome some early growing pains thanks to hard work, Mr. Callahan said.

The Jets are acutely aware of the bad stuff that can happen if a piece goes missing. When Mr. Woody injured his knee during the first quarter of the Jets' game against the Miami Dolphins on Dec. 12, he was replaced by backup Wayne Hunter. The Jets labored all afternoon in a 10-6 loss, and it was the offensive line's most porous effort of the season. The Dolphins sacked Mr. Sanchez sacked six times, and the Jets averaged 2.8 yards per carry.

Mr. Hunter took much of the responsibility afterward, explaining that it takes time to find a "rhythm" on the line. But after a week of practice, Mr. Hunter found his niche. That was clear in the Jets' win over the Steelers the following Sunday, when the Jets allowed one sack and averaged 3.9 yards per carry. Mr. Callahan made one key adjustment, sending reserve Rob Turner onto the field as an extra tight end about 25 times on "jumbo" packages. The idea was to counter the Steelers' blitzes and their explosive pass-rushers.

"Bill's always looking for a schematic advantage, and I think that's what makes him an elite coach," Mr. Turner said. "Those guys were mismatches for most tight ends, and speed-wise they were a mismatch for me. So I just relied on technique to frustrate them."

Mr. Callahan has been working this week to re-incorporate Mr. Woody, who has declared himself healthy and ready to play. His return should benefit the Jets—and the offensive line, which has spent the entire season building itself up for this weekend.

 Write to  Scott Cacciola at scott.cacciola@wsj.com 