Syria's government took measures to calm the country's uprising as anti-government unrest continued on Saturday, according to news reports.

Track day-by-day events in the countries facing unrest in North Africa and the Middle East.

  More photos and interactive graphics  

The government freed over 200 political prisoners, including Islamists and Kurds, from the notorious Saydnaya prison in Damascus on Saturday, according to human-rights groups.

The move came after President Bashar al-Assad pledged Thursday to move forward with political and economic reforms to appease opponents. In the past, such promises have been made but gone undelivered.

Observers of Syrian politics said the detainee release isn't a serious enough move to persuade opponents of Mr. Assad that he is committed to reforms this time around. 

"I don't think we've seen any thing serious yet," said a Beirut-based political analyst. "A serious step would be a promise of election at a fixed date and a change a government, and lifting the state of emergency." 

So far Mr. Assad hasn't directly addressed the nation, delivering news of the release through an adviser, in what analysts say is a bid to avoid becoming the target of public rage. So far protestors have by and large not called for Mr. Assad's ouster, but rather for reform and change.

Damascus was quiet on Saturday, one day after thousands of Syrians marched in cities across the country in an unprecedented display of public dissent. Friday's protests were violently put down by security forces, leaving dozens dead, according to witnesses and media reports.

 Analysts in Syria's capital say it is difficult to predict what will happen next. "The lack of information is making it hard to assess the scale of unrest and making it harder for other Syrians to decide what to do," said one. 

Protests were reported on Saturday in the coastal city of Latakia, northwestern Syria, with reports of snipers shooting and killing two people and injuring two others, according to Agence France Press.

Funerals were also reportedly held across the country Saturday for Friday's victims. But such news was reduced to a trickle: Daraa, the site of a week of protests and deadly government repisals on Friday, has largely been sealed. On Friday evening, the bureau chief for Reuters in Damascus was deported.

A Facebook group for Syrian protesters called for demonstrations across the country on Saturday. But as of Saturday afternoon, residents said they had heard only of chants from mourners in Daraa and other southern cities as they attended funerals of victims of yesterday's shootings by security forces.

Mosques across Daraa announced the names of "martyrs" as hundreds of people gathered in the main square, chanting for freedom, Al Jazeera reported. In nearby Tafas, mourners in the funeral procession of Kamal Baradan, who was killed yesterday in Daraa, set fire to the Baath party building and the police station, Al Jazeera and others reported.

Syria had seen little unrest before last week, amid months of protests sweeping the Middle East. That has changed dramatically in the past seven days as the arrests of some youths in one southern Syrian town spiraled into violent confrontations in that area and sparked protests across several other major cities, including the capital, Damascus—events that would have long been unthinkable against a regime believed to have an unshakable grip on security. 

A prolonged period of unrest in Syria could have major regional repercussions. Syria is a key conduit for Iranian influence in the Middle East, and the country wields strong influence on neighboring Lebanon and the Palestinian territories, where it supports the militant groups Hezbollah and Hamas. Syria also remains officially at war with Israel over the disputed Golan Heights.

Some U.S., European and Israeli officials saw the potential weakening of Mr. Assad's government as an important opening to significantly undermine Tehran's role in the region. 

 Write to  Farnaz Fassihi at farnaz.fassihi@wsj.com 