Liberal activists still fuming over last year's Supreme Court decision in Citizens United v. FEC, which re-established the First Amendment rights of businesses and unions to engage in independent political speech, spent the weekend test-driving their new strategy to discourage free speech.

Near Rancho Mirage, Calif., campaign finance reform group Common Cause staked out a conference held by conservative philanthropists Charles and David Koch in an effort to intimidate attending businessmen and call attention to the Koch brothers' history of conservative donations.

With the protests dubbed "uncloaking the Kochs," Common Cause aimed to out the "billionaires caucus" consorting with conservative donors and to discourage new attendees from exercising the political speech available to them since Citizens United. Liberal blog ThinkProgress ran lists of "key Republican donors" at the supposedly "secret" conference while noting that 40% of the attendees would be first-timers this year. The Los Angeles Times reported that outside the conference, Common Cause President Bob Edgar told the rally that the Kochs were "at the center of a hardcore conservative political network." Protesters carried signs with messages like "Kochtopus: Drowning Democracy in Dirty Money."

Overturning Citizens United is a top priority for Common Cause and other campaign finance reform groups, who have lately turned to tactics outside the courtroom to advance their agenda. Supreme Court Justices Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas found themselves in Common Cause's crosshairs recently when the group sent a letter to the Justice Department demanding an investigation of whether their attendance at a previous conference held by the Kochs should have required that they recuse themselves from hearing Citizens United.

According to a petition that the group is circulating, Justices Scalia and Thomas have been "featured guests at secretive political strategy sessions sponsored by Koch Industries, a multi-billion dollar conglomerate that has invested millions of dollars in political campaigns and causes." The justices weren't in fact guests of the Kochs, but of the Federalist Society, and a Supreme Court spokesman has said neither participated in the conference. But the real point here is to cast aspersions on two of the conservative votes for dismantling restrictions on free speech in hopes of discrediting their judgment.

To read more stories like this one, please subscribe to Political Diary. 