U.S. astronaut safety is threatened by continuing disputes over NASA's direction, as well as by the agency's own rules for new spacecraft designs, according to a high-level federal oversight group.

The independent panel warned that U.S. manned exploration of space may face greater risks due to the "lack of clarity and constancy of purpose among NASA, Congress and the White House." 

In a report released Thursday, NASA's Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel concluded that disputes over the agency's missions and funding levels "can negatively affect worker morale and the ability to attract and maintain" a skilled work force needed to "effectively reduce risk going into the future."

The latest concerns about NASA's drift come amid heightened uncertainty over its budget and policy priorities, as the new House Republican leadership begins to spell out a vision for the agency. Veteran GOP lawmakers on committees overseeing NASA generally have strongly opposed White House efforts to turn over core agency functions—including transporting astronauts to and from the international space station—to commercial rocket and spacecraft suppliers and operators.

Meanwhile, President Barack Obama's ambitious goal of launching a manned expedition to an asteroid by 2025 hasn't gained much traction inside NASA or among lawmakers. 

On Thursday, Rep. Ralph Hall (R., Texas), the chairman of the House Committee on Science, Space and Technology, criticized the Obama administration for seeking to kill long-established manned projects. Instead of providing NASA with a larger budget advocated by outside experts, according to Mr. Hall, the White House "simply said it was unaffordable" and has denied NASA the resources "necessary to have a program worthy of a great nation." 

Another portion of the report by the congressionally chartered oversight panel focuses on fundamental questions such as "how safe is safe enough" when it comes to replacing the existing space-shuttle fleet. 

As part of its annual safety scorecard, the eight-member panel criticized the agency's design criteria for next-generation space vehicles. NASA's recently established acceptable risk levels for a fatal accident, according to the report, "may not be as safe as modern technology can and should provide." 

The shuttles are slated to be retired this year, but no clear plan has emerged about what will come after them. Still, NASA has determined that for follow-on spacecraft on six-month missions, the chances of a fatal accident can't be greater than one out of 270. Eventually, NASA seeks a "long-term maturity goal" for improving the safety of such spacecraft. It wants to reduce the probability of a fatal accident to one out of 750.

The panel emphasized that while these goals "are an improvement relative to the shuttle," they amount to "less improvement than expected" considering that the current fleet doesn't have any emergency crew-escape system and doesn't reflect "major technology advancements that have occurred" over the past three decades. 

The panel urged NASA to reassess its risk criteria. And it said astronaut safety in coming decades will be "profoundly linked" to establishing "a good acquisition strategy as quickly as possible" for commercial spacecraft. 

By contrast, certain commercially developed space hardware already appears to enjoy a much lower probability of catastrophic failure than NASA's rules envision. Before last month's historic launch and recovery of an unmanned capsule by space entrepreneur Elon Musk's company, for example, the Federal Aviation Administration projected the "combined risk to the public" from debris was less than 30 in one million. 

On Saturday, however, a number of industry and government space officials said the two statistical measures focus on substantially different outcomes, and therefore aren't comparable. The FAA numbers indicate the potential risk of death or injury to someone on the ground during the brief period of a launch or return from orbit. NASA's internal safety metrics, on the other hand, try to measure the cumulative risk of a spacecraft accident, explosion or some other type of calamity for the astronauts onboard. And NASA is looking at the risk profile over a six-month or 210-day long mission.

Further complicating the safety debate, earlier this week NASA officials delivered a separate report to Capitol Hill arguing that they can't build a new rocket and Apollo-like capsule on the budget and deadline established by lawmakers. None of the options analyzed so far, according to NASA, will be able to fly by 2016 unless lawmakers significantly increase the agency's appropriations.

That prompted angry responses from lawmakers including Democratic Sen. Bill Nelson of Florida, who championed a compromise earlier this year to build a replacement heavy-lift rocket based on shuttle-derived technologies. 

 Write to  Andy Pasztor at andy.pasztor@wsj.com 