For a sense of the breathtaking pace of change in the mobile sector, consider this: Nokia went from market-leader in 2007 with nearly 70% of the smartphone market to market-laggard three years later with only 38% of the market.

Instead, the likes of  Apple
AAPL


0.85
%




 and Android-based smartphones (which didn't even exist in 2007) have taken up dominant positions in less time than many industries update a product line. Similarly, those non-technology firms that have incorporated this technology into their businesses and supply chains are challenging market leaders in a way that was, until recently, unthinkable.

Although its lingering public image is of a company that would be more at home in the pink-lipsticked milieu of Mad Men, Avon Products is still the world's largest direct selling organization.

Since the current chairman, Andrea Jung, assumed her role in 1999, the company has aggressively embraced new technology. Interviewed by Fortune magazine in 2001 after a slow year, Ms. Jung had this to say: "I'm probably thinking that we need to be even bolder and faster."

By 2008, the cosmetics giant, which operates in over 140 countries worldwide and has annual sales of $10 billion (€7 billion), became one of the first companies of its size to take to the cloud in order to better serve the needs of its network of paid sales managers, who oversee the work of the self-employed representatives.

Avon's geographically disparate and highly mobile workforce had long struggled to keep up with the need to review and redesign printed materials such as training manuals, which were edited and updated via a laborious e-mail process. Switching to the cloud proved a swifter solution than a wholesale redesign of the company's systems, required minimal training and support and produced quicker results. The cloud-based system also features a spreadsheet for field training managers to monitor representatives, and acts as a repository for the company's library of training materials, which are available for download. 

In 2008, as Ms. Jung took a seat on the board of Apple, Avon emphasized its commitment to technical innovation with the appointment of Donagh Herlihy as vice president and chief information officer. With a nod to the popularity of social networking sites such as Facebook, Mr. Herlihy instigated and launched Customer Connect, a suite of solutions that track the relationship between customers and their representatives. 

It also functions as a forum for representatives to discuss sales leads and techniques. In the future, Mr. Herlihy plans to introduce a new system that would bring the direct selling model of Avon completely online, to enable representatives to manage their business in the cloud. 

The hope is that such systems will result in faster delivery of products to representatives and their customers.

Such rapid change has come from the confluence of a number of factors, including but not exclusively: the development of low energy powerful processors based on ARM-based processors; the development of "smart" cellular phones; a slew of highly portable touch-screen computers such as the iPad; nimbler dedicated applications that store data in the online network that has become known as the cloud, making information accessible on any connected device. 

There was a consensus among the tech leaders that the impact on businesses would be profound both in terms of the way they work and the products and services they offer: "Businesses will become ever more responsive as mobile and nomadic workers become better connected and more able to perform effectively," says  Tim Watkins, vice president for Western Europe for Huawei Technologies. 

"I cannot over-emphasize the importance of the cloud," says  Jean-Philippe Courtois, the president of Microsoft International, who oversees all of the software giant's development outside the U.S. and Canada.

Although Microsoft is widely perceived to be lagging in mobile services, Mr. Courtois is convinced its long-term strategy of 'cloud' investment will pay off. "The starting point for our company is to enable continuous cloud services. We want to connect every person in Europe, every village on the planet. That's a mission that we started many years ago from the original vision of the company."

Security and privacy concerns were cited as deterrents to corporate cloud computing: "Changes in the working environment, including mobility and increased number of devices accessing the network, creates a more challenging environment for organizations from a security perspective," says  Chris Dedicoat, the president of European markets for Cisco. He adds that these and other challenges will have to be met by both technology firms and internal IT departments: "A growing dependency on technology to provide applications and services from any location and on any device is driving a rapid transition towards the virtualization of computing resources.

"A need to increase productivity and drive innovation will see a growth in the use of collaboration technologies – such as video and social networking. As a consequence we will see an increase in the number of different devices and applications that IT departments will be required to manage."

Alongside cloud computing comes the increasing trend of delivering software as a service, a key issue identified by  Ralf Schneider, chief technology editor of German insurance giant Allianz. He refers to the idea that enterprises, used to paying for software as a discrete cost, will move increasingly to paying only for the time they actually use the product. Software as a service will liberate workers and give them access not only to information, but to software whereever they are, whenever they need it. This will have profound impacts on work patterns and business response.

A point echoed by a many of the tech leaders was that mobile technology will transform the way in which customers and businesses engage with one another and with it a series of new challenges and opportunities. "The days are gone when a website was the dominant channel to your customers. Today, for many businesses, mobile phone app presence is as important as websites 10 years ago," says  Ilja Laurs, chief executive of GetJar. He adds that these businesses have to consider which platforms to embrace and how to extend products and marketing to all these new channels. 

And for technology firms,  Niklas Zennstrom, venture capitalist at Atomico offers this advice: "There are a set of new start-ups which are designing products 100% focused on the smart-phone experience. These start-ups have a golden opportunity to disrupt existing web-based players who may not be as agile to execute a mobile strategy." The tech leaders made many references to collaborative working.  Joanna Shields of  Google offered this: "Mobile devices are driving up wireless revenues with consumers. There is an opportunity for technology companies to tap into this, and to identify a strategy that will foster innovation and allow them to tap into lucrative new areas or extend current market leadership." With this rapid change, does this mean the days of the PC are numbered?



For now, Mr. Laurs thinks the PC is still at the heart of the internet in the developed world. It's the internet that is changing: "Mobile apps are becoming an extension of the internet. The apps we see now are replacing websites for functionality. Where once we had a URL, we now have a pictogram that we push with our finger."

As a result, he says, "exactly the same players dominate the mobile space, because they are already established. If you look at which applications are most used today, 80% of them are Facebook, chatting, messaging, Twitter and so on. A lot of services that are essentially web services". Is it too late for organizations that were dominant in the previous technologies – such as Microsoft? "Not at all. We are just at the beginning of an incredible era for portable devices. At present, only one in five phones sold are smartphones, and people change phones a lot more frequently than they change their PCs. There's a lot of volatility in the market, and a big opportunity for software," says Mr. Courtois.

See the full Tech Council report.

