This season was supposed to be an awkward transition. It was supposed to be about clearing out the dregs of a disappointing decade, so that the St. John's program could renew itself next year, with one of the strongest recruiting classes in the country.

The Steve Lavin era couldn't officially start or invite reasonable judgment until his hand-picked players swarmed the court, not the 10 inherited seniors he sometimes referred to this season as his stepchildren. 

Only someone forgot to tell St. John's. 

On Wednesday at 2 p.m., the fifth-seeded Red Storm (20-10, 12-6 Big East) will face Rutgers (15-16) in the second round of the Big East Tournament at Madison Square Garden. St. John's enters the game tied for third in conference standings, ranked No. 17/18 in the country, and all but a lock for the program's first ticket to the NCAA Tournament since 2002. 

"I think everybody is a little surprised," admitted Chris Monasch, the St. John's athletic director.

This Red Storm team has specialized in surprises, good and bad, from their stunning disintegrations against Fordham and St. Bonaventure early in the year to a recent 84-70 drubbing by Seton Hall (13-18), which fell to Rutgers 76-70 in overtime Tuesday in the first round of the Big East Tournament.

But the pendulum-like season has also included spectacular upswings, like toppling then No. 3-ranked Duke in front of a sell-out crowd at Madison Square Garden. It was one of six wins against Top 25 teams for the Red Storm this year, including four in the Top Ten. 

Those attempting to puzzle out St. John's post-season fortunes have one more contradiction to consider: St. John's is one of the most veteran teams in college basketball, with nine active seniors, none of whom have ever played in an NCAA tournament.

"I'd say it's a veteran team that's entering into new territory," head coach Steve Lavin said with a slight smile.

In other words: Who knows how far they can go?

Still, the program's first 20-win regular season in more than a decade has entranced a city ready to believe.

 According to the university, men's basketball revenues increased 70% this season, to $2.9 million; corporate sponsorship for the athletic program is up 27%; and season tickets soared by 26%. Student season-ticket sales have nearly doubled, going from 384 last year to 551 this season.

"I'm hearing from people I haven't spoken to in, like, 10 years," said senior Justin Burrell with a grin. He estimated that "maybe 1,000 people" pestered him for tickets to senior night.

Burrell, who was named the Big East's Sixth Man of the Year earlier this week, and his teammates have already spent time scouring bracketology predictions and plotting possible tournament scenarios.

Lavin and the coaching staff have attempted to squelch distractions; the team is not allowed to go on Facebook or Twitter or frequent bars or clubs. A series of 6 a.m. practices started the season; throughout the year, players have attended sessions tailored for each position, for perimeter play, for extra free throw shooting as well as film study.

But although Lavin has cycled in new plays, new approaches and new sets all season—sometimes introducing entirely new offenses in the middle of time-outs—the most significant adjustment, he said, was attitude.

"It was more of a fragile group that hadn't had success, that had a crisis in confidence," he said. "So it was trying to build the belief they could win and now that they've had success you want to build the appetite for more—but not to the point where they're big-headed or cocky or exhibiting bravado."

During his stint at UCLA, Lavin said complacency was a constant threat. "With this particular group I haven't worried about letdowns only because they're so hungry and they haven't had that degree of success," he said.

The team's leading scorer, senior guard Dwight Hardy (17.9 points per game), started only two games last season; this year he's started every one and was just named the Most Improved Player in the Big East.

The team's second-leading scorer, senior forward Justin Brownlee (12.1 points per game), started only three games last year and has nearly doubled his scoring output.

In turn, several of last season's starters, including Sean Evans and Malik Boothe, quietly accepted reduced roles and places back on the bench. 

It is a bargain the seniors made with each other before the season began to wipe away the preseason narrative that pegged them for irrelevance, and seize their final chance.

"We realize this is our last go-round," Boothe said.

"Collectively they've bought in," Lavin said. 

Evans agreed. 

"If he says don't wear shoelaces," Evans deadpanned, "I don't wear shoelaces."

It's worked so far.