OTTAWA—Canada's central bank held its benchmark overnight rate steady at 1% for the fourth consecutive time, acknowledged a "slightly" faster than expected economic recovery, but reiterated that global risks remain elevated and exporters face "considerable challenges" from a strong currency and poor productivity.

The Bank of Canada said "any further reduction in monetary policy stimulus would need to be carefully considered," repeating a line that appeared in all of its recent policy statements. It also reiterated that the stand-pat decision leaves "considerable" monetary stimulus in place, consistent with achieving the 2% inflation target "in an environment of excess supply" in Canada.

The decision was predicted by all 12 economists at primary government securities dealers surveyed by Dow Jones Newswires.

The Canadian dollar, which on Monday surged to its highest level since November 2007 in the wake of stronger-than-expected economic data, extended gains after the bank's rate decision was published. The U.S. dollar fell to C$0.9710 from C$0.9717 just before the release. The U.S. dollar closed officially at C$0.9714 Monday.

Canada's economy accelerated faster than expected in the final three months of 2010, driven by the largest exports gain in more than six years and the strongest pace of consumer spending in three years. Gross domestic product advanced by a 3.3% annualized rate following an upwardly revised 1.8% gain in the previous three months, Statistics Canada said Monday. Growth was one percentage point higher than the bank had forecast in January, and better than the 3% gain expected by the market.

"The recovery in Canada is proceeding slightly faster than expected, and there is more evidence of the anticipated rebalancing of demand," the bank said.

There are early signs of a recovery in net exports, supported by stronger U.S. activity and global demand for commodities. "However, the export sector continues to face considerable challenges from the cumulative effects of the persistent strength in the Canadian dollar and Canada's poor relative productivity performance," the bank said.

Robust demand from emerging-market economies is driving underlying strength of commodity prices, and this could be further reinforced "temporarily" as a result of continuing tensions in the Arab world, the central bank said. Canada is a net exporter of oil, and the Canadian dollar is benefitting from soaring oil prices.

High oil and food prices are driving global inflationary pressures, but thus far, that hasn't been a problem for Canada. The Bank of Canada said inflation has been "consistent" with its expectations, and "underlying pressures affecting prices remain subdued, reflecting "considerable slack" in the economy.

It said business investment continues to expand rapidly as companies take advantage of stimulative financial conditions "and respond to competitive imperatives."

The bank signaled an easing of concern about the state of household balance sheets. Although consumption growth remains strong, it said there are signs that household spending is moving more in line with income growth. In its Jan. 18 policy statement, the bank said it expected stretched household balance sheets to restrain the pace of consumption growth and residential investment.

The global recovery is proceeding "broadly in line" with the bank's forecast, but the European sovereign debt crisis and bank balance-sheet woes are a "significant" source of uncertainty for the outlook, it said. Activity in the U.S., Canada's largest trading partner, is "solidifying" and remains supported by stimulative fiscal and monetary policies, the bank said. Its next rate decision is on April 12. 

 Write to  Nirmala Menon at Nirmala.Menon@dowjones.com 