Now that  Timmy Nangano is retired, he has free time. When he isn't hanging out at the car auctions or shopping the local garage sales, he's chatting with Snippy, one of his hyper-loquacious parrots. You can also find the former AC repairman down at the track, betting on the ponies. But they're not just any nags: They're his ponies. Mr. Nangano, 66 years old, is the proud owner of 13 race horses.

Make that parts of 13 horses. Little, tiny parts. Mr. Nangano, who lives in Holbrook on Long Island, owns partnerships in four harness racers and nine thoroughbreds through Funky Munky Stable, one of several local operations offering shares for less than the price of a fancy dinner for four. Racing may be the sport of kings, but Funky Munky's investors include firemen, finance guys, lawyers (lots of lawyers) and cops. 

While Mr. Nangano often buys a 3% share—typically a $1,000 partnership in a $30,000 horse—he's still a big shot at the track: An owner's card gets him free admission, a paddock pass and a really good parking spot. If his horse wins, he can pose for a photo (with 20 fellow partners) in the winner's circle.

  Richie Munk, the man behind Funky Munky Stable, is a lifelong Manhattanite who, aside from stints managing bands in the '70s (remember Battle Ax?) and driving a cab, spent most of his career selling the daylights out of janitorial supplies. ("I don't know anyone who was better, not to blow my own horn.") Now, the laid-back South Street Seaport man oversees 13 partnerships and 225 investors.

On a recent frosty morning, he left his apartment at dawn to meet one of his newest partners at Belmont Park. He found  Mandy Laderer, a high-end North Shore real estate agent, cooing over her investment, a dark bay thoroughbred named W.W.'s Lady's Man. She was dressed for the stables in oversize Chanel-logo earrings and high-heeled boots. Passing a horse enjoying a foot bath for a bad ankle, she smiled with approval: "He's getting a pedicure!"

For Ms. Laderer, the investment is an exercise in wish fulfillment. She's been going to the track since she was 8. Her home, a renovated horse barn, features life-size horse heads guarding the mantel, a collection of Derby glasses and a herd of equine sculptures, not to mention posters of Seabiscuit and Secretariat. 

As the sun warmed the chilly morning air, the two joined trainer  Gary Gullo at the exercise track. Every horse has a story. One Way to Rock, named after the Sammy Hagar song, has maturity issues. Jack on the Rocks is the big breadwinner—the $30,000 horse earned $250,000 in two years. Then there's Mr. Munk's favorite, Funky Munky Mama. It's risky to put the stable's name on a horse. "What if he turns out to be a rat?" he says. "But I know she's fast."

Back in the barn, Mr. Munk has a surprise for Ms. Laderer: a new arrival. It's Funky Munky Mama's half sister, the Funky Express (their father is an insanely fertile New York stud named Freud). They also stop to scold W.W.'s Lady's Man. "You embarrassed us in the last race," says Mr. Munk. Ms. Laderer chimes in: "I had to explain to 1,300 Facebook friends why you came in fifth."

There's nothing more thrilling than watching your horse beat the pack. But when he loses, it's disappointing and expensive. On top of the initial buy-in, partners are responsible for the $45,000 a year it costs to maintain a thoroughbred. If all goes well, winnings cover expenses, and partners divide the profits. Things seldom go well. "It's a terrible investment if you're looking for a profit," says Mr. Munk. Still, the stable had a solid 2010: Thanks to $546,000 in purse revenue, the average partner earned about $550.

A week later, Mr. Munk and his wife Karen sat in the Man o' War Room at the Aqueduct, waiting for post time. Their entrant in the $20,000 race, Goodnight Brad, is the namesake of financial services exec  Brad Weisberg, who offered to buy an ownership interest in exchange for the naming rights. Mr. Weisberg, who invests for entertainment, says the appellation derives from a golf weekend with friends. He went to bed early, but his pals kept him awake with a recurring adieu: "Goodnight Brad!"

"They kept needling me," says Mr. Weisberg. His peculiar revenge: He vowed to buy a racehorse and name it Goodnight Brad. "He's going to Derby and you're not invited," he told his buddies.

Alas, the $17,000 stallion isn't quite Derby material. "He's not that good a horse," says Mr. Munk, "he's slow." Mrs. Munk, a former harness trainer, looks up from her New York Post and nods: "God just didn't make him a superstar."

The Munks join partner  Ed Filush, a retired police captain from Connecticut, down at paddock to meet the jockey.  C.C. Lopez is dressed in Funky Munky silks: hot-pink horseshoes on a bright green jacket. Brad bares his teeth and tosses his head. Mr. Filush, who bet $15 on the race, isn't hopeful: "I went in with the assumption I'm not going to make money."

Still, it's disappointing when, after a strong start, Brad loses steam and finishes a distant fifth. Back in the paddock, everyone watches the rerun with folded arms. Mr. Munk says next time, he'll enter Brad in a lower-stakes race: "It's not like we've got liquid gold here."

Timmy Nangano, the retired repairman, had high hopes for the next race. Jack on the Rocks, the stable's superstar, was running in Philadelphia's Bensalem Stakes for a $75,000 purse. "He's a tough horse!" Mr. Nangano said admiringly. He stayed home with the parrots and watched the race online. It was smart to stay put, Mr. Nangano said later—Jack came in fourth. He declined to speculate on the stable's fortunes for 2011: "If I knew that, boy, I'd be awful smart."

—Ms. Kadet, who writes the "Tough Customer" column for SmartMoney magazine, can be reached at anne.kadet@dowjones.com 