TOKYO—Taking advantage of the strong yen and record-low interest rates, Japan's famously conservative individual investors are feeding their risk appetite and have started pouring their money into emerging-market currencies and other asset classes. 

According to the Bank of Japan, individuals held about 4.83 trillion yen ($58.87 billion) in foreign-currency deposits at Japanese banks as of the end of November last year, up 2.8% from a year ago and the highest since the central bank started providing the data in April 1999. Experts say the trend is set to accelerate this year, as the yen continues to hover near 15-year highs against the dollar. On Thursday, the yen declined weakened after a three-day winning streak, to trade at 83.01 yen against the dollar.

In Japan, individual or "retail" investors are often referred to as Mrs. Watanabe, a term that can conjure up images of day-trading housewives. Some of them trade directly in currency markets and other risky areas, but usually, Japanese retail investors stick to safe areas like savings accounts and Japanese government bonds.

Japan's rapidly aging population and skyrocketing social-security costs have caused its legions of baby boomers, who like in the U.S. have already begun to retire, to become alarmed about the size of their potential pension payouts. 

The outlook is bleak: Japan's Government Pension Investment Fund, the largest in the world with assets totaling 123 trillion yen, is selling a record four trillion yen of assets by the end of March to free up funds for payouts. By the year 2055, 40% of all Japanese are expected to be over 65 years old. 

With the yen higher and near-zero interest rates, many investors are considering higher-yielding currencies, such as the Australian dollar.

"We believe one of the biggest structural changes to come over the longer haul as the population ages will be an increase in the appetite for investment risk among individuals—especially commodity/emerging market currencies," said  Cameron Umetsu, economist at UBS in Tokyo, in a report. 

Sony Bank, the online banking unit of  Sony Financial Holdings Inc.,
SNYFY


1.55
%




 says foreign-currency deposits among its clients totaled 343 billion yen at the end of September, a 9% rise from the same period a year ago. 

A Sony Bank spokeswoman said foreign-currency deposits started to become more popular among individual investors when the yen surged against other major currencies last summer. Its core clientele base is men in their 30s and 40s.

Last June, Sony Bank started a promotion, offering lower commissions on foreign-exchange transactions every month, timed to the release of the U.S. employment report. 

  Morio Okayasu, chief analyst at Forex.com Japan, said Japanese investors are particularly bullish on the Australian dollar, the Brazilian real and the South African rand.  

"The appetite and demand for high-yielding currencies persists and is increasing," said  Shane Braunstein, the managing director of Forex.com Japan, the online foreign-exchange brokerage. 

"[Japanese investors] want to chase yield." he added. "There's a comfort level with foreign currencies you don't find anywhere else in the world." 

 Write to  Mariko Sanchanta at mariko.sanchanta@wsj.com and Atsuko Fukase at atsuko.fukase@dowjones.com 