NEW DELHI -- Auto makers in India welcomed the government's move to abstain from increasing excise tax on vehicles by two percentage points in the federal budget and sharpen its focus on environmentally friendly hybrid and electric vehicles. 

The news lifted the share prices of most auto makers as companies and investors were expecting an increase in the central excise tax on cars and two-wheeled vehicles to 12% from 10%. Also, an increased focus on the rural sector and spending on the infrastructure sector in the budget are expected to improve the long-term prospects for the automobile sector. 

"Any increase in excise tax would have been inconsequential in comparison to the current interest rates and higher oil prices, but it is a welcome move,"  Venu Srinivasan, chairman and managing director of TVS Motor Co. Ltd., India's third-largest two-wheeler maker by sales, told Dow Jones Newswires. 

Finance Minister  Pranab Mukherjee, in his budget speech for the fiscal year starting April 1, also proposed starting a national mission for hybrid and electric vehicles. 

He also proposed granting an exemption from the basic import tax and other charges on the import of parts for hybrid vehicles as "import dependence for their critical parts/sub-assemblies is still quite high." 

He also proposed a concessional excise tax of 5% on hybrid vehicles to encourage local production of such vehicles. In addition, Mr. Mukherjee proposed halving the excise tax on kits used for conversion of fossil fuel vehicles into hybrid vehicles to 5%. 

Such a move could benefit companies such as Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd., which already has a presence in the hybrid and electric vehicle sectors. 

"Increased allocation to agriculture will lead to more spending [in rural areas] and will help all companies who have business in that area," said  Uday Phadke, president in charge of finance, legal and financial services sector at Mahindra & Mahindra, India's biggest sports-utility vehicle and tractor maker by sales. "No change in excise duty is also a welcome move." 

Shares of Mahindra rose as much 8% on the news. They traded 3.3% higher at 614 rupees on the Bombay Stock Exchange, compared with a 0.7% rise in the benchmark index. 

TVS Motor traded 6.5% higher at 51 rupees, while Maruti Suzuki India Ltd., India's biggest car maker by sales, gained 3.3% to 614.80 rupees. Shares of  Tata Motors Ltd., however, slid 2.4% to 1,080 rupees, while Hero Honda Motors Ltd. fell 2.4% to 1,465 rupees. 

 Write to  Santanu Choudhury at santanu.choudhury@dowjones.com and Nikhil Gulati at nikhil.gulati@dowjones.com 