WASHINGTON—Nineteen big banks that underwent government stress tests in 2009 were to submit new capital plans to the Federal Reserve by Friday to be eligible to raise their dividends or repurchase stock. 

The Fed, after a review of the plans that is expected to take about three months, is likely to permit a large group of these financial institutions to raise their dividends, analysts say. 

"This stress test is going to provide the Fed the political cover to say it's OK for some banks to issue dividends. The Fed will allow the stronger banks such as  Morgan Stanley and  Wells Fargo & Co. to issue new dividends," said  Nancy Bush, financial industry consultant at NAB Research. 

"There may be some in the next tier down where you have had progress on earnings but they are not back to a normal earnings environment, where the Fed will want to have a second look before approving dividend hikes." 

  Jaret Seiberg, analyst at MF Global Inc., said he expects that most healthy banks will boost dividends by the end of the second quarter. 

All of this is raising competitive concerns with those financial institutions worried they won't be permitted to raise dividends. 

"It may have a greater impact than just the dividend issue," said  Dwight Smith, partner at Alston & Bird LLC, in Washington. "Some banks may be perceived as unhealthy." 

During the financial crisis that shook the economy to the brink of disaster in Sept. 2008, dividends were suspended or reduced to minimal levels. The new stress tests set in place a mechanism so that, if institutions pass the tests, they can raise their dividends to as much as 30% of their post-tax net income. 

However, participating institutions such as  Suntrust Banks Inc., KeyCorp and  Regions Financial Corp. that haven't repaid taxpayer-funded capital injections from the crisis-response Troubled Asset Relief Program are unlikely to be permitted to raise their dividends. 

The Fed said in a statement that big banks must repay TARP funds and satisfy other conditions related to TARP before the central bank can consider letting them take other capital actions. 

However, TARP investment or not, all 19 banks are expected to submit capital plans to the Fed. The financial institutions that still have TARP investments are expected to submit plans for how they will repay the money. They can also explain how they will reinstate a larger dividend once TARP is paid back. 

Officials from KeyCorp and Regions declined to comment on their capital plans. SunTrust spokesman  Michael McCoy said the Atlanta-based institution will be submitting capital plans to the Fed explaining how it is willing, and able, to repay the government's investment in the company "at the appropriate time." 

The other financial institutions expected to submit capital-raising plans are  J.P. Morgan Chase & Co.,  Citigroup Inc., Wells Fargo,  Goldman Sachs Group Inc., GMAC LLC,  Fifth Third Bancorp, Bank of America Corp., Morgan Stanley,  PNC Financial Services Group Inc., U.S. Bancorp, BB&T Corp.,  American Express Co.,  MetLife Inc., Bank of New York Mellon Corp. and  State Street Corp. 

Banks with TARP funds must limit dividend payments to one cent per common share. 

Alston's Mr. Smith agreed that the Fed will likely approve some dividend increases. "I don't think the Fed would have gone through this exercise unless they would approve some dividends." 

Bank of America has paid back its TARP investment and  Charles Noski, the institution's chief financial officer, said that the Fed has confirmed that the company has fulfilled its final TARP commitment, which was to increase its equity by $3 billion through asset sales. 

NAB Research's Ms. Bush says that the Fed's approval of Bank of America's asset sales puts the company one step closer to being permitted to raise its dividend payout. However, she said, the bank must still be evaluated on its capital levels and ability to absorb other types of losses. 

Once the plans are submitted, the Fed plans to evaluate each institution based on how they plan to fulfill Basel III capital requirements, under which banks must eventually hold top-quality capital totaling 7% of their risk-bearing assets. 

The Fed said banks must take into account risks on the horizon, such as their ability to absorb losses on litigation and other costs, including suits from investors seeking to force banks to repurchase or "put-back" bad mortgages the banks sold them. Bank of America, for example, is being sued by investors including the New York Fed that demand the lender purchase $47 billion worth of mortgages.

The Fed is expected to privately let the 19 big banks know whether they can raise their dividends by March 22.