Facing a brick wall of debt, Gov. Chris Christie Thursday proposed a plan to pay for $8 billion in transportation repairs over the next five years. He said the plan includes less borrowing than took place in previous administrations, in part due to the use of money from a canceled Hudson River train tunnel.

Mr. Christie also wants to lean on the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, asking the agency to pick up some $1.8 billion in projects. Another $1.8 billion would come from the Turnpike Authority and from squeezing more money out of the state budget, while the balance, $4.4 billion, would be borrowed. The plan would avoid an unpopular gasoline tax increase.

Fixing the transportation-financing system, known as the Transportation Trust Fund, is one of the biggest challenges of Mr. Christie's governorship, and several parts of the plan need legislative approval. At the end of this fiscal year, debt payments would have sucked up the nearly $900 million a year allowed to be spent under law, with no room to borrow more or pay for projects.

Mass-transit advocates and Democrats said the plan proved Mr. Christie killed the massive train-tunnel project, Access to the Region's Core, to free up money for this fix, but the Republican governor insisted the two were separate decisions.

Without the money freed up by ARC, Mr. Christie said the state might have had to scale back the annual workload. 

"I don't have to worry about that, because ARC didn't happen," he said.

Overall, the Christie administration's goal is to borrow less than previous governors—$1.6 billion a year of state funding, with a roughly equal federal match—while performing the same amount of work. Mr. Christie, though critical of debt, said this is a start.

"What you have here is a plan that is fiscally responsible, that will not burden over the long haul our children and grandchildren with extraordinary debt payments, and will address the needs that we have as a state for infrastructure," he said.

Questions still remain, such as how much money will come from an already tight state budget—the Christie administration isn't saying—and whether New York's new governor will go along with the plan. The transportation proposal sets the stage for the first test of the working relationship between two of the nation's most-watched governors, New York's Andrew Cuomo and Mr. Christie, who share power over the Port Authority.

The Port Authority would take on projects such as the aging Pulaski Skyway, a series of bridges connecting Newark and Jersey City. 

A spokesman for Mr. Cuomo, Joshua Vlasto, said: "We will work with the Port Authority and with New Jersey to ensure that the transportation system's critical role in the regional economy remains strong."

Yet the proposal could upset the delicate deal agreed to by previous governors to carve up Port Authority money. Although Mr. Christie has asserted his state's claim to use the ARC money on New Jersey projects, the canceled tunnel would have brought thousands of new commuters into Midtown Manhattan every day and likely spurred development on the West Side. It'll be difficult for Mr. Christie to make the case the new projects will benefit New York in the same way, giving Mr. Cuomo some leverage, New York officials say.

The trust fund was formed in 1984 with the goal of providing a steady source of money for road projects using 10-year bonds. Over the next 25 years, however, governors and lawmakers kept borrowing, extending the terms of bonds and allowing the fund to pay for a wider variety of costs associated with transportation management, including salaries or short-term work.

Transportation groups have called for the gas tax to be raised for the first time since 1989 to pay for the work, but Mr. Christie has been dead-set against the unpopular move.

Democratic State Chairman John Wisniewski said the proposal relies on already-approved toll increases, which were passed to pay for the ARC tunnel but are now being redirected to the trust fund. He also said the plan would bite into other budgetary priorities.

"By definition, something else has got to give," Mr. Wisniewski said, though he declined to offer an alternative solution.

Christie administration officials said they do not need voter approval for the new borrowing because it would use gas, sales and petroleum-products taxes that are already constitutionally dedicated.

Democrats, despite their own history of borrowing, jumped on Mr. Christie's borrowing. Assembly Speaker Sheila Oliver called it a "haphazard plan...that relies on many of the same gimmicks he has long derided others for," such as "irresponsible borrowing."

—Andrew Grossman contributed to this article.