The Frank and Ruth E. Caruso Foundation is small. But by focusing on just one cause, President Lisa Turngren is hoping it can be mighty.

Rather than spread its relatively modest resources—the foundation has about $4.7 million in assets—the eight-year-old group will for at least two years focus nearly exclusively on aiding New York-based organizations that deal with sexual violence. The foundation previously also supported areas such as education, medical research and forest preservation.

"As a small foundation, we can make a difference" by "pinpointing" a specific topic, said Ms. Turngren, niece of the foundation's namesakes. Mr. Caruso, a commercial real-estate developer in New Jersey, and Mrs. Caruso, a painter, both died in 2007.

Ms. Turngren said Philanthropy New York, an association of foundations, helped her focus the group's giving so each gift would be more meaningful. 

The Caruso Foundation in 2007 began focusing on mental health issues and in December the board determined to narrow the scope of giving further.

The foundation gives away anywhere from $140,000 to $240,000 annually. It is targeting sexual violence in part because Ms. Turngren, a clinical social worker by training, said many women she came across in her practice disclosed a history of sexual assault. 

"I realized that it was a huge problem," said Ms. Turngren, who scaled back her patient load this winter to focus on philanthropy.

The Caruso Foundation began supporting anti-violence groups in 2007, giving four-figure gifts each to organizations including the New York City Alliance Against Sexual Assault and the Anti-Violence Project. 

The Alliance offers information and support for communities to reduce the incidence of sexual violence, while the Anti-Violence Project addresses hate violence in the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and queer and HIV-affected communities.

With its newfound focus, Ms. Turngren says the foundation should be able to help such organizations even more.

Encouraging prevention rather than just treatment, the Caruso Foundation has begun supporting the Alliance Against Sexual Assault's Project Envision. That project uses locals to find the root causes of sexual violence in various neighborhoods—such as religious traditions or societal acceptance in immigrant communities—and implement programs to stop it. The foundation gave $10,000 to Project Envision in 2010, and another $15,000 to the Alliance at large. Ms. Turngren now sits on Project Envision's steering committee.

Treatment is still key, too. For example, the Anti-Violence Project later this winter will begin offering art therapy to survivors of sexual violence. The organization is using the $22,000 it received from the Caruso Foundation in 2010 to enhance its sexual violence-specific programming.