 Orcas Island, Wash. 

It can be hard to build a house that's barely there. 

In 1981, Seattle interior designer Rysia Suchecka and her engineer husband, John Warburton, fell in love with this remote island, buying a plot for about $300,000 and spending summers for the next 27 years in the small modular home that was already there. And for most of those years, Ms. Suchecka worked on sketches of the dream home she and her husband imagined on their 3½ acres of beachfront property. The couple wanted as few walls as possible, and an environmentally friendly energy system. The goal was simplicity. 

But when Ms. Suchecka finally handed her drawings to architect Joe Herrin, partner at Seattle-based Heliotrope Architects, and they began the permit process, the reality became more complicated. It turned out the land they owned had been a winter camp for Lummi Indians for over a thousand years, evidenced by artifacts like shells and stones shaped as tools, which legally barred them from digging into the ground. Since the house was on a flood zone, they also needed to lift it off the ground, yet do so without stilts that necessitated digging into the ground. 

After half a dozen schemes and 2½ years, the approximately 2,100-square-foot home, finished a few months ago for $300 a square foot, looks like a floating glass rectangle. The foundation is a mat slab, the concrete poured right over the grass. Walls along the edges raise the house up 3½ feet.

Nevertheless, the house doesn't compromise on the couple's original vision. Twenty-foot-long glass walls on either side provide no barrier to views of overgrown meadows, trees and a dark-sanded beach, strewn with seaweed and washed up logs, that overlooks the dark-blue Strait of Georgia and a horizon that stretches to Canada. 

To keep the glass walls standing, small rooms at either end of the rectangle (the utility room on one side, guest rooms on the other) act as bookends with solid walls to provide structural buttressing. Otherwise, there are no interior walls. The rooms flow into one another, with the living room at one end separated from the kitchen by a long, narrow alder dining table and the dining room separated from the kitchen by a 12-foot-long Carrara marble countertop.

"We wanted to know what it was like to live in a house without walls," said Ms. Suchecka, whose clients have included Seattle's Gates Foundation and New York University Medical Center. "You are so aware of what's going on outside you're actually a part of it." The moon provides so much light that they usually don't have to turn on any lights at night; it feels like the otters, ducks and eagles are in the next room. Mr. Herrin, the architect, calls the concept "disappearing architecture." 

For a modicum of privacy, a cube made up of a light-greenish reflective glass was inserted between the kitchen and the master bedroom, encompassing the pantry, a walk-in closet and the master bathroom. 

The interior is spare—there's one painting in the master bedroom. Ms. Suchecka said she and her husband, who declined to reveal their ages, have only what they need. Since the home is hidden behind the meadow and trees and a private beach "we don't feel exposed," she said. 

Outside, an ipe wood deck flanks both sides of the house. The guest rooms at one end of the house are mirror images of each other, separated by a large shower and reached by exterior doors only (satisfying Ms. Suchecka's request that guests be separate but close physically) on either side of one end of the deck. A rough path through the grasses goes through trees, past what the couple calls the "gin and tonic area"—four wooden chairs with an ocean view—down some 80 feet to the beach, a two-mile stretch that includes several small, run-down homes. A five-bedroom home built in 1971 that's on a nearby beach with four acres is currently for sale for $2.1 million. 

The house satisfied its owners' desire to be energy efficient. A vegetated roof reduces storm-water runoff and provides habitat for insects. The water that does run off is collected and stored in tanks for irrigation. Solar-thermal collectors on the roof supply much of the potable-hot-water and hydronic-heating needs, and photovoltaic panels provide supplemental electricity. 

They could be completely energy neutral if they only went in the summer. But they said they can't stay away in the winter, when the otters, eagles and seals are close by. So the couple installed a backup boiler. "It's a compromise for now," said Mr. Warburton, who plans to put in a pump that is heated by wind when they find an efficient design.

Although the house has guest rooms, the couple find they have fewer visitors than they used to, partly because more of their friends own their own homes on Orcas, and partly because they like being at the home alone. "We like privacy," Ms. Suchecka said.

 Write to  Nancy Keates at nancy.keates@wsj.com 