The basement of Fino Ristorante Italiano Wall Street was converted into a gambling den for the Great Gatsby Gambling Gala. Some played blackjack and craps while others played in a Texas Hold 'Em tournament.

"Royal Pains" star Jill Flint play host for Friday night's benefit, which raised funds for the United Cerebral Palsy of New York City. 

Growing up, Ms. Flint's longtime baby-sitter had a son with cerebral palsy. "I'm here for him," she said. 

In a black sequined flapper dress, she had very clearly Gatsbied up. However with a quick survey of the room, she began to compare and despair. "I should have worn pearls. And a headband. Do you know how hard it is to find a good headband?"

Many of the guests had indeed found them, and gave the era their best shot with glitter, boas and feathers galore.

The actress, who lives in Brooklyn and whose television show shoots mostly there and in Long Island, said the gambling part of the festivities held little appeal. During a Vegas blackjack expedition 10 years ago, she said, "I broke even for two hours. And I was so bored, so I decided to put it all down, and I lost it. Gone!" 

Edward R. Matthews, CEO of UCP/NYC, said the event was designed to cultivate a younger generation of patrons. For him, the Gatsby appeal is about recalling "an era of gentle civility."

Christopher Laul, principal of architecture firm HOK and chairman of the gala, hadn't actually read the book, but, he said, "I'm all about the spirit of the book, which is living the good life, with the drama." 

In a very Prohibition-era manner, gala Co-Chairman John Lombardo, a vice president at Bank of New York Mellon, and his wife, Karen, ate dinner in a candlelit room off the wine cellar with friends. In anticipation of the benefit, "We actually rented 'The Great Gatsby' last week," he said. "I think any scene with Robert Redford was my favorite."

Gala Co-Chairman Thomas O'Halloran, a vice president at Structure Tone, said he felt "a lot less separation anxiety when he knew his money was going to a charity rather than a casino." He, however, wasn't Gatsbied up. "It's hard enough to dress appropriately for 2011, let alone the '20s," he said.