ROCKLEDGE, Fla.—Rivian Automotive hopes the sleek, 60 miles-per-gallon sports car it is developing with help from NASA engineers will eventually deliver 1,200 jobs here along Florida's Space Coast.

That would be welcome news for a region expected to lose 9,000 jobs with the space-shuttle program's end, which nears with Friday's scheduled second-to-last liftoff. The Space Coast—stretching south along Florida's Atlantic coast from Kennedy Space Center through cities like Titusville and Cocoa Beach—has long built its identity and economy around the space program and the thousands of scientists, engineers and technicians it employed. 

Now, economic-development officials are intent on luring new aerospace-related businesses, and there have been successes: Commercial launch company SpaceX and Brazilian aircraft maker  Embraer SA are among those hiring.

"Here, there's a huge untapped technical work force that can support us," said Rivian Chief Executive  R.J. Scaringe.

But there is still a long way to go to fill the void left by the shuttle program, and the mood among the space community's workers ranges from somber to angry. "It's gut-wrenching," said Lisa Rice, president of Brevard Workforce, a county agency helping place the unemployed. "It's the ending of an era."

So far, some 2,700 workers directly tied to the space program have been laid off, said Ms. Rice. And Brevard County, which is home to Cape Canaveral, leads the state in job losses. 

Many workers have left for states like Georgia and South Carolina in search of employment elsewhere. Blocks that once teemed with aerospace employees are dotted with empty homes. 

Some fear a repeat of the aftermath of the Apollo program's end in 1975, when NASA eliminated 10,000 jobs and parts of the area looked like ghost towns.

Yet Ms. Rice says the region has a much more diverse economy today, and that agencies like hers have been preparing for years to help workers deal with the transition. The state last year increased economic-development agency Space Florida's budget by more than six times to $31 million—funding that allows it to help finance start-ups, including Rivian. 

The company is already relying on the area's knowledge base. National Aeronautics and Space Administration engineers with expertise in lightweight materials periodically test components of the car, which has a featherweight aluminum frame, under an agreement with the Kennedy Space Center.

The region's highly skilled and disciplined workers are an important part of Space Florida's pitch. "Companies spend a fortune to develop that kind of culture in a work force," said Frank DiBello, the agency's CEO. 

The agency also hopes to capitalize on the steady growth of commercial launch services, which will help fill the void left by the shuttle program. SpaceX signed a deal with NASA for 12 cargo missions to the International Space Station, which are expected to launch from SpaceX's pad in Cape Canaveral. SpaceX was also one of four companies recently awarded NASA grant money to develop spacecraft that can carry astronauts.

The company has hired former Kennedy Space Center employees and eventually plans to have a few hundred workers at its Space Coast facilities. 

In February, Embraer unveiled a new assembly plant at Melbourne International Airport, south of Cape Canaveral. The Space Coast's work force "was one of the main drivers" behind the decision to locate there, said  Gary Spulak, president of Embraer Aircraft Holding. 

Two other aviation companies are also opening facilities in Melbourne:  AAR Corp.
AIR


-4.88
%




, which plans to hire 225 employees, and Midair SA, which expects to hire an additional 450.

Still, jobs are scarce for many space-program veterans. "I expected to be working by now," said Bill Bender, a project manager who was laid off from a NASA contractor in March. But after sending off dozens of résumés he has landed only one sit-down interview. He's considering an assignment abroad. 

"It took us 50 years to build this brain trust," said state Rep. Steve Crisafulli, who serves on Space Florida's board. "We don't want to lose it." 