HARRISON, N.J.— Even as the game unfolded on the field in front of him, Dave Lee sat in Red Bull Arena Saturday night and stared hard at the feed on his laptop. During the most stressful 90 minutes of his week, there was plenty of work to do.

Beside the window that showed the Red Bulls beating the Seattle Sounders, he had a chart of live statistics and a list of key actions to tag for later use. As the team's official performance analyst, Lee knew he would be watching this game again—and again. 

After he left, he would splice together the footage he captured with three cameras installed at the top of the stadium and study the game again with all 22 players in the same frame.

 By Monday morning, the victory had been distilled to a series of lessons. And by Monday afternoon, Lee already had the Red Bulls' next opponent, the Columbus Crew, on his screen and on the brain. 

"In my experience it can help a team become 15% or 20% better," said Red Bulls coach Hans Backe, who worked with a team of six performance analysts at Manchester City. "We will know almost everything about the other team going into the game. I don't think anything can surprise us."

The team hired Lee last month as the first full-time performance analyst in Major League Soccer. Burning through terabytes of data and video every season, his job is to dissect every game and every opponent to provide as much analysis as possible. He's like an NFL coordinator with a touch of the baseball sabermetrician thrown in. 

The biggest obstacle that Lee or any other soccer statistician faces is the fundamental challenge that the sport, by its nature, presents: How do you read a fluid game of ever-changing situations as a series of discrete, consistent occurrences? 

Whereas plays in baseball all have distinct beginnings and endings in clearly defined sections of the diamond, a new string of soccer action can begin anywhere on the field. Twenty-two players are in constant motion. And from any given field position, a player might routinely roam in a 60-yard radius —far greater than even the most nimble shortstop.

"It's a long way until data alone can be as useful as it is in baseball," Lee said. "I don't think anyone's found a Holy Grail of football stats and I don't see one that exists."

Indeed, there is no single number or small set of numbers that can indicate whether someone played well or not. There is no pitching line, no quarterback rating.

 Certainly, goals and assists help. But how can a coach objectively tell whether his left back passed muster?

Back to the screen of Lee's laptop, where every snippet of film is highlighted a dozen different ways and spreadsheets are forever in progress.

The massive log of measurements that can be taken fall into two broad categories. There are those numbers that hint at a player's fitness and work rate —how far, how long and how hard a player has run. Then there are others that record his tactical and technical contributions, a whole slew of metrics that, taken together, suggest how productively a player is using the ball. 

Lee preferred to keep many of the specifics secret. Since performance analysis in soccer is so young—a large-scale innovation of the last decade—every new approach represents a potential breakthrough to be fiercely guarded from rivals. Lee added that if he were still in England, where the analyst community is much denser, he would have never even agreed to an interview.

Classified or not, the numbers only matter if they are relevant to the style the manager wants his team to play and, of course, the players' individual positions.

Consider the defensive midfielder, a player whose primary responsibilities in a passing team are winning back the ball from the opposition and relaunching play in the other direction. 

To assess his performance, Lee begins by looking at how many times that midfielder touches the ball. Then he breaks down what that player is doing with the ball when he has it: Is he turning it over? How far is he passing it forward? Is he switching sides? How much ground is he covering? The list of questions that Lee asks himself for every man on the field seems endless. And still, it gets more complicated. 

Since each of the 22 players only ever has the ball at his feet for a tiny fraction of the 90 minutes, analyzing the whole of his performance can be a statistician's nightmare. 

"Ninety-eight percent of the time, all you want is for that player to be in the right position," Lee said. "And that's impossible to measure because it changes based on where every other player on the pitch is and where the ball is."

For now, the coach must suffice as the best judge of a player's movement. But analysts are finding aspects of a team's positional play that they can measure objectively. 

One that Lee pays particular attention to is the time it takes a team to regain its defensive shape after a turnover. Anything more than five or six seconds, and a side is highly likely to be exposed or mismatched somewhere on the field. 

Mercifully for Lee, soccer has a few set plays. During corners and free kicks, endlessly rehearsed on the practice field, every player has a clearly defined assignment. Make a run to the near post, say, or stick to this player like his shadow. It is what Lee likes to watch when he needs a break. "You can go through every individual player and say, 'Did you do your job or not?'" he said. 

Prior to joining the Red Bulls, Lee, 24, obtained degrees in Sport Technology from Staffordshire University in Performance Analysis from one of the only places in Britain that offered the program, the University of Wales Institute, Cardiff. 

He then spent a year-and-a-half as the performance analyst for Exeter City, his boyhood club from the third tier of English soccer. Lee wound up here on a recommendation to Backe by a member of the Manchester City staff.

Having barely seen the American game before taking the job, Lee spent most the Red Bulls' training camp holed up in his hotel room studying. He guessed that in the last three weeks, he watched well over 150 hours of tape from all over the league. 

Now that the season is underway, Lee joked that he hardly sleeps. In a few weeks' time, his 1 a.m. bedtime after Saturday's game will seem like a rare extravagance.

"But the rewards are great when you get things right," Lee said. "When you've identified a weakness in a corner and you score from that corner, that's the best feeling in the world for me. It's the closest I'm going to get to scoring a goal."