As customers flock back to stores for their espresso fix,  Starbucks Corp.
SBUX


-0.21
%




 Chief Executive  Howard Schultz seems confident the chain can navigate its latest challenges, such as the rising coffee-bean costs and stepped-up competition from lower-priced competitors.

After Starbucks' rapid expansion a few years ago—to the detriment of customer service—the Seattle company retrenched. It closed hundreds of stores, pared suppliers and introduced more efficient ways to grind beans and pull espresso shots. The changes helped it turn the corner: Earnings rose 44% during the holiday quarter, with customer visits up 5% and average customer checks up 2% from a year earlier.

Mr. Schultz recently spoke about how the company— which is approaching its 40th birthday—is evolving, how it's handling the volatility in commodities prices and whether McDonald's Corp.'s coffee has made a dent in its business.

Excerpts:

 WSJ:  Recently, Starbucks has regained its footing. What led to the turnaround?

 Mr. Schultz: Putting our feet in the shoes of our customers, understanding what they were dealing with and the anxiety of the [financial] crisis. In addition to that, getting our own people to understand what was at stake and specifically asking them to be more accountable. We were growing the company with such speed and aggression that we lost sight of the customer experience.

 WSJ:  Some of the changes at Starbucks have been intended to make things more efficient behind the counter, but there's been some criticism that streamlining the coffee-making process could actually take some of the romance out of the experience and slow down service. What kind of feedback have you gotten from customers?

 Mr. Schultz: Through lean practices we've been able to comprehensively bring about a significant change in the effectiveness of making an espresso drink and serving our customers. The interesting thing about today versus three years ago is that the qualitative scores of the Starbucks brand, speed of service, cleanliness of store, trust in the brand and overall satisfaction are at record levels going back a decade.

 WSJ:  Now that Starbucks has made strides in improving its domestic business, tell me about your plans for the rest of the world.

 Mr. Schultz: Outside of North America, we're sitting with less than 6,000 stores, so there's a large runway for growth and opportunity. We have an opportunity now to build thousands of stores in China. We're in a very good position to begin to look at India as the next market for Starbucks and we hope to get the first stores there open within 12 months. I haven't talked about Brazil, I haven't talked about Russia. In both those cases we have less than 100 stores.

 WSJ:  Since you're focusing so much on international expansion, are you finding that foreign exchange fluctuations are affecting your business?

 Mr. Schultz:  Our international business, in terms of its overall size, is still rather small, so foreign exchange for us is still a de minimis issue.

 WSJ:  Recently you've taken the company in a new direction by focusing on consumer products, like Via instant coffee, that can be sold in other outlets, like supermarkets. What is the rationale behind that decision?

 Mr. Schultz:  If you look at the world of consumer brands today you have two types in terms of channels. You've got brick and mortar businesses like Gap or J.Crew or Wal-Mart that have built their brands and business through a national footprint of retail stores, and on the other side you have classic consumer brands like Coke, Pepsi, Kellogg whose business has been developing multiple channels of distribution. There isn't a consumer brand that has been able to integrate their business into both channels and what we're about to do is exactly that and we're uniquely positioned to do it. We are building and investing in resources and people to build a significant consumer products business that over time will rival the size and scale of our retail company. I suspect there will be a number of acquisitions over the course of time that we will buy to be able to leverage what I've just described.

 WSJ:  How soon might we see an acquisition?

 Mr. Schultz:  Over the next 12 to 18 months.

 WSJ:  When you came back as CEO three years ago, you said the company needed to return to its coffee roots, but you're dropping the word "coffee" from your logo. Why is that?

 Mr. Schultz:  It's very possible that Starbucks as a corporation will be marketing and selling multiple products that don't have coffee in them or coffee associated with them.

 WSJ:  You recently decided to end the long-term deal you had with Kraft Foods to distribute Starbucks coffee in grocery stores, and it resulted in a pretty nasty public battle. How did things turn so sour with Kraft and how will the termination of that relationship help Starbucks?

 Mr. Schultz:  We shared with Kraft our concern and frustration about the performance, in terms of market share, sales, velocity and how our brand was showing up. We don't book the revenue of the sales of that business, the hundreds of millions of dollars of revenue gets booked by Kraft. But it's more than the revenue and profit of the business. It's the fact that the equity of the brand and the performance of Starbucks within the grocery aisle was not meeting our standards. In view of that, we felt very strongly that we needed to take the business back.

 WSJ:  It's been almost two years now since McDonald's rolled out specialty coffee drinks nationwide. How much of a threat has the burger chain turned out to be?

 Mr. Schultz:  I think the awareness that McDonald's created, through hundreds of millions of dollars of advertising, benefited Starbucks. My respect for McDonald's as a company is at the highest regard, but in terms of the impact they've had on Starbucks with coffee, it's de minimis if not at all.

 WSJ: How are you managing the continuing volatility in commodity prices, particularly the rising cost of coffee beans?

 Mr. Schultz:  We have locked in coffee for fiscal 2011 to take uncertainty out of the equation, at higher prices than we bought last year and since that time, the coffee market has gone up significantly. I've been in coffee farms in the last three, four months in India and China and the coffee farmers I talk to are not the ones making the money, and that's a tragedy.

 WSJ: You've been adjusting prices of certain drinks on a market-by-market basis, with some basic drinks holding steady or coming down in price and more complicated drinks getting more expensive. But if coffee prices continue their ascent, at what point might you have to impose across-the-board price increases?

 Mr. Schultz:  I don't have any intention of doing that at this stage.