Contrary to popular belief, being the first to market rarely pays off, a new research paper concludes.

Pioneering firms commonly die young because consumers aren't ready to embrace their business models, according to authors  Stanislav Dobrev, a professor at the University of Utah's David Eccles School of Business, and Aleksios Gotsopoulos, a professor at Boston University School of Management. And since market forerunners lack predecessors to look to for guidance, the unprecedented decisions they make often end up fatal.

 10 Reasons to Start a Business This Year 

"If you have an idea for a new market, it's extremely hard to pull off," says Mr. Dobrev.

He and Mr. Gotsopoulos researched the life spans of 2,197 automobile companies that launched in the U.S. between 1885 and 1981. None of the initial 25 lasted for more than 15 years, and today there are just three dominant players in the U.S. auto industry— General Motors Co.
GM


0.17
%




,  Ford Motor Co.
F


-0.20
%




 and Chrysler Group LLC. The professors' findings were published in the October edition of the Academy of Management Journal.

Several modern examples also illustrate the consequences of being among the first—if not the very first—to penetrate an untapped market. Take Netscape, the now-defunct Web browser that preceded Internet Explorer, Safari, Firefox and Chrome. 

Or consider the fate of personal-computer manufacturers like Osborne Computer Corp., Kaypro Corp. and Commodore Business Machines. They've all long been replaced by current market leaders  Hewlett-Packard Co.
HPQ


0.00
%




,  Dell Inc., Gateway Inc. and others.

And while social-networking innovators the Well, Friendster and MySpace still exist today, none match the popularity or financial prowess of their successor, Facebook.

If you're unfamiliar with some of these, you're not alone. Once so-called first movers disappear, they're often quickly forgotten, says Mr. Dobrev. "You rarely hear about first movers who failed," he explains. "They don't exist very long. They don't leave a lot of records." 

Though it may seem unfair, similar but improved versions of failed trailblazers are often credited with leading the pack, Mr. Dobrev adds. As a result, many entrepreneurs falsely assume that success lies in being the first to brave uncharted waters. "We like to hear a good story about someone who's ingenious and comes up with a great idea and sees it through," he says. "That's not true most of the time." 



Of course, there are exceptions, with first-of-their kind companies like  Coca-Cola Co.
KO


0.12
%




 and  eBay Inc.
EBAY


0.64
%




 still going strong today. What's more, there is at least one major advantage to being the first to market—a lack of competitors. But solitude isn't a guaranteed recipe for a hit. "You can be the first to market and fail," says Mr. Dobrev. "It boils down to having a good strategy."

  Isaac Barchas, director of the technology incubator at the University of Texas at Austin, says entrepreneurs looking to break into an untested or emerging market should consider taking a wait-and-see approach. "If you can watch other people and learn from them, that gives you the opportunity to figure out how to tweak the business on the margins to be better," he says. "You can learn a lot from the experience (someone else has) paid for."

Attempting to make history can backfire on a young company, adds Mr. Barchas. "A colloquial way of looking at this is being the first soldier on the lip of the trench. It's a glorious and noble position, but it's also dangerous." 

Salescoop LLC's Scoop St., a daily deal website, launched in October 2009, about a year after rival Groupon Inc. took off, and nearly a decade after online discounter Goldstar debuted. In building Scoop St., co-founder  David Ambrose says he and his partner,  Justin Tsang, benefited by observing the competitive landscape prior to launching. 

"You can see what the marketplace is doing in front of you if you're not the first out of the gate," says Mr. Ambrose, whose business has so far raised $1.5 million in angel investments and projects to reach profitability by the spring or summer. "When you're looking at the first movers, you're reacting."

To distinguish their start-up, Mr. Ambrose and Mr. Tsang decided to offer deals on Scoop St. that encourage buyers to engage with one another, such as coupons for weekend-long festivals. By contrast, they say their competitors mostly offer deals for services or products that consumers are likely to cash in on their own. They also decided to limit their offerings to New York City where as many other online deal sites operate nationally.

Still, Mr. Ambrose adds that spending too much time focusing on the competition can be distracting. "If you're only looking at the people in front of you, you're never going to grow your business," he says. 

 Write to  Sarah E. Needleman at sarah.needleman@wsj.com 