And here they call it the  Vodafone Ashes? The naming rights for the 2010 series belong to  Alastair Cook as surely as  Andrew Flintoff laid claim to those of 2005, and  Ian Botham to the Ashes of 1981. When Cook finally, but not wearily, trudged from the field with another gargantuan hundred to his name he had virtually ensured his team would end this series as winners. 

England's lead at the close was 208 and just as significantly Australia's body language was as flat as southern beer. It was as if they knew the game was up and the series had gone. It was a 154-run partnership, by far the biggest of the match, between Mr. Cook and  Ian Bell that did it, an advantage hammered home when  Matt Prior joined Mr. Bell in the final session for another three-figure combination. Things were desperate enough for  Michael Clarke to call upon  Mike Hussey to turn his arm over, but Mr. Cricket's talents stretch only so far. 

These were the best conditions of the match for batting for sure, as the sun finally showed its face at the SCG, sucking the last drops of moisture from the pitch and removing the final vestiges of greenness, but the confidence and certainty with which England played, on what could have been a tricky day, spoke volumes for the difference in attitude between the teams. It was a day to grab the initiative and it was England who did the grabbing. 

They did so thanks to Mr. Cook who fell only 11 shy of another double hundred, when  Shane Watson finally duped him into driving lazily at a wide ball, and to Mr. Bell, who scored his first Ashes hundred in 18 Tests against Australia, and to Mr. Prior who took advantage of a tiring attack to maul a run-a-ball fifty before bad light brought a premature close to the day. In between there was a failure for  Paul Collingwood, which may herald the end of him as a Test player.

  Gideon Haigh: Off-Stump Mystery Solved by Cook 

  Richard Hobson: Bell Shows New-Found Tough Streak 

To Mr. Cook firstly, who played so well, and so freely that the memories of his struggles in the summer against Pakistan have become so distant that they might have been imagined. Certainly, to watch him so secure in defence, so certain in attack, it is hard to imagine it is the same player. Until his lapse at the end, his discipline outside off stump was the fundamental upon which this latest exhibition of Test match batting was based, since it forced bowlers to bowl at him, with the result that 68 of his first 100 runs were scored through the on side. 

As he batted on, his footwork so smooth it could have been fashioned in a blender, records fell to him as readily as autumn leaves into the gutter. One by one he passed them, these great names of English batting who had battered the Australia bowlers in previous Ashes series: past  John Edrich's total in 1970-71; past  Geoffrey Boycott in the same series; past the great  Jack Hobbs in 1911-12, and when he cut Shane Watson for four just after 2 o'clock in the afternoon, past  Herbert Sutcliffe's 734-run tally in Australia 1924-25. 

Nineteen runs later he had gone past the great  Denis Compton, old Compo himself, who famously tucked into South Africa's attack for 753 runs in 1947. Mr. Cook now has 766 runs in this series and even if he suffers a duck in the unlikely event of a second innings he will end with an average in it of more than 100. His has been an immense performance. Only  Wally Hammond's run-glut in the 1928-29 Ashes series, when he scored 905, stands above Mr. Cook's series here for the number of runs scored by an England batsman in any series in history. Apologies for the stat-fest, but very rarely in cricket do numbers tell the whole story, as they do here. 

If there was one moment of controversy in Mr. Cook's vigil, it came when he attempted to push  Michael Beer into the leg side to bring up his hundred. The ball landed in  Phillip Hughes's hands, but via the turf, the ensuing referral clearing up a decision that before the advent of technology would have been made simply and honestly by players. Later, when Mr. Bell was reprieved, there was another, uglier incident that again showed the unintended consequences of the creeping extension of technology. 

Mr. Bell was on 67 when he inside-edged Watson to  Brad Haddin. The appeal was genuine and immediate, more so than Mr. Bell's referral, which came after lengthy consultation with Mr. Prior at the other end. Hotspot showed no edge, but nor did it prove that  Aleem Dar was wrong, and subsequent replays suggested that the umpire's first instinct was right. This was a clear case of a batsman short-circuiting the referral system—no blame attached to him, since professional sportsmen will always tweak things to their best advantage—and a clear case of the reliance on technology making a good umpiring decision bad. 

Otherwise, it was a splendid day for Mr. Bell who brought up his hundred in the grand style that we have become accustomed to, full of sweet drives through the off-side and down the ground, and the occasional cheeky improvisation. Reactions to his hundred were nonexistent from Australia, with the exception of Mr. Hussey who touched his palms in appreciation, which tells you all you need to know about what they thought of the earlier referral. Mind you, Australian applause for Mr. Cook was noticeable by its absence. 

There was no doubting the purity of Mr. Bell's strokeplay, or his stature as a batsman which has grown with every innings in these parts. There was a time, maybe not so long ago, when a circumstance such as this—a full house, a tight situation and host of baggy greens in his face—might have fazed him. The referral incident might have done so too once upon a time. But now Mr. Bell was in no mood to show his erstwhile tormenters a flicker of doubt. Even the one chance he offered showcased his new-found physical strength, a return catch on 84 fairly bursting through  Steven Smith's hands. 

Mr. Bell will not bat at number six in the near future for England and whether he bats again with Mr. Collingwood in Tests is a matter for the selectors, given that the Durham man needed runs by his own admission. He made only 13 of them before hoisting Mr. Beer to mid-on, giving the left-arm spinner his first Test wicket with his 69th ball of trying. So long the patron saint of lost causes, Mr. Collingwood's form has deserted him just as England have become a more dominant side. In that sense, maybe his work in Test cricket is done but he has played his part in helping England to get to where they are now. 

His own state of affairs is put into sharp focus by the sublime form shown by the rest of England's top order. As Mr. Bell and Mr. Cook flowed, their bats descending as if on a plumb line, Mr. Collingwood's lack of footwork and jerky movements, born of an increasingly inconspicuous back-lift are more apparent. With Mr. Beer into the attack, he sensed a chance to break free of self-doubt, but chose the wrong ball—too flighted and too wide—to hit over mid-on. It was a rare miss-hit on another splendid day for England's batsmen.