Finding the optimal city to live in and work from is not an easy process. It might be that the best city in which to locate a business, is also the worst for getting to work. Transport links might be of an exceptionally high standard in another location, but if house prices are too high or the business district over-priced then the fact that the trains run on time counts for nothing. 

Read the full Real Estate report.

In terms of business, competitive rates are only one part of the pie. If there are not enough qualified people on the ground then establishing an office is made doubly difficult. The social side of city life is also critical. Good theaters and wide open spaces are a blessing, but can be made irrelevant if the city is polluted or excessive crime makes the streets unsafe. 

In terms of the best places to invest, the picture is also mixed. Although most experts agree the European residential and commercial property market is expected to remain flat this year, especially in light of the recent sovereign debt crisis that has hobbled the European recovery, there is undoubtedly some light at the end of the property tunnel. Industry experts agree that demand at the top-end of the market for the best retail and the best commercial properties will continue. 

The Wall Street Journal has scoured research into some of Europe's most high-profile financial centers and produced a guide to the opportunities and pitfalls of investing and living in the continent's most desirable locations.



 Barcelona 

In 2010 the sunny Spanish city retained its top position for quality of life in the latest European Cities Monitor from global real estate adviser Cushman & Wakefield. It also ranked fifth in the best city in which to locate a business based on ease of access to markets. However, it came at number 44 in property consultant Mercer's Worldwide Cost of Living Survey for last year. Although the city offers a very good transport network and an airport with good regional connections, issues like pollution and high traffic congestion bring the city down in the ranking. Still, enticing factors for investors and expatriates include a vibrant international crowd, an excellent variety of entertainment from theater and opera to music. Good weather for most of the year is also a bonus, as is the city's prime location overlooking the Mediterranean. In terms of investor interest, there were £1.7 billion worth of retail transactions in Barcelona between 2007 and 2010, according to Real Capital Analytics, an indicator of a highly active market. 



 Berlin 

Along with Barcelona, the trendy German capital is seen as a city that's aggressively improving itself. It jumped from the third ranked city in terms of efforts to improve itself in 2009, to take the top spot in the Cushman & Wakefield survey in 2010. Berlin also broke into the top 10 of best cities in terms of easy access to markets and it moved up the ranking into fifth place of best cities in terms of qualified staff, a big incentive for companies to relocate there. Following the political and social turmoil before the fall of the Berlin Wall, the city offers a great variety of cultural options, fashionable restaurants, and a welcoming environment for business. Real estate prices have remained lower than its European equivalents but prices have been on the rise over the last 10 years, according  Dan Fasulo, managing director at Real Capital Analytics in New York. "All the stars are aligned for Berlin to see some tremendous retail growth," he says. Because the city is up and coming, it makes it a great place for an outstanding nightlife, but the very cold temperatures during the winter may put some people off from locating there.



 London 

The U.K. capital remained the top city for business in 2010, according to Cushman & Wakefield. Along with Paris, it also retained its position as one of the best known cities in Europe. London is the top rated city in seven of the 12 major rankings of the survey, including ease of travelling within the city, ease of access to markets and clients, as well as the quality of its staff. 

However, London ranked at 39 in Mercer's survey, which studies the political and social environment, recreational facilities and housing of 420 cities. "The variety of recreational facilities are outstanding and international schools are superb," says Slagin Parakatil, senior researcher at Mercer in Geneva. "London also offers a very good public transport network and international airports with very good connections. However, crime can be an issue simply because of the large size of its population." London's prime property market is expected to outperform the rest of the sector, according to property firm  Savills.
SVS


0.10
%




 Over the next five years the division between average and top-end properties is set to widen, with prime central London house prices expected to rise by 33% compared to a U.K. average of 12%, the research revealed.



 Paris 

Ranked at 34 in Mercer's quality of living survey and number four in terms of best quality of life in the Cushman & Wakefield survey, Paris usually competes with London for the top places. Like the U.K. capital, it is one of the best known cities in Europe and it is among the top ranked for doing business, alongside Frankfurt. 

It offers a wide choice of airports with very good international connections. Consumer goods are very accessible and it offers outstanding housing facilities for expatriates if they can find a house, explains Mr. Parakatil. "It's not easy, if you want to get into the city center." The city also provides great public and private healthcare but traffic congestion and crime could be an issue.



 Rome 

Good weather and food might be positive aspects when it comes to locating to Rome. However, the city is well below the top ranking in most city surveys. 

Political instability has contributed towards a lowly position of number 54 in the Mercer ranking. The constrained nature of the property market doesn't help either. 

"Rome has the same supply constrain characteristics as other mature European markets: It's impossible to build anything in it and there are not many willing sellers," says Mr. Fasulo. 

"Many transactions that take place between private parties that never see the light of day." 



 Mr. Espinoza is a reporter at The Wall Street Journal Europe. He can be reached at javier.espinoza@wsj.com  