JAKARTA, Indonesia—Banking that resurgent airline PT Garuda Indonesia would serve as a proxy for this country's strong economic growth, the state-owned carrier had been planning to raise a little more than $1 billion through a partial public offering. 

But Garuda was forced to cut its ambitions in half, unable to overcome investor skepticism that it can navigate government meddling and contend with growing competition.

Until recently, the carrier had planned to sell a 37% stake at the top of its expected price range. Garuda also had planned that pricing for the offering would be announced Tuesday. The airline announced Wednesday that it is putting only 24.4% up for sale at the bottom of its price range, according to people familiar with situation, valuing the offering at around $530 million. Garuda scaled back its plans, the people said, following tepid response from investors.

At the top of its targeted price range of 750 rupiah to 1,100 rupiah (eight cents to 12 cents) a share, Garuda would have been as much as twice as expensive by some measures as many other carriers in the region, including  Singapore Airlines Ltd.
SINGY


0.50
%




,  AirAsia
AIRASIA


0.00
%




 Bhd. and  Malaysian Airline System Bhd.

The carrier had planned to make the initial public offering on the Indonesian market Feb. 11, but whether the company will stick to that timetable was uncertain Tuesday. The company and the government declined to comment on the IPO.

Once considered among Asia's least-reliable major airlines, Garuda in the last five years has improved service and safety, slashed debt and boosted earnings.

But foreign investors largely have shunned the offering because of Garuda's steep valuation at 1,100 rupiah a share, people familiar with the matter said.Investors also were concerned that the strong performance of Indonesian shares last year won't be repeated this year as rising food and energy costs crimp consumer spending. Indonesia was one of the best performing stock markets globally in 2010, but in the past three weeks the country's benchmark index has dropped 12%.

The IPO process itself also accounted for investor concern. After being delayed more than two years, the price was ratcheted up recently at the behest of politicians who didn't want to be accused of selling state assets at a discount, people familiar with the offering said.

Garuda had been hoping its shares would be seen as way to invest in the growth of a country that has the world's fourth largest population, after China, India and the U.S. The Indonesian economy is expected to expand more than 6% this year, powered by rising commodity exports and an increasingly affluent consumer class. 

Garuda plans to win customers by using the IPO proceeds to expand its fleet to 153 planes in 2015 from 87 at the end of last year. Many of the aircraft would be planes with fewer than 100 seats in an effort to tap growing demand for domestic flights, the best way to travel in this country of more than 17,000 islands.

Like many state-established carriers, the 62-year-old airline for much of its history was known for bad service and a dicey safety record, as well as questionable business decisions that left it wallowing in debt. In 2007 Garuda and other Indonesian carriers were banned from flying to the European Union after a string of crashes in Indonesia.

Under the leadership of  Emirsyah Satar, a former banker who was appointed chief executive in 2005, Garuda cut costs by offering retirement to highly paid employees and weeding out corruption in contract awards. The carrier also upgraded its service and improved its reputation through advertising. It has recorded a profit in the last three years and now has its debt under control, cutting its debt-to-equity ratio to 1 last year from 3.5 in 2008.

Garuda was granted permission last year to resume flights to the EU, after improving the training of pilots and maintenance personnel. Indonesia also restructured its aviation regulator to give it more power over airlines that broke rules.

The money from the IPO will give Garuda a war chest to retire its debt and fund expansion with an eye toward fending off the increased competition. Low-cost carriers like Indonesia-based Lion Air and Malaysia's AirAsia also are fighting in the Indonesian market. Despite being the country's flagship carrier, Garuda is No. 2 to Lion Air in the domestic flight market.Competition is so intense that some carriers are dropping out. Earlier this month one of Indonesia's budget carriers, PT Mandala Airlines, stopped all flights as it struggled to pay its debt.

Mr. Satar has said he'll also consider acquiring competitors. "Consolidation in the aviation industry in Indonesia is likely to happen in the near term," he said. "That provides a possibility for us to grow nonorganically."

"I think right now the management team is the best that Garuda has ever had," said  Adrian Rusmana, head of research at Sucorinvest Securities in Jakarta. "People have high confidence in the CEO. All the financial and marketing restructuring happened because of him."

But some investors said the airline still shows signs of its government-run roots. When Garuda in November restated its nine-month results to a profit from a loss, the company offered little explanation beyond an auditing "anomaly." Later that month, hundreds of Garuda passengers were stranded without flights due to a glitch in the carrier's new computer system.

And the IPO's price was directly affected by political considerations. For months, Garuda talked about raising between $300 million to $500 million, surprising analysts and investors when Garuda began hawking more than $1 billion in shares. 

The government told Garuda and its underwriters that an earlier suggested price range of 560 rupiah to 850 rupiah was too low, people familiar with the issue said. Politicians wanted to avoid a repeat of the most recent IPO of a government company, when the shares of PT Krakatau Steel surged 49% on the first day of trading in November, sparking a public outcry that the government had been tricked into selling its assets at bargain prices.

Some investors and analysts said that at 1,100 rupiah apiece, Garuda's shares were too expensive, considering the broad economic and market risks and intensifying competition in Southeast Asia.

The price of 1,100 rupiah gave Garuda a valuation of more than 30 times its 2010 earnings per share, said  Andrew Argado, an analyst at PT eTrading Securities in Jakarta. That's more than double the price of similar airlines in the region.

—I-Made Sentana  and Alison Tudor  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Eric Bellman at eric.bellman@wsj.com 