It's "the ultimate power shirt," as Sotheby's David Roche calls it.

The deer-hide war shirt, with locks of human hair dangling from its chest, belonged to Chief Black Bird of the Oglala Sioux. The chief played a part in the Great Sioux War of 1876-77 and, in all likelihood, the Battle of the Little Bighorn in 1876 alongside legendary Sioux leader Crazy Horse. 

Now the object hangs at Sotheby's New York branch with arms outstretched, awaiting the annual American Indian art auction Wednesday. 

The shirt might never have seen battle, though Black Bird did model it for others: He's wearing it in a promotional postcard for Buffalo Bill's Wild West Show in the early 1900s. Sotheby's lists the item as a top lot in this sale and values it at $250,000 to $350,000, partly because of that photograph and several others showing Black Bird in the tunic.

"It's historically significant because it can be tied to a particular person," said Joe Horse Capture, an associate curator of Native American art at the Minneapolis Institute of Arts and an authority on war shirts. This year his museum bought an early-18th-century painted-hide shirt at Christie's for $362,500, above the high estimate of $300,000.

The hair strands attached to the shirt were talismans, probably taken from a family member and worn for protection, said Mr. Roche. He added that the adornments, which were intertwined with horse hair, were also meant to look fearsome—what he called "a nod to the threat of scalping." 

The sale of a shirt believed by Sioux to be powerful enough to deflect bullets has its critics. "People's war shirts have their personal power on them," said Tom Grayson Colonnese, chair of the American Indian studies department at the University of Washington. "These kinds of items that have power are alive, so you don't sell those things."

Buyers of such objects are rarely Native American, said Mr. Roche, senior consultant to Sotheby's American Indian art department. Native American art is increasingly purchased by bidders from Canada, Europe and the Middle East, with half of all lots going to international buyers at the Sotheby's American Indian art sale last year, he said. 

After Black Bird's death—the date is unknown—the shirt resurfaced in 1960 when Nuremberg Trial courtroom artist Ed Vebell bought it from the American etiquette expert Amy Vanderbilt. Sotheby's obtained the shirt from private collectors who acquired it from Mr. Vebell in 2007. 

—Ellen Gamerman