Hear Ye! Hear Ye! This emergency meeting of the Esteemed Membership of the New York/New Jersey Metro Area Chapter of the Rex Ryan Bashers is now officially declared in session!

Rex Ryan Bashers: Do not waver now, in this, your great hour of whine! Yes, any basher of Rex Ryan must be deeply unhappy—shocked, really— that the New York Jets prevailed against the Indianapolis Colts in Saturday night's Wild-Card playoff. You thought Indy had it locked up when Adam Vinatieri booted a 50-yard field goal with less than a minute remaining.

The Rex Ryan Bashers were fired up to host their first official Told-You-So parade. There was a permit to march down Broadway, which they planned to rechristen the "Canyon of Zeroes." Free pay phones on every corner to call WFAN and gloat. Mr. Ryan would be summoned to City Hall, handed a gift certificate for etiquette lessons, and forced to listen to all the complaints.

The criticisms were obvious. Mr. Ryan didn't talk the talk. He didn't deliver. He doesn't get it, and his chatty act is wearing thin. Peyton Manning is a classy champion and showed Rex how it's done. Mr. Ryan needs to learn to zip his mouth—or leave town.

But back in Indianapolis...Antonio Cromartie. And Mark Sanchez. And Braylon Edwards. And Nick Folk from 32 yards.

Oh, dear. Jets 17, Colts 16.

Cancel the Told-You-So parade. Eat the deposit on the party tent and the cake. Cue the hated New England Patriots, and another Rex Ryan Blab Show.

On Monday Mr. Ryan taunted Tom Brady and sounded giddy to get to the Sunday contest. 

"This is going to be about me raising my level against Bill Belichick," he said.



Argh! New York-New Jersey Metro Area Chapter of the Rex Ryan Bashers cannot take this torment much longer. When will the Jets head coach's comeuppance finally come?

The Bashers thought Mr. Rex would be humbled after the opening week loss to Baltimore. Then after the embarrassment with Ines Sainz. Then after Braylon's car trouble. The Patriots took the Jets down in a 45-3 pasting. Then there was, ahem, Mr. Ryan's "personal matter."

Rex kept on being Rex.

The Colts were supposed to finish him off. But then the Jets stunned the team that stopped them in the AFC championship last season, giving Mr. Ryan his revenge.

Now he's out for more revenge, this time against the vaunted Mr. Belichick and Mr. Brady, the latter of whom he teased for skipping the Indy-Jet game to see "Lombardi" on Broadway.

"Peyton Manning would have been watching our game," Mr. Ryan said.

It's maddening to the Bashers. Rexy is still Sexy. He is the Mouth of Steel.

Or is he...actually a good football coach who is definitely obnoxious, talks too much and probably could take it down a notch, but has taken an anguished franchise to three playoff victories in two years, including a game Saturday night that most people thought they'd lose?

The Bashers need the Pats to end this charade. They're 14-2 Super Bowl favorites. They thoroughly thrashed the Jets last time around. 

The Bashers are eager to call the city and get another permit for the Told-You-So Parade. They want to order a new cake and party tent.

But what if the Jets beat the Patriots? What will Rex Ryan become then?

Bashers, to the supermarket! It may be time to stock up on batteries, flashlights and dry goods.

 Write to  Jason Gay at jason.gay@wsj.com 