 Her restaurants: London's River Café

 What She's Known For: Bringing elegant, seasonal Italian cuisine to the British food world.

London chef Ruth Rogers is culinary royalty. She and partner Rose Gray (who passed away last February), opened River Café in 1987. The restaurant started as an employee cafe for her husband's architectural firm (Ms. Rogers is married to Lord Richard Rogers, who worked on the Centre Pompidou and the European Court of Human Rights), then opened to the public. 

The restaurant's commitment to simple Italian cuisine made with fresh ingredients revolutionized English dining. It earned its first Michelin star the same year it opened. Kitchen alums include Jamie Oliver and April Bloomfield. 

For her first Slow Food Fast dish, Ms. Rogers shares a recipe for roasted sea bass with potatoes, olives and capers. It represents the sort of rustic elegance that's come to define River Café. 

A native of Woodstock, N.Y., Ms. Rogers travels to Italy every two months. This particular recipe was inspired by a meal she and Ms. Gray enjoyed on the Tuscan coast years back. Done the Italian way (they altered the original only slightly by adding olives into the caper and thyme mix), it's served whole and presented simply at the table. 

This time of year, Ms. Rogers says, sea bass is especially popular. While the restaurant will serve a large fish to a table of four, individual fish, which are easier to find, work just as well. Roasting them whole—bones, head and all—slows down the cooking and preserves texture and depth of flavor. Top off with a drizzle of good olive oil and a lemon wedge. 

—Kitty Greenwald

 Serves: 4

 Total Time: 45 minutes; Active Time: 5 minutes

4 1-pound whole sea bass, gutted and scaled  1¾ pounds small Yukon Gold potatoes  ½ cup black olives, pitted and roughly chopped  1/3 cup capers, soaked and drained  3 tablespoons fresh thyme leaves  1 cup white wine  6 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil  Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper

1. Preheat oven to 400 degrees.

2. Bring a pot of salted water to a boil. Cut potatoes in half or in quarters, depending on their size, and cook until just tender, about 12 minutes. Drain and set aside. 

3. Line a baking tray with parchment paper. Spread potatoes on tray and drizzle with 2 tablespoons olive oil. Toss to coat.

4. Place fish over the potatoes. Season with salt and pepper.

5. Scatter olives, capers and thyme leaves over the fish and potatoes, stuffing some inside the fish. 

6. Bake for 5 minutes then drizzle remaining olive oil over the fish and add white wine to the pan.

7. Roast fish until it is just cooked through, about 20 minutes. It should be opaque throughout.

8. Serve fish whole with a generous scoop of potatoes, olives and capers. Top with pan drippings and garnish with a drizzle of good olive oil and a lemon wedge.