You can watch it a dozen times and not believe it. The first man cinches his arms around his opponent's waist from behind, bucks forward and then simply dead-lifts him up and drops backward with him, tracing an arc of perhaps 140 degrees so that they land together, their weight on the neck of the man being thrown. 

As they grapple for leverage on the mat, the first man catches onto the second man's left leg, working down toward the ankle as they rise, and then drops it, spinning to his right and catching his opponent flush with an elbow to the head that knocks him down to the mat, helpless again. From impact to impact, the whole fluid sequence lasts 10 seconds

"I've never seen anyone throw anything like that," said the second man, a tough veteran fighter named Stephan Bonnar. "I didn't even know it hit me. I was laying there thinking someone from the audience threw a bottle or something."

The fight was a test, Jon Jones's eighth in less than a year and his second in the Ultimate Fighting Championship, the leading mixed martial arts promotion. Five fights, four wins and just more than two years later, Jones, 23, is preparing for his first chance at a UFC title. 

Saturday at the Prudential Center in Newark, N.J., he is scheduled to fight Mauricio "Shogun" Rua, champion of the 205-pound division, a feared Muay Thai artist and Brazilian jiu-jitsu player who has finished two-thirds of his 24 professional fights by knockout or technical knockout.

At stake, though, is more than a championship. Since first gaining purchase on the American consciousness five years ago, fighting has won a hard sort of semi-legitimacy as a sport. Major televised bouts draw around six million viewers, top fights regularly sell more than a million pay-per-view orders and an upcoming show in Toronto has, according to the promotion, sold about 55,000 tickets, with an estimated gate of $11 million.

The gap between a status as underground freak show and grudgingly tolerated niche sport, though, may be smaller than the one between fighting as it is now and as it aspires to be. If it is ever to become anything near a major sport, it will have to present a transcendent athlete. Jones may not be that man, but he's likely closer than anyone yet has been—which in its way just shows how far fighting has yet to go.

Jones grew up in Rochester, N.Y., younger brother of Arthur Jones, currently a defensive tackle with the Baltimore Ravens. He took up wrestling in seventh grade. In 2006 he won a NJCAA championship while at Iowa Central Community College, where his roommate introduced him to the gentle art of jiu-jitsu. In April 2008, out of school and needing an income, he took his first fight, and his second, and his third, training with local fighters and picking up moves by watching fights on YouTube. 

"I would meditate on fighting," Jones said. "I would shadow box, I would kick the wall, I would kick the corner of a door just to work on form. I would spinning-back-kick my couch. I was always flowing. I'd go out to a party and I'd come home a little wasted and shadow box, like, forever, just start moving around, just loving fighting, loving shadow boxing, loving MMA."

Between April 12 and May 9 he fought four times for regional promotions in the Northeast, defeating all his opponents and going past the first round just once. By July he was 6-0, and when the UFC needed an opponent for a prospect named Andre Gusmao at short notice, Jones got the shot.

"I was nervous," he said, "but I'm like, 'I gotta take it.' ...I got in shape and ended up squeaking out a decision."

His next fight, against Bonnar, was another decision win, and the one that marked him as something special. 

"He was like 10 feet away from me," Bonnar said, "and he threw this step-forward back kick and it landed. I went to counter him and I'm like 10 feet away from him. It's something you're not used to dealing with. I mean, 85-inch reach? That's incredible."

Jones's reach, officially listed at 84.5 inches, is probably his most unique attribute. At 6 feet, 4 inches, he has a reach advantage of an inch and a half on Stefan Struve, a heavyweight fighter seven inches taller. Between his size, sheer speed and wrestling base—in seven UFC fights, not one opponent has been able to take him down or even attempt a submission on him—he presents a physical problem with no obvious solution. More impressive, though, has been the way he took to the art of fighting.

"He took one move and turned it into a hundred different possibilities, instead of learning a hundred moves and only having a hundred possibilities," said Firas Zahabi, a trainer who worked with him early in his UFC career.

Most of the work fighters do takes place in the gym. The actual bouts, which last up to 25 minutes and take place, at the higher levels, just two or three times a year, briefly punctuate months of unrelieved tedium. Belonging to a good camp makes all the difference. After his third UFC fight, Jones joined one of the best.

Jackson's Submission Fighting, run by top coaches Greg Jackson and Mike Winkeljohn out of Albuquerque, N.M., has trained UFC champions such as Georges St-Pierre and Rashad Evans and frontline contenders in nearly every major weight class. Known for its emphasis on intricate game plans and crisp execution, it is a sort of finishing school for elite fighters.

The differences between Jones's performance before and after joining Jackson's camp are impressive. According to FightMetric, which provides statistical services to the UFC, in his first three UFC fights he landed 112 significant strikes to 82 landed by his opponents. In his next four, against increasingly difficult competition, the difference was 90-15. In the first of those, against a fighter named Matt Hamill, he secured a full mount and began smashing down with elbows, looking up at the referee, seemingly begging him to stop the fight. The ratio was 44 to 5 when the fight ended, as Jones was disqualified for throwing an elbow to the head in a 12-to-6 line, a rules violation. It is his only loss to date.

Lloyd Irvin, a well-regarded fight trainer, expressed the common line on Jones when asked what he saw when he watched Jones fight.

"When I see him fight," he said, "it looks like a next evolution of the type of athlete that's coming in the future. I would say he's a next-generation fighter."

Irvin, though, is a lot more realistic than many fight people are about just what that means.

"We have a crop of high-level wrestlers, national champions that are coming out and going straight into MMA. But," he said, "these aren't guys that are Olympians at their sport." He figures that it will be five to 10 years before a crop of fighters who have been training in MMA since they were young children raises the athletic level of the game to that comparable with major sports. 

It's a point backed by just how dominant Jones has been over a series of opponents who have looked, while fighting him, as if they're at work in a different, lesser game.

"You almost look at these guys after the fight starts," Rami Genauer of FightMetric said, "and you're saying, 'I cannot conceive of nearly any scenario where Jon Jones doesn't win.'"

"Does he deserve a title shot?" asked Forrest Griffin, himself a top contender and a former champion at 205 pounds. "Let me ask you this: Do you see a lot of people asking to fight Jon Jones? You put that question out and you get crickets."