TORONTO— TMX Group Inc.
X


0.14
%




 has won conditional support for its proposed tie-up with  London Stock Exchange Group
LSE


1.50
%




 PLC from an Ontario provincial government committee, according to a person familiar with the matter. 

The committee review is just the first of several regulatory and government signoffs that TMX, which operates Canada's flagship Toronto Stock Exchange, must win to complete the proposed trans-Atlantic deal. 

The committee, composed of representatives from the governing Ontario Liberal Party along with the opposition Progressive Conservative and New Democratic parties, will support the proposed deal with certain conditions, according to a person familiar with the situation. It isn't clear what the conditions are. 

The committee is expected to present its report to the provincial legislature April 19. The report will help inform the province's submission on the proposed transaction to the federal government's Industries Ministry. In addition to approval from that federal ministry, TMX also needs support from securities regulators in Ontario, Quebec, British Columbia and Alberta. The Ontario government committee report could also influence the Ontario Securities Commission, since the regulator falls under the government's jurisdiction. 

A TMX spokeswoman declined to comment. 

Ontario Finance Minister  Dwight Duncan initiated the committee in February, concerned the province and its largest city, Toronto, where the TMX is based, could lose influence over a strategic asset under the proposed deal. LSE shareholders would own 55% of the merged company compared with 45% for TMX shareholders. 

Though a majority of the committee members support the transaction, NDP representative  Gilles Bisson will submit a dissenting opinion, according to a person familiar with the matter. Mr. Bisson declined to comment on the report's contents. 

Mr. Duncan said last week that he didn't expect unanimity among the committee members. A spokesman for the finance minister said Wednesday that he hadn't seen the report. 

The committee's report is based on hearings held in March, during which members heard testimony from TMX and LSE, some of Canada's big banks, shareholders-right groups, the mining sector and securities regulators. 

During the public hearings, Mr. Bisson was particularly concerned that the regulatory regime, which has helped make Canada's capital markets a destination for smaller mining companies around world, could weaken if LSE took control of TMX. He also has publicly worried the TMX could lose it strategic focus if the balance of power running the company tipped to London. 

In support of the deal, TMX argues Canada's stock markets will continue to be subject to Canadian regulators after the transaction. It also notes that Canada will be home to the combined entity's global listings, energy and derivatives businesses. 