AUSTIN, Texas—Former U.S. House Majority Leader Tom DeLay, once one of the most powerful politicians in Texas and Washington, was sentenced Monday to three years in state prison for conspiracy to commit money laundering.

Mr. DeLay also received a five-year term for money laundering itself, but Judge Pat Priest converted that sentence to 10 years' probation. Mr. DeLay posted a $10,000 bond, which would allow him to remain free while appealing the sentence.

Mr. DeLay, a Republican, isn't the first high-powered congressman to face prison. In recent years, Reps. William Jefferson of Louisiana, a Democrat, and Republicans Bob Ney of Ohio and Duke Cunningham of California all received multiyear prison sentences. But Mr. DeLay's case is unusual because he wasn't accused of accepting bribes or favors for himself.

A jury convicted him in November of illegally channeling $190,000 of corporate donations to several Republicans running for the Texas legislature in 2002. State law bars corporate campaign contributions to local races. His lawyers, who had asked for probation, vowed to fight.

Former House Majority Leader Tom DeLay was sentenced Monday to three years in prison. Some other members of Congress who have received prison terms:

"If I told you what I thought I'd get sued," said Dick DeGuerin, Mr. DeLay's lead counsel. "This will not stand."

Prosecutors had sought at least 10 years in jail for Mr. DeLay, which would have made him ineligible for bond. He faced up to 119 years.

Rosemary Lehmberg, the Travis County district attorney, called the sentence appropriate and fair. "I do think it'll send a message to others," she said. "Corporate contributions are illegal in Texas and you can't give them to candidates directly and you can't give them to candidates indirectly."

Mr. DeLay has long contended that he was targeted because of his political prowess by Ms. Lehmberg's predecessor, Ronnie Earle, a Democrat. Prosecutors said they were concerned only with making sure Texas laws were enforced.

Both the prosecution and defense rejected the first judges assigned to the case because of concerns they would be partisan, prompting the chief justice of the Texas Supreme Court to appoint Judge Priest, a retired Democrat, to handle the matter.

Before the sentencing, Mr. DeLay had an opportunity to make his case before Judge Priest.

Wearing a red tie and an American flag pin on the lapel of his dark suit, Mr. DeLay stood in front of the bench and said he was "very passionate" about his ideals and his party and "very arrogant," but that he never intended to break the law.

"I can't be remorseful for something I don't think I did," he said.

—Jess Bravin  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Ana Campoy at ana.campoy@dowjones.com 