Seen from the rest of Europe, Greece appears fiscally unmanageable and uncompetitive.

The view from Athens is worse. Discontinued social programs have hurt people on lower incomes, and pension cuts are hitting the elderly. Wage cuts and rising taxes are shrinking the purses of the middle class. Home building is down by a third from a year ago, crime rates are up and Athens is dotted with boarded-up shops.

The government warned that pain was coming when it pushed through radical spending cuts to comply with the terms of its €110 billion ($158 billion) bailout from the European Union and the International Monetary Fund. The upside, Greeks were told, was that the country would emerge solvent, with a revitalized economy. 

How it's gone wrong and finding a difficult way out of an apparent dead end will now be the focus of a meeting of European finance ministers beginning Monday.

First the basics. The bailout deal was predicated on Greece repairing its deep budget deficit, cutting debt and regaining the trust of investors in time to go back to the bond markets next year. Government economists calculated that for Greece's debt to become sustainable, its economy would have to grow by an average of 3% in each of the next few years.

But the figures aren't adding up. A deepening recession has thwarted attempts to boost tax revenue. A crackdown on tax evasion, while long overdue, has also had the effect of cutting into consumers' disposable income. 

For this year, the government forecasts the economy to shrink by at least 3%, and some private-sector economists expect a contraction as deep as 4%.

The European Union has been doing its own calculations since Greece missed its 2010 deficit-reduction target. Brussels, Berlin and Paris worry it is unable to tackle the endemic tax evasion and increase its competitiveness with structural changes. They called Greece's finance minister to account in Luxembourg on Friday. What they got was an admission that the country has little chance of returning to the markets next year and will probably need more financial aid. The confirmation that more help is needed will come some time after the EU and the IMF audit the government's budget next month.

If it does get a new deal, Greece is almost certain to face demands for even greater fiscal restraint. That won't play well at home.

The public-sector strike against planned staff cuts that paralyzed the country Wednesday was just a rehearsal for what could be more unrest this summer, because to fix the budget and the economy, Prime Minister George Papandreou's Socialist government will have to take on the civil servants.

It isn't that Greece's public sector is disproportionately large by European standards. The problem is that it is notoriously unproductive. In the eight years leading up to the debt crisis, civil-service salaries went up 170%, while productivity rose by only 70%.

The government may have to go still further in restructuring the country's work force by privatizing state industries and winding down public-sector jobs, but at the risk of recurring social unrest and more economic setbacks.

The brunt of the pressure is on the man with the worst job in Europe. At home, Finance Minister George Papaconstantinou isn't earning popularity points by telling Greeks to tighten their belts and work longer for less money. Abroad, he's the whipping boy of his euro-zone counterparts for missing deficit targets. But some Greek and EU insiders identify Mr. Papaconstantinou as one of just a handful of cabinet ministers who fully understand the difficulty of pulling Greece out of the hole. 

Many senior Socialist Party politicians still believe this crisis will blow over as others before it, and have resisted Mr. Papaconstantinou's regular pleas for cutbacks. Unpopular reform even divides the cabinet, riven by bickering over privatization plans and spending cuts. 

Mr. Papaconstantinou has been locked in a dispute with Environment Minister Tina Birbili over whether the state would continue to control 51% of the Public Power Corp., which has a virtual monopoly on electric power generation and distribution. Where the finance minister wants to privatize the big utility, Ms. Birbili wants to retain state control as an asset of national importance, and to keep power bills down.

The government has managed to come up with another €26 billion in spending cuts and tax rises to be presented to Parliament next week. The EU will nod its approval and may be disposed to more aid if Greece can deliver. But a second bailout and accompanying austerity promises another bitter year for Greece, with the risk of further economic contraction, squeezing households yet more.

The real worry now is that there doesn't appear to be a clear way to reverse the crippling effects of the cure without a massive increase in the economy's productivity rates and a major debt restructuring. 

The first, if achievable at all, would be devastating for the Greek people and lead to the fall of the government. The second would have massive knock-on effects throughout the euro-zone financial system.

Health Minister Andreas Loverdos may have put it best when he said last week: "We are at war in a time of peace. These are very critical days."

 Write to  Costas Paris at costas.paris@dowjones.com and Terence Roth at terence.roth@dowjones.com 