The Justice Department, preparing for a host of proposed cuts from the White House, has begun its own reductions in the hopes of softening the blow.

The department—which saw years of rapid growth after the 2001 terror attacks—is just one of the federal agencies facing significant cutbacks. In recent weeks, Justice Department officials have been negotiating with the White House on details of a proposed budget, even as they brace for possibly tougher reductions from Congress.

According to internal documents reviewed by The Wall Street Journal, the White House Office of Management and Budget has proposed a number of cost-cutting measures, including: 

—Increasing the amount of time deducted from prison sentences for good behavior, which they estimated would save money by immediately qualifying some 4,000 federal convicts for release, and another 4,000 over the next 10 years. 

—Eliminating the FBI's National Gang Intelligence Center, for a savings of $8 million.

—Sharing less of the proceeds of property confiscated from criminals with state and local authorities and eliminating other funding to local police departments for some operations. The change would recoup and save $120 million, according to the White House documents. 

A White House spokesman declined to comment before the president's budget proposal is formally unveiled next month. 

Some parts of the department are already making cuts, and others are contemplating ending cherished programs. 

The U.S. Marshals Service has quietly shelved the Fugitive Safe Surrender Program, which has cleared the books on thousands of low-level criminal cases since it began six years ago. Under the program, law-enforcement officials set up temporary shop in a church or a public setting, urging fugitives to turn themselves in to resolve old warrants and often drawing hundreds in a single day.

U.S. Marshals spokesman Jeff Carter said officials there decided that although the program's goals "were laudable, the agency could not sustain this unfunded initiative."

Supporters of the program say it is an extremely cost-effective way to resolve piles of old cases. But the agency determined that it could not justify the program as part of its core mission, which is capturing violent fugitives. 

Last week, Attorney General Eric Holder announced a hiring freeze and reductions in non-essential, non-personnel spending.

Other parts of the department are also weighing reductions. At the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, where the White House had proposed, in a document drafted just before Christmas, a spending cut of 3.5% from what the agency is likely to spend this year—and a 12.7% cut from what the agency had said it needed—officials spent weeks deliberating whether to scale back Operation Gunrunner, part of the Obama administration's effort to attack Mexican drug cartels by cracking down on illegal gunrunning along the southwest border. 

Privately, law enforcement officials say ATF expects to preserve Gunrunner and face a less punishing overall cut in the president's final budget proposal expected next month, in part because the recent shooting of Rep. Gabrielle Giffords (D., Ariz.) in Tucson.

An ATF spokesman declined to discuss any potential budget decisions.

Mayors Against Illegal Guns, an advocacy group led by New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg, has argued ATF is already underfunded, even before any new cuts might be imposed.

"This is an agency with important responsibilities, and 500 mayors have called on the administration to give the agency the resources it needs to do its job," said Arkadi Gerney, a special adviser to Mr. Bloomberg. 

Interestingly, in the OMB document written just before Christmas, White House budget officials said "it appears that adding more agents does not increase the number of favorable outcomes," citing as evidence the average length of sentence for convicted drug traffickers fell between 1996 and 2009.

At a congressional hearing Wednesday, the head of the criminal division, Lanny Breuer, was asked generally about the potential impact of cuts on his ability to catch criminals.

"It's inescapable that if you take our prosecutors away, you take our FBI agents away, we will not be able to protect the American people in the way we're now protecting them...If there are fewer of us, we'll be able to do less," Mr. Breuer said.

—Thomas Catan contributed to this article.

 Write to  Devlin Barrett at devlin.barrett@wsj.com 