(Please see Corrections & Amplifications item below.)

TUCSON, Ariz.—Students and faculty at Pima Community College feared for their safety as Jared Lee Loughner's increasingly erratic behavior led to a series of encounters with campus police in the eight months before he was suspended from school last fall, police reports show.

After he was accused of shooting 19 people last Saturday, school officials described his behavior while at Pima as odd and disruptive. But police reports show in chilling detail that the behavior frightened students and teachers.

In February, a rattled student told school officials she feared he had a knife, after Mr. Loughner upset his Advanced Poetry Writing class by making comments such as, "why don't we just strap bombs to babies."

In May, an instructor was so worried about physical violence on Mr. Loughner's part that she requested—and received—a police guard outside her class. By June, a dean told the police that students in Mr. Loughner's math class were "afraid of any repercussions that could exist from Loughner being unstable in his actions."

 Read the Pima Community College Department of Public Safety reports mentioning Jared Lee Loughner. Warning: Some of the language in these reports may be graphic and disturbing. 

The school finally suspended Mr. Loughner in late September, after police officers who removed him from a biology class told the school they believed he had mental health problems. On the day of his suspension, the police were able to recognize his voice and his "reflection in the window" in a video posted on YouTube. In the video, according to the reports, he made statements such as, "We are examining the torture of students," and, "I haven't forgotten the teacher that gave me a B for freedom of speech." 

There is no evidence that Mr. Loughner had been diagnosed with a mental illness, and it is unclear whether Mr. Loughner ever received psychiatric treatment.

But the trove of records demonstrates more clearly than before how abruptly Mr. Loughner's life spiraled out of control. When his problems began in February, he had no disciplinary record, the school told police at the time.

By September, he was suspended, and later told he couldn't return to school without a mental-health clearance. In November, he bought a gun. Last Saturday, police say, Mr. Loughner opened fire at a supermarket here that left six dead and 14 wounded, including U.S. Rep. Gabrielle Giffords.

The documents also demonstrate the challenges facing campus police when students exhibit disturbing, even threatening, behavior—even when parents are notified. School administrators and counselors met repeatedly with Mr. Loughner, who twice appears to have been accompanied by his mother, according to the documents. Campus police talked to Mr. Loughner's father when they delivered the suspension letter to the family's home on Sept. 29. 

Mr. Loughner's parents have declined to talk to reporters since the incident, but they did release a statement expressing their sorrow and regret for their son's actions, and saying, "we don't understand why this happened."

There are no laws that require colleges to disclose concerns about potentially dangerous students to off-campus authorities, apart from mental-health professionals who must alert law enforcement if a threat to an identifiable victim is imminent. Moreover, it is nearly impossible to predict whether any given individual is going to become violent, say psychiatrists.

"We will never be able to anticipate all acts of violence and perhaps not even most acts of violence," says Paul Appelbaum, a professor of psychiatry, medicine and law at Columbia University.

Neal Cash, who heads an organization that oversees federally funded mental health services in the region, said Mr. Loughner didn't receive treatment through the program. But he could have received private counseling.

Before the police reports were released, Pima Community College's spokesman, Paul Schwalbach, told The Wall Street Journal that Mr. Loughner was "a disruptive and an odd, strange sort of character," but not dangerous. Mr. Schwalbach didn't respond to a request for further comment Wednesday.

One of Mr. Loughner's lawyers, Mark Fleming, declined to comment.

Instructors and school officials mentioned in the police reports couldn't be reached for comment or referred questions to the community college's public affairs office. 

At first, police didn't see serious problems with Mr. Loughner's behavior. A dean, Patricia Houston, described him as having a "dark personality" and being "kind of 'creepy,'" when she told the campus police he had "reacted strangely" to the reading of a poem written by one of his classmates, linking it to "abortion, wars, killing people."

The police told Ms. Houston they would check Mr. Loughner's history and if there was cause for concern, they would talk to him.

After looking into Mr. Loughner's background and finding some "prior drug involvement but no warrants," the police decided not to take any action.

"For now, this report documents the faculty's concerns but does not in my opinion justify making contact with Loughner by police," wrote Officer D. Simmons. 

But later, the police reports repeatedly describe Mr. Loughner as acting oddly and being unable to understand why the police had been called. 

In September, after Mr. Loughner had an outburst over a biology grade that left his instructor "visibly upset," one officer wrote, Mr. Loughner's "head was constantly tilted to the left and his eyes were jittery and looking up and to the left." 

Another officer called to the scene wrote, "By taking the extra time through repeated explanation I was eventually able to communicate with Mr. Loughner that his actions in the classroom were disruptive and not permitted," adding, "It was clear that he was unable to fully understand his actions."

The documents released by the college compare, but also contrast in some ways, with Mr. Loughner's own narrated version of events. 

In videos posted on YouTube, his rambling statements displayed an obsession with grammar and a hatred of the educational system.

And in postings on online forums associated with the game Earth Empires, which Mr. Loughner wrote during the same period as several of the incidents mentioned in the police reports, he repeatedly railed against the his college and displayed hatred for teachers.

At 10:30 p.m. on May 17, after one run-in, Mr. Loughner wrote that he "told this woman. That she was a Bully. And that if there was PIG in front of me....the pig would would call you a bully." He said he then said "Horses---! Bulls---!" You are a scam!"

On June 3rd, he described the incident in poetry class, "I mention about the BBC Jihad Teenager soccer bombs!" he said. "I then mention Incest in poetry!"

Ben McGahee, a math instructor at Pima who contacted school officials about Mr. Loughner's outbursts in class, said he thinks the school did everything it could. 

"They are not required to give a psychological evaluation or counseling," he said. "It is Jared's responsibility to follow up. And his parents."

In Mr. McGahee's class, the instructor called a number 6 and Jared called it an 18 and asked, "How can you deny math?"

Told about Mr. Loughner's behavior in other classes, including talking about "strapping bombs to babies," Mr. McGahee said, "It seemed obvious to me that he had mental problems, that he was disconnected from the class, that he lived in his own mind. It was like he was playing a scene from a movie in his own mind. He was speaking language X and everyone else was speaking language Y."

In a written statement to The Wall Street Journal, the college said that it may notify external law enforcement authorities when a violation of its code of conduct "is also a violation of state or federal law."

Charlotte Fugett, an administrator at the school, said Pima doesn't offer mental-health counseling services. "We can suggest mental-health resources and we do," she said. "Absent that, and any imminent threat or violation of the law, that is what our options are," she said.

The school security department had one final interaction with Mr. Loughner, when two college police officers went to his house Sept. 29 to hand deliver the school's Notice of Immediate Suspension letter. Two additional officers were asked to remain in the area "as backup," according to a police report. 

No one answered the door. They returned an hour later and met Mr. Loughner's father, who invited them into the garage, after securing the family dogs.

In the garage, the officers spoke with the younger Mr. Loughner, "who held a constant trance of staring," as one of the police officers narrated the events that had led up to the suspension and made him read back the letter of suspension. 

Mr. Loughner responded: "I realize now that this was all a scam." 

The officers talked briefly to his father and left. 

"No further information is known," the report concluded.

—Ana Campoy, Alexandra Berzon and Shirley S. Wang contributed to this article.

 Corrections & Amplifications 

Jared Loughner is accused of shooting 19 people on Jan. 8. Twenty people were injured in the shooting, but only 19 were shot. An earlier version of this article incorrectly said he was accused of shooting 20 people.

 Write to  Leslie Eaton at leslie.eaton@wsj.com and Ann Zimmerman at ann.zimmerman@wsj.com 