ABU DHABI—Billionaire philanthropist  Bill Gates will press the case at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, this week that investing in preventing disease can aid the long-term stability of developing nations, after securing his first Middle East partnership to tackle two disease trouble spots. 

Mr. Gates, who co-chairs the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation with his wife, on Wednesday committed $50 million alongside a similar sum from Abu Dhabi's crown prince Sheik Mohammed bin Zayed Al Nahyan to vaccinate children in Afghanistan and Pakistan against a range of diseases. 

The highly contagious polio virus remains deeply entrenched in those two countries, as well as in Nigeria and India. The Gates Foundation—with the World Health Organization, Unicef, and others—supports a global polio-eradication initiative that has managed to reduce incidence of the crippling disease by 99% world-wide in the past 20 years. 

"If governments look at the numbers—the impact of this—it compares favorably to almost anything else you can do to help a country," Mr. Gates said in an interview in Abu Dhabi. Preventing disease helps stem population growth by encouraging smaller family sizes, which in turn allows governments to focus on development issues from unemployment to food security, Mr. Gates said. "If you don't, if you let the population growth stay high—like it is in countries with very poor health—whether it's stability or education, all of it is kind of out of reach," he said. 

The largest chunk of the $100 million pledged Wednesday will be focused on increasing the number of Afghan children that get vaccinated for a broad number of diseases, including hepatitis B, diphtheria and whooping cough. The money also will support delivery of a new vaccine for pneumococcal disease, which causes pneumonia, one of the main killers of children world-wide. 

A smaller amount, $34 million, is focused on fighting polio in Pakistan and Afghanistan, both conflict nations stuck in a cycle of reinfection between their populations.

The new money comes at a major crossroads in the effort to eradicate polio. For more than two decades, organizations including the WHO and Rotary International have spent $9 billion trying to wipe out the disease, but it has bounced back again and again. The group last year set the end of 2012 as a new goal for getting close to eradicating the disease.

"We're trying to get the current donors to step up a bit to make sure funding doesn't hold us back, and having new donors like Abu Dhabi is a very positive thing," he said. On Friday, Mr. Gates will announce a polio-related milestone with U.K. Prime Minister David Cameron.

Mr. Gates said the new money committed Wednesday brings the global polio initiative's funding gap for the two-year period to 2012 to $700 million—with the campaign's funding needs at about $1 billion a year. He also said he is confident the campaign could raise the rest, and optimistic on the new plan with Abu Dhabi's crown prince. Targeted vaccines, which target areas by the type of polio that is common there, are part of a new strategy that has helped the campaign bring down the number of cases in recent years, Mr. Gates said. 

The money from the Abu Dhabi prince won't do much to bridge that gap but it is focused on two of the places that need it the most, and could make it easier to hit the high coverage-ratio target with a regional partner monitoring results. In Pakistan—where increased migration and last year's flood have made it difficult to reach children—the Pakistani and U.S. armies take part in helping vaccinators reach the children in need, Mr. Gates said.

Pakistan last year experienced a surge in reported polio cases—to 140 cases in 2010 from 89 cases a year earlier. The government there this week announced a national emergency plan to eradicate polio. 

Mr. Gates planned to head to the World Economic Forum's annual meeting in Davos later Wednesday, and he will stop for meetings in the African Union before traveling to New York for the release of his foundation's annual letter on Monday. 

In Davos, he will argue that the targeted investments his foundation supports—getting vaccinations to the people who most need them and wiping out cases of polio—have dramatic knock-on effects that even budget-conscious governments cannot ignore. 

"The case has to be made that there's real impact—whether you care about the humanitarian impact or whether you care about letting these countries be stable and self sufficient—that these are great investments," Mr. Gates said.

His 2011 annual letter will focus on polio eradication and the experience of eliminating smallpox, the only human disease ever to be eradicated."In the annals of public health and improving human lives, the smallpox eradication and then that increase in vaccination use—those are the most amazing things ever done," Mr. Gates said. "Having a successful polio [eradication] would really energize the whole field."

—Robert A. Guth contributed to this article.



