  Bank of America Corp.
BAC


2.89
%




 intends to give some investment bankers a greater share of their bonuses in cash, the latest Wall Street compensation move roiling banking chieftains as they meet in Davos, Switzerland. 

Last year the highest-paid bankers at the nation's largest bank by assets received as little as 5% of their payout in cash. Now bankers and traders making more than $5 million are getting as much as 30% of their 2010 compensation in cash and at least 70% in deferred stock, according to people familiar with the situation. Some could see a stock award of as much as 80% and 20% in cash.

Last year's level of cash was unusually low because the bank was restricted by federal pay rules as a condition of the $45 billion it received in U.S. aid.

"We feel that our pay practices are fair and appropriate for our employees and our shareholders," a spokesman said.

Still, multiple bankers gathered at the World Economic Forum in Davos grumbled that Bank of America would increase the cash portion of bonuses—news that traveled fast once the bank's employees were told.

But Bank of America's terms are strikingly similar to  Credit Suisse Group AG, for example. The Swiss bank defers all of the bonus pay of its executive-board members. That's hardly different than the terms for Bank of America's chief executive,  Brian Moynihan, and his direct reports whose bonuses will be 100% deferred, according to people familiar with the situation. The highest-paid managing directors at Credit Suisse, like Bank of America, will have 70% to 80% of their compensation deferred.

At  J.P. Morgan Chase
JPM


0.12
%




 & Co., Bank of America's largest U.S. rival, most bankers are having 50% of their pay deferred and some more. 

Despite the similarities, the rancor is symptomatic of the heightened sensitivity to the issue of compensation, which took center stage at Davos. European bank executives gathered in the Alps this week are up in arms over the lack of similar rules governing payouts by their U.S. rivals.

"It's not a level playing field," said  William Vereker, co-head of global investment banking at  Nomura Holdings Inc.

Their fear is that any stark differences in pay between firms—and even continents—could make it harder to retain employees in search of better compensation. U.K. based  HSBC Holdings PLC has threatened to move its headquarters elsewhere because of regulations that include compensation rules. The bank said it lost roughly a dozen employees to competitors with more lax rules on pay. 

Such complaints are particularly acute from European bankers, which have to comply with new European Union requirements that bonuses be comprised primarily of stock or other noncash instruments and must be deferred for at least three years. The most cash that can immediately be rewarded is 20% of the overall payout. 

U.S. regulators haven't yet settled on rules governing pay. Since they don't yet exist, U.S. rules are perceived as much more lenient than those across the Atlantic. 

That doesn't mean there isn't plenty of sniping among U.S. banks. Within hours of recent compensation announcements, rivals griped that firms went too far in enriching their employees. 

One banker, fearing that a rival firm was boosting base salaries, called it "absurd" to guarantee bigger pay regardless of the bank's future performance. After  Morgan Stanley's
MS


0.29
%




 investment banking division and  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
GS


0.37
%




 announced that their 2010 compensation would be 43% and 39% of revenues, respectively, bankers at one rival firm that paid less blanched.

Goldman and Morgan Stanley declined to comment. 

U.S. banks are also carping that though pay restrictions haven't been formally memorialized, the Dodd-Frank regulatory overhaul has started to impose sweeping restrictions on the industry. Some bankers fret that the European banks may try to take advantage of their hemmedin U.S. counterparts. "It isn't like U.S. banks are getting off easy here," said one bank executive. 

Pressure in the U.S. to reign in pay has endured since the financial meltdown. The Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, which issued a report on Thursday on the causes of the market meltdown, repeatedly spotlighted the role of Wall Street compensation systems in fueling excessive risk taking. Financial-sector compensation, which generally equaled other paychecks in the half century after the Great Depression, rose to a level 80% higher between 1980 and 2007, the report said.

The FCIC noted that "the securities industry has reported record profits and is once again distributing large bonuses." 

In Europe, banker-bashing remains an extremely popular pastime for politicians and the media. It's especially true in the U.K., Europe's financial capital, where bank executives are getting tarred in the press and by lawmakers for bonuses of £2 million or £3 million ($3.2 million or $4.8 million).

Despite the griping over Bank of America's compensation structure, the company seems sensitive to the coming regulatory rules. Even though some bankers are receiving more cash, the total bonus pool for investment bankers and traders was down in 2010 as compared to 2009, said people familiar with the situation. In 2009, the pay for investment bankers and traders was more than $4 billion.

Even though the bank lost $2.2 billion in 2010, its investment banking and trading units earned $6.3 billion, making it the most profitable division. 

—Aaron Lucchetti and Randall Smith contributed to this article.

 Write to  Dan Fitzpatrick at dan.fitzpatrick@wsj.com and David Enrich at david.enrich@wsj.com 