 (Please see Correction below.) 

Most Asian markets advanced Thursday, with South Korean equities staging a strong rebound as foreigners turned buyers and snapped up beaten-down stocks, while Chinese banks helped lift Hong Kong shares on an upbeat earnings outlook.

Japan's Nikkei Stock Average added 0.9%, Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index climbed 0.3%, South Korea's Kospi jumped 2.2%, Australia's S&P/ASX 200 inched up 0.1% and Taiwan's Taiex finished 1.4% higher.

Regional sentiment was underpinned by Wednesday's modest rise on Wall Street, an increase in U.S. index futures, the Federal Reserve's Beige Book report of an improving U.S. economy and accelerating European manufacturing activity.

Dow Jones Industrial Average futures were up 56 points in screen trade.

Michael McCarthy, chief market analyst at CMC Markets in Sydney said that "investors now expect the U.S. and Europe to make more significant contributions to global growth prospects."

Still, investors remained cautious, with worries about Middle East turmoil and soaring crude-oil prices lurked just under the surface.

"Right now, outlook concerns are driving the market more than current economic fundamentals," said Tsuyoshi Segawa, equity strategist at Mizuho Securities in Tokyo. "As it's unclear where crude oil prices and the North Africa situation are going, choppy trading will likely continue."

April Nymex crude-oil prices closed at $102.23 a barrel in New York on Wednesday—the highest settlement since Sept. 26, 2008. They advanced further in Asian trade, going as high as $102.94 a barrel before retreating. The contract was recently down $1.07 at $101.16 on Globex.

The turnaround came amid prospects for a peaceful conclusion to the conflict. News network Al Jazeera reported, citing reports from Venezuela, that Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi has accepted Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez's proposal for a mediated solution to the crisis in Libya. Reuters reported Arab League Secretary-General Amr Moussa said the proposal was under consideration by his group.

South Korean stocks posted gains, buoyed by solid industrial output data and bargain-hunting by foreign investors, who turned net buyers following a six-session selling spree.

Automobile stocks rose on robust February car sales data, with Hyundai Motor Co. advancing 2.8% and Kia Motors Co. soaring 6.6%.

Construction and airline stocks also rebounded after their recent underperformance, with Hyundai Engineering & Construction Co. rising 6.6% and Daewoo Engineering & Construction climbing 4.2%, while Korean Air Lines Co. added 3.3%.

Data released Thursday showed South Korea's industrial output in January was up 13.7% from a year earlier, the third consecutive monthly increase, spurred by overseas demand for semiconductors and automobiles.

In Tokyo, relief over Wall Street's modest rise spurred some buying, although demand remained tentative due to the tense Middle East situation.

Softbank advanced 4.8% on the news of Apple's second-generation iPad, which Softbank sells in Japan.

Trading house Itochu rose 1.4% on news it will buy U.K. tire company Kwik Fit.

Hong Kong shares were aided by gains in Chinese banks on hopes the rising interest-rate environment on the mainland will boost their interest incomes. Also on Thursday, Bernstein Research raised Chinese bank-earning estimates for 2011 and 2012, saying the lenders' first-quarter results were expected to act as a catalyst for their shares.

China Construction Bank and Industrial & Commercial Bank of China each advanced 1%; in Shanghai, the stocks rose 1.4% and 0.5%, respectively.

However, Chinese markets ended lower, with the benchmark Shanghai Composite index falling 0.4% on worries Beijing could further tighten its monetary policy.

"The (market's) upside is likely to be limited as investors remain cautious amid persistent concerns over the possibility that Beijing will announce more tightening measures," said Run Li, an analyst from Guosen Securities.

Shares of Qingdao Haier Co. fell 2.6% and Dongfang Electric Corp. dropped 1.8%, while Air China declined 1.8%.

Elsewhere in the region, New Zealand's NZX 50 rose 0.5% and Philippine shares finished 1.6% higher.

India's Sensex ended 0.2% higher after moving in both directions, Singapore's Straits Times Index gained 0.3%, Indonesian shares gained 0.2% and Thailand's SET Index gained 0.3%.

In foreign exchange markets, the euro was steady against the U.S. dollar ahead of the European Central Bank's rate-setting meeting due later in the day, amid growing expectations the central bank will raise interest rates soon.

"Though the ECB is not expected to hike, [ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet] is expected to take a more vigorous focus on the inflation backdrop," strategists at RBC Capital Markets said in note to clients. "If nothing else, such a tone would highlight again the divergent forces that are affecting European monetary policy makers as opposed to the forces at work on the (U.S.) Federal Reserve."

The euro was fetching $1.3854 from $1.3868 late in New York on Wednesday, and 113.34 yen from 113.52 yen. The dollar was buying 81.83 yen from 81.87 yen. The greenback rose against the Swiss franc after losing ground Wednesday on worries about the Middle East; it was recently at 0.9257 francs.

Lead Japanese government bond futures were down 0.16 at 139.54 points on the Nikkei's rise, although traders expect selling interest to moderate owing to the unrest in the Middle East. The yield on the 10-year cash JGB was up 0.025 percentage point at 1.290%.

Spot gold was at $1,426.40 per troy ounce, down $9.30 from its New York close Wednesday.



 Correction 

Reuters quoted Arab League Secretary-General Amr Moussa as saying a peace plan for Libya proposed by Venezuela's President Hugo Chavez was under consideration. An earlier version of this article incorrectly said Reuters reported the plan had been accepted by Moammar Gadhafi.

 Write to  Shri Navaratnam at shri.navaratnam@dowjones.com 