ROME— Bulgari SpA is finally "going in the right direction" with its watch business while its core jewelry business is producing a "stellar" performance, Chief Executive  Francesco Trapani said Wednesday as the company reported a 21% jump in quarterly revenue. 

Strong sales in Japan also helped Bulgari finish 2010 with record quarterly revenue, while an intensified push into China this year should propel the company to further growth, Mr. Trapani said in an interview. 

Bulgari's new Serpenti watch, launched in December, immediately became the Italian luxury group's best-selling women's watch, Mr. Trapani said. "It's a very good start" for the new model, which is under scrutiny by investors who have been wondering whether Bulgari's hugely successful 1990s expansion into watches is sustainable. 

Bulgari on Wednesday reported that sales during the fourth quarter rose to €358 million, a figure well above expectations that took the company's full-year revenue well over the €1 billion mark. All product categories and geographic areas posted gains, with Japanese sales posting a surprisingly strong 25% annualized jump. 

Watch sales—which make up 20% of Bulgari's total revenue—grew 7% in the quarter, helped by currency effects. But stripping away the one-time effects of the discontinuation of the Daniel Roth and Gerald Genta models, watch sales rose 17%, Mr. Trapani said. 

Jewelry sales, which account for almost half of Bulgari's business, rose 28% in the fourth quarter, or 18% if adjusted for currency fluctuations. 

Sales in the U.S., where high-income consumers were out in force late last year, rose a "not spectacular" 3.2% in dollar terms but sales of core Bulgari products—those costing under $70,000—rose at a double-digit pace, Mr. Trapani said. 

The strengthening dollar meant that Bulgari's revenue from the Americas rose 10.3% when reported in euros. 

While Asian sales shot up 38%, five times as fast as sales in Bulgari's home Italian market, and sales in Greater China rose even faster, the company's performance in Japan was particularly striking. 

Long a sore point for Bulgari and other luxury players, Japanese sales rose a surprising 25%, boosted by the yen but still up 7.1% independently of the currency effect. 

Mr. Trapani said its flagship store in Tokyo's Ginza neighborhood outperformed. "After a long time of suffering in Japan we have seen a change of trend since September," he said. 

The chief executive, a scion of the Bulgari family that founded and still controls the company, said he had high hopes Bulgari's new distribution alliance with China's Hengdeli would propel further growth for its watches in 2011. 

Apart from strong growth in Greater China and Hengdeli's retail penetration with 50 planned multibrand stores, Mr. Trapani noted Bulgari has an aggressive advertising plan in China this year, is opening more of its own stores there and is sponsoring two jewelry exhibits in Bejing and Shanghai to promote the 126-year-old brand. 

Bulgari's turnaround will also lead to a normalization of the company's tax rate at around 20% of pretax profits, Mr. Trapani said. He said the company's lighter tax rate of only around 10% in recent years was due to non-recurring factors. 

 Write to  Christopher Emsden at chris.emsden@dowjones.com 