A surging dollar and a collapse in oil prices roiled commodity markets, as fears grow that high costs for energy and raw materials are undermining the global economic recovery.

A months-long rally in the prices of basic goods has shown cracks in recent weeks, pressured by a barrage of economic data confirming that $4-a-gallon gasoline and soaring food prices are hurting businesses and straining consumers' budgets. 

That lack of confidence was pivotal in spurring a hectic retreat by investors who had bought commodities—particularly silver and oil—as a hedge against a steadily weakening dollar. The greenback abruptly changed course shortly before the U.S. trading day began, when European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet failed to invoke the word "vigilance" when speaking about inflation, denting expectations for quick interest-rate increases that would enhance the advantage of holding the euro over other major currencies. 

By midafternoon, the dollar had jumped nearly 2% against the euro, and oil prices had closed below $100 a barrel for the first time since March 16. Silver futures settled down 8%, at $36.240 per troy ounce, and off 25% since Friday.

The strengthening dollar and sliding oil prices acted as a signal to abandon metals, grains and other commodities where concerns about rising prices and flagging demand also are on the rise. 

Most markets saw their first big drop Thursday morning from the twin hits of Mr. Trichet's comments and a U.S. Labor Department report showing claims for new unemployment benefits surging to 474,000, the most since August. Separately, manufacturing orders in Germany showed an unexpected 4% drop. 

Commodities markets already were on edge due to this week's collapse in silver prices, as well as an array of indicators showing flagging consumption for increasingly costly raw goods. The arrival of $4-a-gallon retail gasoline prices across parts of the U.S. was seen as a potential turning point for the economy. Meanwhile, the U.S. Department of Agriculture reported weekly grain-export sales Thursday that were "poor across the board" as consumers balk at high prices, said  Don Roose, president of U.S. Commodities in Des Moines, Iowa.

Copper prices dropped below $4 a pound for the first time this year, and gold also fell, with the gold contract for May delivery settling down 2.2% at $1,480.90 per troy ounce. Cotton fell 3.1%, while corn dropped 3% and natural gas sank 8.2%.

"There's been a growing, nagging feeling about how well, or not well, the economy is doing. There are a lot of little dots getting connected," said  John Kilduff, founding partner of hedge fund Again Capital. "This time around, $4-a-gallon gasoline is clearly doing damage to the consumer psyche and to the economy."

After driving commodity prices higher for much of 2011 amid worries about supply shortages, investors now fear that high prices will lower consumption. Central banks around the world are raising interest rates and ending other programs designed to speed up the economic recovery, and some policy makers are worried high food and energy costs will threaten continued growth.

Even so, commodity prices remain well above levels seen last year, when supply shortages in wheat, cotton and other goods first sent consumers scrambling to secure raw materials. Oil could still draw support should unrest in the Middle East further disrupt production, for example.

"I don't think we've seen the end of $100 a barrel oil. Prices could go lower for now, but by next year they should be back up at current levels," said  Simon Wardell, research manager in the energy practice at IHS Global Insight. "We're not going to have a big plunge like in 2008, but we could go back to $90 a barrel in the short term."

Economists believe that growth is still possible with triple-digit oil prices, but rising energy costs have undoubtedly hurt consumers' ability to spend. The U.S. economy slowed in the first quarter due to rising prices for food and energy, the Commerce Department said last month. Companies reporting quarterly earnings have also pointed to rising energy and commodity costs.

  Dow Chemical Co.
DOW


-1.79
%




 last week said it raised prices by 12% across its businesses to help offset a $700 million increase in feedstock and energy costs.  Ford Motor Co.
F


-0.41
%




 is increasing spending on commodities by roughly $2 billion this year, following a $1 billion increase in 2010.

—Tatyana Shumsky, Leslie Josephs and Ian Berry contributed to this article. 