The Mideast watched developments in Cairo on Friday, and in some countries, activists took to the streets.

In Jordan, after Friday prayers, thousands of people marched in Amman and other cities. Protesters decried rising prices and high unemployment, calling for a change in government.

The protests—called by the powerful Islamist opposition, left-wing trade-union activists and other opposition parties—were the third such demonstration in the past three weeks in Jordan, and were inspired in part by growing popular dissent in other parts of the Arab world. 

Such anger isn't new, but in the past, Arab governments have generally been able to call on their police forces and secret services to quell public outcry. 

Leaders have also been able to deflect public anger by blaming their citizens' ills on outside forces, whether Israel, communism, Iran or the U.S.

A succession of rallies and demonstrations, in Egypt, Jordan, Yemen and Algeria have been inspired directly by the popular outpouring of anger that toppled Tunisian President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali. See how these uprising progressed.

First in Tunisia and now in Egypt, the reflex to deploy security forces against an unruly public backfired. 

In Tunisia, pictures of dozens of protesters shot—many in the back and head— by police forces united the nation and changed the focus of protests from economic discontent to overthrow of the regime of President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali. 

In Egypt, the regime's iron-fisted response to crowds seemed only to spur on greater participation as they were overwhelmed.

"If it is regime change that is on [protesters'] mind, then, by definition that is something the regime cannot and will not concede. That leaves Arab rulers with very little margin of maneuver, and little hope for a soft landing," according to Robert Malley, Mideast director of the International Crisis Group, a U.S. think tank.

In Egypt, demonstrators also appeared to lose their fear of a hated security force, which U.S. officials and other nations have long condemned for abuses. 

In the Persian Gulf, monarchies girded by oil revenues will likely feel compelled to revisit plans to increase political participation that have been put on the back burner or shelved altogether as oil prices have brought in new funds.

Across the region, conditions vary from nation to nation, as does the mix of opposition groups, from secular to Islamist. But Mr. Mubarak's sacking of his government under pressure Friday, so close on the heels of Tunisian leader Mr. Ben Ali's resignation, is likely to further embolden protesters elsewhere. 

Older demonstrators who spent years in Tunisian jails say they lost their fear of the feared security forces when they saw the energy of their younger compatriots to stay on the streets. 

"We used to watch our backs all the time. The regime tried to keep us isolated, but this time we were all united," says Mohammed Abbou, a Tunisian lawyer who spent almost a decade in jail under Mr. Ben Ali's regime.

In Jordan, protesters are likely to increase pressure on King Abdullah II to remove Prime Minister Samir Rifai, and could aim some of their ire directly at the king himself to spur economic and political change.

Jordan's Muslim Brotherhood, an Islamist group, has been calling for overhauls including a change in the constitution so that the prime minister and other officials are elected, rather than appointed.

Demonstrators praised Egyptians for their protests and called for President Hosni Mubarak to step down. "Ben Ali, tell Mubarak the plane is ready," they shouted. "Mubarak … Mubarak … Saudi Arabia is waiting," protesters called, a reference to ousted former Tunisian president's exile in Saudi Arabia.

Police forces looked on while more than 3,500 demonstrators chanted antigovernment slogans in Amman Friday. Protesters waved banners that called on the government to curb unemployment, poverty and corruption. Around 2,000 people staged protests in other Jordanian cities, the Jordanian police said.

The crowds, waving colorful banners, called for Prime Minister Rifai to step down. 

"Jordan…Jordan is free, the government should flee," they chanted.

 Write to  Margaret Coker at margaret.coker@wsj.com, Bill Spindle at bill.spindle@wsj.com and Hassan Hafidh at hassan.hafidh@wsj.com 