When I was young, reading my way through the children's library in my small town, I somehow missed Maud Hart Lovelace's books about best friends Betsy and Tacy. How in the world did that happen? The only explanation I can think of is that all the Betsy-Tacy books in the "L" section were permanently checked out. Lovelace is not a household name, but in many houses for the past six decades Betsy and Tacy have been.

Lovelace's first book about the girls appeared in 1940, when she was almost 50. It was set in the time of her own childhood in Mankato, Minn., in the late 1890s. The series begins in a place called Deep Valley with Betsy and Tacy at age 5 and then follows them until they're in their 20s—we watch as they have picnics, climb trees, perform songs, quarrel with their sisters, grieve over a dead sibling, seriously miscalculate how long their homework will take, get cliquish, travel by themselves and think about boys and, eventually, husbands.

Prodded by a letter-writing campaign mounted by the Betsy-Tacy Society, Harper Perennial in recent years has republished all 10 of the books. Now it is bringing out three more Lovelace novels, in two volumes. They possess the familiar spirit and charm but feature Betsy and Tacy's friends or members of their social orbit. If you're a Lovelace fan eager for these hard-to-find treasures, you've probably already stopped reading this piece to place your online order. But for new converts or interested parties, any one of the three stories may serve as an invigorating introduction to Maud Hart Lovelace's world.

The shortest is "Winona's Pony Cart," a 1953 novel for younger children about Betsy's classmate Winona and her plans (a bit different from her mother's) for her eighth birthday. Even though Lovelace had most recently been writing about 21-year-old Betsy's adventures in Europe on the eve of World War I, the author slips back easily into the tone and psychology of young children and their endearingly selfish concerns.

Winona has snapping black eyes; she likes to play wild games and climb trees. She's a bit of a trial for her somewhat frail but beautifully dressed mother. At one point, we're told, Winona's mother gives her "a look": "It was a sort of sad, discouraged look as though she was thinking, what on earth am I going to do with this child! 'Winona,' she said, 'you're almost eight years old. You ought to be more dignified.' " What Winona wants is a big birthday party and a pony. She gets them, too. But Lovelace, without belaboring the point, also gives her a lesson or two.

Winona overhears her parents disagreeing about her behavior and how they should bring her up—and then hears them each admit their faults. At these moments, Winona does begin to grow up, even if she is still not dignified. Winona's energy takes a new form as she listens. First she controls herself and decides to be happy with what she has. Then "something rushed over her; it was like a wind full of joy and love and gratefulness. She was grateful for everything—not just the pony. For the party, and her presents, and her father and mother and sisters."

The other two stories are longer novels for older girls. "Carney's House Party," from 1949, is the more conventional. Betsy's friend Carney is back home in Minnesota for summer vacation after her sophomore year at Vassar. She has invited one of her friends from school back East—the sophisticated and perhaps not wholly straightforward Isobel Porteous—to come for a visit. And of course Carney's old crowd of high-school friends drops in with amusing plans for entertainment. Love and its misunderstandings peep out.

The tale is a romp but a romp under a shadow: We know something that these wholesome and mirth-loving young people in 1912 or so don't. When Carney and her boyfriend become engaged, they make plans about their honeymoon two years off—"Unless there's a war or something," Carney jokes. Lovelace adds: "She knew, as everyone did, that there was never going to be another war. Wars belonged only to history classes."

The best starter-book for grown-ups in this trio is "Emily of Deep Valley,"  the most thoughtful about the inevitable loneliness of growing up. The novel, published in 1950, begins when the world is opening up for the young people of Deep Valley—they're leaving home to go to college in St. Paul, or to study singing in Europe, or to live in New York or California. Their changes of scene are hopeful but poignant, too, because almost all of the young men and women in Betsy's crowd come from close and loving families. (One of the pleasures of reading Lovelace's work, in fact, is witnessing the many varieties of happy families and seeing in particular the kindness of fathers.) But this book's main character, Emily Webster, is an exception: She's an orphan living with her slightly enfeebled grandfather; despite her intellectual gifts, she has chosen not to go to college but to stay home and take care of him.

Growing up includes taking responsibility for one's character and not feeling put upon by fate. Not surprisingly, Emily at 18 can't always live up to this demanding standard. She slips into self-pity, even despondency at times. But when she looks outside herself, she discovers that Deep Valley has plenty of people who manage with grace to confront the burdens of circumstance, age or private tragedy.

Many of the Deep Valley stories run from the beginning of the school year to graduation, but Emily's tale is bookended by the family and civic ceremony of Decoration Day (now Memorial Day): laying flowers on family graves; a parade with a band playing "When Johnny Comes Marching Home" and "The Girl I Left Behind Me"; the recitation of the Gettysburg Address. Emily's grandfather is one of the "six old men in blue uniforms"; he served in the First Minnesota volunteer infantry at Gettysburg.

Emily is "saturated with her grandfather's joy and pride in the day": "Those young men of the First Minnesota who had charged so bravely to their death were almost as real to her as last year's football team." Emily's love interest is the tall and handsome Don Walker, who has "a poise, an air of sophistication"—and consequently a disdain for the "bunk" of Decoration Day. His cutting comment to Emily: "I'm afraid you're a sentimentalist."

By Maud Hart Lovelace  

Maybe. But Emily's understanding of military grit—and of good literature—is part of her self-salvation. The turning point comes when Emily recalls a line from Shakespeare: "Muster your wits: stand in your own defense." 

She reads a Lincoln biography to her grandfather. She goes to Elks dances and learns how to talk to people older than she is. She befriends some Syrian children whose family has immigrated to Deep Valley, and she starts a little club for the kids—and for some local Deep Valley boys. 

These fresh accomplishments spur a real confidence in herself. She has also become a "stunner," says Don, back from college and engaged to Annette, one of Emily's cousins. Now that Emily has become admirable and admired, Don's superficial attraction is reanimated. And Emily, bless her, knows it. Holding back her laughter, she skillfully deflects him from the dramatic scene he desires: "He couldn't bear it, she thought, because she wasn't tortured by his engagement. He was probably in love with Annette, and he was most certainly not in love with her. But it was more than he could bear to have her take the matter so calmly."

Bravo, Emily! To see through false sophistication and teenage self-absorption without despising the other person or feeling smug oneself—now that's a lesson well-learned. Lovelace's books show people discovering how to be good, but the books themselves are not goody-goody or preachy. They focus on everyday matters, from playing with paper dolls to keeping a diary to feasting on midnight sandwiches in the kitchen with high-school friends. Within such activities, Lovelace reminds us, we learn a great deal about the ways of the world and the governing of our hearts. Sentimental bunk? Count me in Emily's camp.

—Ms. Mullen writes for the Barnes & Noble Review.