LISBON—Portugal passed a key test by carrying out a pair of government-bond auctions on Wednesday, but the high interest rates demanded by investors on the new debt sustained concerns that the Iberian country could be next in line for a bailout, after Greece and Ireland.

Portuguese officials said the auction, in which Portugal sold €1.25 billion ($1.62 billion) of government bonds that come due in October 2014 and June 2020, the maximum planned, was a sign that investors are confident in the country's ability to improve its financial health. 

The auction came just a few days after Portugal sold €1.1 billion to China in a private placement, a person familiar with the matter said.

But while the average yield on the longer-dated bond wasn't as high as analysts had anticipated, at 6.716%, they remained close to levels that many economists deem unsustainable in a slow-growing country such as Portugal.

High interest rates paid by Portugal to finance its public debt have fueled concerns that, after Greece and Ireland, Portugal will need to seek a bailout from the European Union and the International Monetary Fund.

"We don't need that help," Portugal Prime Minister José Sócrates said after the auction. "We only need confidence, the confidence that markets have shown today." 

In Brussels, however, European officials are debating how better to help euro-zone countries cope with their debt problems. 

EU Economics Commissioner Olli Rehn on Wednesday said the European Financial Stability Facility, the euro zone's current bailout fund, should be reinforced and its application widened.

Mr. Rehn's remarks echoed growing concerns that the EFSF, created in May after a bailout for Greece, may be ill-suited to assist countries before their public finances collapse.

Officials said the discussions have covered a wide range of ideas about how to improve the functioning of the EFSF and a permanent rescue fund that will replace it in 2013. 

The ideas include expanding the size of the current bailout fund, which is currently set up to lend a maximum €255 billion to troubled governments, allowing the fund to buy sovereign bonds and reducing the interest rate charged to borrowers.

Unlike Ireland's economy, which was rescued by the EU and the IMF late last year, Portugal isn't sagging under a pile of real-estate debt. 

And unlike Greece, Portugal moved relatively quickly to shore up its public finances with a combination of spending cuts and tax increases. 

Yet Portugal is now feeling similar pressure to Greece and Ireland. 

Economists say Portugal may struggle to regain full investor confidence—and to raise debt at affordable costs—after the central bank Tuesday projected the country's economy would shrink 1.3% this year.

To reach budget-deficit reduction targets in 2011, Portugal may need to consider a new package of unpopular spending cuts, on top of already tough measures adopted last year, economists say.

"Portugal could also seek more time to consolidate its budget but that would inevitably hurt investor sentiment," said  Jesus Castillo, an economist with French bank Natixis SA.

The government, which forecasts economic growth of 0.2% in 2011, has said it is committed to reducing the budget deficit and meeting targets.

Meanwhile, Portuguese commercial banks stepped up their use of European Central Bank lending facilities last month. According to figures posted on the Portuguese central bank's website, banks borrowed €40.9 billion from the ECB in December, a €3 billion increase from the previous month. 

—Emese Bartha in Frankfurt and Stephen Fidler and Riva Froymovich in Brussels contributed to this article.

 Write to  Emese Bartha at emese.bartha@dowjones.com 