 Scottsdale, Ariz. 

Turning up Vicki and Kent Logan's driveway means encountering severed heads, torsos without legs or arms and a horned man holding a skull up to his mouth. A 6-foot-tall man stands with his eyes closed, his mouth frozen in a maniacal laugh. A woman in rags dangles a baby upside down over a well. 

This isn't the entry to a haunted house. The figures are sculptures—members of a noted contemporary art collection all situated in a conservative, heavily manicured gated golf course community in a suburb of Phoenix. 

"The art adds a whole new dimension to our living experience. It's omnipresent," said Ms. Logan, 64, attired in pink striped shorts. Mr. Logan, 66, a retired investment banker, equally preppy with his tan and golf attire, said the couple's collection deals with modern-day issues. "Our collection is edgy. It is an exploration of emerging artists," he said. 

The Logans and their collection live in a part-home, part-museum, finished in 2008 at a cost of over $5 million. The 7,500-square-foot concrete-and-glass four-bedroom house is a series of squares and rectangles with a flat roof that blends into the rocky, rust and tan hillside dotted with saguaro cacti. 

The front door opens into a gallery. Twenty-four parabolic white plaster shafts, each 6 feet deep, allow light to bounce and reflect off art hung on both sides of walls, some of which are suspended in the room from the ceiling by cables. Here, among other works, hangs a topless woman amidst a pile of oranges ("Miss Navel Orange #2" by Mel Ramos), several large guns ("Gun," by Andy Warhol, and "Professional Courtesy," by James Rosenquist) and a man with a neck as long as a giraffe's ("Swan," by Yue Minjun). 

"Super Nova," a seven-panel painting with colorful mushrooms by Takashi Murakami, takes up 30 feet of wall in a 95-foot-long hallway. Off the hall is the Light Gallery, an 18-foot square room that looks like a glowing cube from the outside, as sunlight diffuses first through translucent film within the glass and then through white stretched fabric 6 feet below the ceiling. In the room lurk two metallic, monster-like aluminum figures, part of Thomas Schutte's Grosse Geister series. 

On the other side of the building is the Dark Gallery—or the "black box"—where hints of natural light come from small holes cast into the 12-inch thick concrete walls. Inhabitants here include a pile of bronze-coated muffins on the floor in a corner (Jude Tallichet's "Horde of Muffins") and a Mormon cap made entirely of corsage pins (Angela Ellsworth's "Seer Bonnet VI"). 

 "No one else in Phoenix collects the kind of art they collect, said Ellen Katz, former chairman of the board of the Phoenix Art Museum, noting that the others tend to focus on safer niches, like Western art or Native American pieces. The couple said they don't have advisers; industry sources estimate the value of their collection at well over $100 million.

Even though the Logans spent years in New York, they only started collecting art after they moved to San Francisco in 1992, when Mr. Logan went to Montgomery Securities. 

Since then they've amassed about 900 pieces of contemporary art, a third of it works by masters like Andy Warhol and Jeff Koons and two thirds by emerging artists. The Logans have donated extensively to museums, including a $60 million gift to the Denver Art Museum in 2005 that includes their property in Vail, Colo. (with its 15,000-square-foot home and 7,500-square-foot museum). The couple bought the property in Arizona in 2005 on a whim during a golf trip, hiring architect Eddie Jones of Jones Studio in Phoenix. 

To note the separation between the gallery space and the living space, Mr. Jones sandblasted into the concrete walls outside the galleries a pattern of two eyes: One is wide-open, with eyelashes, for Ms. Logan, and one is narrower and more calculating, for Mr. Logan. "Eyes show up a lot in their art," said Mr. Jones, who also designed several rugs with the same eye pattern for the living room and bedrooms. 

But the living spaces have art that's just as avant-garde. The master bedroom, up a wood and concrete stairway from the entry gallery, has a wall that pivots instead of a door. On it hangs a Virgil Marti piece with flowers made of human bones. At the entry of the master closet is a sculpture of a dead pigeon on a pedestal by Jason Middlebrook. 

"It really does subjugate human needs for the art," said Judy Robins, an interior designer and friend who has stayed in one of the three guest rooms, which display paintings like a 4-foot-tall depiction of Bill Clinton in an old-fashioned suit and Tyra Banks in a wedding dress hovering over a little girl in a dress with the head of Arnold Schwarzenegger. 

The kitchen, with its stainless steel island and windows that overlook the golf course, is the most conventional room in the house. Yet even there things get provocative: A painting shows a bare breasted blonde leaning over a Lipton "Ice Tea" box. "Since we don't have children or grandchildren, we didn't have to worry about things like boobs in the kitchen," said Ms. Logan. 

 Write to  Nancy Keates at nancy.keates@wsj.com 