ANNAPOLIS, Md.—Two small incendiary devices, including one addressed to Maryland Gov. Martin O'Malley, went off in the mail rooms of two Maryland state government office buildings Thursday, forcing employee evacuations and touching off an investigation by state and federal authorities.

The governor said the mailing meant for him complained about highway signs that urge motorists to report suspicious activity, the Associated Press reported late Thursday. 

"Somebody doesn't like seeing that sign," he said.

The state also uses the overhead signs to post information about missing children and to display real-time traffic estimates. Some commuters complained drivers were slowing down to read the signs, backing up traffic.

Maryland State Police spokesman Greg Shipley said that a mail room employee at the Jeffrey Building in Annapolis opened the first package, described as a book mailer, shortly after noon, only to see it flash and smoke. 

Jack Waldner, a bomb squad commander for the Maryland State Fire Marshal's Office, said an "incendiary reaction occurred, producing a small flame and fire." He said that the person who opened the package, addressed to Mr. O'Malley, detected the odor of sulfur. 

The officials displayed a photograph of the package, which had five 44-cent Christmas stamps on it. 

The employee's fingers were singed, but the injuries were minor and no treatment was sought, Mr. Shipley said. The building, which handles mail addressed to the governor, was evacuated until about 3 p.m. 

The second incident occurred at the headquarters of the Maryland Department of Transportation. It also included a flash of fire, smoke and the smell of sulfur, Mr. Shipley said. Although there were no serious injuries there either, several employees from that mail room were transported to a local hospital as a precaution. That package was addressed to Maryland's transportation secretary. 

"This is not to be compared with a significant explosion," Mr. Shipley said during an afternoon news conference. He added that there was no property damage or serious injury. "We're covering all the bases right now, until evidence points in one direction or the other," he said. 

The incidents prompted a widespread reaction, with the Department of Homeland Security responding, along with the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives and the Federal Bureau of Investigation as well. 

The Maryland Emergency Management Agency sent out a bulletin ordering Maryland state agencies to lock down their mail rooms immediately. 

Late Thursday afternoon, Baltimore police were called to a local courthouse to investigate a suspicious package there, a spokeswoman for the police said. It proved harmless. Dulles International Airport, a major airport near Washington, was partly closed for a brief period over concerns of a suspicious package that turned out to be harmless.

Authorities investigated similar incidents in 2004 when business-size envelopes rigged with matches were sent to governors in at least 20 states. 

The Department of Homeland Security said Maryland state police were leading the probe.

—Josh Mitchell  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Gary Fields at gary.fields@wsj.com 