Kansas City's Heart of America Shakespeare Festival says that unless it manages to raise $100,000 by next week, the company's production of "Macbeth" will be canceled. Not so long ago, that would have been fairly big theater news. Now it's just another drop in the bottomless bucket of high-culture fiscal crisis.

Consider the following:

On April 4, the Syracuse Symphony "suspended" operations after its musicians refused to accept a $1.3 million pay cut.

On April 7, the New York City Opera revealed that it was suspending plans to announce its 2011-12 season, pending the outcome of a top-to-bottom review of the company's finances that is expected to lead to drastic budget cuts. "There is no line item that's sacrosanct," said Charles Wall, the new chairman. The American Guild of Musical Artists, the union that represents City Opera's singers and production staffers, responded by threatening to strike.

On April 16, the board of Seattle's Intiman Theater, one of the country's top regional theater companies, voted to cancel the rest of its current season and lay off its staff.

On April 20, the Philadelphia Orchestra filed for bankruptcy.

That last event sent shudders up and down the spines of every classical-music manager in America. The Philadelphia Orchestra is universally regarded as one of the world's half-dozen greatest orchestras. If it can get into a hole so deep that bankruptcy is the only option, then no orchestra is safe.

What's the problem? In the immortal (if apocryphal) words of Sam Goldwyn, "If nobody wants to see your picture, there's nothing you can do to stop them." Corollary: If nobody can afford a ticket to your show, there's nothing you can do to make them buy one. When money is tight and ticket prices keep climbing, playgoers and opera buffs will respond by staying home. Moreover, the high-culture business models of the past don't work anymore. In particular, the subscription-based models that kept opera and theater companies and symphony orchestras afloat throughout the 20th century are no longer viable now that younger Americans are unwilling to commit in advance to attending future performances, and most of these groups are still trying to find consistently effective new ways to balance the books. 

And what's the moral of the story? Here's part of it: High-culture unions that fight to hang on to an untenable status quo are shooting themselves in the head. Labor leaders invariably respond to managerial cries of disaster-around-the-corner by arguing that their members should not be made to suffer today for the managerial mistakes of the past. But in the end, it doesn't matter who made the first blunder. Everybody in the culture business, union leaders included, has been guilty of chronic myopia when it comes to outmoded business models. The point is that there is no longer any alternative to root-and-branch fiscal reform. What's more, managers and board members now know this. Increasingly, they're willing to shut up shop altogether—or, like the Philadelphia Orchestra, declare bankruptcy—rather than purchase short-term labor peace, as they did in the past, by agreeing to contracts that they can no longer afford.

When unions choose cooperation over confrontation, the results are almost always beneficial for both sides. In 2006, the Metropolitan Opera persuaded its unions to agree to forgo upfront payments for recordings and broadcasts in return for a revenue-sharing deal. This cleared the way for the Met to beam live high-definition telecasts of its stage performances to movie theaters throughout the world. These popular and profitable telecasts are one of the few highbrow success stories of the past decade.

The Met, however, is still the most prestigious of cultural brand names. Most performing ensembles can't count on bringing in new revenue by telecasting their performances. For if there's anything that we've learned since the turn of the 20th century, it's that the market for opera, live theater and symphonic concerts, far from being unlimited, is shrinking. You can argue endlessly about why this is so, but you can't argue about what it means to the organizations that present such performances. They're in trouble, and unless they find ways to slash costs and lower ticket prices without significantly diminishing the quality of their artistic product, they will go to the wall. That means salary cuts and shorter seasons. It also means rethinking the business models of the past century.

Above all, it means that high-culture artists and organizations must work much, much harder to persuade an increasingly indifferent public that their wares are worth the price of the ticket. Yes, Shakespeare and Stravinsky are as good as they ever were, and the Philadelphia Orchestra, like the Met, is one of America's crown jewels. But no high-culture organization is too big—or too good—to fail.

—Mr. Teachout, the Journal's drama critic, writes "Sightings" every other Friday. He is the author of "Pops: A Life of Louis Armstrong." Write to him at tteachout@wsj.com.