LONDON—The U.K. tourist authority predicted Thursday that an extra 300,000 people would visit the U.K. in 2011, in part because of publicity surrounding the April nuptials of Prince William and Kate Middleton, but also because of economic recovery.

VisitBritain, the tourist authority, plans to roll out a global marketing campaign in April to publicize the U.K. through the royal wedding. It will target the U.S. in particular, one of the British tourist economy's most important markets. 

Americans, the highest spenders of all the overseas visitors to the U.K., are a key target audience for VisitBritain. A spokesman said the tourist authority had "lost ground" on American visitors in recent years and was hoping to regain it. About 2.9 million Americans visited the U.K. last year, spending almost £2.2 billion.

The tourist authority intends to promote not just London, but other British destinations, using the royal couple's story. That means emphasizing places like St. Andrews, the picturesque Scottish town where the pair met, and Anglesey, the costal area of North Wales, where Prince William is stationed as a Royal Air Force pilot, and where the couple are expected to spend the early days of their marriage. 

Even if the campaign doesn't encourage tourists to visit the U.K. during the nuptials, it may encourage them to vacation in Britain later in the year, particularly as the country gears up for another key tourist event, the 2012 Olympics, a spokesman for VisitBritain said. He didn't provide figures for how much the marketing campaign would cost. 

"Our aim is to get Britain on the radar of those who have never traveled here and also to reinvigorate our appeal in core markets such as the USA and near Europe," VisitBritain Chief Executive  Sandie Dawe said Thursday.

Tourism is crucial for the U.K., and is the country's fifth-largest industry, according to VisitBritain. The tourist authority expects 30 million inbound travelers to come to the U.K. next year, an estimated 1% rise from 2010; it expects them to spend £17.2 billion ($26.6 billion), a 2% rise from 2010 spending in nominal terms. 

Still, with the economic downturn pinching travel budgets, tourism to the U.K. hasn't recovered to prerecession levels. About three million more tourists came to the U.K. in 2006 than came this year. Tourists spent about £1.5 billion more in the U.K. in 2006 than they did in 2010, when adjusting for currency fluctuations. 