TOKYO— Tokyo Electric Power 
9501


0.14
%




Co. will accept a government role in its management and won't cap total compensation for those hurt by Japan's nuclear crisis, as part of an agreement for help paying potentially tens of billions of dollars in claims.

Tepco, as the company is known, said its president, Masataka Shimizu, notified the government Wednesday that it was accepting the conditions. 

The cabinet of Prime Minister Naoto Kan was to meet Thursday evening to discuss the final government plan, chief spokesman Yukio Edano said at a press briefing. Domestic media have said that the plan may include a ¥5 trillion ($62 billion) fund to pay for compensation to those affected by the accident Mr. Edano said no total amounts have yet been determined.

A key element accepted by Tepco is that there will be no ceiling on the total amount of compensation. Tepco and the government haven't released any estimates, but a private forecast from Merrill Lynch has said the total could be from ¥2.5 trillion (about $30 billion) to ¥4 trillion.

Tepco is required to seek broad participation in the effort. Goshi Hosono, special adviser to the prime minister on the nuclear issue, said this was a reference to debt holders and shareholders, among others, suggesting investors may be asked to accept losses.

Industry Minister Banri Kaieda said later he expected to see an active government role in managing the utility's future. "If the government gives assistance, it should become involved in the management in proportion to its stake in the company," he said at the news conference with Mr. Hosono.

The program will be overseen by a panel of experts made up of accountants, lawyers and business managers, Mr. Kaieda said. The panel will ensure asset sales and restructuring are properly executed by Tepco.

At the Fukushima Daiichi plant, Tepco said Thursday it has found that water levels at the No. 1 reactor's pressure vessel were lower than expected, with the partially melted fuel rods having fallen to a lower than normal position. But it saidit would increase the amount of water being injected into the reactor, but noted that with temperatures around 100 to 120 degrees Celsius, there was no risk of immediate the fuel overheating. It said that it may need to reconsider the current approach to injecting water into the unit.

On Wednesday, a prefecture just south of Tokyo said it had detected higher-than-permissible amounts of radioactive material in tea leaves collected May 9 from the city of Minamiashigara. The contamination is the first case in nearly a month in which an agricultural product has been found tainted outside the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant's home prefecture.

The last time any prefecture outside Fukushima reported contamination of an agricultural product was spinach from Ibaraki prefecture on April 12, said Japan's health ministry. In some prefectures, previously banned shipments of certain vegetables have resumed, as tests showed declines in contamination levels.

According to Kanagawa officials, a sample of tea leaves was found to contain 550 becquerels of cesium per kilogram in a first test and 570 becquerels in a repeated test. Since the discovery, the prefecture has suspended shipments of tea leaves from all of Kanagawa prefecture.

On Tuesday, as Tepco formally submitted its request for government aid, the company said it was experiencing funding problems that could hinder its plan to make payouts. Tepco has said it will undertake a large-scale restructuring, expected to include a sale of nonessential assets, such as real estate and securities holdings.

To ensure a steady supply of electricity, the government will allow Tepco to keep its key operating assets, such as distribution networks and various power-generating facilities, government officials have said.

Prime Minister Kan said Tuesday that an independent commission will be launched to investigate the cause of the accident. "No politicians will be spared from the inquiry, including Prime Minister Kan himself," he said.

—William Sposato  contributed to this article.

  