CHICAGO—The man behind the profanity-laced Twitter feeds purporting to be from  Rahm Emanuel as he ran for mayor of Chicago has just inked a book deal, the working title: "The F***ing Epic Twitter Quest of @MayorEmanuel."

  Dan Sinker, a journalism professor at Chicago's Columbia College and the former editor of a zine called Punk Planet, started the twitter account @MayorEmanuel on a lark on Sept. 27 as the former White House Chief of Staff began his campaign to succeed Mayor  Richard Daley.

The graphic, arrogant and at times touching satire quickly caught fire, as it pretended to chronicle the campaign from Mr. Emanuel's perspective. By the end of the first week, Mr. Sinker said he had 1,000 followers. At the campaign's culmination with Mr. Emanuel's blowout victory on Feb. 22, he had 38,000.

Mr. Sinker, 36-years old, wrote nearly 2,000 tweets in all, taking readers inside imaginary conversations with former senior White House adviser David Axelrod, failed Democratic Senate candidate  Alexi Giannoulias and a Teamster named Bruno. The conceit throughout was that Mr. Emanuel knew he was going to win the election and the entire race was a rather onerous dog-and-pony show. In one tweet, Mr. Sinker wrote: "Unless mother----ing Oprah mother----ing enters this race, it's going to be me against a field of dong-tards and s---eaters."

"It's a satire about modern-day politics and the kind of absurd things that happen," Mr. Sinker said. "The sheer amount of money and the photo ops are at the root of the satire—and then it sort of took on a life of its own."

In Mr. Sinker's telling, Mr. Emanuel does nothing without an overheated mixture of ego, id and anger.

"Mother***ing coffee, I'm going to drink you like there's no goddamn tomorrow," he wrote.

Two weeks before the election, Mr. Emanuel embraced the feed and offered $5,000 to the charity of the author's choice, if he would come forward. That increased the scramble to uncover the writer and Mr. Sinker said he started to get a little paranoid as he tweeted on his phone on the train during his commute. 

Mr. Sinker finally outed himself to the Atlantic magazine a few days after the election. The book deal with Scribner, a unit of Simon & Schuster, was announced Friday. A foreword will be written by Twitter co-founder Biz Stone.

