 Volkswagen's 2010 operating profit more than tripled to €7.1 billion ($9.9 billion) from €1.9 billion, fueled by fast-climbing sales in China and other emerging markets. 

The German auto maker also said preparations for the €5 billion ($6.95 billion) capital increase at Porsche Automobil Holding SE as part of the planned merger are "fully on schedule."

BMW increased its dividend for 2010 following a strong rise in sales and earnings, the latest sign that luxury-car makers staged a speedy recovery last year. BMW reported a surge in net profit to 3.23 billion euros ($4.5 billion) from 210 million euros in 2009.

 General Motors Chief Financial Officer Chris Liddell is leaving the company after 14 months, and will be succeeded by Treasurer Dan Ammann starting April 1 in the latest executive shakeup at the auto maker.  

Ferrari, controlled by industrial group Fiat, said it will start selling its sports cars in India by the spring of this year through a dealership each in New Delhi and Mumbai.

The Indian unit of Volvo Cars will start selling the S60 luxury sedan this month, with prices starting at 2.7 million rupees ($60,129). Volvo Cars is owned by Chinese auto maker Zhejiang Geely Holding Group, which bought it last year from Ford.

U.S. aviation regulators will restrict operation of Eclipse Aerospace's Eclipse jets to a maximum altitude of 9,000 meters in response to persistent engine problems on the light, twin-engine planes. 

Bank of America said it would start reducing loan balances for military borrowers who are struggling to pay their mortgages as they leave active duty. Also among the initiatives are further reductions in interest rates. 

 Spain's Supreme Court ruled that Banco Santander Chief Executive Alfredo Sáenz should be arrested and suspended from holding any position in banking for three months, though since he doesn't have a prior criminal record, he is unlikely to be arrested, said a court spokesman.  

BASF said it plans to sell its entire 10.3% shareholding in fertilizer and salt company K+S in a deal that could be worth around €1 billion ($1.4 billion) to "optimize" its balance sheet and reduce debt. 

Swire Pacific said 2010 net profit soared 75% to 38.25 billion Hong Kong dollars (US$4.91 billion), helped by a stronger contribution from its Cathay Pacific Airways affiliate, continued profit growth at its property unit, and revaluation gains on investment properties. 

 Valero is close to finalizing a deal to buy an oil refinery in southwest Wales from Chevron for $2 billion, marking the independent refiner's first foray into Europe, according to a person familiar with the situation. 

Lukoil Holdings, Russia's largest privately owned oil producer, said 2010 net profit rose 29% to $9.01 billion, boosted by higher oil prices and a one-off gain in the third quarter. 

 Macau casino mogul Stanley Ho and members of his family said they settled a two-month-long dispute over a controlling stake in his multibillion-dollar empire. A lack of details in a written statement issued by Ho left unknown who would control his casino company, SJM Holdings.  

Actor Charlie Sheen has sued Time Warner's Warner Bros. and "Two and a Half Men" co-creator Chuck Lorre for $100 million plus punitive damages over his termination on the hit television show.

Swatch Group said 2010 sales increased nearly 19% to 6.44 billion Swiss francs ($6.93 billion), while net profit rose almost 42% to 1.07 billion francs. 

Credit Suisse Group agreed to pay $70 million to settle a consolidated securities class-action lawsuit filed by investors alleging it misled investors about its mortgage exposure during a roughly one-year period that began more than four years ago. 

U.K. insurer Standard Life said 2010 net profit doubled to £432 million ($700 million) from £213 million in 2009, as a strong performance in the U.K. and higher revenue from its investment-management business more than made up for a rise in investment costs. 

Munich Re said its net profit in the fourth quarter fell 39% from a year earlier to €467 million ($649.3 million), owing to large bills for floods in Australia and a previous earthquake in New Zealand, as well as lower investment income.

The world's largest reinsurer also said full-year net profit declined 3.9% to €2.42 billion. 

Italian asset-management company Banca Generali said net profit for 2010 rose 30% to €82.2 million on higher fees and profits from trading. 

Schroders said it sees further growth across its businesses, as it reported a tripling in 2010 net profit to £311.2 million ($504.2 million), up from £95.7 million in 2009, driven by an asset base that grew from fund inflows and market performance. 

AIG is taking steps to protect nearly $65 billion in tax benefits, as the bailed-out insurer prepares to exit majority U.S. government ownership in the next two years. It adopted a plan that would deter any single investor from acquiring 5% of its stock, in an attempt to preserve the company's ability to offset its past losses against its future income to save on taxes.

Green Mountain Coffee Roasters announced an agreement to sell Starbucks coffee and Tazo tea brands for its Keurig Single-Cup brewing system starting this fall.

Tokyo Stock Exchange President Atsushi Saito said he will meet with Osaka Securities Exchange President Michio Yoneda to explore the possibility of integration, as Japan's two major stock exchanges agreed to bury the hatchet on their rivalry.

Cumulus Media agreed to buy rival U.S. radio broadcaster Citadel Broadcasting in a $2.5 billion cash-and-stock deal, following months of exclusive talks. The buyer, the second-largest owner of radio stations in the U.S., said last month it was in exclusive negotiations with No. 3 Citadel.

Three powerful Mexican billionaires, lambasting one another as "monopolists" and "duopolists," filed complaints against each other, ratcheting up a battle over the country's $35 billion telecommunication and broadcast markets. 

 Steelmakers who own nearly half of Mozambique-focused coking coal miner Riversdale Mining risk supply delays and dilution of their returns from the company if they fail to back a 4 billion Australian dollar (US$4.04 billion) bid by Rio Tinto, Riversdale's managing director said. 

Aluminum producer China Hongqiao Group, plans to raise US$1 billion in a second effort at an initial public offering in Hong Kong this month, a person familiar with the deal said, as it moves to seek funds before its regulatory approval expires at the end of this month. 

Wm. Morrison Supermarkets, the U.K.'s fourth-largest supermarket chain, said full-year net profit rose 5.7% to £632 million ($1 billion) and will invest £32 million for a 10% stake in New York Internet grocer FreshDirect in its first foray into the online food market.

Belgian supermarket operator Delhaize Group said fourth-quarter net profit rose 34% to €190 million ($264.2 million), as U.S. earnings improved in the fourth quarter despite intense competition and a tough economic climate.

 Rovio, the company behind mobile gaming sensation Angry Birds said it has raised $42 million from investors to facilitate a strategic expansion that could include a cartoon version broadcast on TV or online. 

 Sony plans to combine its videogame and consumer-electronics businesses and then promote Kazuo Hirai, the head of its PlayStation game business, to oversee the newly formed unit, making him a possible successor to company Chief Executive Howard Stringer. 

AOL laid off 20% of its workforce, according to a person familiar with the matter, eliminating 950 jobs in the U.S. and India as it struggles to resurrect its business.

Hewlett-Packard's board of directors is again under fire, this time from an influential shareholder advisory group that contends H-P's new chief executive, Leo Apotheker, was too actively involved in remaking the board. 