 The physicist and best-selling author Brian Greene makes a striking argument in his new book: that there may be countless universes out there, some with exact replicas of us. We invited the computer scientist David Gelernter to interview Mr. Greene about "The Hidden Reality: Parallel Universes and the Deep Laws of the Cosmos."  

 Mr. Gelernter: Your book is about the idea of a "multiverse"—that is, multiple universes. But that sounds impossible. If "universe" means "all there is," how can there be more than one?  

 Mr. Greene: Right, so how can you have multiple "everythings"? It sounds meaningless, like asking whether the number 9 is blue. But lots of recent research in physics has made the canvas of reality look much wider than we ever imagined. Our most refined cosmological theories indicate, for instance, that the big bang, which created our own universe, may not have been a unique event. There may have been (and may still be) various big bangs at far-flung locations, each one creating its own universe. Our "everything" may be just one enormous expanding bubble in a gigantic cosmic bubble bath of universes.

 In one of the theories that you describe, there are universes not only apart from ours but identical to it, moment-by-moment. This staggering idea is the result of an amazingly simple argument. Would you explain? 

In any finite region of space, matter can only arrange itself in a finite number of configurations, just as a deck of cards can be arranged in only finitely many different orders. If you shuffle the deck infinitely many times, the card orderings must necessarily repeat. Similarly, in an infinite expanse of space, particle arrangements must repeat too—there just aren't enough different particle configurations to go around. And if the particles in a given region of space the size of ours are arranged identically to how they are arranged here, then reality in that region will be identical to reality here. Except that maybe we'd be seeing the Jets and the Bears in the Super Bowl. 

 You write that, if parallel universes really exist, "there are many perfect copies of you out there in the cosmos, feeling exactly the same way. And there's no way to say which is  really  you." But I'd have no doubt which one is really me.  I am.  Those clones have no effect on my own self-awareness.  

Imagine that I line up all your duplicates and ask: "Which of you is the David Gelernter?" All of them would raise their hands, and none of them is being deceptive. Each of these beings really thinks that he is you. And each is fully justified in saying so. Each has had all of your experiences, and each has all your memories. My point is that none of the clones is any more justified than any other in having this thought. There is no "real" you that is somehow distinguished from the others. 

 So it depends on whether you're looking from within a mind or from outside?    

Right.

 Your book is called "The Hidden Reality." But where are these alternate universes "hidden"?  

In a number of these theories, the other universes constitute a part of reality we generally don't have access to. Universes arising from other big bangs, for example, lie outside of ours, so we can't visit or observe them. But another meaning of "hidden" has to do with the astonishing capacity of mathematics to reveal truths that otherwise aren't available to us. Over the centuries, monumental upheavals in science have emerged time and again from following the leads set out by mathematics. That's the strategy we still follow.

 Can we test these multiverse proposals? Most non-scientists will think, not unreasonably, that these ideas can't possibly be more than interesting guesses. 

Obviously, finding credible evidence is crucial. In some multiverse proposals, it's possible for us to interact with other universes. In the "cosmic bubble bath" scenario, for instance, universes can slam into one another, a collision that in our universe would generate ripples in the cosmic microwave background radiation (residual heat from the big bang). Astronomers are now using powerful telescopes to look for such signals. 

Remember, too, that a theory can be testable even if we don't have access to everything it describes. If a theory offers the most accurate and complete predictions about our own universe and also requires the existence of other universes, then confirmation of its predictions gives us confidence that other universes are out there. 

 Is there currently any experimental evidence for thinking that we're part of a multiverse? 

In the late 1990s, astronomical observations revealed that space appears to be filled with a uniform diffuse energy that is driving the universe to expand at an ever faster pace. Since this energy doesn't give off light, it has been dubbed "dark energy." When astronomers measured the amount of dark energy permeating space, they found a fantastically small number. Most physicists couldn't imagine having that tiny number emerge as the answer. They were really perplexed.

A multiverse framework has the capacity to cast this problem in a new light. Imagine a multiverse populated by a great many universes, each of which is permeated by a different amount of dark energy. In this context, trying to calculate the amount of dark energy is a fool's errand. It's like trying to explain the jacket size carried by a clothing store. Just as the store has jackets of many different sizes, the multiverse has universes containing many different amounts of dark energy.

 Can we explain why we happen to live in a universe with this particular amount of dark energy? 

Well, when you buy a jacket, you pick the size to ensure it fits. Similarly, we live in a universe in which the amount of dark energy fits our biological make-up. If the amount of dark energy were substantially different from what we've measured, the environmental conditions would be inhospitable to our form of life. So, while the multiverse contains universes with many different amounts of dark energy, we couldn't survive in most, explaining why we're in this universe and not another.

 But if we ask why the sky is blue, we expect an answer based on the scattering of different frequencies of light, not an answer that says, in effect, "on different planets the sky is many different colors, but we can only survive where the sky is blue."  

You've put your finger on why this kind of reasoning is controversial. But consider this: If I modify your example and ask, "Why is the Earth 93 million miles from the sun?" how would you answer? Unlike the case for the blue sky, there is no fundamental explanation. In this case, your approach is correct. Many different planets are many different distances from their host star; we find ourselves at this distance because if we were closer or farther away, the temperature would be hotter or colder, eliminating liquid water, an essential ingredient for our survival. Some questions can be addressed directly by fundamental physics, but others require that we take into account our own existence. 

 Do you find it thought-provoking that puny creatures like us, in an unfashionable, down-market galaxy, should be able to achieve such a profound understanding of the cosmos? Religious people account for this by saying that God made the cosmos and made man in His image—so man and the cosmos have a special relationship. What do you make of it? 

When Einstein said that "the most incomprehensible thing about the universe is that it's comprehensible," he was articulating a view that many physicists hold, including me. Invoking a "special relationship" to explain how we've been able to do this adds no insight, at least for me. For many in the world, religion can provide meaning: Why are we here? What's our purpose? But for explaining physical processes, science alone has proved to be our most trustworthy guide. 