HONG KONG –  Nomura Holdings Inc. said it has promoted  Tarun Jotwani to head its global markets, part of a broad management shakeup by the Japanese firm in a bid to bolster profits.

Nomura has also hired  Benoit Savoret as joint head of global equities and named  John Phizackerley as chief executive of Europe, Middle East and Africa.

With these appointments,  Jasjit "Jesse" Bhattal is putting his own stamp on wholesale banking at Nomura. His promotion to chief executive of the division as well as joint deputy president of the group was announced earlier this week and takes effect April 1.

"These appointments represent a critical next step in meeting the increasingly sophisticated needs of our global clients," Mr. Bhattal said in a statement.

The shakeup also represents the firm's gradually shifting emphasis from relatively low-margin cash trading, the Japanese brokerage's traditional strength, to riskier and potentially more profitable derivatives and structured products, people familiar with the matter said.

Mr. Jotwani replaces  Hiromasa Yamazaki as head of global markets. Mr. Yamazaki was a proponent of Nomura's global focus on cash equities, said one of the people. Mr. Yamazaki will oversee a new office advising the group's top management on strategy effective April 1.

Since it bought Lehman's Asian and European arms in the fall of 2008, Nomura—which has had a relatively low return on equity among investment banks—has sought to blend the high-risk, high-reward culture of the Wall Street firm with its own. Mr. Bhattal was Lehman's Asia-Pacific chief executive, a position he'd had since 2000; he joined the firm in 1993. Under his leadership, Lehman's revenues in Asia grew to $2.9 billion in 2007 from $425 million in 2001.

Nomura's management changes come after Japan's largest investment bank by revenue posted a net profit of 13.39 billion yen (US$162.2 million) for the quarter ended Dec. 31, short of analysts' consensus forecast. Nomura's overseas operations were unprofitable for the third straight quarter, losing 3.05 billion yen.

  Takumi Shibata, the outgoing wholesale chief executive, will remain chairman of the wholesale division and co-deputy president of Nomura Holdings. Mr. Shibata, who negotiated Nomura's acquisition of Lehman's Asian franchise with Mr. Bhattal, will take on a more ambassadorial role—leaving Mr. Bhattal with more decision-making autonomy said people familiar with the matter.

Mr. Jotwani, a U.S. citizen born in India, has risen swiftly through Nomura's ranks. Soon after Nomura's acquisition of the Lehman franchises he was made head of its global fixed-income business; in 2010 he was named chief executive of EMEA.

Mr. Savoret spent 11 years at Lehman, where he was chief operating officer in EMEA, head of European equities and prior to that head of Asia-Pacific equities. Mr. Phizackerley was joint chief administrative officer for Nomura's wholesale division.  Rachid Bouzouba, who was joint head of equities, is discussing alternative roles with Nomura.



