Forces loyal to Libyan strongman Moammar Gadhafi closed in on key rebel positions on Monday, threatening to strangle the revolt even as the U.S., Europe and the United Nations continued debating possible military responses.

Col. Gadhafi's forces advanced on Ajdabiya, the last major population center between government-controlled territory and the de facto rebel capital, Benghazi. Libyan government warplanes bombed a major roundabout, dropped leaflets urging loyalists to hunt down "traitors" and left some residents fearful that Col. Gadhafi may soon exact revenge on those who had turned on him.

"People are nervous—maybe he'll come into the city today, maybe tomorrow," fretted Hassan Atiallah, a 29-year-old oil company worker as he waited in Ajdabiya's hospital for his brother Salah, injured in Monday's bombing, to undergo surgery. "It will be a disaster—he will kill lots of people."

While the rebels battled to hang on, the United Nations Security Council again considered the imposition of a no-fly zone over Libya, with Britain, France and the Arab League leading the diplomatic campaign. 

U.K. Prime Minister David Cameron told British lawmakers that further inaction by the West could allow a "failed pariah state" to fester on Europe's southern border and threaten the Continent's security by "pushing people across the Mediterranean."

The Obama administration continued to take a cautious approach on backing any military intervention. But it did encourage the Libyan opposition by appointing Chris Stevens, formerly deputy chief of mission in Tripoli, as the U.S. liaison to Libya's rebel groups.

While conferring with European and Arab leaders in Paris, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton called for a "full and public discussion" over the options available to constrain the Col. Gadhafi. She met with Mahmoud Jibril, a leading Libyan opposition figure who requested "combat materials" from the U.S.

Ms. Clinton told Mr. Jibril that the U.S. would consider the request and would support the opposition beyond purely humanitarian assistance, but she didn't specify how, a U.S. official said. The official added that the Arab countries "need to take the lead on any military actions."

The White House reiterated that the U.S. hadn't decided whether a no-fly-zone was the best course of action. White House spokesman Jay Carney said the U.S. and allies have the "capacity" to do a no-fly zone, but added, "the issue is making sure that the policy decisions we make…are cognizant of what the goals are, whether they're achievable and what the impacts of that decision will be."

The Obama administration's unwillingness to throw its weight behind a no-fly zone is fueling criticism among Libyan dissidents and democracy activists. President Barack Obama, after formally calling for Col. Gadhafi to step down, has taken few steps to back this demand, they said. And the Libyan leader's ability to regain control over his country could have wider impact on the democracy wave spreading across the Middle East.

"I don't understand what they have in their minds at this stage," said Ali Errishi, an opposition leader who has met with U.S. officials in recent days. "Not to act at this stage is an abandoning of their responsibilities." 

Track events day by day.

See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

A look at the economic and political status of selected countries facing unrest in North Africa and the Middle East.

Lebanon, the only Arab country that is a Security Council member, began conferring on a draft resolution for the no-fly zone over the weekend, but it remained unclear Monday whether if it would get the necessary votes. The draft is based on a proposal approved by the Arab League.

China, facing its own civil unrest, was still cool to a no-fly zone that would support antigovernment rebels in a region in widespread tumult. China, this month's Security Council president, would also not want to jeopardize construction and oil contracts with the Gadhafi government, diplomats at the U.N. said. Russia, too, raised concerns on Monday.

"A number of colleagues asked legitimate questions," said Nawaf Salam, Lebanon's ambassador to the U.N. "Some can't be answered: Would it be effective, would it be enough, would it deter Gadhafi, or would it require military action?"

 Mr. Salam added that the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina illustrated that even a no-fly zone can't always stop massacres from taking part the ground. "It doesn't mean it was useless, but it was not enough," he said.

 In Libya, Col. Gadhafi's forces continued to retake ground from rebels who only weeks ago seem poised to overthrow the Arab world's longest-serving leader.

Ajdabiya stands a little more than an hour's drive from Benghazi. To the east, another desert highway that leads to the Egyptian border could allow Col. Gadhafi to encircle the rebel heartland, cutting off vital supply and communication lines with the outside world.

"Ajdabiya is a vital, key city, and we will defend it," said the revolutionary military's chief of staff, Gen. Abdel Fattah Younis, who served as Col. Gadhafi's minister of interior before defecting to the rebels last month.

Col. Gadhafi's forces inched toward Ajdabiya after inflicting a series of battlefield setbacks on the disorganized rebel forces in recent days, seizing crucial oil installations in the port city of Ras Lanuf and ousting the rebels from the oil town of Brega. 

Government warplanes, warships and missile launchers pounded rebel forces near Brega forcing them to pull back to approximately halfway between Brega and Ajdabiya, said Maj. Gen. Ahmed Gotrani, the rebel military's frontline commander. Brega remained contested and hadn't been secured by government forces, he insisted.

—Keith Johnson in Paris contributed to this article.

 Write to  Charles Levinson at charles.levinson@wsj.com and Stephen Fidler at stephen.fidler@wsj.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications  China is currently president of the United Nations Security Council. A previous version of this article incorrectly stated it was Lebanon.