 The British jazz singer talks to The Wall Street Journal Europe about how she starts her weekend. 

With the typical life of a performer, Clare Teal can be found most weekends on stage at venues across the U.K., working when others are resting. "Having a weekend off is a real rarity," she says. "I take my time off whenever possible—normally Mondays." 

Currently, Ms. Teal, who turns 38 Saturday, is busy promoting her newly released 10th album, "Hey Ho" (MUD Records), and preparing for summer performances at the Harrogate International and Glastonbury festivals.

In her downtime, the Yorkshire native likes to go running or enjoy a cocktail with friends. Of course, one of the downsides to her artist's life is that "if you want to go out and play on a Monday, nobody else is off because they are all at work," she says.

  How does your weekend start?  

On the rare occasion that we get the weekend off, it normally starts with a run in the morning in Bath, a beautiful Georgian town, where I live. The town is on a hill, so wherever you run, you are going to have to run uphill. It's horrible, but it's good. I go running with my partner Muddy. She drags me out kicking and screaming sometimes. Ideally we run about three miles.... It clears your head and gets rid of stress. 

  Do you listen to music when you run?  

No. We normally chat. We run the music business together. We have our own label and write songs together and she is also my tour manager. So when we run, we talk about the day-to-day stuff, planning what's coming up. 

  Even when relaxing, it sounds like you are working.  

I know. Very dull.

  What else do you get up to?  

We come back from running and have a nice, healthy breakfast: lots of fruit, seeds, muesli and soya milk. I am not very good at having free time. I feel quite guilty if I am not doing something. But then I enjoy what I do and I enjoy listening to music. So if I have the time to listen to somebody else rather than me, that's lovely.

  Do you spend time with friends?  

Because we are away most of the time, we try to catch up with friends and family whenever we can. Our friends are all over, but we have a lot of friends in Bath. It is a fantastic city, quite friendly. 

  Where do you like to hang out?  

The devastating news is that our favorite wine bar has just closed down. It's awful because now we are looking for something new. It was called 1453 but it had many names. It was run by a French and an English man, and they made great cocktails. It was the kind of place where you can walk in and Kevin, the bar manager, would say "What would you like to drink?" and I would say "I don't know. What do I want to drink?" and he would say "I think you want this" and then he would make something. I miss having a local, somewhere where you don't have to arrange to meet people, a place where you can just walk in and know people.

  And when you're not at the local?  

We also have dinner parties. I really enjoy cooking, although Muddy would tell you that I'm a really stressful person in the kitchen. I think I am doing well, but apparently I am unbearable. We have been recently cooking new salads with chorizo, potatoes and poached eggs on the top over spinach leaves and feta cheese. It's not rocket science, but I like making it. I find it relaxing.

  Do you have a favorite place in Bath?  

Whenever possible, we go out and see live music. There are a few very small venues where you can go and see some great people. I like the Chapel Arts Center, which can fit about 100 people. Whenever we have been touring, the last gig of the year is always there. 

  Musical friends  

We also have a lot of musical friends who don't live so far away. The guy we met about six years ago is Pee Wee Ellis, who was James Brown's and Van Morrison's musical director. He just turned 70, but we are great buddies. I go and hang out in his gigs, and he comes and hangs out in our gigs. I love hearing his stories. He lives near Bath and we all love going out for dinner. There's a Jamie Oliver restaurant which we like a lot.

 Write to  Javier Espinoza at javier.espinoza@wsj.com 