 Anthology Film Archives  32 Second Ave. (212) 505-5181  Saturday 

Every October, the Baltimore-based nonprofit Center for Home Movies sponsors national Home Movie Day, with festival screening events in some 50 cities across the country, showing off the strange, miraculous and mundane celluloid previously lurking in America's basements and attics. This weekend, CHM co-founder Dwight Swanson decided to look at the greater legacy and history of home movies. "Amateur Night" is his curatorial compilation of 16 short films housed in such archives as the Nebraska State Historical Society, the Harvard Film Archive and the Nixon Presidential Library and Museum. 

The films come in a variety of formats, from the ubiquitous, genre-staple Super 8 to such long-lost gauges as 9.5 and 28mm. Everything was processed at New York's Cineric film lab and blown up to 35mm, with sound tracks that accommodate vocal commentaries or musical scores that have been added to the films.

"I wanted to show the diversity and range of the home movie," Mr. Swanson said, "something that sounded interesting or unique in some way. I wanted the films to stand on their own and not require additional context." 

It's an often magical array, reaching all the way back to 1915 for "Naushon Sheep Drive," shot by Alexander Forbes on the island his family owned off the Massachusetts coast. There are behind-the-scenes glimpses of 20th-century icons (Smokey Bear, Alfred Hitchcock) and intimate encounters with history, including newsman Louis C. Harris's 1953 document "Atom Bomb," which captures Operation Upshot-Knothole in the Nevada desert, where a 16-kiloton atomic bomb was detonated. The Augusta (Ga.) Chronicle editor died in 1978, at age 66, of cancer. 

There are some other remarkable encounters, such as Richard Nixon's visit to an airfield in Idaho Falls, Idaho, in 1971. As the Super 8 cameras of various staff members (including John Ehrlichman and H.R. Haldeman) roll, the president shakes hands with a throng of local high-school kids, decked out in bold red outfits and broad grins. "We are Americans," they sing in unison, "and we hope that you are, too!"

One of the greatest hits of Home Movie Day returns for a victory lap of sorts. Shown in 2007 for the first time in a decade, "Our Day" is a 1938 production made by Lebanon, Ky., newsman Wallace Kelly. He directed his family in a charming everyday drama, illustrating the simple joys of Southern living. In the audience was Dan Streible, then a member of the National Film Preservation Board, who campaigned to name "Our Day" to the National Film Registry the same year. This version of the film features a delicate, introspective score by Kentucky composer and violinist Rachel Grimes.



 reRun Gastropub Theater  147 Front St., Brooklyn, (718) 716-9110  Friday-Jan. 27 

Naked Twister, anyone? It's tempting to call this micro-budget ensemble comedy about young bohemians making sexual and emotional discoveries while navigating life in Brooklyn yet another example of … exactly that. "Gabi" is more deliberate, though, as writer-director-actor Lawrence Michael Levine deploys a poised eye and witty dialogue that sticks like a needle left sitting on a cushion. He's Sam, a shaggy, striving painter whose summer is turned sideways when sister Gabi (Sophia Takal) arrives for an extended visit from college (Oberlin, of course). Gabi, a "post-Fluxus feminist" performance artist, is an anarchic innocent who upends Sam's crowded household as he juggles a needy girlfriend (Brooke Bloom) and a former flame (Amy Seimetz) who can boost his art career. Wisely observant of human nature as it bounces between the leads, "Gabi" evokes Woody Allen with a more generous heart (and a lot more casual nudity).

 Museum of the Moving Image  3601 35th Ave., Queens  (718) 777-6888  Saturday-Sunday 

It was the culmination of French cinema pioneer Marcel L'Herbier's career as a director of silent films, a grand finale before moving into the sound era. "L'Argent," a 1928 adaptation of Emile Zola's anti-capitalist novel, was updated from the 1860s to contemporary Paris. There, rival bankers scheme to undo each other amid glittering Art Deco sets that helped account for the massive 5 million franc budget. The film's 180 minutes were restored by France's Centre National de la Cinématographie and then unspooled at the Telluride Film Festival in 2009. This weekend's presentations reunite the film with its accompanists from that event, the Mont Alto Orchestra. The six musicians in the Colorado-based ensemble will perform an original score.

 Japan Society  333 E. 47th St., (212) 715-1258  Friday 

Japanese cinema at its most visceral, the films in this ongoing series plunge into the dark, disturbing depths of madness and damnation. This month's selection most literally so. "Hell" ("Jigoku"), from 1960, sits very near the foundations of the Japanese horror film. Director Nobuo Nakagawa charts the downward spiral of a theology student after a hit-and-run accident kills a drunken, two-bit yakuza. Nakagawa's stark and gripping imagery has the punch of a surrealist noir, hypnotizing with poetic visual flourishes before diving into the fiery, forsaken pit of the title—which is realized with an extreme flair for the grotesque and hallucinatory. There's no room here for the symbolic subtlety of his peers, as the filmmaker goes where no one—at least in 1960—had gone before.

 Film Society of Lincoln Center  165 65th St., (212) 875-5601  Friday-Saturday 

Iconoclast auteur William Richert visits this weekend for a retrospective that features the director's cuts of his four films, including the New York premiere of "The Man in the Iron Mask." That 1998 effort went head-to-head with the version of the Alexander Dumas saga starring Leonardo DiCaprio, and was further complicated by the sudden death of River Phoenix, whom the director had hoped to cast. Instead, Mr. Richert and his son Nicholas took the key roles in the contemporized Three Musketeers tale. "There are no other indie musketeer epics besides this one," the filmmaker has said. He'll field questions about the work, as he will at screenings of 1979's "Winter Kills," 1980's "Success" ("The American Success Company") and the autobiographical "Aren't You Even Gonna Kiss Me Goodbye?" ("A Night in the Life of Jimmy Reardon") from 1988.