TOKYO—Is Japan the Greece of Asia? The Japanese bond market's muted reaction Thursday to a lower credit rating indicates few investors seem worried about that possibility—for now—since Tokyo effectively self-finances its debt issuance domestically. The point of no return may well come, but such a crisis still appears to be at least a few years away.

Japan's debt problem is, by far, the worst in the developed world—expected to surpass 200% of gross domestic product this year, according to some projections. That's well above Greece's 137%. 

But unlike Greece and the other countries suffering from market runs on their sovereign borrowing, Japan has been largely immune to the dictates of global hedge funds and other demanding investors who look askance at the razor-thin yields offered for Japanese government-issued debt. 

The day of reckoning is expected only when buying from domestic investors diminishes, or is overwhelmed by an even larger rising tide of Japanese government bonds, or JGBs.

Since the early 1990s—when Japan moved from fiscal surplus to deficits—Tokyo has been able to fund its expenditures by tapping into the country's $17 trillion in savings, much of which is channeled through currency risk-averse domestic institutional investors into JGBs. While foreign investors make up an average of 60% of trades on the Tokyo Stock Exchange, just 6.4% of Japan's government debt is held outside of the country, according to Bank of Japan data.

That has allowed the Japanese government to roll over its existing debt and issue new obligations without paying much need to global demand and supply considerations.

In that sense, a lower credit rating is a largely symbolic act because it is unlikely to dissuade Japanese institutional investors from soaking up new government-issued debt. For them, JGBs remain attractive relative to investments with potentially greater risk, especially as deflation has increased the real return of the bonds, even with nominally low rates. 

"This downgrade by S&P also shouldn't have any serious impact," said  Chotaro Morita, head of Japan fixed income strategy research at Barclays Capital Japan Limited. "Ratings haven't been such a critical factor for the market also for the major reason that money flows have simply continued to be so supportive of JGB demand."

However, Japan may not be able to count on that continuing in the coming years. Spending is likely to soar even faster, as a rapidly aging population leads to increased outlays in the form of rising payments for pensions, health care and other government entitlements. At the same time, the country's savings pool—the funds used to buy the JGBs—is being drained by a combination of more retirees and fewer workers due to a low birth rate. 

Based on current trends, Japan's gross public debt load could exceed total household financial assets by as soon as 2015, according to a working paper issued last year by International Monetary Fund economist  Kiichi Tokuoka. "Although these results do not imply any specific turning point for public debt financing, they suggest that if current trends continue, domestic financing could become more difficult toward the mid-2010s, placing a premium on other sources of financing, including from overseas," the paper stated.

In announcing its decision to lower Japan's long-term sovereign credit ratings to double-A-minus from double-A, Standard & Poor's cited, among other issues, that "total social security-related expenses now make up 31% of the government's fiscal 2011 budget, and this ratio will rise absent reforms beyond those enacted in 2004."

Should Japan find itself in need of capital from beyond its own shores, its diminished credit rating could force it to offer higher rates of return in order to attract foreign investors. That would raise the government's own borrowing costs and also those of Japanese companies and individuals as local banks follow the government's lead. 

Japan's debt financing reached a record level in fiscal year 2009, which ended March 2010, when the value of the bonds it issued exceeded expected tax revenue by some 17 trillion yen ($ 21 billion), according to a recent report by Credit Suisse. That report estimated that net borrowing in the fiscal year ended last March alone totaled 11% of the country's gross domestic product.

"Persistent and large fiscal deficits might destabilize financial markets at some point as confidence about the country's fiscal sustainability eventually deteriorates meaningfully," the report said, noting that might result in a major sell-off of JGBs and the yen.

In addition to Japan's ongoing funding needs, its debt-servicing payments also have been increasing at a fast pace relative to its stagnant tax base. In fiscal 2010, debt service accounted for 22.4% of total expenditures, according to the Japanese Ministry of Finance. 

As long as economic growth rates remain low, economist say Japan cannot expect tax coffers to fill the gap at current rates. 

  Brendan Brown, the London-based head of economic research at Mitsubishi UFJ Securities, said he sees the likelihood that Japan will be able to put its fiscal house in order "as a 25%-20% scenario." Instead, he predicts the Japanese government is most likely pursue an inflationary policy that uses a devalued currency to pay off its debt load—something that would prove painful to Japanese savers living on fixed incomes. 

Japanese policy makers have shown few signs of willingness to wean the country from its debt habit. They face an unpalatable choice of drastically cutting non-discretionary spending or raising taxes to unprecedented levels—or some combination of the two. 

While Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan has acknowledged the country's dire fiscal outlook, his Democratic Party of Japan swept into power in late 2009 after promising to expand entitlement payments and enact targeted tax cuts. In December, the cabinet approved a proposal for a corporate tax cut without offsetting the loss of revenue and then decided on a record debt issuance for the coming fiscal year that starts in April.

Whether the government is able to deliver on recently enunciated commitments to belt-tightening will be closely watched by the investors in yen-denominated securities. The Kan administration has been floating trial balloons for proposals to increase Japan's sales tax and earmark those proceeds to fund rising entitlement costs. There has also been an active debate in Japanese policy circles about raising the age at which retirees can start collecting pension payments in the future.

"The crucial period will be the next several months to see if the ruling Democratic Party of Japan and Prime Minister Naoto Kan can make progress with the pension and tax system reforms they have proposed," said  Thomas Byrne, credit officer for Asia & Middle East in the sovereign risk unit of Moody's Investor Service Inc.

While those measures are widely views as necessary steps, they will amount to just a small down payment on Japan's looming debt load. 

—William Sposato contributed to this article.