NEW YORK—The Federal Reserve intervened in the currency market, buying dollars and selling yen as part of a coordinated effort by Group of Seven nations to weaken Japan's currency. 

It was the first coordinated currency intervention since 2000 and started overnight in Tokyo when the Bank of Japan initiated a promised "battle" against currency speculators by the Ministry of Finance. The Bank of England, Bundesbank, Banque de France and Bank of Italy all then intervened during European trading, and the Bank of Canada also acted.

Nomura Securities estimated ¥2 trillion ($25.34 billion) for the BOJ intervention and another $5 billion across Europe. Those coordinated efforts helped send the dollar shooting up as high as ¥82 from ¥78.93 late Thursday in New York.

The initial intervention from the Fed came right at 8 a.m. EDT, the start of the New York trading day. 

Traders in New York estimated that orders were placed in mostly $50 million blocks with multiple banks and that the Fed likely traded about $600 million.

The intervention showed the world's central banks stood with the BOJ in a coordinated effort to push back against speculators who had ridden down the dollar against the yen to record levels early Thursday.

The strength of the yen has been a long-time problem for Japanese officials even before this week, as it makes it difficult for its high-tech and auto components export-driven economy to compete in the global market. Japan's strong currency has contributed to deflationary conditions that have proven hard to shake for the world's third-largest economy.

The question market participants were asking themselves Friday following the intervention was how long the dollar will remain propped up against the yen, said analysts.

One of the reasons why interventions have been typically frowned upon as a form of market manipulation is that they have typically not worked for long. 

The dollar spiked to ¥81.76 in the first minute of trading in New York, after the Fed intervened but it then pulled back to trade around ¥80.90 the rest of the Friday session. 

"It's human nature to test the limits, but I do think they will respect this, as they [definitely] provoked a response [on Thursday]," said  Michael Woolfolk, senior currency strategist at BNY Mellon in New York, about speculators.

But  Alan Ruskin, head of G10 foreign exchange strategy at Deutsche Bank in New York, said there will be "lots of probing of central banks' will power" long term.

Nomura analysts Friday said from the BOJ's perspective an ideal dollar target level is between ¥82.70 and ¥83. 

As a prelude to Friday, the dollar plunged to a record low of ¥76.25 early in Thursday's global session, shattering the previous low of ¥79.75. 

The yen had been strengthening as traders bet Japanese insurers and corporations would need to repatriate yen to help pay for rebuilding the country after last week's major earthquake and tsunami. 

Meanwhile, the euro also climbed Friday to its highest level this year against the dollar, as traders added to bets on expected interest-rate increases in the euro zone. 

The single currency began ticking higher after European Central Bank President  Jean-Claude Trichet said the bank was "extremely attentive" on anchoring inflation expectations, a signal that rate increases could be coming shortly. The euro subsequently rose as high as $1.4184.

Late Friday, the euro was at $1.4168 from $1.4022 late Thursday. The dollar was at ¥80.76 versus ¥78.95 late Thursday. The euro was at ¥114.41 from ¥110.70. The U.K. pound was at $1.6224 from $1.6139. The dollar was at 0.9030 Swiss franc from 0.8990 franc.

The ICE Dollar Index, which tracks the U.S. dollar against a trade-weighted basket of currencies, was at 75.57 from 75.968. 

—Javier E. David, Neil Shah and Erin McCarthy contributed to this article.

 Write to  Stephen L. Bernard at stephen.bernard@dowjones.com 