 STEVE: "You're so lucky," a colleague said after hearing of my plan to travel with Levi for six months. "I wish I could afford to do that."

Me too.

I still have doubts whether we can afford this. I'll only know whether our investment in the trip was worth it long after Levi and I get back home in July after traveling overland from Uganda through East Africa and the Middle East on our quest to trace early history and experience modern cultures.

We managed to set aside money for the trip by defying several personal-finance rules: We decided to borrow against our future, close certain options later in life and not delay gratification.

Karen and I decided we could tap investments we'd squirreled away for retirement -- not our 401(k)s (those are sacrosanct), but a little extra we'd hoped would fund travel when we're 70 years old. Some of that is better spent now with Levi than on ourselves later; we can just sit in our rockers a little longer than we planned 20 years from now.

Next, we refinanced our mortgage. Lucky us, we lowered our rate several points in November, pulled cash out of the house for the first time in our lives, and now have a large sum as an emergency fund while Levi and I are gone -- with almost the same monthly payment. Yes, that means we'll have less equity when we sell the house.

We fixed up our basement "suite" -- once our teenagers' bohemian bedroom and den -- so Karen can take in a paying boarder and make up for some of my lost wages.

Then -- the clincher -- I made sure I had a job to come back to. No matter how ruinous the trip is financially, I can plunge back in and get us back in the black if we tighten our belts.

Levi and I are doing our part on the spending side. We'll travel cheaply. Our first hostel in Uganda charges about $6 a night for dorm beds. We'll splurge on a three-day camping safari in the Serengeti but then do penance by taking an overnight bus to Dar Es Salaam, instead of flying.

Still, this trip will cost us tens of thousands of dollars in spending and lost wages. Shouldn't I wait until we can better afford it?

I've taken inspiration from one of my favorite travel-philosophy books: "Vagabonding: An Uncommon Guide to the Art of Long-Term World Travel," by  Rolf Potts. Almost anyone can vagabond who makes it a priority, Mr. Potts writes, saying he's met long-term travelers who left jobs as bankers, waiters, policemen, construction workers and strippers.

"We'd love to drop all and explore the world outside, we tell ourselves, but the time never seems right," he writes. "Vagabonding is about gaining the courage to loosen your grip on the so-called certainties of this world."

 LEVI: "You're so lucky," one friend said to me after hearing about my plan to travel with Dad for six months. Another, hearing I was dropping out of school, asked: "How can you do that?"

Easy: I'm going to be taking four courses at an online school my high school uses for cases like mine. At first, Dad and I had doubts about how the online school would work -- especially for biology, where labs are so important. And for English, would I have to lug several books on our travels?

I got started on the Web classes early, and it was better than we thought. For English, most of the readings are short stories or poetry on the website. For biology, there are labs with simple ingredients we can get ourselves.

I'll clearly lose something by not being in class, and the online school may be a little too easy. I did a history lesson to test it, and discovered that I could ace the quiz after every lesson simply by skimming the reading. (Of course, I would never do that in real life; I was just seeing if I could.)

What I lose by not being in class, though, I'll probably more than make up for by the education of travel.

Many of the people I talk to about my trip also ask me about my safety. Some of the countries we are going to have a history of violence -- some even in the past few years -- so their concern is understandable.

But Dad and I have been doing our research. We have studied our most likely path and made sure it is safe by asking fellow travelers and checking travelers' websites. We also have many friends -- and friends of friends -- along the way, so we can contact them about safety.

And many of my friends say the same thing Dad's colleague did: "I wish I could afford that."

We're definitely being as frugal as possible. We're packing light -- just one big pack and a daypack each. And we've tried to buy everything as cheaply as possible, such as used packs, military surplus and used sleeping bags.

The man at the surplus store told us a valuable piece of advice. "Only take things you're willing to lose or get stolen," he said. "Don't get attached to your possessions when you travel."

We couldn't skimp on a couple of things. To do my online studies, I don't want to depend on computer cafes, so we bought a new $350 netbook. We also spent about $500 for visas, and more for all the inoculations we needed.

Everything is set up and ready. The only thing left now is to get on the plane. Dad and I still aren't sure how we pulled it off.

—Steve Yoder is chief of The Wall Street Journal's San Francisco bureau. His son Isaac is 19 years old and a college sophomore. His son Levi is 15 years old and a high-school sophomore. Email: yoder&son@wsj.com 