Tom Coughlin couldn't talk smack if he tried.

He's 64, he's absurdly disciplined and his most treasured tenet is "talk is cheap." Yet there he was, on one knee in the cramped visitors' locker room at FedEx Field.

The season was over and the Giants had just dispatched the Redskins—but still fallen short of the playoffs. Mr. Coughlin looked at his players, told them they had accomplished a lot by finishing 10-6. Then his voice went up a notch as he addressed the many critics of his team who were not in the room. 

"A 10-win season in the NFL, OK?!," he says. "They can kiss my a--, OK?! They can line up and kiss my a--. It's not an easy thing to do!"

The clip of the ostensibly private scene, making the rounds Thursday after its airing on Showtime's "Inside the NFL," became an immediate talker. Former Giants quarterback Phil Simms practically giggled as he discussed it and the football universe collectively wondered where the old school, rigid, un-Rex Ryan went.

The football universe outside the Giants, that is. 

Shortly after that moment on Sunday, co-owner and team president John Mara announced that Mr. Coughlin would be back to coach the Giants and be offered a contract extension, because the Giants know who they have—and who Mr. Coughlin can be.

Yes, the grandfather of 10 can be amusingly profane: Back in November, as the Giants finished whipping the Seahawks 41-7, running back Brandon Jacobs saw a fan with a sign reading, "41-7—is that all you got?" Mr. Jacobs asked for the sign, showed it to Mr. Coughlin and his coach offered a suggestion for the sign and the fan.

"He's a funny guy," Mr. Jacobs said then.

Yes, that's a chip on his shoulder: After that horrid collapse against the Eagles, quarterback Eli Manning called a team meeting and reminded the Giants they're at their best when their backs are against the wall. 

Later that week, Mr. Coughlin acknowledged that probably comes from him, that he's at his best when someone's doubting him. "What's sweeter than proving the detractors wrong?" his smile wordlessly said then. 

Yes, he really is proud of his players: The part of Mr. Coughlin that will dance with a 16-year- old cancer patient and extract a promise that she'd go to prom showed up in the locker room this year. Maybe it was twice being stranded by snow together. Maybe it was all the years he's had with these players. Maybe he's just getting soft.

Whatever it was, kicker Lawrence Tynes said Mr. Coughlin was both human and downright fatherly this year. Mr. Coughlin was encouraging. He repeatedly told his players he was proud of them and twice in the season's final five days, he said he loved them.

"I love playing for him," running back Ahmad Bradshaw said.

OK, so Mr. Coughlin has proved he has his players' backs. Here, in this offseason, is how these Giants can show they have his.

 Eli Manning: Three days before the start of training camp, Mr. Coughlin gamely played along with The Wall Street Journal's slam book-style series of queries. In one, he was asked who'd make sure practice happened if the coaches were locked in a closet. His answer? His quarterback.

This offseason, Mr. Manning very likely gets to justify that response. If there is a lockout, the only way the Giants' young receivers make progress is if their quarterback demands it. There were too many wrong routes, too much miscommunication and too much to be left un-addressed if labor strife steals OTAs and minicamps.

 Matt Dodge: Mr. Coughlin chased down the rookie punter after his first punt at Green Bay just to give him a pat on the back. Now that he knows the drills, the non-kicking practice and the film study that goes into being an NFL punter, Mr. Dodge must do it. 

All year long Mr. Coughlin stuck with him. As general manager Jerry Reese says he's not opposed to finding a veteran punter to provide some competition, Mr. Dodge can reward Mr. Coughlin's faith in him.

 Jerry Reese: Find Mr. Coughlin a game-changing linebacker. Asked about this group Monday, Mr. Reese used the word "steady." And yes, middle linebacker Jonathan Goff was steady. The rest of the linebacking play was inconsistent, impressive in spurts, so-so in others. 

Eleven-year veteran Keith Bulluck said he'd rather be on a boat than play in the spot duty he saw this year. If former second-round pick Clint Sintim isn't an every-down player, either, then it's time to find one. 

 Steve Smith, Domenik Hixon, Mathias Kiwanuka: Get healthy and re-sign. Mr. Smith (knee surgery) is Mr. Manning's security blanket, the receiver who makes the same reads as his quarterback and who converts third downs like a currency bank. 

The Giants ranked 31st in kickoff returns and punt returns. Return man and receiver Mr. Hixon (knee surgery) went down in minicamp. Monday he said he's better than he was before. 

Mr. Kiwanuka (neck) was the Giants most versatile—and best—defensive player before getting hurt. Like Mr. Smith and Mr. Hixon, he has no contract and won't get an offer from the Giants until there is a new collective bargaining agreement. But like the other two, when that does happen, he'll hopefully be in shape to at least sign a one-year deal to, as Mr. Reese said, re-establish his value. 

All that and maybe this time next year, Mr. Coughlin will be talking about kicking a-- instead of kissing it. 

 Write to  Aditi Kinkhabwala at aditi.kinkhabwala@wsj.com 