KABUL—A growing insurgency in northern Afghanistan could lead to renewed opium cultivation in provinces where the crop has been eliminated, a senior United Nations official warned.

Jean-Luc Lemahieu, Afghanistan representative of the U.N. Office on Drugs and Crime, said at least two provinces were now "vulnerable to relapse" into opium production this year.

The U.N. estimates that the Taliban reaps about $125 million a year in opium profits, an important source of funding for the insurgency. Afghanistan produces some 90% of the world's opium.

Nearly a decade of Western-backed counternarcotics programs have reduced the number of Afghan provinces where most of the country's opium is cultivated to seven from 30, all of them in Afghanistan's south and west. 

Mr. Lemahieu said the northern provinces of Kunduz, Takhar and possibly Kapisa and Ghor could see a return to opium cultivation. Renewed production in the once-peaceful northern provinces of Kunduz and Takhar would represent a major setback.

The Taliban have greatly expanded their presence in northern Afghanistan over the past year, taking advantage of a sparse coalition presence there. The Taliban often provide seeds and loans to farmers growing opium and collect the crop once it has been cultivated.

"In times of conflict, opium is the Afghan currency. It's not heavy and you can carry it with you. Prices continue to rise, and just a few kilos is a Swiss bank account for a farmer," said Mr. Lemahieu. "Compared to pomegranates or wheat, opium has a tremendous shelf life, well over five years; try storing a bucket of fruit for that long."

A jump in opium prices, partially caused by a blight last year, is creating an added incentive for farmers to grow opium poppy instead of legitimate crops. The price for a kilo of dry opium rose to $213,000 in November 2010, tripling from a year earlier when a kilo yielded $79,000, according to the U.N. office.

Afghanistan's Ministry of Counternarcotics said the north's vulnerability wasn't surprising given the lure of the steep rise in opium prices. 

"It's definitely a major concern for the ministry," said ministry spokesman Samer Abdul Qayyum. "We are expecting that the international community will support our programs and policies more this year to help sustain opium-free provinces" by building the capacity of Afghanistan's counternarcotics police. 

The U.S. Embassy in Kabul wasn't available to comment.

Any solution to Afghanistan's opium problems needs regional cooperation, the U.N. drug office says, to clamp down on smuggling routes. Land-locked Afghanistan is bordered by Central Asian states, China, Pakistan and Iran.

A new UNODC-supported intelligence sharing office, being established in Tehran, aims to encourage Iranian, Afghan and Pakistani officials to share information and run joint operations to clamp down on cultivation and smuggling.