WASHINGTON -- Republican lawmakers are stepping up attacks on the Obama administration's offshore drilling policies as crude-oil and gasoline prices rise.

With oil prices hovering near $90 a barrel Friday, reaching a 27-month high earlier in the week, Republicans and energy lobbyists say the administration should take steps to increase domestic production.

Testifying Friday before the Senate Budget Committee, Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke said the Fed is "closely watching" gasoline prices and said higher prices could hurt economic growth. 

Gasoline prices have increased 15% in the last 12 months, with a gallon of regular gasoline costing $3.07 as of Monday, up from $2.67 this time last year, according to the Energy Information Administration. 

Americans used about 313 million gallons of regular gasoline a day in 2009, which means the recent increase drained about $45.7 billion from consumers' pockets in the last year. 

Since the April 20 Deepwater Horizon oil explosion in the Gulf of Mexico, the Obama administration has slowed the pace of issuing new drilling permits, blocked access to the Atlantic coast and eastern Gulf for drilling until 2017, and developed tougher safety regulations for the offshore drilling industry. 

"In response to the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico, the Obama administration has worked to make sure responsible permitting and development continues, while also ensuring we have unprecedented safety standards and proper oversight," said Kendra Barkoff, a spokeswoman for the Interior Department. 

The department also launched an environmental review of lease sales planned for this year and next -- a move that could force it to cancel one or more of those sales, in which oil companies bid for valuable exploration rights. 

Republican lawmakers and oil industry lobbyists say the administration's moves are contributing to higher oil and gas prices.

"The American people will look to Congress and the administration to foster more American energy production," said Rep.  Doc Hastings (R., Wash.), chair of the House of Representatives' Natural Resources Committee. "Unfortunately, the Obama administration has been responsible for a significant decline in domestic oil and natural gas from federal lands and waters." 

Rep.  Fred Upton (R., Mich.), chair of the House's powerful energy committee, said earlier this week that Republicans are likely to hold hearings on the administration's new five-year drilling plan, which prevents oil companies from accessing certain parts of federal waters for the next six years. 

"We've got problems ahead of us that we've got to be prepared for," Mr. Upton told reporters Tuesday, during a lunch hosted by the American Petroleum Institute. 

Mr. Upton also supports drilling in Alaska's Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, writing in a Dec. 6 letter to President Obama that advances in drilling technology make it possible to drill while "preserving the sanctity of nature." 

In 2008, when oil prices climbed above $140 a barrel, the Bush administration responded by lifting a years-long drilling ban on areas of the Outer  Continental
CTTAY


-0.69
%




 Shelf. Congress, meanwhile, took a similar step and allowed a legislative ban to expire. 

Environmental groups defend the administration's recent attempts to improve safety standards in the Gulf of Mexico and to restrict access to other parts of federal waters. 

"The fact that the oil industry would try to exploit peoples' fear of increased cost of living [expenses] to try to access more areas for more of profit to themselves is shocking and shameful," said  Regan Nelson, senior oceans advocate for the Natural Resources Defense Council. 

A commission investigating the Deepwater Horizon spill said earlier this week that the disaster highlighted "systemic" flaws in the oil industry's practices that could lead to another spill. 

"We have a brand new Congress coming fresh from outside D.C. and they have seen what the economy is doing," said Randall Luthi, president of the offshore energy group National Ocean Industries Association and former head of the Interior Department's offshore-drilling agency. "I think the new members are going to be particularly sensitive to [gasoline prices]." 

 Write to  Tennille Tracy at tennille.tracy@dowjones.com 