British civil servants, in their struggle to sort out the country's debt woes, are heading to the cellar.

In a move the U.K. government believes will save it tens of thousands of pounds a year, the Foreign and Commonwealth Office is opening its 100-year-old wine vaults for sale. The government plans to sell some of the bottles currently in its collection and to flip for a profit some crates it buys in the future.

The move is one of many eccentric steps that state-financed bodies are considering to reduce a budget deficit that still stands at about 8% of gross domestic product. One cash-strapped council in central England wants to use hot air generated from a crematorium to heat a local swimming pool. A London council is planning to charge children $4 for access to a playground. And in east England, the Norfolk County Council is ending subsidized diapers for new parents.

Last summer, the U.K. Treasury even asked the British public for their ideas on how best to cut costs. Ideas included limiting the amount of tea that civil servants drink and selling the county of Cornwall to the U.S.

The wine announcement came after a nearly yearlong review into whether the government's well-stocked cellar, used to entertain heads of state and other dignitaries, is "appropriate to the contemporary environment." The U.K. has mounted an aggressive program of fiscal tightening, raising taxes and cutting spending for public services, from libraries to the British army.

"I seriously considered abolishing the cellar, but all the evidence shows that we will save the taxpayer money by keeping the cellar and reforming it so that wine purchases are self-funded through sale," said  Henry Bellingham, a Foreign and Commonwealth Office minister.

Once, all government departments had their own wine vault, but they were handed over to this ministry about a century ago. Now, the office has decided to "conduct targeted sales of high-value stock in order to pay for future purchases," said a spokeswoman. That will see wine experts dipping into the 39,500-bottle-strong vault in the cellar of a 19th century government-owned townhouse in central London.

This year, the Ministry hopes to sell about £50,000 ($81,400) of wine to fund the same amount in new purchases.

With a cash-strapped public crying foul at any signs of government extravagance, Britain's wine list has already been under pressure. The amount spent last year, £49,000, is a third of the booze bill in 2008, the year the financial crisis got going.

The cellar contains an impressive collection of vintage Champagne and aged reds from the top estates in Bordeaux, according to an inventory released under a recent Freedom of Information request. There is a bottle of Chateau Petrus 1978, described on the inventory as one to "drink slowly" and on "v. special occasions only." There is a bottle of Chateau Lafite Rothschild 1988, now valued at more than £10,000 a case, described as having an "elusive perfume."

A magnum of Krug 1964, from one of the finest houses in Champagne, has a value of more than £3,000. The collection's oldest bottle is an 1878 Grand Fins Bois Cognac. Some wine critics say it is an impressive collection. "This is good kit—the government doesn't skimp," said wine critic  Margaret Rand.

Flying the flag for England's increasingly respectable wine industry is a half-case from Surrey's Denbies vineyard and Chapel Down in Kent.

Downing Street's tastes aren't likely to please close allies such as Australia, New Zealand and the U.S., whose products are barely represented and relegated to lower grades of meetings.

Financially, the government could be on to a winner. The international fine-wine market has experienced more than a decade of growth, with the rise in some wine prices outstripping growth in oil and gold prices. Live-ex's Fine Wine 100 Index, which tracks prices of the world's 100 most sought-after wines, has climbed by more than 200% since it was launched in 2001.

Brokers attribute the rise to increased demand in the luxury-product sector coupled with limited supply.

Not all critics are convinced of the vault's value.  Tim Atkin, a U.K. wine critic, describes the £2 million price tag often put on the government's collection as "fanciful," saying: "I think the government should hang on to the good wines, most of which were bought comparatively cheaply, and pour the rest down the nearest Whitehall drain."

—Caroline Henshaw contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Alistair MacDonald at alistair.macdonald@wsj.com and Will Lyons at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 