The popular notebook, famously used by Picasso, Hemingway and the cool kids at your local coffee shop, is now available in software form. From the customizable cover screen, which you can decorate with your own photos, to your choice of plain, lined or ruled paper, the app does a good job of replicating that iconic Moleskine aesthetic. Accordingly, each note is called a "thought," and the one advanced feature in this otherwise bare-bones app is the ability to geotag your notes—so you can remember whether you had that epiphany while cruising around Gibraltar or someplace less exotic like your couch. Some might find this all a bit affected, but for die-hard fans of the real thing, it's a good way to go digital and buck that $10-a-pop addiction. Free, available on iPhone and iPad 

Evernote is an app that eschews minimalism in favor of letting you capture and edit anything, anywhere. Plain text, voice memos, snapshots (you can simply take pictures of text, like, say, a menu)—you can access all of it on the web or through the companion desktop app. While you might not need all or even most of Evernote's features, and the wealth of options can seem cluttered, the opportunity to take down everything on the go, from snippets of inspiration to your multimedia magnum opus, offers a certain peace of mind. Consider it the Swiss Army knife for all your writerly needs. Free, available on iPhone, iPad, Android, BlackBerry, Windows Mobile and WebOS 

Whether you prefer handwriting, draw a lot of complex diagrams and flow charts or just plain like to doodle, Note Taker HD is an intuitive and full-featured app for all of your jotting needs. For the chronically butterfingered there's even a magnified input area from which you can adjust your "ink" to whatever size you please—no reading glasses necessary. And after your scribbles look just right, you can file them away, export them into a variety of formats with built-in support for programs like Dropbox and Evernote or even overlay them on top of images or PDFs for easy document creation and form-filling.  $5, available on iPad  

—Dennis Tang