In Louis Bayard's historical whodunit "The School of Night" (Henry Holt, 338 pages, $25), Tudor scholar Henry Cavendish succumbs to the terrible and all-consuming madness of book-collecting. Just listen to what a single sheet of a newly discovered antique document can do to him: "Other men give their hearts to vellum or parchment. Me, I'm a rag-paper man. . . . I love everything about it: its translucency, its frangibility, its ragged edges, its bruises and discolorations."

The sheet of paper is a particular provocation to Cavendish, though. It is the second page of a letter from the Elizabethan poet and explorer Walter Raleigh to the polymath Thomas Harriot. This portion of the letter offers evidence of a secret atheist society long rumored to have been formed by the two men in league with the playwright Christopher Marlowe. Scholars have speculated that Shakespeare knew of the society, spicing up "Love's Labour's Lost" with a passing reference to the group as "the school of the night." More important: On the back of the sheet is a map with a coded message promising "great stores of gold." In the course of the treasure hunt, Henry is soon ensnared between two rival (and document-mad) antiquarians—his roguish friend Alonzo Wax and the villainous, patrician Bernard Styles.

Using a template for the novel that has become increasingly common, Mr. Bayard links this modern-day storyline with one set in the past, here in 1603 and centering on Harriot. As we learn, Harriot was in fact a brilliant scientist—his mappings of the moon preceded Galileo's—but he never published his findings for fear of reprisals from the pious King James I. Mr. Bayard narrates Harriot's life from the perspective of a chambermaid named Margaret Crookenshanks; Harriot eventually employs her as his lab assistant, and they fall in love.

The hope when constructing these parallel narratives is that the each will add to the intrigue and tension of the other. In reality, though, the tension the reader feels is a mounting impatience with the inferior story. In "The School of Night," Mr. Bayard's portrayal of Harriot is rich and rewarding. Through Margaret's eyes we get an indelible sense of "how many wonders are to be unearthed and concatenated" by his secretive research into optics and astronomy. And their love story becomes nicely complicated when Margaret is tempted by a madness of her own—an obsession with alchemy.

Henry Cavendish's story in the modern day, by contrast, is so dominated by cryptography and cheesy action sequences that it comes to read like an academic's parody of Dan Brown. (Book collectors "circling each other like Bowery brawlers" is not exactly edge-of-your-seat stuff.) Mr. Bayard writes seamless prose and conjures the past with credibility; it seems a waste when he goofs around with a rote thriller formula.

Rosalind Brackenbury's novel  "Becoming George Sand" (Mariner, 295 pages, $14.95) has the same past-and-present format, also for good and ill. Twenty years into her marriage to her dependable husband, Edward, Maria Jameson has plunged into an affair with a younger man named Sean. Sex with Sean is a revelation, making Maria feel "newborn." But when Edward finds out about the affair, he leaves her; then Sean, concerned for his own marriage, leaves Maria too.

The most interesting, if at times infuriating, thing about "Becoming George Sand" is Maria's refusal to apologize for her affair, even after it has left her in ruins. Instead she loses herself in researching the life of novelist and "romantic rebel" (as one biographer called her) George Sand, whose many love affairs make her, in Maria's mind, a paragon of independence and physical self-fulfillment: "What would George do," she asks, "why was it easier for George?"

But why exactly does Sand belong here? Unlike Maria, who deceived Edward for almost a year, Sand conducted her affairs openly, after she had separated from her husband—perplexingly, neither Maria nor Ms. Brackenbury seem to recognize the difference. "Becoming George Sand" offers sketchy vignettes of Sand's excursion to Mallorca with the pettish and ailing composer Frédéric Chopin, but these scenes shed no light on Maria's problems, which are based not on passion but on lying. Readers may begin to suspect that the main purpose of the parallel stories is to give the novel a marketable hook. That, at least, is something that would have earned the approval of the market-wise Sand.