What does the declining stock market mean for individual investors? Opportunity, for one thing. With a 8.5% decline this year through Friday, the Bombay Stock Exchange's 30-share Sensex is off to a bad start. One major reason for this decline has been a withdrawal of funds by foreign institutional investors. This week through Friday, they have pulled out $746 million, according to data from the Securities and Exchange Board of India. The stock ride has been a rocky one with the Sensex losing 490 points or 2.5% on Monday, and then gaining 310 points or 1.6% on Thursday. On Friday, the Sensex fell 1.7%, or 322 points, to close at around 18,860. Savvy investors can exploit this volatility to their benefit and build wealth in the long-term. Here are tips on how to do that:

1. Don't miss big gain days

In a falling market, it seems logical that you could sell stocks and buy them back at lower prices before they go up.

But even for professional investors, it's very hard, if not impossible, to get the timing of an upward move correct. Missing even one day of large moves can be devastating to your portfolio. And guess what – there are not too many days of big gains.

According to one study of the American stock market over a 30-year period between the mid-1960s and mid-1990s, 95% of the significant market gains over this period came in just 90 trading days. That's 90 days out of a total 7,500 trading days – just around 1%. Investors who had missed even one of those days would have lost heavily. In India too, often large gains have come on a single day. The most memorable such day was May 19, 2009, when the Sensex rose 17% on the back of the re-election of the Congress-led United Progressive Alliance government. So, unless you can predict which days will be the big market gain days, the only way to capture them is to hang on for the ride even in the downturn. Ignore the advice of market pundits who are advising you to go to cash now. "If you can stay invested, we will go places," says  Ranjit Dani, co-founder of Think Financial and Insurance Consultants Pvt. Ltd. in Nagpur tells his clients. "But the journey will not be smooth," he adds. 

2. Capture the dips

If you're in the market to buy a fridge to use for the next 10 years, wouldn't you prefer to buy it when it costs 10% less?

Many stocks are cheaper today than they were just a couple of weeks ago so here's a chance to buy them at lower prices. Sure, they can go down further but that too is hard to predict. If you own individual stocks, consider adding to them to bring down your average purchase price. Consider putting in orders with your broker or online trading platform to buy when your stock picks hit a certain price. Keep your expectations realistic -- stocks could fall 10% to 20% in the near term but market observers are not expecting a 50% decline.

Investors who don't dabble in individual stocks can consider adding to their mutual fund investments. Buy those funds which have fallen the most. This is a good time to start a systematic investment plan, in which money is deducted periodically from your bank account and invested in funds of your choice. First-time investors can start by buying some index funds like the UTI Master Index fund which aims to provide the return of the Sensex. 

3. Risk assessment When markets are going up, up and up, the risk of investing in stocks appears small and it's easy to overestimate your ability to handle that risk. Only when you lose money do you really learn how much loss you can handle. So, volatile markets are a great time to reassess the risk in your long-term portfolio. Do you own too many stocks in a specific sector which have fallen far more than the overall index? Bank stocks, for instance are down nearly 12% this year, according to the banking index of Bombay Stock Exchange.

On the rebound, whenever it happens, perhaps these stocks will gain the most. But if you are feeling very uneasy now, you know that you need to cut back. Mr. Dani says he typically limits his clients' investments in sector funds to 5% or less. He says these are a way to spice up his clients' portfolios. Their "staple diet will not be a sector fund," he adds. Ensure that you have some investments in relatively safe assets like bond funds, or bank fixed deposits and government-issued investments, so that you can tide over a long period of stock market decline, in case that comes. An investor with a moderate-risk appetite can put around 40% of his or her overall portfolio in fixed income investments.

 Write to Ms. Anand at shefali.anand@wsj.com, or follow her @shefalianand.