New Jersey will greatly increase its number of public charter schools, adding 23 this year, the Christie administration said Tuesday.

The additions, including nine in Newark, would bring the number of charter schools in New Jersey to 97 by September.

At the same time, Gov. Chris Christie proposed a slew of changes to make it easier for charter schools to open and operate. The proposals would let districts convert failing schools into charters, make it easier for private schools to become public charters, and relax regulations and mandates, such as eliminating tenure at charter schools.



"I want every child...to have the chance to have the education that they and their parents want them to have, and that is not the case now, particularly...in our urban communities," Mr. Christie said at Robert Treat Academy, a Newark charter school he has championed.

The Republican governor, who is entering his second year in office, has made a push for more charter schools a pillar of his attempt to break down the walls of the traditional public education system. There's debate about how effective the schools are, but the state released data Tuesday showing the current New Jersey charters more often than not outperform their peers.

For example,  Robert Treat, founded in 1997 by Democratic power broker  Stephen Adubato, in 2010 posted standardized state test scores that were roughly 34 to 66 points above its district's average scores.

Critics, though, say the data are not as rosy as they seem.  Bruce Baker, an associate professor at Rutgers who researches education finance, said charter schools are not necessarily representative of the population at large. 

His research argues that there is statistically a small or no performance gain when factors such as poverty, homelessness and race are factored in.

The state has been criticized for not having enough administrative staff at the Department of Education to help control, sustain and evaluate charters. Questions about quality control were raised Tuesday by the state's largest teachers union, the New Jersey Education Association, which said it supports "high quality charter schools."

"But we have real concerns about rushing to approve large numbers of applications because of the real potential for quality control issues," spokesman  Steve Baker said. "This is clearly an important political move for the governor, but we need to be focused on education policy, not political statements."

Mr. Christie said he wasn't trying to turn the state into a land of charters, but rather aims to use charters as a place for experimentation and innovation. 

He vowed to shut failing charter schools, and pushed back against what he predicted would be "reflexive partisanship" to a push for charters, which he described as a grass-roots, statewide movement.

The Christie administration said the round of 23 schools was the biggest since New Jersey's first charter schools were granted their charters in 1997. The administration would not release any details about applicants that were denied.

The charters announced Tuesday included schools promising rigorous Hebrew language immersion, online learning, autism specialties and music education. Mr. Christie's proposed relaxation of charter-school rules would need legislative approval.