New York cyclists occupy a strange purgatory these days. After years of navigating inhospitable, dangerous streets, riders find themselves in a city that is finally treating cycling as a legitimate mode of transportation. Hundreds of miles of bike paths have been created; traffic and parking have been reconsidered; businesses are accommodating bike commuters. It's not perfect, but many more people are riding. It's obvious to anyone out there pedaling.

At the same time, there's a backlash, a complaint that the city is ceding too much to bike riders as they wantonly continue to violate rules— failing to stop at lights, riding on sidewalks, weaving against traffic and so on. 

Some of this criticism is legitimate: No cyclist should be above the law. But a small, noisy fraction of the outcry borders on Reefer Madness-style hysteria, as if Mayor Bloomberg is secretly sleeping in spandex, eager for everyone to start shaving their legs and subscribing to L'Equipe.

What gets lost is how far New York is riding ahead of the curve. 

Outside of this city—and many places inside the city—it's still very risky to ride a bike. Cyclists remain afterthoughts in the planning process. Parents don't dream of letting their kids ride on the street. A lot of adults are too scared to even try.

This is why Tim Johnson is riding into New York this weekend. Johnson, 33, is an unfamiliar name to most sports fans, but to hardcore cyclists, he's something of a cult hero, a six-time U.S. champion of cyclocross, a muddy racing genre that's an exhilarating mix between mountain biking and skinny-tire stuff found in the Tour de France.

Saturday night, Johnson and a group of other cyclists are riding into the city amid a 550-mile trip between Boston and Washington D.C, where the National Bike Summit occurs next week. The ride is designed to raise awareness and funds for Bikes Belong, an organization that seeks to make roadways safer and get more people on bikes.

"Where I grew up, you could ride whenever you wanted, wherever you wanted," the Massachusetts-raised Johnson says. "Now it's much harder. There are too many people who want to ride, but don't."

Johnson is no stranger to New York. With his wife, the former Canadian cyclocross national champion Lynn Bessette, he's competed in the glorious early morning madness that is Central Park bike racing, where amateurs whirl around the loop at an hour when folks are still staggering home from bars and clubs.

Last year, Johnson and Bessette came to New York and did the tourist thing—renting bikes and pedaling down Broadway along the new green paths. Johnson was amazed. "For a city as old as New York to change its transportation, it's huge" he says. "A bike is a perfect way to get around."

But as the city transforms and readjusts, cyclists are getting painted with an unfairly broad brush. Just as all drivers can't be judged by the idiot weaving down the BQE, all cyclists aren't clowns slapping car hoods and cursing out stroller pushers. Cycling is an activity that encompasses racers, enthusiasts, commuters, messengers, food delivery people, rich, poor, young, old, and, yes, That Guy Who's Always On the Unicycle. 

As disparate as these groups are, they all basically want the same thing: to get somewhere efficiently and alive.

To be sure, cycling has an anti-authority streak. There are definitely boneheads out there. Everyone on a bike needs to see themselves as part of a bigger transit equation. Rider education is crucial. 

Pedestrians, drivers, rules—yes, even those red lights—-must be respected.

"No one is going to fix cycling," Johnson says, "Except cyclists."

The outlaw culture is changing, slowly. Biking uptown on a busy weekday morning, you'll actually see clusters of riders pausing for red lights. That's a minor miracle and a good example. 

Sunday morning at 7:45 a.m. Johnson will be hopping on his Cannondale outside Midtown's Hudson Hotel, spinning a lap in Central Park (hopefully not getting ticketed) and heading to a brunch at NYC Velo, a bike shop in the East Village. Anyone who misbehaves may get a warning from a champion who doesn't see himself any differently from anyone else on two wheels. Then it's off to New Jersey, Philadelphia, Baltimore and down to D.C., and a lot of places where the roads are far less friendly to bikes than the misunderstood streets of New York.

 Write to  Jason Gay at jason.gay@wsj.com 