SAN FRANCISCO—Baseball home-run king  Barry Bonds goes on trial Monday in the highest-profile case stemming from a seven-year government probe of sports doping that has ensnared Olympic gold medalists, track coaches, a lawyer and a chemist.

 Barry Bonds: Born on July 24, 1964, in Riverside, Calif. 

 1986: Begins major league career with the Pittsburgh Pirates

 1993: Joins San Francisco Giants as free agent

 2001: Hits 73 home runs, breaking major league single-season record

 2003: Testifies before federal grand jury in San Francisco

 2007: In August, breaks Hank Aaron's career home run record, hitting his 756th home run

 2007: In November, indicted in federal court for allegedly lying to a grand jury in 2003

Mr. Bonds is charged with making false statements to a grand jury and obstruction of justice for allegedly lying to a federal grand jury in 2003. Mr. Bonds denies the charges.

He testified he never knowingly took steroids, never accepted human growth hormone from a personal trainer and never allowed anyone other than medical personnel to give him injections. If convicted, Mr. Bonds could face five years or more in federal prison.

Either way, his single-season and lifetime home-run records may never escape the shadow of a criminal case. A lawyer for the 46-year-old Mr. Bonds, Ted Cassman, declined to comment. 

Mr. Bonds's case hinges on whether prosecutors can prove the former San Francisco Giants slugger took steroids and that he knew what they were when he was taking them. The case was delayed two years after the government unsuccessfully appealed a judge's decision to bar key evidence that included positive drug tests.

"This is not a steroid case per se," said Richard Collins, a criminal-defense attorney specializing in cases involving athletes and performance-enhancing drugs, who has no involvement in this case. "This is the same as anyone who is accused of lying under oath." 

One challenge for the prosecutors is that some of the potentially most compelling evidence of Mr. Bonds having allegedly perjured himself is connected to Mr. Bonds's trainer and childhood friend, Greg Anderson, who had elected to go to jail rather than testify against Mr. Bonds, said Rory Little, a former federal prosecutor and a professor at Hastings College of the Law here. 

That evidence, allegedly including a positive drug test, was connected to Mr. Anderson. But after he was jailed for contempt of court, a judge ruled the evidence was inadmissable.

Mr. Anderson's lawyer, Mark Geragos, said he is aware that "cynics think [Mr. Anderson's] being paid off," but "there's a wellspring of support in the Bay Area among people who think he's doing the honorable thing." 

The trial promises some fireworks.Various former professional baseball players are expected to testify about steroid use and, according to a court filing, a former girlfriend of Mr. Bonds is expected to talk about physical changes to Mr. Bonds's anatomy during the time prosecutors say he used steroids.

Mr. Bonds has polarized fans since he was first linked to allegations of steroid use. He has received standing ovations in San Francisco but San Diego Padres fans threw a syringe at him on a visit to that city. 

Whatever the outcome of the trial, the case will close a chapter in a probe of what antidoping officials call the most sophisticated doping conspiracy in history, providing "hope for clean athletes who play by the rules," said Travis Tygart, chief executive of the United States Anti-Doping Agency, a nonprofit that fights doping by athletes.

The sequence of events in the case began more than a decade ago, when Victor Conte, the head of the Bay Area Laboratory Cooperative, a nutritional-supplement maker outside San Francisco, started providing steroids to athletes, according to prosecutors and Mr. Conte. 

In 1999, Mr. Conte said in an interview this month, he met a chemist named Patrick Arnold at a Las Vegas bodybuilding event. In the coming months, said Mr. Conte, Mr. Arnold, who has pleaded guilty to steroid-distribution charges, gave Mr. Conte samples of a steroid for which athletic organizations didn't conduct tests. 

"I took it for four days in a row," Mr. Conte said. "I realized right away that this was a very potent substance." 

Mr. Conte said he received other substances from Mr. Arnold, and his company, known as Balco, provided them to athletes before the 2000 Olympics. Mr. Conte is not a witness in Mr. Bonds's trial.

Among athletes who later admitted to taking steroids from Balco were track stars  Tim Montgomery and  Marion Jones, who won gold medals at the 2000 Olympics. 

Federal investigators began probing Balco in 2003, after antidoping authorities received an anonymous tip—and a syringe containing a mystery substance—that ultimately linked Balco to doping. 

After raiding the company, prosecutors convened a grand jury in San Francisco that interviewed baseball and football players and track stars. Transcripts were leaked to the San Francisco Chronicle, which reported on portions of the proceedings. 

Criminal prosecutions and guilty pleas followed. Track coach Trevor Graham, who turned out to be the person who tipped antidoping officials in the case, was convicted of making a false statement to a government investigator. 

Another coach, Remi Korchemny, entered a guilty plea in the case. Ms. Jones, the sprinter, pleaded guilty to lying to federal investigators and served six months in prison. Mr. Bonds was indicted in 2007 on charges of lying to the grand jury. Cyclist Tammy Thomas was convicted in 2008 of lying to the grand jury. 

Mr. Conte pleaded guilty in 2005 to conspiring to distribute steroids, and spent four months in prison. A lawyer for one of Mr. Conte's former business partners pleaded guilty to leaking the grand jury transcripts, and also served prison time. 

After the Balco scandal, Congress held hearings on steroids in baseball; pitcher Roger Clemens was charged last year with lying to Congress. Jeff Novitzky, the federal agent who pursued Balco, is currently heading a probe of Tour de France champion Lance Armstrong. The cyclist says he is innocent and has never failed a drug test. 

 Write to  Justin Scheck at justin.scheck@wsj.com and Hannah Karp at hannah.karp@dowjones.com 