World War I was a great turning point. The four years of fighting strained nations to their limit—and beyond—and devastated the bourgeois civilization that had grown during the century of peace and prosperity that followed Napoleon's defeat at Waterloo. The war of attrition forever shattered the optimistic, self-assured Europe that had existed before 1914. Nonetheless, many of the changes brought about by the war had their roots the late 19th and early 20th centuries. The political and cultural movements identified under the broad category of Modernism all preceded the war, and it is by setting them in such a context that both Adam Hochschild and Grace Brockington strive to make sense of them.

Something very like revolution seemed likely in England on the eve of World War I. A wave of strikes accompanied the growth of a political labor movement. Suffragettes went beyond petitioning for the vote to using physical action to force their demands on the public. Their violence and civil disobedience shocked a generally law-abiding society. Ireland stood on the brink of civil war as Protestant Ulster threatened to resist, with force, Home Rule—that is, rule by an Irish parliament in Dublin. The unease before 1914 led the writer George Dangerfield to see in the prewar years the "strange death of liberal England," when political moderation and compromise seemed to fail. 

Mr. Hochschild describes these tensions in "To End All Wars" and shows how they shaped the responses to war in August 1914. Rupert Brooke captured a certain public mood with the lines: "To turn, as swimmers into cleanness leaping / Glad from a world grown old, and cold and weary." Others saw the war as a betrayal of their socialist and cosmopolitan principles. Keir Hardie, the Labour Party's first member of Parliament, struggled to oppose the war without seeming to undermine the men who served and their families. The Pankhursts, first family of the suffragette movement, were divided. Sylvia, Hardie's lover, became an outspoken pacifist, but her mother, Emmeline, and sister Christabel backed the war effort with patriotic zeal. 

Soldiers were happy to get on with their task, and the war's deeper effect only became clear as losses mounted without any indication of how it could be won. Even those who, like Rudyard Kipling, did so much to rally patriotic support in 1914, faltered when their sons or brothers died. Kipling lost his only son, John, at Loos the next year and told an American friend to "thank God you haven't a son."

The heart of Mr. Hochschild's story is the coincidental relationship among emblematic figures of the era—some famous, some obscure. Leading pacifists had ties with such prominent commanders as Sir John French and Sir Douglas Haig. The feminist radical Charlotte Despard, for example, was French's sister. French and Haig, cavalrymen who had made their reputations during the Boer War in South Africa, represented a world that had passed without their realizing it. They blithely oversaw the slaughter of masses of young men in their charge. 

 By Adam Hochschild  Houghton Mifflin, 448 pages, $28

Mr. Hochschild stacks the deck by presenting such particularly unappealing characters as foils to the pacifist and liberals he seeks to praise. His choice of figures offers an easy—and misleading—contrast between self-satisfied representatives of a world gone by and activists striving for a better world to come. Yet the radicals had no better grasp of the war and what was being lost all around them. Mr. Hochschild weaves ordinary people into his story along with statesmen, generals and socialites, but all the figures he presents viewed their world in stark terms of good and evil. What of those who strove to the best of their ability to understand the shades of gray? What of a world in which there were no obvious answers?

Part of the war's great tragedy came from the fact that the belligerents had sacrificed so much that no government could accept, let alone propose, a compromise peace without risking civic disorder. (The revolution of 1905 in Russia, following Russia's defeat in the Russo-Japanese War, showed what a government could expect if it lost its legitimacy.) Young German recruits suffered losses so heavy at Ypres in late 1914 that the battle became known as the Kindermord, or the "massacre of the innocents." Such losses could only be justified in victory. Each nation faced similar tolls and similar choices. Rather than compromise or bargain for a return to the status quo ante bellum, leaders doubled down and raised the stakes for victory. 

 By Grace Brockington  Yale, 264 pages, $75

Mr. Hochschild presents a fairly conventional view of World War I—a pointless waste made worse by elite incompetence—even though many Britons during and immediately after the war accepted it as a struggle that had to be won. The anti-heroic narrative took hold only much later, especially after the publication of memoirs describing the loss of loved ones in the war. Mr. Hochschild's failure to present the preponderant judgment at the time is a way of further stacking the deck.

Many within the elite recognized the cost of the war. Lord Landsdowne, a statesman who had expressed private doubts within the cabinet, argued that prolonged war would destroy civilization and called publicly in 1917 for a compromise peace. But his desire to preserve a liberal society—one open enough for both Sir John French and his bohemian sister to find a public role and for others of humble origins to rise by talent—falls outside Mr. Hochschild's framework of noble radicals and willful reactionaries.

 Cataclysm: The First World War as Political Tragedy  by David Stevenson (2004) A comprehensive take on why the war began, why it continued and what it meant for the 20th century. Setting operations and strategy in context, it reflects the work of a long scholarly career.

 The Marne, 1914: The Opening of World War I and the Battle that Changed the World  by Holger Herwig (2009) Why didn't the war end by Christmas 1914? This vivid account of the opening campaign in the West highlights the way firepower increased the lethality of combat and made decisive victory illusory. These battles set the pattern for the fighting and raised the stakes of the war.

 Gallipoli: The End of the Myth  by Robin Prior (2009) The definitive account of the ill-conceived attempt to shorten the war by opening a sea rout to Russia through the Mediterranean. Bitter fighting on the Gallipoli peninsula reprised the deadlock on the Western Front as British, Australian and New Zealand troops sought to break well-defended Turkish lines.

 A Peace to End All Peace  by David Fromkin (1989) We largely view World War I through the struggles on the Western Front, and Mr. Fromkin filled a major gap by showing how it created the political landscape, from the Balkans to India, with which we struggle today. 

 Brest-Litovsk: The Forgotten Peace, March 1918  by John Wheeler-Bennett (1938) The classic account of a generally neglected story: the negotiations after Germany's victory on the Eastern Front. Russia's collapse gave the central powers a last hope for winning the war.

—William Anthony Hay

Total war presented commanders on both sides with immense challenges. Mass armies remained in the field for years, and improved firepower gave defensive positions an overwhelming advantage. Stalemate was the result. Vast offensives seemed the only means of securing the elusive breakthrough that would change the dynamic of the war. Yet Mr. Hochschild neglects the British generals who did their best to work through the tactical problem and who minimized casualties while restoring battlefield mobility. Their success in 1918 made victory possible, if at a terrible price: what Winston Churchill called a "crippled, broken world." 

Mr. Hochschild repeatedly laments the thwarted hopes of radicals and dissenters and the toll that the war inflicted on the young, but he fails to note its broader, profounder effects. Britain came out of the war financially weakened and geopolitically overextended: Its commitments exceeded its means of fulfilling them. Fiscal reality dashed any hopes for social reform as a reward for wartime sacrifice. And there was a radical break in continuity. Roughly 29,000 estates were sold during the 1920s as their now childless occupants grew old. Middle-class society, especially in the countryside and small towns, suffered heavily, since it had disproportionately supplied the officers whose life expectancy at the front came to be measured in months. Prewar optimism, and the world sustained by 19th-century bourgeois society in Europe, was dead. The disappointments of activists, so important to Mr. Hochschild, seem rather petty by contrast.

Grace Brockington's lavishly illustrated "Above the Battlefield" is also focused on dissenting voices, especially the English artistic movements she unites under the heading of "Pacifist Modernism." She uses the questions about the role of art in national emergency—whether artists should back the authorities or give voice to dissent—as a framework for exploring the crisis of artistic vocation in Britain after 1914. 

Thanks to the postwar avant-garde, Modernism is associated with violence. But in the years before World War I, intellectuals embraced avant-garde art as a substitute for religion. Art became part of the imperative driving reform. The war challenged the cosmopolitan optimism of this milieu, and Ms. Brockington shows how the English Modernists became preoccupied with salvaging civilization from the unfolding conflagration. The famous Bloomsbury set feared that the war's violence would engulf rationality. Such fears were justified.

Like the wider society, English art struggled to find a space apart from the conflict where it could express a pacifist alternative that went beyond rejecting jingoist nationalism. Ms. Brockington, like Mr. Hochschild, focuses on relationships as a prism to refract ideas, but she has a more interesting cast of characters. She ranges beyond well-known figures to take in the movement as a whole, including performance and literature along with the visual arts. 

Although a scholarly book by an art historian, "Above the Battlefield" is written in a lively style that contrasts with the rather lifeless prose of "To End All Wars." Where Mr. Hochschild loses the thread, by trying to cover too much, Ms. Brockington deftly focuses on an important yet often neglected facet of Modernism. 

—Mr. Hay is a historian at Mississippi State University.