British contemporary painter  Tony Bevan's artwork—he's best known for his self-portraits and paintings of architecture—has been described as "violent, vivid paintings, as angry as a bruise and seductive as a Glasgow kiss," by one critic ( Alfred Hickling for The Guardian).

In a National Portrait Gallery catalog essay for Mr. Bevan's current show, curator  Paul Moorhouse writes, "In Bevan's art, self-portraiture has broken with its historic infatuation with recording personal appearance."

His paintings are displayed in museums around the world, including the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York and the National Portrait Gallery and Tate Gallery in London. Mr. Bevan, who was born in 1951 in Bradford, England, now works in London. His first solo show in Hong Kong is on view until April 9 at  Ben Brown Fine Arts.

Q: Why do you do self-portraiture?

A: It's something that I've been interested in for many years—the last 30 years. I think it's possibly the way to express your own situation and experience through how you feel onto canvas. This interested me. It's really having this model that you know and you revisit—as an endless supply of feeling that you can go into.

Q: When was the first time that you did a self-portrait?

A: I suppose I was doing it as a child. But it's only in the last 35 years that I've continuously done self-portraits. And then around the period of 2009 I made a number of self portraits—about 20 self-portraits—that were really to sculptures of [Franz Xaver] Messerschmidt, an 18th-century German sculptor, whose work I've been interested in for years.

When I was a student I wrote my thesis on this German sculptor. I found the sculptures very fascinating, and they stayed with me for many years. I've used elements in the past, but recently I decided to work specifically through these sculptures. So I used formal elements from the sculptures to make self-portraits because it's believed that a lot of these sculptures were self-portraits. So I used the formal elements of his to work through my own self-portraits.

Q: What about his work drew you to it, made you write a thesis about it, and then come back to it in 2009 and explore it?

A: I first saw them illustrated in a book called "Psychoanalytic Approaches to Art"… When I came to them they looked incredibly contemporary, and I hadn't seen any of them before. I just found these things fascinating, and they had very unusual titles, which I later found out were added a hundred years after his death because people saw this physiognomy, illustrations of single expressions, really.

So when I wrote this art-history thesis, which you had to do as a student, I always thought you should just look at the sculptures first—the quality of the sculpture—and forget the titles and forget the psychoanalytic approach, whether this person was psychotic or not, but just to go and look at the sculptures. And… I think there are aspects of Messerschmidt that I've always held in my unconscious somewhere and have always filtered through, or percolated into, other works.

It's only these recent works that I've referred specifically to Messerschmidt, that these are paintings through Messerschmidt, but I'm sure in the past there have been elements of those sculptures coming into these paintings.

Q: In your work, two things stand out: portraits and architectural paintings. What about these two subjects link together?

A: For me, they're very similar. If I'm working with a piece of architecture or painting the heads, they become these spaces to enter into, for the imagination to enter into. Spatially both the head and the building are a very close comparison. And with the structures—these internal and external structures of the head, and the structures of the buildings—for me, there's a great deal of similarity. The lines become almost a threshold of going into this particular spatial area, into the building, and into the head. So they're very closely connected.

Q: When you paint, is there a facet of contemporary art that you try to address, to investigate or examine further?

A: I don't think it has to do with if it's contemporary because we're in this time. But I absorb things around me, and also I'm very aware of art history, and how artists have dealt with it in the past…. For me, painting still holds a fascination. I get very excited by painting even after all these years. I just find it endlessly surprising and inventive — what can actually be done with paint.

Ben Brown Fine Arts Hong Kong, 301 Pedder Building, 12 Pedder St., Central, Hong Kong. Tel: 852-2522-9600

Get Scene in your inbox by subscribing to our daily newsletter.