AMMAN—Rasmy Mahmoud Khair supported his family in Jordan for nearly 15 years by working on a farm in Saudi Arabia. In the two decades since the farm job ended, he and two adult sons have tried in vain to reconnect the family to a Saudi paycheck. 

"They use others now—Filipinos and Pakistani," Mr. Khair says, explaining that his efforts to return to his old job feeding chickens keep being rebuffed by Saudi authorities, who say Jordanian applicants must be certified as skilled technicians. Instead of the 700 dinars per month—about $1,000 at the time—he made working with poultry, he now earns 200 dinars a month at best picking up odd jobs, Mr. Khair says. 

But in the one area of the Arab world that continues to be a job-making machine—the oil sheikdoms—Arabs aren't getting as many jobs as they once did. The Gulf Cooperation Council, or GCC, countries—which include Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Oman, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates—employ more than 15 million "guest workers," according to World Bank figures. 

Arab manpower once comprised the bulk of this imported work force. Now, some 11 million of the GCC's guest workers hail from countries east of the Persian Gulf, mainly India and Pakistan. Some countries have contingents from China. The remaining four million migrants arrive from places like Jordan, Yemen, Sudan, Syria and Egypt. 

Demonstrations that have gripped countries across the Middle East have been fueled, in part, by resentment over the lack of opportunity in countries across the region. But even as unemployment grows across the Arab world, jobs are increasingly going to Asian guest workers.

The Arab Labor Organization, based in Cairo, reports the number of unemployed people in the Arabic-speaking world—from Morocco to the Gulf nations—exceeds 20 million. It warns that in the absence of real job growth, those numbers could swell to over 100 million unemployed by 2020.

Asians first began out-competing Arabs in service and construction jobs. But now Asians outnumber Arab guest workers in all but the most professional sectors, such as medicine and law. Egypt, with 1.6 million workers, is the leading Arab "sender" to the GCC, while Jordan—whose economy is one of the Middle East's most-dependent on overseas remittances—ranks sixth among Arab "senders," with just 184,000 GCC migrants, according to World Bank estimates.

In the mind of employers in oil-rich nations, Asians present several advantages. Many arrive more skilled, especially as English speakers, a big selling point in economies relying more on information and service industries. Asians have tended not to bring their families, as many Palestinian, Lebanese and Jordanians have. Asians also have been easier to lay off and send home, in part because Asian governments exert less pressure on behalf of their workers than can fellow Arab governments.

Asians have tended to work for less, bringing Asian wage expectations to a region where locals were used to wages that soared in petroleum boom years. 

At antigovernment protests last month in Amman, a man who gave his name as Ameer demonstrated alongside Islamists in solidarity with Egypt's rebels. A college graduate, Ameer described hitting the Internet each week, looking for openings to submit a résumé to employers in the U.A.E. "Most don't even reply," he said.

Another man at the rally, who said he holds a masters degree in environmental engineering, said his efforts to find work in Saudi Arabia also have come to naught. "They pay less than what I make in Jordan," he explained. 

In the 1990s, as it became clear Asians would work for less and without putting down roots, GCC employers began turning away Arabic-speaking guest workers. After Saddam Hussein's 1990 invasion of Kuwait, many Arab guest workers also were deemed politically suspect—in part because their home governments' leaders weren't overly supportive of the Desert Storm coalition that drove Iraqi forces from Kuwait. 

An estimated one million Yemenis were expelled from Saudi Arabia in the wake of Desert Storm. Kuwait expelled 300,000 Palestinians, most holding Jordanian passports, and 150,000 Egyptians. "The Arab employee is seen as someone who is demanding and as someone who poses a political risk," explains  Muhammad Malallah, a management consultant in Amman. "The Indian employee does not. The Pakistani does not." 

Surging oil prices in the past decade, which swelled revenues in the combined GCC nations to $355 billion in 2008 from $90 billion in 2002, triggered a construction boom. By then, GCC states were committed to relying heavily on Asian workers.

"The trend is clearly up. Eighty percent of the people here recruited into the hospitality sector are Asian," says  Tamsin Doma, recruitment manager at Dubai-based Appointments, which specializes in hiring for hotels. 

"Now many hotels employ just one Arabic speaker, in case they need the language capability. Otherwise they recruit Asians." That trend is worrisome to governments like Jordan's. In January, days before being sacked by King Abdullah, Prime Minister Samir Rifai traveled to Qatar, where his delegation lobbied for more jobs for Jordanians, especially teachers.

Such a request comes despite the GCC countries' long-term goal of reducing the guest work force.

In 2003, Saudi Arabia announced its intention to reduce foreign residents—then some six million—to less than one-fifth of the total population. But instead of shrinking the foreign presence, the Saudis kept importing. Today more than eight million foreign workers reside in the kingdom, increasing the foreign presence to nearly a third of all residents.

Families like the Khairs have been shut out of the GCC boom. Rasmy Khair doesn't expect to work outside Jordan again. Only one of his sons has regular work, earning 200 dinars monthly in the kitchen of a luxury hotel. The other son drives a taxi. 

"I would love to work abroad," says Murad Khair, 21, who works at the Dead Sea Spa Hotel south of Amman. He complains that his employer hires workers from the Philippines, who will take lower salaries than Jordanians. An official at the hotel confirmed the property employs Filipinos, but said they normally are paid more than Jordanians.

Like his father and older brother, Murad Khair says he has sought work for years through contractors with ties to GCC employers. So far, he says, none has matched him with a job paying even 250 Jordanian dinars a month. After calculating his living expenses abroad, Mr. Khair says he would earn even less abroad than he does now.

 Write to  Joel Millman at joel.millman@wsj.com and Joe Parkinson at joe.parkinson@dowjones.com 