China appeared to reinstate some restrictions on foreign journalists that were lifted ahead of the 2008 Beijing Olympics, as the government tried to stifle online activists' calls for a "Jasmine Revolution."

Dozens of foreign reporters have been told by Chinese police officers in the past few days that they require special permission—or are completely forbidden—to report from areas of Shanghai and Beijing where activists have called for silent "strolling" protests.

Chinese Foreign Ministry Spokeswoman Jiang Yu on Tuesday said regulations on foreign reporters' interviews haven't changed, citing a government order that says only that the consent of the subject individual or company is required. But she also said local governments can implement "specific operating details" of the rules to ensure an "unhindered interview environment."

Police in Shanghai summoned a Wall Street Journal reporter Tuesday and told him that the government of the city's Huangpu district had decided the area around the Peace Cinema, one of the designated protest sites—and adjacent to the central People's Square—was now off-limits to foreign reporters.

"From now on do not go to those places to do reporting," the officer said. Another Wall Street Journal reporter was told by police Sunday that he required special permission to report from the designated protest site in Beijing, a McDonald's outlet on the central shopping street of Wangfujing. On that street Sunday, police detained and assaulted several foreign reporters; one working for Bloomberg television was grabbed by five plainclothes officers, dragged along the ground by his leg, punched in the head and beaten with a broomstick.



"This is the worst aggression against the foreign press we've seen since the Olympics in 2008," said Bob Dietz, the Asia coordinator for the Committee to Protect Journalists, in a statement. "Such a heavy-handed response discredits the ruling Chinese Communist Party and highlights their fear of popular opposition."

When asked if the regulations have reverted to their pre-Olympics state, the Foreign Ministry's Ms. Jiang said the government order that allows journalists to interview anyone who consents is still in effect.

Jon Huntsman, the U.S. Ambassador to China and potential Republican presidential contender, issued a statement Monday saying he had met several foreign reporters who were "illegally detained or harassed" on Sunday.

"This type of harassment and intimidation is unacceptable and deeply disturbing," said Mr. Huntsman, who angered Chinese nationalist bloggers by appearing at the Beijing protest site on Feb. 20, the first Sunday on which activists urged people to gather. The U.S. embassy said he was there by coincidence.

"I am disappointed that the Chinese public-security authorities could not protect the safety and property of foreign journalists doing their jobs," he continued. "I call on the Chinese government to hold the perpetrators accountable for harassing and assaulting innocent individuals and ask that they respect the rights of foreign journalists to report in China."

In a similar statement issued after meeting foreign reporters, the European Union's delegation in China urged authorities to respect foreign journalists' rights.

Meanwhile, anonymous online activists issued fresh protest appeals through Twitter and other foreign websites, which are blocked in China but visible to wealthier urbanites who use proxies and virtual private networks to circumvent Web filters. One called for protests in 35 cities every Sunday, and another urged people not to go to work or school on Fridays.

It was unclear who was behind the appeals. While the earlier ones don't appear to have generated many actual protests, it was hard to tell because many of the designated sites were busy shopping areas that are usually crowded on Sundays anyway.

The calls for protest have certainly succeeded in provoking China's security services, which suggests how concerned the country's leaders are about the potential for unrest and demonstrates the extent of the Internet and physical controls they rely on to maintain the Communist Party's monopoly on power.

The new police restrictions on foreign reporters appear to contradict a pledge made ahead of the 2008 Beijing Olympics to allow reporters to work anywhere in China and interview anyone who consents.

 China is a paranoid state. The country is doing surprisingly well, with employment and the economy in steady control, and yet they fear a change that almost certainly isn't coming. The government of China is behaving irrationally. 

—Christopher Winfield

Special permission remains required to report from Tibet. Some reporters were barred from visiting certain areas affected by the Sichuan earthquake in 2008, but the central government said that was because local authorities were unaware of the regulation. Reporters for Chinese media organizations are on a much tighter leash than foreign correspondents, who are required to have journalism visas approved by the Foreign Ministry and issued by local police departments but aren't subject to direct controls over what they publish.

The beating of the Bloomberg reporter has also conjured memories of an assault by plainclothes Chinese security officers on  Todd Carrel, a reporter for ABC news who was left with permanent back injuries. He was attacked in Tiananmen Square while covering the third anniversary of the 1989 crackdown on pro-democracy protests there.

Ms. Jiang said Beijing police "properly handled" the incidents at Wangfujing and that they gave clear explanations to journalists at the scene. She also said the Bloomberg journalist reported the attack on him to police in Beijing's Dongcheng District and that the police will investigate it in accordance with regulations.

Another consequence of China's ramping up of Internet controls has been to raise concerns about the future of some Internet businesses, especially Twitter-like microblogging services that are now widely used as forums for politically sensitive discussions. Sina.com, a portal that runs one of the most popular microblogging services, posted a statement on its website Monday warning users against using the Internet to carry out any illegal activities.

—Owen Fletcher in Beijing contributed to this article.

 Write to  Jeremy Page at jeremy.page@wsj.com and James T. Areddy at james.areddy@wsj.com 