WASHINGTON—A government watchdog on Friday issued a warning about the cost of payment-protection plans, which credit-card companies offer as a way to put payments on hold during times of illness or financial distress. 

The Government Accountability Office has found that the products come with significant fees and not much benefit to consumers. The office is urging the new Consumer Financial Protection Bureau to examine the pricing of the products. 

The GAO notes that the plans offered by companies such as  J.P. Morgan Chase
JPM


0.12
%




 & Co.,  Bank of America Corp.
BAC


3.62
%




,  Citigroup Inc.
C


1.20
%




 and  American Express Co.
AXP


-0.37
%




 can help protect cardholders' credit ratings and offer consumers a sense of security during times of hardship. Also, regulators have reported relatively few consumer complaints related to these products, the GAO said. 

However, the congressional watchdog said the costs and benefits of the products haven't been adequately reviewed due to regulatory gaps at the federal level. Also, it said public information about the products is "scarce" because federal regulators don't routinely require credit-card issuers to report detailed information. 

While the nation's nine largest credit-card issuers collected $2.4 billion in fees for debt-protection products in 2009, they only provided $518 million of benefits to consumers, according to the GAO report, which was mandated by the Credit Card Accountability Responsibility and Disclosure Act of 2009. In addition, only about 5.3% of cardholders with a payment protection plan and a balance received a benefit in 2009. 

"Fees for the products can be substantial in relation to the aggregate financial benefits consumers receive, and consumers may have trouble evaluating different products and deciding whether the product is best for them," the report said. 

It added that "the direct monetary value to a cardholder who does receive a debt-protection product benefit can be modest." 

According to the report, fees from the nine largest credit-card issuers ranged from 85 cents to $1.35 a month for every $100 in outstanding balance. Card holders, on average, paid about $200 in 2009 for debt-production products, it said. 

The GAO said the new Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, a centerpiece of the Dodd-Frank financial overhaul, should review the pricing of payment-protection plans and help educate consumers about the costs and benefits of the products. 

"The increased popularity of debt-protection products raises the importance of effective regulatory oversight of these products," the GAO said. 

In a response, the consumer bureau—which doesn't launch until late July—signaled that it intends to evaluate whether banks are making the prices of the debt protection products clear to consumers. 

"The report highlights the important role the new Consumer Financial Protection Bureau can play in markets like these," wrote  Rajeev Date, the consumer agency's associate director for research, markets and regulations, in a letter to the GAO. 

 Write to  Maya Jackson Randall at Maya.Jackson-Randall@dowjones.com 