PARIS—Former French President Jacques Chirac is due to stand trial on Monday on embezzlement charges related to his stint as Paris mayor, but a last-minute claim filed by a codefendant could lead the court to adjourn the case indefinitely. 

In 2009, investigating magistrate Xavière Simeoni ordered Mr. Chirac to stand trial on criminal charges for allegedly adding several people to the city payroll while he was mayor of Paris between 1977 and 1995, even though their work was of no use to the city. 

Mr. Chirac has repeatedly denied the allegation and argued the jobs were legitimate. His lawyer, Jean Veil, declined to comment ahead of the trial. 

If the trial takes place, it will be the first time in recent history that a former French head of state defends himself before a judge.

On Monday, however, the court will have to first look into a claim filed by Rémy Chardon, a codefendant in the trial who was Mr. Chirac's chief of staff at the time. 

The claim is highly technical, said one of Mr. Chardon's lawyers. It challenges the prosecution's decision to dismiss the statute of limitation in the case, arguing that the law the investigating magistrate used to do so doesn't comply with France's constitution. 

If the claim is rejected, the trial will proceed; if it is deemed "serious," the whole trial will be adjourned while a higher court looks into Mr. Chardon's claim. Examination of the claim might take several months, especially if the higher court decides that it needs to be reviewed by France's constitutional court.

The trial follows a decade-long investigation by magistrates and is set to last a month. 

If found guilty, Mr. Chirac, 78 years old, could face up to 10 years in prison and fines of up to €150,000 ($208,295).

During his time as president between 1995 and 2007, Mr. Chirac saw his approval rating hover around the 30% mark as the country struggled with crime and high unemployment. 

Political analysts say the case could harm Mr. Chirac's carefully orchestrated recent attempts to endear himself to the French population by recasting himself as a national grandfather figure.

Since he left office, Mr. Chirac's popularity has boomed. An Ifop poll last month gave Mr. Chirac a 73% approval rating, making him the third-most-popular politician in France—despite being retired. In February, hundreds of people flocked around the lanky Frenchman as he paid his annual visit to Paris's agricultural show. 

Reasons for the show of appreciation vary, analysts say. 

French people still look back on certain moments of Mr. Chirac's presidency with pride—notably his stand in 2003 against the war in Iraq and images of him shouting with joy after France won the 1998 World Cup, political analysts say.

Mr. Chirac's style of government also stands in contrast to that of current President Nicolas Sarkozy. Mr. Chirac left most of the day-to-day running of France to his prime ministers. 

Mr. Sarkozy has a more hands-on management style. 

As a result, many French people blame him directly, not the broader government, for the country's high unemployment rate and limp economic growth.

The investigation into Mr. Chirac's activities as Paris mayor started in the late 1990s following a complaint by a taxpayer. 

Mr. Chirac was put under formal investigation only four years ago because, before then, he benefited from presidential immunity between 1995 and 2007. 

Last year, Mr. Chirac negotiated an out-of-court settlement with Paris, which had filed a civil suit to recover the cost of remunerating the 21 aides. The city has since withdrawn its complaint, a spokesman for the mayor's office said. 

The criminal trial is the one due to begin on Monday.

At the time of the out-of-court settlement, Mr. Chirac's lawyer, Mr. Veil, said that the aides' jobs had been useful.

Along with Mr. Chirac, Mr. Chardon and eight other defendants are expected to stand trial on related charges.

Some political allies of the former president say Mr. Chirac is being unfairly targeted. In 2009, former Socialist Party leader Ségolène Royale said he was being "hounded" by judges. 

Recently, the French press reported that Mr. Chirac was suffering from memory loss and was unfit to stand trial. 

"He can be a little impatient," Mrs. Chirac told French radio station Europe 1. "But as far as I am concerned, sadly, this is nothing new." 

 Write to  Max Colchester at max.colchester@wsj.com and David Gauthier-Villars at David.Gauthier-Villars@wsj.com 