'Spain is different" was a slogan during the dictatorial regime of Gen. Francisco Franco. Stanley G. Payne, a professor at the University of Wisconsin, has made a name for himself writing about Franco, Franco's brand of fascism and the Spanish Civil War. With "Spain: A Unique History," he ranges far further over the centuries to see if there is anything to this assertion of Spanish difference. 

Writers about Spanish history and identity have developed what Mr. Payne calls a Grand Narrative, which varies depending upon the standpoint of the writer. Some, he says, subscribe to a "Black Legend" that depicts the country as a "stereotype of cruelty, fanaticism, and lust for power and destruction." This idea has cultivated, at times, "a kind of national inferiority complex." Quite the opposite, but equally misleading, is a traditionalist stereotype of "Romantic Spain," portraying Spaniards as premodern people "motivated by honor, personal courage, and an archaic style of life," veering toward a kind of superiority complex.

In a Grand Narrative of his own, Mr. Payne holds that Spain is not really so different from other European countries. Incorporation into the Roman Empire, and then the invasion of foreigners and the arrival of Christianity, were experiences paralleled elsewhere on the Continent. Almost uninterrupted warfare and gradual centralization under a single monarchy are by no means singular to Spain.

Furthermore, Muslims threatened France, Austria, Hungary, Sicily and to some extent mainland Italy, so the occupation that turned Spain into Muslim Andalus, from the eighth century to the 15th, was exceptional only in its duration. The cities of Andalus, Mr. Payne comments, rivaled the great Muslim centers of the Middle East. The native population became overwhelmingly Muslim, but the Reconquest of Spain, completed in 1492, was nevertheless primarily a healthy reaction to the "rigid, intolerant and anti- intellectual tendencies in Islamic religion and culture." From the 17th century onward, Spain participated unevenly in Europe's wider struggle to modernize. The Catholic religion did much to prevent the formation of the national and liberal state that would have assured Spain's pre-eminence.

 By Stanley G. Payne  University of Wisconsin Press, 304 pages, $26.95

As learned professors often do, Mr. Payne writes at a high level of generalization, taking the reader's knowledge for granted. Chapters leap from topic to topic without much concern for sequence, as though they were separate and self-contained essays. Words like "retrodictive," "sexennium," "defascistization" and "mesocratic" act as brakes on Mr. Payne's prose. New universities have a "localist and endogamic character," whatever that may mean. "Spain: A Unique History" opens unusually, too, with a chapter of nearly 30 autobiographical pages closely describing the stages by which Mr. Payne became a Hispanist and professor. Such self-indulgence sits uneasily with the scholarly tone of the rest of the book. Footnotes refer to sources in at least six languages, among them Polish and Russian.

It is far from obvious why Mr. Payne leaves out much that is familiar and that would have served either to reinforce or to refute stereotypes. No mention of El Cid, for instance, the personification of the European and Christian warrior-hero whose victory over Muslims is still a component of national identity. No mention of Torquemada, who made the Spanish Inquisition a precursor of modern ideological persecution; or of Holy Week in Seville, with its special cult of penance; or of St. John of the Cross and St. Teresa of Avila, standard-bearers of Spanish Christianity.

The Jewish community in the Spanish Middle Ages produced gifted and influential men, only one of whom is named in "Spain: A Unique History," and then only in passing. No mention either of the expulsion of the Jews in 1492, surely a contribution to the Black Legend. No mention of the Aztecs or the Incas and hardly anything about the Spanish Empire or its rulers, even so great an emperor as Charles V (1500-58). As for Romantic Spain, Velázquez and El Greco are ignored; and Cervantes and Goya, two geniuses central to Spanish identity, each have to make do with a fleeting subclause. 

The final 100 or so pages of "Spain: A Unique History" deal with Franco and the Civil War, Mr. Payne's speciality, and he deals with them thoroughly. The popular perception has been that democracy and fascism fought it out in Spain in a curtain-raiser for the approaching world war. For Mr. Payne, the international politics of the day are open to more complex interpretations. Stalin's main objective in intervening in Spain was not to win the war but to keep it going until France and Britain were ready to join with him in an anti-Hitler coalition. With typical duplicity, he was already putting out the feelers to Hitler that led to their mutual pact in 1939. Stalin, Mr. Payne concludes, had been too Machiavellian for his own good. Nor did Hitler extract the rewards that he expected for dispatching forces to Spain. By nature, Franco was an equivocator; his terms for joining the Nazi war effort were so high that Hitler was left complaining angrily of his ally's ingratitude. 

Whether or not Spaniards can be pressed to fit into broad stereotypes seems almost moot now. Membership in the European Union has drained Spain's historic identity and rendered national differences meaningless. For better or worse, even the concept of a Grand Narrative now belongs to the irrevocable past.

 Mr. Pryce-Jones's next book, "Treason of the Heart: From Tom Paine to Kim Philby," will be published in May by Encounter Books. 