Asian markets rose Monday against a backdrop of caution over heightened geopolitical concerns in the Mideast and North Africa, as energy stocks climbed on higher oil prices and on optimism over progress in resolving Japan's nuclear crisis.

Hong Kong's Hang Seng index rose 1.7%, South Korea's Kospi added 1.1%, Australia's S&P/ASX 200 gained 0.4%, China's Shanghai Composite rose 0.1% and Taiwan's Taiex advanced 0.9%.



India's Sensex fell 0.2%. Japanese markets were shut for Vernal Equinox Day.

"I'm still cautious in my short-term outlook. There is uncertainty over everything ... Despite today's rebound, I don't think the market has stabilized," said Linus Yip, strategist at First Shanghai Securities in Hong Kong, listing high inflation in Asia, rising oil prices, the political crisis in the Mideast and North Africa as well as European sovereign-debt troubles as causes for concern.

Dow Jones Industrial Average futures were up 124 points in screen trade.

Crude-oil prices edged higher after allied forces launched air strikes on Libya, under a United Nations resolution to halt attacks on civilians involved in a month-long uprising against the regime of Col. Moammar Gadhafi, who vowed in return to wage a "long war."

April Nymex crude-oil futures were up $1.53 at $102.60 per barrel on Globex.

A number of energy stocks outperformed in the region, with Woodside Petroleum rising 1.8% and Santos climbing 1.1% in Sydney; PetroChina gaining 3.3% in Hong Kong and 1.6% in Shanghai; and Cairn India advancing 1.9% in Mumbai trade.

However, some analysts were optimistic the fallout from the turmoil in the region could be contained.

"We think a protracted Libyan civil war may be an economic nonevent as Saudi will make up for (oil) supply shortfalls. More importantly, serious nuclear fallout in Japan looks increasingly unlikely with some power restored to plants, and fire engines having good success in keeping spent fuel rods cool," analysts at Phillip Securities wrote in a research note.

The comments came amid reports that Japan had made progress with its nuclear crisis, restoring power to some of its stricken reactors at the Fukushima Daiichi plant.

Meanwhile, the World Bank offered an upbeat assessment on the impact of the nuclear crisis, saying the effects will be "short-lived."

Australian uranium stocks continued to recover from heavy losses caused by the Japanese nuclear crisis. Paladin Energy added 2.5% and Extract Resources jumped 14.4%.

In China, banks and property developers rose as investors looked past a well-anticipated increase in lenders' reserve requirement ratio by 0.50 percentage points on Friday by the People's Bank of China. The increase, the PBOC's third such move so far this year, takes effect Friday and is aimed at draining liquidity from the banking system as part of Beijing's efforts to rein in inflation. 

Shares of Industrial & Commercial Bank of China climbed 1.9% and China Construction Bank rose 0.6% in Shanghai; in Hong Kong, they added 1.7% and 1%, respectively.

Property developers also climbed, with China Vanke rising 1.2% in Shenzhen, Poly Real Estate Group adding 1% in Shanghai and China Overseas Land & Investment jumping 3.8% in Hong Kong.

Elsewhere in the region, New Zealand's NZX 50 gained 0.3%, Philippine shares finished 0.1% higher, Singapore's Straits Times Index rose 1.6%, Thailand's SET added 1.7% and Indonesian shares gained 0.7%.

In foreign-exchange markets, the yen was weighed down by the prospect of further moves by major central banks to weaken the currency. While activity was subdued by the holiday in Japan, traders in other parts of Asia kept a close watch for potential intervention by the Bank of Japan to sell the yen, after coordinated action by the Group of Seven industrialized nations Friday to push the currency down.

Analysts at UBS noted that after the Japanese developments, and given the heightened Mideast tensions, Tokyo leaders seemed determined to draw a line in the sand on the U.S. dollar against the yen. They added further action by central banks was "very likely, either through deployment of their own resources or custodial transactions on behalf of the Bank of Japan."

The U.S. dollar was recently at 짜81.14 from 짜80.62 in late New York trade on Friday, while the euro was at 짜114.84 from 짜114.34 and at $1.4153 from $1.4175.

Spot gold was at $1,425.80 per troy ounce, up $6.10 from its New York settlement Friday.

 Write to  Colin Ng at colin.ng@dowjones.com 