Whatever happened to the power lunch? Traditionally, it was a huddle of besuited males, semi-obscured on banquettes around a linen-covered table with a bottle (or two) of claret quietly breathing in decanters nearby. The cuisine was invariably indifferent to filthy—consisting of over-cooked pies, meat or game. 

Then came the Big Bang, the 1987 financial shake-out that seemingly ended the reign of the ancien régime in the City of London. Since then, a cycle of booms and busts has moved the goalposts even further so that nowadays, the location, content and even timing of these events has completely changed. 

 Caffè Ciampini 

Close to Parliament, Ciampini is a popular destination for politicians. Open from 7:30 a.m., the outdoor tables are the preferred seats, as it is more difficult to be overheard. The typical fare is a cappuccino and croissant with cherry marmalade; €30 for two.

Piazza San Lorenzo in Lucina 29 

 39 06-6876606

 www.ciampini.net 

 Hotel Raphael 

While trendy power brokers may flock to the Hôtel Costes, this discreet hotel close to the Arc de Triomphe is a favorite with insiders like Bernard-Henri Lévy. Breakfast-goers range from Hollywood types to senior diplomats. Breakfast buffet, 7-10 a.m.; €39 per person.

17 Avenue Kléber 

 33 (0)1 53 64 32 00

 www.raphael-hotel.com 

 Coffeemania 

Open 24 hours a day, this fashionable café is frequented by the foreign business community as well as wealthy Russians. In the summer, the terrace is the most popular place for coffee and cakes, despite the high prices; €60 for two. 

Bolshaya Nikitskaya ul 13 

 7 495 775 51 88 

 www.coffeemania.ru 

Breakfast is frequently considered to be the new power lunch and private members' clubs have increased in importance. In London, there are three places that attract powerful people for breakfast: the Goring Hotel, discreetly hidden behind Buckingham Palace; the Wolseley, on Piccadilly next to the Ritz; and George, a private members' club in Mayfair. One senior banker assured me that "the reality is that the power breakfast is alive and kicking, and in many ways has overtaken the power lunch." 

However, in the art world, it is a slightly different story. One senior auction executive who recently arrived in London from New York was told to "never, ever invite anybody to do a business breakfast, as that is completely frowned on over here," as too commercial. "In the early '90s, the business lunch crowd tended to be stockbrokers, lawyers and head-hunters," says restaurateur Nigel Platts-Martin, "but these days, they are more likely to be hedge-fund directors or senior people in the art world." Art denizens congregate at Cecconi's near Savile Row, although many key players, such as portrait specialist Philip Mould, prefer to entertain closer to home. "My business lunches take place in my gallery, so the portraits become extended guests at the event and often end up selling themselves." However, he has reason to be grateful for the power lunch too. "The quickest sale I ever made was under 30 seconds to a hedge funder who was obviously well-oiled from someone else's power lunch before he came through my door."

The efficiency of mixing business with pleasure may have been embraced across Europe, but Britain remains the capital of the power lunch. Business lunches here last from one to two hours, and the speed of service often outweighs the quality of the food. In Paris, these meetings rarely, if ever, last for just one hour and they all tend to take place at two- or, more commonly, three-star Michelin establishments in the leading hotels, such as Le Cinq at Four Seasons George V, Alain Ducasse at Plaza Athénée, Eric Frechon at Le Bristol or Yannick Aleno at Le Meurice.

In Italy, the concept has some life in Milan but in Rome, they tend to be pleasurable affairs that extend throughout the afternoon at places such as Dal Bolognese on Piazza del Popolo or Ristorante Tullio off Piazza Barberini. "The only residents in Rome who take lunch seriously nowadays are non-powerful people like cardinals and aristocrats," one Milanese publisher added. 

 One stalwart London location for the power lunch has always been the Ritz, with its stylish three-course lunch, served in precisely one hour, and the superlative French-Empire room overlooking Green Park. Lord Renwick, a former British ambassador to the U.S. and currently a director of several major companies, still has a regular table. However, on a recent visit, the room was practically deserted, with only a third of the tables filled on a Friday. Instead, it is almost impossible to get a table there for breakfast.

But it is perhaps London's Savoy Grill that is still considered ground zero of power lunches. Its location almost equidistant to Mayfair, Fleet Street and the City of London has attracted a potent mixture of celebrities, newspaper editors and tycoons. In the 1950s, there was even a guide produced showing where Walt Disney and Aristotle Onassis preferred to sit. Since the Grill reopened after the hotel's total refurbishment late last year, it has quickly regained the business crowd for lunch. 

Increasingly, however, one big shift from the days of old has been the tendency for no alcoholic consumption whatsoever. My banker friend, who has an enviable wine cellar, told me that one of the paramount rules is that he never says he would like to drink. He leaves it to the guest to decide first and if they say no, he refrains from ordering even a glass. Sniffed one financier: "The Americans have a lot to answer for." 

 Write to  Bruce Palling at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 