TOKYO—The Japanese government took its first steps Wednesday toward overhauling the country's tax regime, picking key ministers to formulate a tax-increase proposal and seeking talks with the private sector ahead of what is expected to be a bruising battle that could make or break the premiership of Prime Minister Naoto Kan.

The moves lay the groundwork for a draft proposal by the end of June to change Japan's strained tax and social security systems, partly through increasing the country's 5% consumption tax. Mr. Kan, who shuffled his cabinet last week, has been escalating efforts to curb the country's ballooning public debt, which stands at nearly twice annual economic output, although political stalemate and low public approval ratings make it uncertain whether his ambitious plan will succeed.

Earlier in the day, Economy Minister Kaoru Yosano, National Policy Minister Koichiro Genba, Chief Cabinet Secretary Yukio Edano and Deputy Chief Cabinet Secretary Hirohisa Fujii met in the prime minister's office to decide the roles they should play in the project.

The four policy makers put Mr. Yosano—a veteran fiscal "hawk" who has long championed higher consumption taxes—in charge of coming up with the details of the plan, according to the economy minister. They also decided to set up a panel of government officials and private-sector experts to debate the tax issue, Mr. Yosano said.

"If we keep going with no fiscal discipline, allowing the stock of public debt to grow larger or continuing to borrow more than we receive in tax revenue, international confidence in Japan could be gradually eroded," Mr. Yosano said.

Mr. Yosano, along with Mr. Fujii and Finance Minister Yoshihiko Noda, have recently called for passing a law by the fiscal year ending March 2012 to allow a gradual increase in the consumption tax rate. He told reporters earlier in the day that the government "should clearly note" the size and timing of future consumption tax rises in the reform proposal.

Mr. Genba will be responsible for talking to ruling and opposition lawmakers about the planned overhaul, while Messrs. Edano and Fujii will supervise the whole project, according to Mr. Yosano.

The meeting comes as the government prepares to launch regular ministerial talks on tax and social security reform, with the four ministers and other high-profile officials, including Finance Minister Noda, expected to be regular attendees.

Although the date of the first meeting hasn't been set, "we'd like to start [talks] as soon as possible," Mr. Yosano told reporters.

Levied on nearly every good and service bought by consumers in Japan, the sales tax brings in stable revenue streams that are less dependent on maintaining buoyant economic growth, and many analysts consider increases in the tax the best way to reduce Japan's debt over time. But the tax has been unpopular with Japanese voters, making it a politically hot-button issue.

Japan's divided parliament, Mr. Kan's low public approval ratings and increasingly uncooperative opposition parties also make the success of the project far from certain. His Democratic Party of Japan holds control over the Lower House of Parliament, but passing tax legislation will require approval from the opposition-controlled Upper House. 

—Takashi Mochizuki contributed to this article.

 Write to  Takashi Nakamichi at takashi.nakamichi@dowjones.com 