BRUSSELS—European leaders sealed Thursday a revised agreement to create a new euro-zone bailout fund, even as one of the bloc's most troubled members, Portugal, lurched closer to needing a rescue itself.

But the revisions, to a preliminary deal reached by finance ministers just days ago, appear to weaken the fund, and leaders couldn't come to an accord on modifications to a separate, temporary fund they have long vowed to beef up.

EU leaders have said for weeks that a two-day summit under way in Brussels would seal a "grand bargain" on measures to combat Europe's persistent sovereign debt crisis. But efforts to complete that deal have been complicated by last-minute resistance to the terms of the bailout funds, and by Portugal's sudden political crisis.

Wednesday night, Portuguese Prime Minister José Sócrates submitted his resignation after losing a key vote in parliament on a package of budget cuts and tax increases that European policymakers had urged him to make earlier this month.

The resignation thrust Portugal into political limbo. Mr. Sócrates is in Brussels for the summit, but it isn't clear whether he'd have the authority to negotiate a bailout. Portugal has a dwindling cash balance and faces a large bond repayment in mid-April, meaning time is tight for it to secure more cash.

Portuguese President Aníbal Cavaco Silva will begin meeting Friday with the leaders of all the political parties represented in Parliament, the first step of a process that is expected to lead to early elections.

After the failure of Mr. Sócrates' budget measures, yields on Portuguese debt shot up in the secondary market, reflecting the higher borrowing costs the country would face should it try to raise money from investors.

The ratings firms Standard & Poor's and Fitch Ratings both cut Portugal's debt two notches Thursday. In Brussels, talk turned to a Portuguese rescue.

"It could perhaps be useful to give aid, simply because the aid will allow [Portugal] to pay less interest on its debt while it reforms and therefore seeks less effort from the people," said Belgian Finance Minister Didier Reynders, ahead of Thursday's meeting.

Jean-Claude Juncker of Luxembourg, who heads the group of euro-zone finance ministers, said in a radio interview that he couldn't rule out a Portuguese bailout and suggested that €75 billion ($106 billion) was an appropriate amount.

At Thursday's meeting, Mr. Sócrates briefed his peers on the situation and assured them that Portugal still intended to meet fiscal targets it had earlier established. He made no request for aid. It is possible that Mr. Sócrates' caretaker government could attempt to limp on for several more weeks until elections are organized.

Meantime, European leaders acquiesced to a proposal by Germany that the new bailout fund, the European Stability Mechanism, be modified to reduce the strain on donor countries' budgets. 

The ESM, as conceived earlier this week by finance ministers, was supposed to be able to provide up to €500 billion in emergency assistance. It was to have a base of paid-in capital—which is to say, cash—of €80 billion, half of which was to be injected at the fund's debut in July 2013.

But Germany, which is responsible for nearly €22 billion of the €80 billion, balked at writing a large check. Instead, the capital contributions will be spread out over five years. 

That appears to give the fund less firepower at the outset, though leaders said they would make up any needed gaps with extra loan guarantees. 

Separately, consensus remained elusive on precisely how to beef up the bloc's temporary bailout fund, which has only about €250 billion available to lend despite being backed by €440 billion in guarantees. EU leaders have said they'll adjust the fund so that it can lend €440 billion, but there is disagreement on how.

Some resistance comes from Finland, whose parliament has dissolved ahead of elections next month. A right-wing party there has made significant strides in polling, in part by taking a stand against bailouts of weaker states.

Finland is one of six euro-zone countries with a triple-A credit rating, which gives it particular importance in discussions of the bailout funds. 

—Patricia Kowsmann, Matthew Dalton and Costas Paris contributed to this article.

 Write to  Charles Forelle at charles.forelle@wsj.com 