In conversation with others, we widen our eyes when they express surprise and crease our brows when they're worried. Psychologists believe that such physical mirroring heightens empathy and understanding.

Researchers wondered, then, whether someone who had received Botox injections, which stifle facial movements, would have trouble reading the emotions of others. They recruited 31 female patients from cosmetic-surgery clinics. Half had gotten Botox; the facial wrinkles of the rest were treated with a dermal "filler" that didn't inhibit motion.

When looking at photos of people expressing emotions, women who had used Botox had a lower accuracy rate, 69.9%, than the control group's 76.9%.

So, conversely, might people who are unusually conscious of facial movement be better at recognizing emotion? The researchers applied a quick-drying plastic film to the faces of half the men and women in a group of several dozen. Those wearing the film, which created a tugging sensation with each smile or frown, beat a control group at recognizing emotions in the photos. 

 "Embodied Emotion Perception: Amplifying and Dampening Facial Feedback Modulates Emotion Perception Accuracy," David T. Neal and Tanya L. Chartrand, Social Psychological & Personality Science (forthcoming) 

Foreign-policy "realists" dismiss the idea that international law matters in disputes between nations. But a study claims that such law shaped the course of 165 territorial disputes from 1945 to 2000. 

From the first voicing of a complaint, the researchers made monthly evaluations of whether a nation accepted the status quo, sought negotiations or threatened violence. They also coded the legal strength of the two sides' positions. 

Challengers with strong claims were 58% more likely to seek negotiations than nations with weak or "mixed" legal claims. In cases that entered negotiations or went before an international body, there was a final settlement 57% more often when one side had a stronger claim than the other. In reaching a favorable settlement, potent legal arguments far outweighed military strength.

 "Does International Law Promote the Peaceful Settlement of International Disputes? Evidence from the Study of Territorial Conflicts since 1945," Paul K. Huth, Sarah E. Croco, and Benjamin J. Appel, American Political Science Review (May) 

What factors shape human altruism? Researchers went to Brisbane, Australia, to three T-shaped intersections where motorists who stopped had to wait for an opening in the traffic flow.

The researchers watched from the roadside. In 959 interactions, drivers slowed to let the other driver in about 40% of the time—a fairly high rate of selfless behavior, the researchers observed. In general, men and women acted equally altruistically, but men were 22 percentage points more altruistic than women if the waiting driver was a woman.

Drivers of high-status cars, as defined by the researchers, were less likely to slow down (38% of the time) than drivers of average cars (47%), but more so than drivers of low-status cars (32%). Where car size and status were concerned, people tended to defer to people like themselves. And in general, drivers who looked 45 or older were more altruistic than younger drivers.

Of all factors measured, peer pressure was the most important: Drivers with at least one passenger acted altruistically 25 percentage points more often than those traveling solo.

 "Altruism in Society: Evidence From a Natural Experiment Involving Commuters," Redzo Mujcic and Paul Frijters, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA) Discussion Paper (April) 

Both white and black Americans see significant progress in the fight against antiblack bias, but white Americans believe that this progress has come at their expense, a survey finds.

The researchers asked a random national sample of 209 whites and 208 blacks how much discrimination each group faced, on a 1-to-10 scale, for each decade since the 1950s.

Black Americans saw antiblack bias steadily falling to 6.1 in the 2000s from 9.7 in the 1950s, while they saw antiwhite bias rise to 1.8 from 1.4. White Americans saw an even steeper decline in antiblack bias: to 3.6 in the 2000s from 9.1 in the '50s, but they perceived antiwhite bias shooting up to 4.7 from 1.8 in that period. White Americans, in short, thought that by the '00s antiwhite bias exceeded antiblack bias.

 "Whites See Racism as a Zero-Sum Game That They Are Now Losing," Michael I. Norton and Samuel R. Sommers, Perspectives on Psychological Science (May) 