Lights oscillate on a futuristic device that looks like an iPad redesigned for use on the Starship Enterprise. Yuka Honda, the versatile keyboardist and a star of New York's downtown music scene since the 1990s, is showing off her new toy with delight, creating a simple melody displayed in dancing LED patterns. 

"It doesn't save what you did," she says, explaining the charm of the Tenori-On, the Japanese-made electronic musical gizmo she recently acquired. "So you have to make your music every time. I think it's brilliant. It's Zen to me."

It's a sunny afternoon in the home studio that Ms. Honda shares with several musicians who also live in this Manhattan brownstone. One of them is her ex-boyfriend, Sean Lennon, a partner with Ms. Honda in the artist-run record company Chimera Music. On March 22, the label will release the debut album, "Salt on a Sea Glass," by If By Yes, the new quartet featuring Ms. Honda, Los Angeles-based vocalist Petra Haden, drummer Yuka Araki and guitarist Hirotaka "Shimmy" Shimizu. The group will perform Sunday at Littefield in Brooklyn and on Monday at (Le) Poisson Rouge in the West Village.

Ms. Honda, 50, spoke with the Journal about her unusual path through life. 

 In the mid-1980s, the Tokyo-born Ms. Honda hopes to visit Southeast Asia on a backpacking tour. But when she can't find a traveling companion, she decides to fly in the other direction, and lands in the East Village. 

I came, with no purpose. I wanted to go to Jamaica and see Reggae Sunsplash. I was just hanging out in the apartment. That's kind of how I got into music. My roommate had all these musical instruments that he bought in Japan, that he couldn't read the manuals of. So I started to read the manuals. This was all an accident."

 Mostly through the efforts of those around her, Ms. Honda turns to playing music.  

"I had this luck of people asking me to play. I was interviewing this woman. She had a piano, and I said, 'I used to take piano lessons as a kid but I was terrible and the teacher hated me and I quit.' And that evening her husband called me and said, 'Can you please play keyboards in my band?'"

 After playing in several bands, Ms. Honda forms Cibo Matto with her friend Miho Hatori in 1994. Ten people show up for their first gig at the Knitting Factory, but the duo soon takes a residency at CB's 313 Gallery, adjacent to the legendary Bowery punk dive CBGB. 

"I thought this was a joke band. We were just doing lots of funny things. It was a really exciting time here. I was jamming a lot. We had so many gigs. And interaction with a lot of musicians. The East Village was still kind of funky but also really happening. There was this experimental thing without the attitude of an experimental thing. There was energy that was really vibrating. We happened to be at the right place at the right time." 

 Though her studio is crammed with some genuine museum pieces from the analog era—including a Mellotron and a celeste—Ms. Honda has a soft spot for the early digital era. 

"I really loved the machines they made during the 1990s. They used to make digital samplers that sounded great. I don't know why, because they were big. Now they make very high-end samplers for computers and laptops, and they never sound as good." 

 In 2010, Ms. Honda marries Nels Cline, a Los Angeles guitar hero widely known as a member of Wilco, but with decades of stunning solo work also to his credit. They met when a mutual friend, bassist Mike Watt, suggested Mr. Cline join a new band they were forming. 

"We almost rushed into it. This is for both of us a second marriage and we felt pretty sure what we were doing. We felt very sure that this is it, for both of us. It felt like there was only one way that this road was taking us to. We got married in Japan in the house I grew up in. I wanted to do it there because my grandmother is 99 years old and it's easy for her to come across the street. We did a Shinto wedding. It became my friends' art installation party.

 Love—and Skype—keeps the couple connected despite often being apart on separate tour schedules. 

It's hard but it's also exciting. It definitely keeps it fresh. It also helps because we both do the same thing. I understand why he wants to go on tour, even though that separates us. I also want to go on tour. The fact that we're physically distant forces us to reach out farther. I can't start taking people for granted. I'm really trying to avoid that this time. I'm older and wiser.

 The songs on the If By Yes album have a breezy, almost tropical feel. They sound like a thinking person's version of beach music. Ms. Honda doesn't take all the credit. 

"Petra brings a lot of the bright side. If I'm alone I tend to write pretty dark songs. I like to work with people who bring in a lot of the sunny side. I have it in me, but they make it easier for me to access that side of myself. I really like the results." 

