Cybersecurity experts combating the Conficker worm claimed qualified success but said millions of computers world-wide were still infected by the malicious software.

In a report released Monday, a group of computer-security researchers said they managed to neutralize the worm's impact by blocking its ability to communicate with its creator, who remains unknown. But despite years of efforts by security experts, the worm still infects an estimated five million to fifteen million computers, the report said. 

The Conficker worm, which first appeared late in 2008, disables a computer's security measures, including Windows software updates and antivirus protection, leaving machines vulnerable to more malicious software. 

Despite success so far in blocking communications with the worm, its creator could still manage to activate the massive network of infected computers at some point, said Rodney Joffe, chairman of the working group and chief technologist of Neustar Inc., a technology and communications company.

"The operation was a complete success, but the patient died," said Mr. Joffe, because the group was unable to clean up the machines already infected or stop new ones from being infected. "It is a really sophisticated weapons system," he said.

A few hundred cyber researchers, academics, and software specialists worked overtime to neutralize Conficker in their free time shortly after it first appeared. An additional eight working groups modeled on the Conficker group are currently tackling other cyber threats; some of those groups' efforts already have led to arrests in other cases.

In its report, the Conficker Working Group concludes that cybersecurity threats are growing faster than the ability to counter them. 

"The number, scope, and sophistication of cyber threats are increasing more rapidly than the number of people vetted within the cybersecurity community capable of fighting them," the report concludes.

Mr. Joffe said the small number of qualified cyber researchers have strained to respond, especially when multiple threats surface at the same time. "It's a losing battle—it's the same people all the time. There comes a point when you get worn out," he said.

The working group's report noted the role private-sector researchers played in battling the worm and the small scale of U.S. government involvement.

"The group as a whole saw little participation from the government. One person put it as 'zero involvement, zero activity, zero knowledge,"' the report said.

Mr. Joffe said the U.S. government should engage the private sector more on cybersecurity issues, especially when it comes to sharing data on cyber incidents in government networks, because many government operations are at least partially dependent on private-sector networks running Internet traffic. 

The U.S. Department of Defense activated its Cyber Command in May to coordinate its offensive and defensive cyber activities and to oversee the protection of military communications networks. The U.S. Department of Homeland Security is responsible for the protection of other federal networks.

Much of the nation's critical infrastructure, from power plants to air-traffic control systems and banks, runs on private networks not formally defended by the government.

 Write to  Keith Johnson at keith.johnson@wsj.com 