Regeneron, the New York biopharmaceutical company that got its start in a leaky Manhattan studio apartment more than 20 years ago, has moved into a new headquarters facility in Westchester County, one that embodies its self-image as young, nimble company.

The three-building complex in the Landmark at Eastview office park near Tarrytown evokes a Google-style emphasis on a fun environment that makes someone straight out of college or graduate school feel at home. 

The design also accomplishes the feat of giving a cheerful look to robotics, tissue-culture labs and countless other rooms filled with highly esoteric equipment. 

The shells of the three classically modernist blue-glass-and-granite buildings were built by the landlord, BioMed Realty Trust, and designed by  Rick Kobus of Tsoi/Kobus & Associates. Mr. Kobus said he "tried to create a feel of glass elements that are suspended over the landscape and masonry elements that were grounded in the landscape."

Regeneron, which employs about 1,350 people, moved into the first two buildings in 2009, and into the third building this year. Regeneron's Westchester campus now encompasses 550,000 square feet, 360,000 of which are in the new buildings. They have some additional space elsewhere on campus. 

KlingStubbins handled the build-out of the first two edifices, and BAM Studio handled the third. Both phases were overseen by  Joanne Deyo, the self-described design "ring leader," and Regeneron's vice president in charge of facilities. 

Ms. Deyo was intent on making the office and laboratory space reflective of the company's start-up culture. "We truly understand that the facility can be a tool for recruiting and retaining employees," she says. "We wanted to create spaces that people want want to work in and be very happy to work in."

Hence the panoply of greens and violets and blues (there are 29 paint colors in all), not to mention bright staff lounges and a new cafeteria and fitness center.

The buildings have glass-enclosed central corridors opening onto office space on either side. The laboratories are along the buildings' perimetersand are complete with windows framing forest views. Natural light filters all the way into the buildings' core. The layered lay-out of the office and lab space is designed to break down intra-office barriers.

"In most labs, scientists like to have an individual fiefdom," said  Ross Cole of BAM Studio. "To consolidate is actually pretty radical."

Mr. Cole, who also designed the campus' fitness center and cafeteria, built a 35-foot-wide bridge over a loading dock to connect two of Regeneron's buildings. The bridge has been outfitted like a lounge, with green, red and blue furniture and a curved white path.

"You get here, and this is the first time that there's this big wide open area, that you can do a lots of stuff with," says Mr. Cole. "It creates a tremendous feeling of relief."