A cut to Greece's credit rating sparked a selloff in the bonds of highly indebted euro-zone countries, fueling concerns that Europe's debt crisis is coming to the boil once more.

Ratings company Standard & Poor's Corp. cut the Greek government's long-term credit rating to single-B from double-B-minus, thereby ranking Greece as less creditworthy than several developing nations. S&P said the risk is rising that Greece will push its bondholders to accept a delay in the repayment of its bonds.

The downgrade comes as European governments struggle to nurse the currency bloc's weakest economies back to health, and doubts are growing about Greece's ability to stabilize its finances and escape a crushing debt burden. While investors are increasingly shunning Greek debt, other countries that use the euro are facing the prospect of having to finance the stricken nation for years to come, despite mounting political resistance in Germany and other frugal northern European countries to bailouts of other euro-zone members. 

Europe's debt crisis has returned full-circle to where it seemed to have peaked almost a year ago, when the euro zone agreed to a €110 billion ($158 billion) bailout of Greece and the creation, together with the International Monetary Fund, of a €750 billion safety net for other struggling euro nations. 

Portugal is currently negotiating the third such aid package, following Ireland's bailout agreement last fall. But Greece's deepening woes show that weaning countries off aid, and restoring investors' trust in them, is proving far harder than expected. 

The euro zone's southern fringe could remain financially fragile "for decades," leading German economist Hans-Werner Sinn said Monday. But Europe needs the euro, he said, adding: "The difficulties that we have can be overcome."

But some economists said the declining confidence in Greece's ability to regain financial health could usher in a new chapter of the euro-zone debt crisis. "The official line that Greece has a liquidity and not a solvency problem is showing its cracks, putting into question the whole framework of financial support," BNP Paribas analysts said in a research note on Monday.

In recent days top European finance officials have begun debating how to keep Greece afloat next year, when it is likely to need nearly €30 billion in additional aid loans from its euro peers. Germany is quietly pushing for Greece to sit down with its bondholders and discuss a delay in the maturity dates of its bonds. Such a move would reduce Greece's new borrowing needs, but it is meeting with resistance from most euro-zone policy makers lest it unsettle financial markets further. 

S&P, announcing its downgrade, expressed the now-widespread view in markets that the likelihood of such a debt rescheduling is growing. The downgrade briefly pushed the euro down to $1.4254, from above $1.44 earlier in the day. It recovered to $1.4349 late afternoon in New York, still down modestly on the day but sharply below last Wednesday, when it was trading above $1.49. 

Greece's battered bonds suffered a further selloff, and the prices of other indebted euro-zone nations, including Ireland, Portugal, Spain and Italy, also fell.

The recent rise in Spanish bond yields is especially worrying for Europe because the country, whose €1.1 trillion economy is far larger than Greece's, is viewed as the key battlefield in Europe's struggle to stabilize its currency union. The extra yield demanded by investors to hold Spanish 10-year bonds rather than their super-safe German equivalents rose to over 2.2 percentage points, up more than one-tenth of a point since Friday.

Rival ratings firm Moody's Investors Service said it was reviewing Greece's creditworthiness for a possible downgrade, citing Greece's weaker-than-expected economy and public finances.

On Monday, French and German officials sought to damp the rising speculation that Greece might default or leave the euro zone. In a speech marking Europe Day, French Prime Minister François Fillon stressed the need for "unfailing solidarity" within the euro zone, particularly with struggling countries on Europe's southern periphery.

A spokesman for German Chancellor Angela Merkel said the idea that Greece might leave the euro zone has never been considered in earnest and isn't being considered now.

Greece criticized S&P for Monday's downgrade, saying there were no new facts to justify such a move. S&P said Greece's key euro-zone creditors appeared likely to extend the maturity dates of their €80 billion of bilateral loans to Greece, and that governments might well seek "comparability of treatment" from private-sector creditors in the form of extending the maturity dates of Greek bonds.

See key dates in Greece's economic crisis.

A group of senior euro-zone finance officials discussed such a maturity extension at talks in Luxembourg on Friday, as well as Greece's likely need for nearly €30 billion in additional aid loans next year, according to people familiar with the matter. There is no consensus about a maturity extension, a move that Germany is quietly pushing but that others, including the European Central Bank, are resisting, these people say.

A maturity extension could alleviate Greece's debt burden if it is accompanied by overhauls to revamp the country's economy and bring down its budget deficit, former ECB Vice President Lucas Papademos said in an interview on Monday. Such a rescheduling "can be done fruitfully if it is accompanied by the necessary fiscal and structural reform measures to address the root causes of the debt crisis," said Mr. Papademos, who used to head Greece's central bank.

S&P said a maturity extension, while worse for creditors than repaying bonds on time, was preferable to the country repaying less than all of its debt.

However, it said 50% or more of Greece's debt might ultimately have to be forgiven in order to bring the country's debt burden down to a sustainable level.

Many economists have suggested for months that a full-blown restructuring of Greece's debts is probably inevitable, given the country's weak growth prospects.

—Patrick McGroarty, Nathalie Boschat and Brian Blackstone contributed to this article.

 Write to  Marcus Walker at marcus.walker@wsj.com and Hannah Benjamin at hannah.benjamin@dowjones.com 