  (See Corrections & Amplifications item below.)  

Parenting advice in China has long stressed discipline and authority. Those lessons are reinforced in best-selling books like "Harvard Girl Liu Yiting," a how-to manual published in 2000 by the parents of a student who won a coveted spot at the Ivy League school. Among the character-building exercises to which they subjected their daughter was having her hold ice cubes in her hands for long stretches.

In recent years, however, books that encourage parents to nurture their children's independence and confidence, as opposed to focusing exclusively on high academic achievement, have grown increasingly popular. They reflect a quiet shift in the parenting style of middle-class families, especially in China's growing cities.

The current best-selling parenting book, "A Good Mom Is Better Than a Good Teacher," by former Beijing public school teacher Yin Jianli, has sold more than two million copies since it was published in January 2009. Ms. Yin advocates listening to kids and developing their potential without forcing them to obey authority. 

 Teaching Math to Spark Creative Thinking 

 Can Bilingualism Make Preschoolers Smarter? 

Chinese parents rarely question the decisions of teachers, but Ms. Yin sometimes offered to do homework for her daughter. In one case, a teacher had asked the girl to copy the same words over a dozen times one night as punishment for failing to memorize them. Ms. Yin believes that such tasks hurt children's interest in studying.

Another best-seller, "Catching Children's Sensitive Periods" by Sun Ruixue, follows a similar approach. Ms. Sun writes that she "aims to help more parents understand their kids and let every kid grow up healthily in love and freedom." It is a sequel to her 2000 book "Love and Freedom," which focused on the idea of discovering a child's "true nature," as developed by the Italian physician and education reformer Maria Montessori. 

In "My Kid Is a Medium-Ranking Student," author Fang Gang stresses that children don't necessarily need the highest test scores to enjoy a happy and successful life. "Our society, to some extent, remains a society full of ranking-related prejudice," he writes. But among the students with the top test scores, he asks, "how many have kept independent thinking, creativity and their unique characteristics?"

Many readers of these books—parents in their 30s and 40s—were born during the Cultural Revolution that took place in China from 1966 to 1976. After the turmoil of that difficult period, traditional thinking about education persisted. At schools, teachers continued to evaluate students on the basis of test scores and how closely they followed instructions. As China has gradually opened up to the world, however, Western ideas about education have spread, and many parents have started to question the traditional approach. 

Now, most of the best-selling parenting books listed on Dangdang.com, China's largest online book retailer, are written by authors from outside of mainland China, including South Korea, the U.S., Taiwan, Japan, Germany and the U.K. American imports on the list include John Gray's "Children Are From Heaven: Positive Parenting Skills for Raising Cooperative, Confident and Compassionate Children," and "How To Talk So Kids Will Listen & Listen So Kids Will Talk," by Adele Faber and Elaine Mazlish.

Another best seller, "One Must Not Fail in the Enterprise of Being a Father," is co-written by Alex Xu, an American businessman who was born in China's countryside and later received his master's degree in the U.S., and his daughter Ashley Xu, who was born and educated in the U.S. Mr. Xu, who runs a hotel chain in China and heads several other multinational companies, urges parents to ease the burden of their children's studies and to choose supplementary after-school activities based on their children's interests rather than on their own ambitions for them. 

Mr. Xu encouraged his daughter Ashley to be "as confident as a foreign kid," resisting the traditional Chinese emphasis on quiet deference to authority. Children shouldn't be arrogant, he says, but they also shouldn't be "overly modest." 

—Victoria Ruan

 Corrections & Amplifications 

A graphic with this article referred to "Taiwan, China." The practice of The Wall Street Journal is to refer to the island as Taiwan.

