  Andrey Melnichenko, a billionaire Russian tycoon, and his wife, Aleksandra, a former model, have bought their first Manhattan home, a pied-à-terre for when they aren't bunking aboard their $300 million yacht.

Property records list Ms. Melnichenko as the purchaser of a two-bedroom penthouse for $12.2 million at 110 Central Park South. The duplex has two balconies and a terrace facing Central Park.

The 2,800-square-foot apartment has an entrance gallery with 24-foot ceilings. But the most striking feature, according to a broker who toured the space, is the dead-on view northward of Central Park in all rooms from the top of the 28-story building. 

  Brian MacLaurin, a spokesman for the Melnichenko family in London, confirmed the purchase of the Manhattan apartment. He declined to provide details.

Mr. Melnichenko, 38 years old, made a fortune in fertilizer and banking and has significant investment in an integrated coal and energy company. He has a net worth estimated by Forbes magazine at $4.4 billion. 

Last year, Mr. Melnichenko's yacht—a 394-foot submarine-shaped vessel designed by  Philippe Starck and known as "A," made waves as it toured along the California coast. It has a crew of at least 35, three pools, bomb-proof glass and bath knobs that cost $40,000 a piece.

The Melnichenkos have numerous homes, including apartments and estates in Moscow, France and the U.K. But the pied-à-terre is believed to be their first toehold in Manhattan.

The sale at 110 Central Park South works out to $4,200 a square foot and shows how the success of buildings like the Plaza to the east, and the Time Warner Center to the west have helped maintain prices in other prime properties in the area.

The building was converted to a co-op with less restrictive condominium rules in 2006. It had previously been the site of an InterContinental Hotel, and before that, the Ritz Carlton Hotel. 

"It is one of the quietest buildings on Central Park South, but there are a lot of high-net-worth individuals there," said  Daniela Sassoun of Corcoran Group, who has a listing in the building.