AJDABIYA, Libya — Col. Moammar Gadhafi's forces seized the last town standing between them and the rebel capital, raising the specter that, even if the U.S. and Europe decide to intervene on the rebels' behalf, their help may come too late.

In a devastating development for the rebel cause, Col. Gadhafi's fighter jets bombed the center of the town of Ajdabiya, and his troops outmaneuvered rebel forces there, clearing a path to the rebel capital of Benghazi, in eastern Libya. 

"The city is in ruins," said Ali Faraj Hammada, leader of Ajdabiya's revolutionary committee, as he fled toward Benghazi in a blood-soaked car.

Gadhafi loyalists pulled back to Ajdabiya's outskirts after nightfall, and residents braced for a new round of shelling and airstrikes. Col. Gadhafi's regime also touted its control of Zuwara, near the Tunisian border, and closed in on Misurata, the country's third-largest city. In Benghazi, streets were eerily empty as many residents started fleeing toward Egypt. 

As events moved at high speed on the battlefield, the U.S. and other nations that have called for Col. Gadhafi's ouster continued to debate how to make that happen.

Mohammed Abdallah, a rebel commander outside Ajdabiya, said foreign inaction meant "the hands of the international community are covered in blood. Now Gadhafi will keep on bombing and killing us without fear of anyone stopping him."

Britain, with backing from the U.S., France and Lebanon, submitted a resolution to the United Nations Security Council that, if approved, would authorize the establishment of a no-fly zone in Libya, as well set up protected humanitarian areas, and impose new sanctions on Libyan officials. 

The Council was scheduled to resume discussion of the draft at 11 a.m. Wednesday said French ambassador Gerard Araud, but he said he was doubtful the measure could be voted on by Wednesday.

"We will have a debate, paragraph by paragraph, as in a traditional negotiation," he said.

Senior U.S. officials said the measures proposed in the U.N. resolution may no longer be enough to push the resurgent Col. Gadhafi from power.

The White House chafed, however, at suggestions that inaction by the U.S. and its allies have allowed Col. Gadhafi to regain the momentum. "We have taken dramatic action, together with our international partners, to put pressure on Moammar Gadhafi and his regime," said White House spokesman Jay Carney.

The U.S. has frozen more than $30 billion in Libyan assets belonging to Col. Gadhafi, his family and the Libyan regime. On Tuesday, the U.S. added Libya's foreign minister and 16 Gadhafi-controlled companies to the list.

The White House stressed that President Barack Obama hadn't decided whether to support military action. But the U.S. was involved in drafting the resolution and would likely sign onto the plan, U.S. officials said. A no-fly zone would begin with strikes on Libyan forces, U.S. officials have said.

Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, in Egypt, said the U.S. "understands the urgency" of the situation on the ground. "We are looking for ways to increase our support for the opposition," she said.

European officials said China and Russia would likely oppose or delay action on the resolution. European diplomats said they need more aggressive U.S. support, as well as logistical support from key Arab countries.

France has struggled to rally support for fast-tracking a military operation, seeking airstrikes against selected targets, such as runways, to clip the wings of Col. Gadhafi's air force.

But Foreign Minister Alain Juppé said Tuesday that at this point airstrikes wouldn't stop Col. Gadhafi's forces.

Col. Gadhafi vowed in a televised address late Tuesday to crush his enemies, and signaled that there would be no mercy for those who fought his regime. 

"If this is a colonialist conspiracy we are determined to defeat it, if this an internal conspiracy we are determined to defeat it!" he said.

Gains by Col. Gadhafi's forces raised the possibility of a heightened humanitarian crisis, as more Libyans try to flee the country and those that stay face the possibility of retribution from the government.

Track events day by day.

See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

A look at the economic and political status of selected countries facing unrest in North Africa and the Middle East.

In British Parliament Tuesday, Foreign Secretary William Hague told lawmakers that a Security Council resolution wouldn't be needed to make military intervention legal, in the case of "overwhelming humanitarian need."

The deliberate pace of diplomacy contrasted with the growing sense of desperation among opponents of Col. Gadhafi's 42-year rule.

"If you do not give the victims of this regime the chance to fight back, then they are going to die," said Mansour el-Kikhia, a U.S.-based Libyan dissident and professor of political science at the University of Texas-San Antonio. 

As recently as early last week, Col. Gadhafi's regime seemed vulnerable to becoming another victim of the popular uprisings sweeping over the Arab world. 

On Monday, Mr. Hammada, the rebel leader in Ajdabiya, was confidently predicting that the ragtag rebel force, helped by defected army soldiers, would be able to hold off Col. Gadhafi's forces for months.

On Tuesday afternoon, demoralized rebels streamed out of Ajdabiya, trying to regroup along a four-lane highway to Benghazi that was packed with ambulances and cars of fleeing civilians.

Ajdabiya was the last major population center between government-controlled territory and Benghazi, a little more than an hour's drive away. To the east, a desert highway that leads to the Egyptian border could allow Col. Gadhafi's ground forces to encircle the rebel heartland.

Libyan government forces first pounded central Ajdabiya with airstrikes, rocket launchers, and artillery Tuesday morning, witnesses said. Then, Col. Gadhafi's troops, many disguised as civilians, penetrated the city from the west and southwest, quickly overrunning Ajdabiya's center, said Mr. Hammada.

"Advance, unite in numbers!" urged a frantic broadcast Tuesday afternoon on the Voice of Free Libya, the rebels' Benghazi-based channel. "Yes, he owns planes, yes he owns missiles, but we have God with us and we'll achieve victory or death! This is our last stand." 

"Anything that moves, anything that drives, they shoot it down," Mr. Hammada said as he careened in his car, with rocket-propelled grenades strewn on a back seat, to a rebel checkpoint position on the eastern exit from Ajdabiya. "The houses and the mosque have been destroyed. Many are killed."

A doctor in the city's hospital said Tuesday night he had treated scores of injured residents and saw 12 fatalities.

Rebel fighters, scanning the skies as they fled Ajdabiya, randomly shot from anti-aircraft guns as one of their commander screamed at the men to disperse along the highway, so as not to make an attractive target.

By day's end, residents of Ajdabiya said Col. Gadhafi's forces appeared to have pulled back from the city center. Armed residents of Ajdabiya took to the streets after nightfall, marching through the city center and celebrating, residents said.

But residents who supported the rebels weren't confident that that was a good sign for them.

"Our fear is that he'll shell us from the sea and launch the air strikes again," said Ayad Hassan, a rebel council member in Ajdabiya. In previous assaults on rebel-held cities, government forces have repeatedly used such tactics, penetrating heavily built-up areas, and then withdrawing as they tightened the noose.

Col. Gadhafi's troops also surrounded the rebel-held coastal city of Misurata, 125 miles east of Tripoli, and residents braced themselves for an imminent offensive.

In western Libya, near the Tunisian border, rebels in Zuwara, one of the first towns seized by the uprising, said government troops retook the town with heavy tank and artillery fire, and the town was calm. The victory, if confirmed, would solidify Col. Gadhafi's hold on the western stretch of coastline. 

Rebels recently said they were still in control of other predominantly Berber towns and villages in an area known as the Western Mountain.

Foreign journalists based in Tripoli were unable to verify the reports.

The International Energy Agency said Tuesday that Libyan oil exports have "ground to halt" in the wake of fierce fighting around oil towns in the country's east.

 Corrections & Amplifications 

China is currently president of the United Nations Security Council. In some editions Tuesday, this article incorrectly said Lebanon is the president.

—Adam Entous, Jay Solomon and Muneef Halawa  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Yaroslav Trofimov at yaroslav.trofimov@wsj.com, Joe Lauria at newseditor@wsj.com and Nathalie Boschat at nathalie.boschat@dowjones.com 