Good news for hefty husbands: According to a new study, for maximal marital happiness, a husband's body-mass index (calculated from a person's weight and height) ought to be greater than his wife's. 

The study checked in with 165 newlywed couples every six months for four years, using two questionnaires. Happiness steadily declined for couples of every size ratio over the course of the study. But men who had a higher BMI than their wives were slightly happier at the outset than those who had the same or a lower BMI. The higher-BMI group maintained that advantage over their peers throughout. 

And apparently it's not just men who like it when the wives are skinnier. For women in the study, male-female BMI ratio didn't play a role in happiness at the start of the study. But by the end of year four, the wives whose BMI was lower than that of their husbands were significantly happier than those who had the same BMI, or a higher one. 

Is there a whiff of societal sexism here? Perhaps, but women of any size can be happy, the authors write—so long as they find a right-sized male.

 "Marriages Are More Satisfying When Wives Are Thinner Than Their Husbands," Andrea L. Meltzer, James K. McNulty, Sarah A. Novak, Emily A. Butler, and Benjamin R. Karney, Social Psychological and Personality Science (forthcoming)  

Having students write about their anxiety before a high-stakes test, for 10 minutes, can reduce or eliminate the performance loss caused by nerves, a new study finds.

College students were given a challenging math test involving a subject they hadn't encountered before (but whose rules could be learned quickly). Then they learned they'd win $10 if they increased their score on a second test, and that their performance would also determine whether another student got $10. To add to the pressure, they'd be videotaped and their methods evaluated. 

Before Test 2, the students either sat quietly for 10 minutes or wrote about what they were feeling. The nonwriters "choked," the researchers said, with their scores dropping by 12 percentage points. But those who wrote about their anxiety raised their scores by four percentage points. Also, in field studies in real high-school biology classes, students with high test anxiety scored the equivalent of B-plus on a final exam when they did the writing exercise, and B-minus when they didn't.

 "Writing About Testing Worries Boosts Exam Performance in the Classroom," Gerardo Ramirez and Sian L. Beilock, Science (January) 

Do victims of the violence in Darfur deserve less sympathy than Haitians made homeless by an earthquake?

One hundred fifteen British students read one of two versions of an article describing the efforts of a (fake) charity group, focused on famine. One group read that natural drought was the primary cause of famine and that millions world-wide were starving. A second group was given the same statistics, but told that famine typically breaks out when armed conflict disrupts agriculture. Questions then probed whether students thought the famine victims deserved any blame for their woes.

On a scale of 1 to 7 (with 1 meaning pure innocence), the "victim blame" score was 1.87 when the disaster was entirely natural and 2.69 when it was a product of conflict. The victims of the natural disaster were also, for no objective reason, viewed as being more active in trying to help themselves.

The students had the option of donating a portion of their £3 participation fee (about $4.80) to the cause. If told famine is caused by natural events, they gave, on average, £2.32. Told it had roots in conflict, they donated £1.77.

 "Donating to Disaster Victims: Responses to Natural and Humanly Caused Events," Hanna Zagefka, Masi Noor, Rupert Brown, Georgina Randsley de Moura, and Tim Hopthrow, European Journal of Social Psychology (forthcoming)  

Antipsychotic drugs are being overprescribed in the U.S, a study suggests, and the trend could be costing billions annually. From 1995 to 2000, there was a simple substitution of new drugs (Seroquel, Risperdal) for older ones (Haldol, for example), according to the study, which drew on reports of office visits kept by a representative sample of 4,800 physicians. But from 2000 to 2008, doctor's visits related to anti-psychotic drugs skyrocketed, from roughly six million to 14.3 million.

According to the report, nine million of these visits were for uses not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, such as treating depression, aggression or post-traumatic stress. Citing a database of drug research, Drugdex, the authors estimate that 91% of off-label uses are supported by, at best, "uncertain" evidence. In 2008, they say, the cost of such potentially dubious prescriptions was $5.4 billion.

 "Increasing Off-Label Use of Antipsychotic Medications in the United States, 1995-2008," G. C. Alexander, S.A. Gallagher, A. Mascola, R.M. Moloney, and R.S. Stafford, Pharmacoepidemiology and Drug Safety (forthcoming)  

A study shows that round numbers pack a psychological punch, motivating both pro baseball players and takers of the SAT. 

The researchers examined the batting averages of Major League Baseball hitters from 1975 to 2008, looking for evidence that crossing the .300 mark inspired unusual effort in a season's final games (including sitting out a game, or an at-bat). If it didn't, the distribution of averages from .298 to .301 would be more or less random. The researchers, however, found that the proportion of players who hit exactly .300 was nearly four times greater than the proportion who hit .299 (1.4% versus 0.38%). 

Similarly, the study found that juniors who scored 10 points below a round number on the SAT were much more likely to retake the test (signaling dissatisfaction) than other students. 

 "Round Numbers as Goals: Evidence From Baseball, SAT Takers, and the Lab," Devin Pope and Uri Simonsohn, Psychological Science (January) 