TOKYO—Japan's budget for the next fiscal year cleared a key parliamentary hurdle, but major challenges remain for the government as worsening political deadlock means the economic and fiscal policy changes needed to pay for the record spending plan look increasingly unlikely to come to fruition. 

The government of beleaguered Prime Minister Naoto Kan could face a fiscal crunch in July or later if opposition parties continue to block measures such as a bond issuance to cover the budget deficit, analysts say, raising the stakes in a political stand-off that some say is likely to end in a snap election. 

Japan's lower house, the more powerful of the two parliamentary chambers, on Tuesday passed a record 92.412 trillion yen ($1.078 trillion) national budget bill for the fiscal year starting in April. 

The move makes the enactment of the budget before the end of the current fiscal year a certainty, as Japan's constitution stipulates that a lower house-endorsed budget is automatically enacted even if the upper chamber rejects it or abstains from voting for 30 days. 

The government now needs to enact separate legislation to carry out some of the measures in the budget, including lowering the nation's roughly 40% corporate tax by five percentage points, raising about 38 trillion yen through a deficit-financing bond issuance and tapping yen reserves to pay more than 2 trillion yen for the national pension program. 

Yet the chance of their swift passage looks slim, as it would require support from the opposition-controlled upper house. The ruling Democratic Party of Japan and its coalition partners don't have a two-thirds majority in the lower house that would enable them to override a rejection from the upper chamber, and as public support for the Kan government slides below 20% in some local media polls, many opposition politicians are growing less willing to approve the government's proposed legislation. 

And in signs of further trouble ahead for Mr. Kan, more than a dozen DPJ lawmakers abstained in the lower chamber vote earlier in the day in a likely show of discontent over Mr. Kan's leadership amid a widening intra-party rift. 

Confident of beating Mr. Kan's DPJ in elections, the largest opposition Liberal Democratic Party is demanding that he dissolve the lower chamber so voters can pick new leaders, while the smaller New Komeito and Social Democratic parties are against the deficit-bond bill. 

The political deadlock has worsened to such an extent that some opposition lawmakers are now questioning their parties' strategies. 

"The LDP should be renovating itself whilst in the opposition, but is instead focusing on attacking Kan," LDP lawmaker Taro Kono said at a conference Monday. "I disagree with the LDP's strategy to force a snap election—we should be concentrating on important budget-related bills, not pushing for an election that neither party could win." 

The budgetary mess highlights the leadership challenges facing Mr. Kan since his party lost control of the upper house in last summer's elections. Over recent months, Mr. Kan's low public support, internal strife within the ruling party, signs of economic recovery and planned nationwide municipal elections in April have made the opposition more uncooperative. 

Unable to break the impasse, the Kan administration did not put key budget-linked legislation to the vote Tuesday. Among them was a deficit-covering bond issuance bill, which is by convention put to vote on the same day as the main budget bill. 

The government could continue to operate for some time without selling deficit-covering securities by using tax revenues and invoking a provision in the main budget bill that allows it to issue up to 20 trillion yen of short-term debt. But analysts say the government would face money shortages in July or later. 

"Also, the market could get confused," as many investors already plan to buy public debt of particular maturities in line with a government borrowing plan released late last year, said Takero Doi, a professor at Keio University specializing in fiscal policy. 

The economy isn't likely to get much boost from the budget even if it is fully executed, as debt-servicing costs and social security spending make up more than half of total spending. 