President Barack Obama is riding a surge of public support into next week's State of the Union address, with more Americans approving of his performance and more seeing him as a political moderate, according to a new Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll.

But public concern is coalescing around the stubbornly high unemployment rate, now 9.4%, a potential pitfall for the president. If rising optimism about the economic recovery dwindles, the surge of support could fade, pollsters say. 

In the survey, 53% said they approved of the job Mr. Obama is doing as president, up eight percentage points from December. Forty-one percent said they disapprove of the president's performance, down from 48% last month. The poll surveyed 1,000 adults from Jan. 13-17.

Among political independents, positive views of Mr. Obama's job performance surpassed negative views for the first time since August 2009. For the first time in a year, the president drew a positive reaction from white adults, when asked about their feelings toward Mr. Obama. 

The poll was conducted days after a shooting rampage in Tucson, Ariz., in which six people died and 14 were injured, including Gabrielle Giffords, a Democratic congresswoman from the state. 

Surges in presidential popularity are common after a galvanizing national tragedy, said Bill McInturff, a Republican pollster who co-directs the Journal/NBC News poll with Democrat Peter Hart. Bill Clinton saw a four-point jump after the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing. George W. Bush saw a surge after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.

But those bounces can be fleeting. Mr. Clinton's faded in a month amid partisan arguments over the budget. Mr. Bush's lasted as the nation shifted onto a war footing.

See results from The Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll.

The poll found that Republicans, whose hand in Congress was strengthened by the November elections, face low voter expectations, with a quarter of respondents saying the new House majority will bring the right kind of change to the country. In January, 2007, 42% of voters said the same of Democrats, as they assumed control of Congress. 

Among those polled, 55% predicted Republican lawmakers would be too inflexible in dealing with the president. At the same time, 55% said Mr. Obama will strike the right balance between flexibility and standing his ground.

Mr. Hart, the pollster, said the results suggest that in dealing with Congress, "the president has the benefit of the doubt, and Republicans, based on this data, have the burden of proof."

Among the poll's respondents, James Barnes, a 59-year-old independent and a retired accountant in Blue Springs, Mo., said, "We've lived through a recent situation where the far left and the far right have been doing all the talking, and they're so far apart on solutions. Everyone is going to have to move toward the middle before things start getting done. I'm not so sure the tea-party folks who got elected are coming in with the thought we're moving toward the middle."

The poll comes after December's lame-duck session of Congress gave Mr. Obama the chance to tack to the center to notch major bipartisan victories on taxes and arms control, while winning the long-sought liberal goal of allowing gays to serve openly in the military.

 I really hope he and Congress can work on implementing an effective plan to reduce the high unemployment and deficit. If your wish is to see that he and Congress fail in accomplishing those goals together, then we are in for at least another two years of economic misery. 

—Robert Hemedes

More recently, Mr. Obama's nationally televised speech after the Arizona shootings was an opportunity to strike a tone of national unity that has eluded him since the presidential campaign. He is likely to reprise themes of national unity in Tuesday night's the State of the Union address. Republican and Democratic lawmakers have promised to sit together for the speech and adopt a less-partisan posture after the shootings. 

A senior administration official said Mr. Obama is now well-positioned to win the public to his side if Republicans in Congress adopt hard-line stances on health care and spending to please their conservative base. White House officials want the president to be seen as the one extending a cooperative hand if relations between the parties break down.

Republicans said their agenda better reflects what voters want from government. "We've laid out an agenda that reflects what the American people's priorities are, something that we haven't seen from this administration in two years," said Brendan Buck, a spokesman for House Speaker John A. Boehner (R, Ohio). "If they are willing to change course and address the people's priorities, that's great, but we haven't seen that yet."

The president's rising approval numbers come amid signs of optimism about the economy. This month, 40% of those surveyed said they believe the economy will improve over the next year, up from 32% in December. Only 17% said it would get worse, down from 24%.

Eduardo D. Sepulveda, a retired 65-year-old independent who lives northwest of San Antonio, Texas, said he disapproves of the way the president—for whom he voted in 2008—is handling the economy, but he still has "faith in him." 

Such ambivalence tinged with optimism comes as Mr. Obama continues what appears to be a successful repositioning in the political center. Forty percent of Americans now see him as a moderate, up 10 percentage points from a year ago. The number calling him "very liberal" has declined from 33% in January 2010, to 27% now. Forty-four percent of independents now call the president a moderate, up from 28% a year ago.

"He wants to be in the center," said Linda Bontrager, 50, a Republican from Goshen, Ind., who credited the new Republican majority for the president's perceived shift. "His goal is to get people talking. He wants to get people to the table to work things out."

"When I voted for him, his rhetoric was liberal," said John Grech, 42, a high-school government teacher in Sebastopol, Calif. "I haven't seen a liberal president. I've seen a moderate president who makes deal after deal." A self-described liberal, Mr. Grech said he was unhappy with Mr. Obama's job performance. 

Politically, Mr. Obama enters the election season in good shape. At this stage in 1995, Bill Clinton's approval rating stood at 45%, and he was two points behind then-Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole, the eventual GOP presidential nominee, in a theoretical match-up. By contrast, Mr. Obama leads former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee 51% to 41% and former House Speaker Newt Gingrich 54% to 35%. Those numbers are comparable to the leads Mr. Obama had last month over former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin and former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney in a Journal/NBC News survey. 

"If there's a winning coalition against Obama, it's not anywhere close to forming," Mr. McInturff said.

But Mr. Obama has work to do if he is to assemble the coalition that gave him his comfortable victory in 2008. His approval ratings have jumped into positive territory in the Midwest, a good sign for him after the drubbing Democrats sustained there in November. But he still trails among white men, especially those over 50, and with voters in the south and in rural America. 

"Those are the groups left behind" in this surge, said Mr. McInturff, adding that if they haven't sided with the president over the last month, they will be very difficult to win over before the 2012 election. 

The Wall Street Journal / NBC News poll was based on nationwide telephone interviews of 1,000 adults, including a sample of 200 adults who only use a cell phone. It was conducted from January 13-17, 2011, by the polling organizations of Peter D. Hart and Bill McInturff. 

The sample was drawn in the following manner: Individuals were selected proportionate to the nation's population in accordance with a probability sample design that gives all landline telephone numbers, listed and unlisted, an equal chance to be included. Registered voters age 18 or over were selected by a systematic procedure to provide a balance of respondents by sex. The cell phone sample was drawn from a list of cell phone users nationally, and respondents were screened to ensure that their cell phone is their only phone.

The data's margin of error is plus or minus 3.1 percentage points. Sample tolerances for subgroups are larger. 

 Write to  Jonathan Weisman at jonathan.weisman@wsj.com and Danny Yadron at danny.yadron@wsj.com 