CARACAS—Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez says he hopes to send one million barrels of oil per day to China within the next three years, but industry data suggest the odds are against that happening. 

The plan would require a drastic increase in production at a time when the South American country faces a lack of investment in the petroleum sector and declining output.

Based on production estimates from foreign energy agencies, such shipments would account for less than half of what Venezuela is now making, while at the same time potentially putting a strain on Venezuela's finances as much of the oil shipments to China are rumored to be sold at steep discounts.

Energy Minister  Rafael Ramirez, who doubles as president of state-owned oil firm Petroleos de Venezuela, denies that oil shipments to China or to any other country are made at discounted rates. But the terms on the sales aren't disclosed. 

In any event, "in the short run, Venezuela cannot afford to send them [China] a million barrels a day," said  Alejandro Grisanti, an analyst at Barclays Capital.

According to the International Energy Agency, Venezuela's oil output stood at 2.2 million barrels per day in February.

Both the IEA and the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, of which Venezuela is a founding member, have been in contention with Caracas in recent years because they estimate output significantly below the nearly three million barrels a day that Venezuela contends it's producing. That figure is similar to consensus industry estimates when Chavez first took office in 1999. 

The Chavez administration says some of its petroleum products are currently not being accounted for in the foreign estimates, which also suggest that production capacity has slipped from 3.3 million barrels to around 2.3 million barrels over the last decade.

Venezuela claims to have the world's largest oil reserves, at nearly 297 billion barrels. But production and refining is where the problem lies, given that most of the country's crude is extra-heavy, as much solid as liquid, and difficult to extract and process.

That difficulty, coupled with an extensive nationalization campaign in the sector and a subsequent dearth of investment as the state oil company diverted resources into social programs, makes industry experts doubt Venezuela has the capacity to send such large volumes to China in the near term. 

At best, such an increase in production would need five years time to further develop the heavy oil reserves in the Orinoco Belt, said analysts at local development bank Corporacion Andina de Fomento. 

Rather than ramping up oil investment, though, critics say the diversion of resources into pet social projects has undercut output and led to a string of accidents that have further crimped production. 

Just in the last few weeks, PdVSA, as the state oil monopoly is known, has had to tackle fires and technical problems at a number of plants, including its largest refinery Amuay, which produces around 640,000 barrels a day.

The company's Isla refinery, located on the Caribbean Island of Curacao, has been struggling to produce at full capacity for more than a year thanks to frequent technical issues. 

The facility is a particularly important one for Venezuela's growing relationship with China, since deep waters around the island support the very large crude carriers necessary to haul oil to the Far East. 

A spokesman at the refinery, which is owned by the government of Curacao, said in an interview last week that despite capacity of 325,000 barrels a day, output at the facility has been averaging around 225,000.

For Mr. Chavez, Washington's loudest critic in Latin America, strengthening ties with China has long been his geopolitical policy. The socialist leader has turned to the Asian giant to finance everything from oil projects, to mining to housing. 

But experts question the practicality of making expensive long-range oil shipments to China, which sources more than 90% of its oil from suppliers closer to home, mainly the Middle East, Africa and Russia. Likewise, Venezuela's natural and traditional market, the U.S., is just on the other side the Caribbean. 

For Mr. Chavez, though, geopolitics trumps economics, suggested  Milton Guzman, an economist at Caracas-based consulting company Fortuny, Guzman & Asociados. 

During an address last week to a Chinese delegation, Mr. Chavez assured his Asian ally, "All the oil (supply) that you all need to increase in the coming years, is here in Venezuela." 

A $20 billion credit line from China opened last year is being paid back through oil shipments. Exact figures are difficult to track down but Venezuelan officials say they ship anywhere from 400,000 to 500,000 barrels of oil to China each day, of which around 300,000 barrels are being used to repay the credit line. 

Amid last week's visit by the Chinese delegation, Venezuelan officials said they were evaluating another $4 billion in Chinese loans for oil. 

Meanwhile, it remains unclear just how much Venezuelan oil is actually making it to China's shores, or whether Beijing is simply avoiding the high logistic costs associated with its Venezuela-sourced oil and instead selling it in the open market for an easy profit. 

U.S. Embassy cables from February 2010, released by Wikileaks, cited an unnamed PdVSA official saying China was paying as little as $5 per barrel of oil and then in turn selling it at a "sizable" profit. 

Officials at China's state oil companies weren't immediately available for comment. 