ROME—Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi financially supported and slept with a "significant number" of prostitutes, according to prosecutors who are seeking authorization from Parliament to search the billionaire's offices in Milan. 

In the request, part of a prostitution case involving an under-age Moroccan woman, Milan's chief prosecutor, Edmondo Bruti Liberati, said prosecutors are seeking to obtain documents and computer files from one of Mr. Berlusconi's offices on the outskirts of Milan. The request was posted on Parliament's website Monday after being made Friday.

Mr. Bruti Liberati said prosecutors believe the documents show that members of Mr Berlusconi's entourage gave gifts and cash to many women, including Karima El Mahroug, a Moroccan teenager nicknamed "Ruby."



  More interactive graphics and photos  

Prosecutors allege Ms. El Mahroug had sexual encounters with Mr. Berlusconi in return for gifts and cash payments between February and May 2010 when she was 17 years old, according to the request filed Jan. 14 to the Chamber of Deputies, or lower house of Parliament. 

As a member of the chamber, Mr. Berlusconi is shielded by a law that requires a chamber commission to sign off on any request by prosecutors to search members' properties before they are carried out. 

A lawyer for Ms. El Mahroug, now 18 years-old, didn't respond to phone calls seeking comment. Mr. Berlusconi, who isn't charged in the investigation, has repeatedly denied making any payments to women in exchange for sexual favors. Under Italian law, it is illegal to patronize a prostitute under the age of 18, but paying an adult prostitute for sexual favors isn't a crime.

In their request to Parliament, prosecutors also named nine other women whom the prime minister allegedly housed in apartments. Efforts to reach the women were unsuccessful.

Piersilvio Cipolotti, a lawyer for Mr. Berlusconi, described the prosecutors' request to search his client's offices as "illegitimate," adding that prosecutors had overstepped their powers in seeking to search the prime minister's property. He also denied that Mr. Berlusconi had ever made payments to women, either directly or through intermediaries.

In a televised address Sunday, the billionaire media mogul said he met Ms. El Mahroug and other women at formal dinners he hosted at his villa near Milan. He rejected prosecutors' allegations that he exploited Ms. El Mahroug as "absurd," describing the investigation as an attempt to smear his reputation. 

He also denied prosecutors' allegations that he abused his office in an attempt to cover-up his alleged links to Ms. El Mahroug.

Mr. Berlusconi has faced dozens of investigations and trials during his 15 years in politics. In the late 1990s he was convicted of corruption charges, but the rulings were either overturned or dismissed after the statute of limitations kicked in. He has always maintained his innocence. The latest investigation, however, comes at a time when his support in Parliament is thin.

In his address, Mr. Berlusconi said he has been in a "stable relationship" with an adult woman who attended the soirees in question. He said the steady relationship began after his wife announced she was seeking a divorce in 2009. He didn't name the woman in his address.

The chamber commission is expected to review the prosecutors' request on Wednesday, according to a chamber spokesman. 

In a video interview recently posted on the website of newspaper La Repubblica, Ms. El Mahroug said she attended three late-night parties at Mr. Berlusconi's villa near Milan that she described as "normal dinners" consisting of song, dance and talk of politics. 

In the request to Parliament, prosecutors also alleged that three members of Mr. Berlusconi's entourage operated a "system of compensation"—consisting of cash payments, gifts and permission to stay rent free in apartments owned by the prime minister—to recruit "a significant number of young women who prostituted themselves with Silvio Berlusconi."

Mr. Cipolotti, Mr. Berlusconi's lawyer, said he had "no specific information" on whether the prime minister hosted any women in apartments he owned.

 Write to  Stacy Meichtry at stacy.meichtry@wsj.com 