SAN FRANCISCO— Hewlett-Packard Co. Chief Executive  Leo Apotheker on Monday is expected to reveal publicly his strategic plan for the company, detailing how he intends to take advantage of technology trends such as a shift to online services, people briefed on the matter said.

While Mr. Apotheker won't offer a long-term financial forecast, he is expected to say H-P will grow at least as fast as the tech industry as a whole, move into new higher-margin businesses and achieve double-digit growth in earnings per share, one of the people said. 

"We look forward to an opportunity on Monday to share our CEO's perspectives on the market, his observations since taking on this role at H-P and his vision for the strategic direction" of H-P, a spokesman said. Mr. Apotheker wasn't available for comment.

Monday's event here is likely to be scrutinized by Wall Street since Mr. Apotheker, who became CEO in November, has said little about his vision for the Palo Alto, Calif., tech giant. His predecessor,  Mark Hurd, who resigned last August, often gave detailed financial forecasts.

Mr. Apotheker's comments are likely to be particularly closely watched since H-P, the world's largest technology company by revenue, last month reported lower-than-expected sales growth for its latest quarter and revised downward its revenue projection for the full fiscal year. The uncharacteristic hiccup has caused some concern among analysts. In the past year, H-P's stock price has fallen 20%.

"There seems to be a lack of confidence in what the strategy is," said  Rob Cihra, an analyst at Caris & Co. "Leo has to instill confidence that he has control of the place and has a plan."

According to people briefed on Mr. Apotheker's strategy, he is expected to cast his plan as evolutionary, rather than revolutionary. He is likely to stress ways that H-P can make its existing products work better together and to encourage the sales force to push such combined systems, the people said.

In his few public comments, Mr. Apotheker has said H-P will expand its software business, which currently makes up less than 3% of the company's revenue. His plan doesn't call for acquiring old-line makers of business applications, such as Mr. Apotheker's former employer,  SAP AG, the people briefed on the plan said.

Instead, Mr. Apotheker will focus H-P on "cloud computing," a catchall term for data and programs accessed over the Internet, and in particular on online services that can help businesses reduce the cost and boost the utility of their existing software, the people said. For instance, H-P will offer tools that can help businesses better analyze the data they collect. 

Mr. Apotheker on Monday also is expected to emphasize the benefits to H-P of selling technology to consumers as well as businesses, the people briefed on the plan said, and that relationships with consumers gives H-P exposure to hot gadgets that rivals like  Oracle Corp. and  International Business Machines Corp., whose customers are largely corporations, don't have. 

A person briefed on the plan said H-P could build an app store for third-party business programs similar to what  Apple Inc. has built for owners of its devices. 

In an interview last month, Mr. Apotheker said, "I don't believe that you need to own all the parts of technology in order to deliver a good service to customers."

 Write to  Ben Worthen at ben.worthen@wsj.com 