HARARE, Zimbabwe—President Robert Mugabe, known for fiery speeches and the arrests of his critics, is quietly backing a project that would extend Zimbabwe's shaky coalition government and provide a reprieve for a nation fearful of the bloodshed that could return with new elections. 

At the Crowne Plaza Hotel in Harare, more than 200 government officials are working to craft a new constitution. They share sandwiches, swap jokes and often toil until midnight to beat a self-imposed September deadline. On April 4, officials from the coalition government began meetings to map out a path to national elections, which would be preceded by a constitution approved by registered voters.

Critics of the current constitution say it gives too much power to the president, including no term limits.

"There will be no election without a new constitution," said Paul Mangwana, joint chairman of the multiparty body responsible for crafting the constitution. "The leaders of all political parties are aware of that."

The cross-party cooperation is a sign of how Zimbabwe's fragile unity government, which has been in place since February 2009, still has some life left, despite warring party leaders threatening to end the alliance.

Arrests of Mr. Mugabe's critics, including a cabinet minister from a coalition partner, and the president's unilateral policy decisions have angered partners. Mr. Mugabe, meanwhile, says he wants out in order to have the freedom to work on policies favorable to him without being questioned by coalition partners.

South Africa's President Jacob Zuma, who is overseeing the mediation, is dispatching a team of top officials to Harare to evaluate the meetings, and he is expected to report on the progress to the Southern African Development Community. The African Union in 2008 gave the SADC a mandate to ensure a free vote in the wake of bloody, disputed elections. 

This week, South African representatives of President Zuma will meet officials from Zimbabwe's unity government in Cape Town to review a road map on elections. Those officials have already agreed that elections will come after a new constitution is approved by a democratic vote.

A lull before the elections could provide a measure of much-needed stability for Zimbabwe. Mr. Mugabe blames Western sanctions against him and his allies for torpedoing the nation's economy. But his policy of forcibly seizing white-owned farms and his promise to take majority control of U.S.- and European-owned companies has deterred much-needed foreign investment, say business executives and analysts.

Recent developments would test any political marriage. 

A minister from Prime Minister Morgan Tsvangirai's party, the Movement for Democratic Change, has been arrested twice on corruption charges his supporters say are trumped up. Meanwhile, a pro-Mugabe minister has announced a plan to take over majority shareholding in foreign-owned mines within six months—without consulting his coalition partners. And Mr. Mugabe's security forces picked up 45 people for watching video footage of Egyptian and Tunisian protests in February. Six will stand trial on treason charges, with death penalties possible.

On April 9, riot police in Harare tear-gassed thousands of people at a prayer meeting for peace that was organized by local churches and arrested 17 people, including four pastors, on charges of inciting public violence. Then, on April 13, a Harare magistrate ordered an investigation into allegations that police tortured the detaineeswhile in custody.

Although Mr. Mugabe has repeatedly threatened to call an election by August, many of his own allies are skeptical, because any election needs the SADC's endorsement, which it says it won't provide without a new constitution in place.

"Mugabe thinks he can have early elections by frustrating us out of government," said the prime minister's spokesman, Nelson Chamisa. 

The regional body wants to avoid a replay of the violent aftermath of Zimbabwe's 2008 elections and the standoff that followed Ivory Coast's disputedvote. On March 31, presidents from South Africa, Mozambique and Namibia expressed "impatience" and "grave concern" over the situation in Zimbabwe.

"It is this kind of pressure from regional peers, who have protected Mugabe from total isolation, that will prevent him from acting unilaterally," said John Makumbe, a political-science professor at the University of Zimbabwe.

But the clearest sign that center may still hold is at the hotel in Harare, where the Constitution Select Committee is spearheading a crucial stepping stonefor any election.

In groups of three—each person representing a party in the alliance—officials upload data from nearly 5,000 meetings where people were asked what should be included in the new constitution. These voices will determine what Zimbabwe's new constitution says about term limits and the conduct of elections, as well as property and human rights.

"We are united and work so well that you will be excused for thinking we are all from the same party," said Mr. Mangwana, a committee leader and former information minister from Mr. Mugabe's party. "It is a lesson that government leaders can learn from us." 