A nearly completed hotel project in Long Island City is coming under fire from residents who say that the building construction has become a public nuisance. 

Developer  Steven Bahar is seeking more time from the city to complete the construction of the SilverCup Hotel, a nine-story building on 39th Avenue. But residents are upset over the several building violations the construction site has racked up over the years.

"He hasn't been a good neighbor," said  Gerald Walsh, president of the Dutch Kills Civic Association, a local advocacy group. Construction took place on the hotel during nights, weekends and holidays despite a stop-work order, he said. 

"He seems to go do what he wants to do," Mr. Walsh said.

Mr. Bahar said opposition to the hotel stems from the critics who don't want a building of that height in the neighborhood. Once the project is completed, he predicted the hotel will make a valuable economic contribution to the neighborhood.

"Shouldn't it be good for the community?" said the developer, whose name appears as Steven Baharestani in some legal documents but who prefers to use Bahar as his surname. 

Mr. Bahar purchased the property at 29-11 39th Ave. in 2006 for $710,000, according to property records. Since 2007, more than 50 complaints about the hotel project have been logged with the city's Department of Buildings. It currently has three open violations. 

A $5,000 fine was issued on the property a year ago for violating a stop-work order, according to the Department of Buildings. There have been nine partial and full stop-work orders issued on the project since construction began in 2007, and there is currently a partial stopwork order on the building. 

Mr. Bahar said the stop-work orders only caused small delays in the hotel's construction. "Those are ordinary delays," he said. 

Last year, some residents opposed a similar nine-story hotel backed by Mr. Bahar on 27th Street also in Long Island City. In May, the city's Board of Standards and Appeals gave Mr. Bahar permission to continue building that hotel. 

For the SilverCup Hotel, Mr. Bahar received permission to complete the construction under zoning laws in place before the Dutch Kills section of Long Island City, where the hotel site is located, was rezoned in 2008. However, that permission now has expired and he is seeking an extension from the Board of Standards and Appeals to finish the work under the old rules. 

A date for a public hearing on the matter hasn't been set, said  Jeff Mulligan, executive director for the board.

 Last week, Mr. Bahar ran into a complaint on another front: his use of the SilverCup name. The Long Island City television and film studio Silvercup Studios Associates LP sued Mr. Bahar on Wednesday claiming trademark infringement over the name for the hotel. 

"That was pretty shocking to me," Mr. Bahar said. Several other businesses in the area also use the Silvercup name, Mr. Bahar said. The film studio derives its name from the former Silvercup Bakery building that it occupies.

Silvercup Studios declined to comment.

 Write to  Joseph De Avila at joseph.deavila@wsj.com 