The most telling figure for the U.S. auto market this week isn't Tuesday's sales report, it is Friday's tally of the national unemployment rate.

The sales data Tuesday are likely to cap a year of steady improvement following the dark days of the recession. Analysts expect December car and truck sales will come in at a seasonally-adjusted annualized rate of about 12.3 million, up 11% from the previous year. 

That also would make the fourth-quarter sales pace the strongest in more than two years.

Even better, the recent gains reflect a firming of consumer demand, not just increased fleet sales to car-rental companies. Barclays Capital estimates the consumer piece of auto sales hit "the high-10-million range" in December, up 15% or so from a year ago. 

Any disappointment on Tuesday may result more from bad weather the week after Christmas, not a significant softening of demand.

Still, the gains are relative. Actual auto sales for 2010 look set to come in at about 11.5 million, a far cry from the 17.5 million peak reached in 2000. The critical question for the industry now is how quickly—if ever—sales will recapture that high. 

That is where Friday's employment report comes in.

A firmer job market at year end is expected to help push the nation's jobless rate down to 9.7% from 9.8% in November. Yet the snail's pace of improvement may not leave unemployment much below 9% this year. 

Credit Suisse analyst  Christopher Ceraso calculates that each percentage point that the rate is above normal (5% or so) holds back about a million auto sales on an annual basis. In other words, unemployment needs "to sink back into the 6% range," he says, to get sales back up above 16 million.

There are other concerns for the industry, too—namely, rising gas prices. 

Roughly speaking, U.S. auto makers earn about $3,000 in pretax profit per car sold, and $9,000 per larger truck or sport-utility vehicle, Mr. Ceraso says. So a move among consumers back to smaller vehicles, echoing a move seen in 2008, could put the squeeze on profit margins.

Firmer sales are a good start, but better job and income growth is needed to help the industry relive its glory days.

 Write to  Kelly Evans at kelly.evans@wsj.com 