The U.S. and France dealt new diplomatic blows to Col. Moammar Gadhafi's government Thursday, but the international community stepped only gingerly toward taking military action against the Libyan strongman.

France formally recognized Libya's main opposition group, the first country to do so. The U.S. said it was suspending relations with the Libyan Embassy in Washington, and Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said she would meet with members of Libyan rebel groups next week. 

The stepped-up contacts inch the U.S. closer toward actively supporting the rebels. The White House has said the United Nations resolution against Libya imposed two weeks ago offered leeway to seek an exemption from the arms embargo to support the opposition.

At a meeting of North Atlantic Treaty Organization defense ministers Thursday, countries agreed only to continue planning for imposing a no-fly zone, should one be required, that would keep Col. Gadhafi's air force from bombing rebel forces. The NATO ministers also agreed to move ships in the Mediterranean to better monitor events. 

Defense Secretary Robert Gates said some at the meeting felt NATO should take its lead from the U.N. and countries around North Africa. Mr. Gates and Anders Fogh Rasmussen, NATO's secretary-general, said a no-fly zone would require additional U.N. authorization. 

The incremental steps throw into sharp relief the dilemma facing the U.S. and its allies as unrest continues to spread around the region. The Obama administration doesn't want to intervene alone, insisting any move be part of an international effort. The Pentagon, scarred by its experiences in Iraq and Afghanistan, has been particularly cautious. U.S. allies, meanwhile, may face difficulties in taking on such a role by themselves.

French government officials said they would use a European Union summit Friday to discuss ways that an international coalition mandated by the United Nations might curtail Col. Gadhafi's ability to hit his own people. France favors striking selected targets, such as military airports.

But French President Nicolas Sarkozy won't seek EU endorsement on any specific plan, the officials said. France also wants support and a possibly material contribution from Arab states before taking part in any military action.

At the U.N., one diplomat said Russia has sent up "trial balloons about the Security Council calling for a cease-fire and political dialogue." The diplomat said that the U.S., Britain and France were instead considering additional measures against Col. Ghadafi's regime that could include fresh U.N. sanctions and a "more muscular" enforcement of the U.N. arms embargo imposed two weeks ago. A Russian spokesman didn't respond to a request to comment.

Raising the stakes for the international community, forces loyal to Col. Gadhafi ratcheted up their offensive against rebels in the country's breakaway east. Pro-Gadhafi forces attacked the oil-refinery city of Ras Lanuf with tanks and planes, said rebel fighters in retreat from the city. The government remained in control of the central square of Zawiya, west of the capital, after seizing the rebel-controlled ground Wednesday.

U.S. intelligence agencies believe Col. Gadhafi is unlikely to be pushed from power by rebels in the east alone, because his forces have superior firepower, James Clapper, the director of U.S. National Intelligence, told a Senate hearing. He said rebels faced a "tough row" because Col. Gadhafi has surrounded himself with the "most luxuriously equipped and the best-trained" troops in the country.

Suggesting divisions within the administration, White House National Security Adviser Tom Donilon said Mr. Clapper was presenting a "one-dimensional" intelligence assessment of Col. Gadhafi's military assets. He noted Col. Gadhafi has lost control of nearly half of his country and held out hope that international sanctions, and military options that are under consideration, could help turn the tide.

France on Thursday became the first country to formally recognize the Transitional National Council, the main opposition force to Col. Gadhafi, as the "legitimate representative of the Libyan people." Stung by accusations it was slow to embrace the revolt in Tunisia, a former French colony, France will send an ambassador to Benghazi, the Libyan coastal city where the council is based, said a spokesman for France's French President Sarkozy. The Libyan council will appoint an ambassador to Paris.

Track events day by day.

The White House made clear it wasn't ready to recognize Libya's opposition but didn't rule out doing so. Mr. Donilon said the U.S. was in direct contact with the rebels, including senior members of the council. Mrs. Clinton on Thursday told lawmakers she plans to meet with Libyan rebel representatives during a trip next week that will include stops in Egypt and Tunisia.

Mr. Donilon said humanitarian-assistance relief teams with the U.S. Agency for International Development would soon travel to eastern Libya to assess what supplies are needed. The White House said it was considering bringing in supplies through the port of Benghazi. 

"It can in no way, shape or form be seen as military intervention," Mr. Donilon said.

The Pentagon's biggest concern is about mission creep, especially if Col. Gadhafi hangs on to power despite air strikes, much as Serbia's Slobodan Milosevic did in the 1990s. 

The U.K. was similarly cool to France's move, saying its legal position is that the U.K. recognizes states rather than governments. Still, "the Interim National Council are valid interlocutors with whom we wish to work closely," a spokesman for the Foreign & Commonwealth Office said.

Though Britain was among the first to raise air strikes as an option, it has set strict criteria on whether the country will participate, and it worries about its flexibility to respond to other crises. 

Italy, which has deep economic ties with Libya, supports efforts to enhance the Transitional National Council's legitimacy, according to a senior Italian diplomat. Italy no longer considers Col. Gadhafi "credible political interlocutor," this person said. 

Italy was weighing whether to recognize the council, the diplomat said, adding that Italy was waiting for other EU members to reach a consensus.

Libyan officials responded angrily to Thursday's moves. Deputy Foreign Minister Khalid Kaim called the French recognition of the Benghazi goverment "illegal" and "a clear violation of Libyan sovereignty." He said the army was under orders to use force only as a means of last resort against the rebels.

Officials in Libyan rebels' de facto capital, Benghazi, called France's recognition of their provisional government a major diplomatic victory. "Now we are not alone," said Iman Bugaighis, a spokeswoman for the rebel government.

"This is just the first step, a sign of the direction things are moving," said Ms. Bugaighis. "This is the first declaration of legitimacy from a member of the U.N. and a member of the EU and one of the countries which have a major role in shaping international politics."

—Stephen Fidler, Nathan Hodge, Alistair MacDonald, Keith Johnson and Joe Lauria contributed to this article.

 Write to  David Gauthier-Villars at David.Gauthier-Villars@wsj.com and Charles Levinson at charles.levinson@wsj.com 