BUENOS AIRES—Argentina's government has levied steep fines against at least three economic consulting firms as it ratchets up the pressure on economists who question its official inflation estimates. 

Consumer prices rose 10% in February from a year ago, according to the national statistics agency, Indec. But most economists say that annual inflation is probably closer to 25% and that prices may rise even faster this year. 

On Tuesday, Graciela Bevacqua, who was once responsible for running Indec's consumer price index, received a notice that she had been fined 500,000 pesos ($125,000). 

"I'm very shocked," she said in an email Wednesday. 

Ms. Bevacqua now runs the economic research project, Buenos Aires City, which measures consumer prices with the help of volunteers from the School of Economics at the University of Buenos Aires. 

Last year, she told a Senate hearing that the government had pressured her to doctor inflation data while at Indec so that it would appear innocuously low. Ms. Bevacqua said she was bullied and received threatening calls at her home. 

The government has slapped similar fines on Estudio Bein & Asociados and Finsoport. An Economy Ministry official said the government also has fined Orlando J Ferreres & Asociados, though as of Wednesday it had yet to be notified. 

Government officials say the fines aim to deter economists from "deceiving" the public into making poor financial decisions. By publishing inflation statistics that differ from those published by Indec, economists are confusing consumers with false information, according to the government. But economists and opposition politicians say the government is simply trying to muzzle criticism of its own inflation data, which, they say, vastly underestimate rising consumer prices. 

"My interpretation is that the government has made a political decision to ensure that there are no dissenting voices regarding inflation or any other economic issue," Finsoport economist Jorge Todesca said Wednesday. He said he is confident a court will overturn the fines. 

"This is in the hands of our lawyers," said Marina dal Poggetto, an economist at Estudio Bein, which is also challenging the fines in court. 

Government officials say they push for wage increases not to keep pace with inflation, but rather to raise wages that had become too low in recent decades. 

Meanwhile, consumer price indexes in several provinces indicate that inflation is more than double the official rate. 

But Norberto Itzcovich, who oversees Indec's CPI, says that these allegations are false and that the government's inflation data have never been better. 

This week, Economy Minister Amado Boudou said there is "no structural inflation" in Argentina. 

An Economy Ministry official said recently that the government is working with the International Monetary Fund to design a new national CPI. But the official couldn't say when such an index might be released. 

 Write to  Taos Turner at taos.turner@dowjones.com 