  Morgan Stanley reported a 35% earnings jump fueled by a surprisingly strong revenue jolt from its army of brokers. But another poor performance by the securities firm's bond traders left analysts wanting more proof that turnaround efforts are gaining traction.

The results showed how much the 75-year-old New York company is trying to forge a new identity in the wake of the financial crisis that nearly destroyed it. Risk-taking has been reduced, some high-rolling traders have left and the firm is increasing its focus on lower-octane businesses like advising individual investors.

Some parts of the push, led by Morgan Stanley Chief Executive  James Gorman, are starting to pay off big, including the joint venture with  Citigroup Inc.'s Smith Barney brokerage unit that Mr. Gorman put together before taking over as CEO at the start of 2010.

The 18,000-person brokerage operation raked in $14 billion in net new assets in the fourth quarter, helping Morgan Stanley's wealth-management division generate $3.35 billion in revenue, up 7% from a year earlier and its highest revenue since the joint venture began in June 2009.

The firm said the asset surge is a sign that more individual investors are returning to the stock market because of its recent gains and fewer worries about the European debt crisis and last year's "flash crash."

In contrast, bond trading remains an especially sore spot for Morgan Stanley, which has has three different managers over the operation in the past three years. In the fourth quarter, the division that includes bond and commodities trading had negative revenue of $29 million, compared with $663 million a year earlier.

Excluding the idiosyncratic effect caused by a rise in Morgan Stanley's bond prices, the unit had revenue of $813 million, far short of  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.'s net revenue of $1.64 billion from bond and commodities trades for clients. 

Morgan Stanley Chief Financial Officer  Ruth Porat said in an interview with The Wall Street Journal that the firm still needs to "close the gap" in interest-rate and currency trading. The company is just halfway into a two-year recovery plan for the trading unit, she added. It has hired more traders whose expertise is dealing with clients that like to buy large amounts of relatively simple products.

Ms. Porat said the turnaround will continue under  Kenneth deRegt, the Morgan Stanley chief risk officer who returned last week to his previous job leading the bond-trading operation. He is known as a careful, calculating manager who specializes in the straightforward products now in vogue at the firm.

"We'd love for it to be faster, but it's a steady build," Ms. Porat said about the unit's overhaul. "It has to be consistent." 

Because the firm overcame its bond-trading funk with at least solid results in investment banking, stock trading and wealth management, Morgan Stanley shares rose 4.6%, or $1.27, to $29.02 in 4 p.m. New York Stock Exchange composite trading. 

Still, Mr. Gorman will face mounting pressure this year to "really produce results," said  Mike Mayo, an analyst at Crédit Agricole Securities. "Honeymoons don't last forever."

Since the start of 2010, Morgan Stanley shares have slipped about 2%, compared with the 13% gain by a Standard & Poor's financial-stock index. Morgan Stanley's stock-market value, once closer to those of Goldman and  Citigroup Inc., has shrunk to about half of Goldman's and one-third of Citigroup's.

Morgan Stanley's return on equity remained low at 5.4% in the fourth quarter and 8.5% in 2010. Executives hope to return the key barometer of profitability to a percentage in the high teens, but trading regulations and the market's gyrations are huge obstacles.

Mr. Gorman told analysts that executives are "intently focused" on improving the firm's financial performance. "We have made progress … despite challenging market conditions." 

As time goes on, Morgan Stanley officials expect brokers and other salesmen to sell more of the products that the firm's investment bankers are helping companies create. The goal is to further diversify the firm's revenue and make its results more consistent. 

"They need consistent revenue growth," said  Roger Freeman, an analyst at Barclays Capital. "That's where they've let investors down."

The 35% jump in profit represents net income applicable to Morgan Stanley, which rose to $836 million from $617 million in the fourth quarter of 2009. The figure includes discontinued operations at the firm but doesn't take into account preferred dividends paid to  Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group. The Japanese bank owns a 20% stake in Morgan Stanley.

 Track the performances of 150 companies as they report and compare their results with analyst estimates. Sort by date and industry.

For 2010, net income applicable to Morgan common shareholders was $3.59 billion, compared with a $907 million net loss in 2009. The company enjoyed its highest net income and revenue since 2006. 

Morgan Stanley also set aside $16.05 billion for compensation and benefits, up 11% from $14.43 billion in 2009. The latest total, which was slightly higher than Goldman's compensation number, reflects the brokerage joint venture and a charge of $272 million related the U.K. government's tax on bonuses.

Compensation as a percentage of revenue declined to 51% from 62% in 2009, despite a bigger percentage of compensation coming from brokers who collect formula-based pay that is often higher as a percentage of revenue.

Morgan also announced Thursday that its employees would get more of the pay they are being told about in coming days in deferred instruments such as restricted stock and stock options. The firm increased the average amount of year-end compensation subject to such deferrals to 60% in 2010 from 40% in 2009. For senior executives, the figure rose to more than 80% from 75%

Some of the choicest bonuses will likely go to investment bankers, who churned out solid results in 2010 behind a strong fourth quarter and numerous high-profile assignments like the lead role underwriting General Motors Co.'s initial public offering. 

Morgan Stanley's investment-banking revenues of $5.1 billion were up 2% from a busy 2009 and eclipsed Goldman's $4.8 billion in investment-banking revenue. 

The quarter was affected by a number of one-time items, including a pre-tax gain of $668 million from the sale of the firm's investment in China International Capital Corp. and a $126 million impairment charge related to the firm's ownership in hedge-fund firm FrontPoint Partners. 

 Write to  Aaron Lucchetti at aaron.lucchetti@wsj.com 