WASHINGTON—The U.S. Supreme Court ruled Monday that prisoners can file federal civil-rights lawsuits that seek DNA testing of crime-scene evidence, a decision that gives inmates a new legal pathway to seek exoneration through scientific evidence.

Separately, the court ruled the Navy couldn't block the release of data about an ammunition and explosives depot in Washington state by citing a commonly used exemption in the Freedom of Information Act. The court left open the possibility that the Navy could use other means to keep the information secret.

The DNA ruling was a follow-up to the Supreme Court's 5-4 decision in 2009 that said convicts had no constitutional right to DNA testing of evidence in their cases, a ruling that left the matter to the discretion of individual states.

Monday's case addressed an issue not decided by the earlier ruling: Can prisoners use federal civil-rights law to challenge the procedural fairness of state laws on DNA testing?

The court, in an opinion by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, ruled 6-3 that Texas death-row inmate Henry Skinner could file such a lawsuit, reversing lower courts that ruled for Texas prosecutors. The decision, however, was narrow in scope. The court's majority did not rule on the merits of Mr. Skinner's bid for access to DNA testing.

Mr. Skinner was convicted of murder in 1995 in the bludgeoning death of his girlfriend and the stabbing deaths of her two sons, but maintains his innocence. The Supreme Court stayed his execution last year only an hour before it was scheduled to take place.

Mr. Skinner said he couldn't have committed the crimes, because he was incapacitated by large amounts of alcohol and codeine, and he pointed to another suspect. After Mr. Skinner was convicted, he lost two bids to use a Texas law that allowed prisoners to gain access to DNA testing in some limited circumstances.

Justice Ginsburg rejected arguments by prosecutors that allowing civil-rights claims like Mr. Skinner's would lead to a flood of prisoner lawsuits in federal court seeking post-conviction discovery of evidence.

Mr. Skinner's lawyer, Robert C. Owen, said his client looked forward to making his case that Texas's refusal to grant access to evidence for DNA testing "is fundamentally unfair and cannot stand."

Mark D. White, an Amarillo, Texas, lawyer representing the local district attorney, expressed disappointment that the court "has not brought finality to this longstanding litigation," but noted the court said nothing about the merits of Mr. Skinner's lawsuit.

In the Navy case, the issue involved a request for information about ammunition and explosives stored at a Naval island facility in Washington's Puget Sound. Area resident Glen Milner sought maps showing how far an explosion at the facility would travel into surrounding communities in Puget Sound. The Navy refused, saying release of the information would pose a security threat.

The Supreme Court, in an 8-1 opinion by Justice Elena Kagan, said the Navy couldn't block the data release by claiming an FOIA exemption that allows the government to withhold information about its internal personnel practices.

Justice Kagan said that the court was sensitive to the Navy's position, but added that "the government has other tools at hand to shield national security information and other sensitive materials."

The Navy will have the chance to make other arguments when the case returns to the lower courts.

  News Corp.'s Dow Jones & Co., publisher of The Wall Street Journal, and other news organizations filed a brief in the case that urged the court to limit the government's use of the FOIA exemption.

 Write to  Brent Kendall at brent.kendall@dowjones.com 