A New York state judge on Monday denied the teachers union's request to block the Department of Education from releasing performance ratings for thousands of New York City teachers. 

The DOE had planned to release the data in October as a result of several Freedom of Information requests by media organizations, including The Wall Street Journal, but the United Federation of Teachers sued to block the release. The UFT argued that the data were unreliable and thus would harm teachers. 

The judge,  Cynthia Kern of the Supreme Court of the state of New York, wrote in a nine-page decision that the UFT's argument "is without merit," adding that the court of appeals "has clearly held that there is no requirement that data be reliable for it to be disclosed." 

The data attempt to measure the progress made by students in fourth through eighth grades under specific teachers by comparing their state test scores in math and English in a given year with the previous year. 

The Department of Education has such data applying to 12,000 teachers; overall, there are nearly 80,000 teachers in New York City.

Educators across the country are divided on such teacher data, with some arguing that they are helpful as one component of a teacher's evaluation, while others say the science around the method is too new to be used or published. 

  Michael Mulgrew, the UFT's president, said the union was disappointed and would "appeal as soon as possible." In a statement, Mr. Mulgrew added that the reports, based on state tests, "have huge margins of error and are filled with inaccuracies" and "will only serve to mislead parents looking for real information." 

  Jesse Levine, a senior counsel in the city's law department, said in a statement that "the court has affirmed the city's belief that the public has a right to this information" under public records law. 

Because the UFT said it intends to appeal, the city will await a decision from an appellate court before releasing the documents. 

 Write to  Barbara Martinez at Barbara.Martinez@wsj.com 