Until Sunday, Osama bin Laden, the man whose actions defined much of life in America since 9/11, was the ultimate survivor.

He dodged a global manhunt for more than a dozen years, including a half-dozen attempted strikes on him dating back to before the 2001 terrorist attacks on the U.S. He escaped in 2001 from the U.S. assault on Tora Bora in Afghanistan, having years earlier dodged Soviet missiles in the same part of the world.

 Mr. bin Laden grew up in Saudi Arabia the son of an influential infrastructure and property tycoon, Muhammed bin Laden, rising to become a potent symbol both of international terrorism and of a virulent brand of radical Islamic thought.

Mr. bin Laden, who was 54 years old, was raised in Riyadh and schooled in the conservative Saudi brand of Islam, called Wahhabism. He left Saudi Arabia for Pakistan about 1979 to join the global jihad fighting the presence of Soviet forces in Afghanistan.



In the Pakistani city of Peshawar, Mr. bin Laden was mentored by a Palestinian cleric named Abdullah Azzam, who recruited fighters from Muslim countries ranging from Egypt to Indonesia. The two formed an organization called "the Base," or al Qaeda in Arabic, which coordinated foreign fighters coming into Pakistan to pursue their campaign against the Soviets. It provided the fighters with weapons and services.

Following the withdrawal of Soviet troops in 1989, most of the Arab fighters in Pakistan, including Mr. bin Laden, returned home. But the Saudi would quickly grow disillusioned with the royal family in his home country. After Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait in 1990, Mr. bin Laden was rebuffed by the Saudi monarchs in his bid to lead an Arab force to drive Saddam's army out of Kuwait. 

Instead, the Saudi government backed a U.S.-led military mission, including the stationing of American troops on Saudi soil. Mr. bin Laden believed the presence of foreign soldiers on Muslim lands was sacrilegious and pledged to drive the U.S. out of the Middle East and other Muslim countries.

He embarked on what became two decades of terrorism targeting American soldiers and civilians, in regions ranging from West Africa to Southeast Asia. He established local divisions of al Qaeda to more effectively pursue his mission. Among these groups are the Abu Sayyaf movement in the Philippines, Jemaah Islamiyah in Indonesia, al Qaeda in Iraq and al Qaeda of the Arabian Peninsula. 

Mr. bin Laden ordered the twin bombings of U.S. embassies in Nairobi, Kenya, and Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, in 1998. The attacks crystallized al Qaeda's mode of operation: targeting American civilians and using suicide bombers. It defined Mr. bin Laden's message that no Americans were safe if the U.S. continued to have a presence in Saudi Arabia and other Islamic countries.

Al Qaeda's most spectacular terrorist attacks would be conceptualized and executed by a small group of Pakistanis led by Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, the self-proclaimed mastermind of the 9/11 operation. Mr. Mohammed and his cousins oversaw the first, bomb attack on the World Trade Center in 1993, as well as a later conspiracy to blow up a half-dozen international airliners operating in Asia. After 9/11, Mr. Mohammed's network continued to execute attacks, hitting hotels in Bali, Indonesia, and a synagogue in Morocco.

Since 2001, U.S. leaders have been dogged by Mr. bin Laden's ability to evade detection. As recently as last year, CIA Director Leon Panetta said the last time the U.S had precise intelligence on his whereabouts was in the early 2000s.

"He is, as is obvious, in very deep hiding," Mr. Panetta said then on ABC's This Week. "He's in an area of the tribal areas of Pakistan that is very difficult.... All I can tell you is it's in the tribal areas. We know that he's located in that vicinity."

 Write to  Jay Solomon at jay.solomon@wsj.com and Siobhan Gorman at siobhan.gorman@wsj.com 