The White House is considering a range of options for intervention in Libya, each carrying risks, as the struggle between Col. Moammar Gadhafi's regime and a ragtag rebel army seems to settle into an impasse.

President Barack Obama has yet to settle on a course of action, but the Pentagon is preparing the ground for a range of humanitarian and military options to try to curb the fighting in Libya and help the rebels.

Mr. Obama and British Prime Minister David Cameron, who spoke by telephone on Tuesday, highlighted the importance of coordinating international efforts, making clear unilateral U.S. action was unlikely at this time.

The first step Mr. Obama is likely to embrace, officials say, would be to authorize U.S. forces, in cooperation with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, to help speed the delivery of humanitarian supplies to eastern Libya, the main opposition stronghold. Planners are assessing a range of entry points for food and medical supplies by ship, by air and by land, across the Egyptian border. The challenge, officials warn, will be ensuring security for U.S. forces.

A humanitarian mission could bolster the image of the U.S. and raise pressure on Col. Gadhafi, who could provoke a military response if he tries to interfere in the distribution of aid. But it could put U.S. forces in harm's way, and would fall short of calls for more forceful assistance that could help the rebels overcome Col. Gadhafi's forces.

 IMPOSE A NO-FLY ZONE 

Pros Might hasten regime's collapse, strengthens rebels

Cons Might not stop Gadhafi ground forces, requires military strikes on air defenses

 ARM THE REBELS 

Pros Avoids direct U.S. military action, aids rebels militarily 

Con Risks arming future enemies

 FEED THE REBELS 

Pros Helps rebels and refugees, avoids worsening U.S. image in Muslim world

Cons Doesn't help rebels militarily, risks escalation

The Pentagon has mounted such humanitarian missions, most recently in Haiti after last year's earthquake and in Pakistan after devastating floods. But such a mission in Africa risks an outcome like that in Somalia in the early 1990s, where U.S. troops landed to prevent mass starvation and left bloodied after being sucked into clan warfare.

A more U.S. aggressive move would be to shut down Col. Gadhafi's air force by imposing a no-fly zone over all or part of Libya.

The U.S. doesn't now have aircraft carriers in the Mediterranean, so military planners are trying to identify air bases in Southern Europe that could house attack aircraft and provide logistical support for a no-fly zone and humanitarian operations. Italy, which is home to many of the largest air bases in the region, has so far balked at the idea of a no-fly zone, complicating U.S. planning.

The number of planes and bases needed for a no-fly zone would depend on its scope, say U.S. officials, who have been assessing Libya's air defenses. If a no-fly zone is imposed, the U.S. and its allies would, as a likely first step, destroy at least some of Libya's air defenses, composed mainly of Russian-built SA-6 surface-to-air missile sites, and radar installations.

Military officials said the missiles can be potent weapons when used against conventional aircraft, including F-15 and F-16 jets. But the officials said the SA-6s, which are effective to about 35,000 to 40,000 feet, would be little threat to the stealth F-22, which can fly faster and at a higher altitude to evade Libyan systems.

"You could put a squadron of F-22s in southern Italy and it could operate inside Gadhafi's airspace with impunity," said a former top Pentagon official who has planned similar operations in the past.

U.S. and NATO officials have sent mixed messages about the wisdom of imposing a no-fly zone. Skeptics say Col. Gadhafi appears to be shifting his tactics, relying increasingly on helicopters rather than fixed-wing aircraft to attack rebel positions. 

A no-fly zone would be less effective against helicopters flying at low altitude, officials say.

Libyan aircraft remain largely ineffective at striking targets on the ground due to poor pilot training, U.S. officials said. Col. Gadhafi's helicopters pose a more serious threat to rebels, who have no air power and limited surface-to-air defenses. 

Top Pentagon officials and some others inside the administration are skeptical of a no-fly zone due to the military risks and have chafed at suggestions by lawmakers that it could help turn the tide against Col. Gadhafi.

Despite their reservations, senior U.S. officials said Mr. Obama could, in conjunction with allies, seek to impose a no-fly zone if rebel casualties mount.

"At this stage, if it keeps going the way it's going, then yes," the U.S. will create a no-fly zone, the senior official said.

Short of declaring a no-fly zone, the U.S. could threaten military action if Col. Gadhafi uses his aircraft to attack the rebels.

But such a warning could box in the administration. If the Libyan leader ignores the U.S. threat, it would force Mr. Obama to authorize military strikes, perhaps a limited attack using fighter planes or cruise missiles. "Coercion works," the former top Pentagon official said.

Sen. John Kerry (D., Mass.) has suggested bombing Libyan runways to make it harder for Col. Gadhafi to use aircraft to attack the opposition.

Republican leaders in Congress have urged the administration to consider arming rebel forces. White House spokesman Jay Carney said doing so was one of the options being considered.

Track events day by day.

See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

A look at the economic and political status of selected countries facing unrest in North Africa and the Middle East.

But State Department spokesman P.J. Crowley has appeared to rule that out, barring U.N. endorsement of any such a move. "It's very simple," he said. "If the U.N. Security Council resolution passed on Libya, there is an arms embargo that affects Libya, which means it's a violation for any country to provide arms to anyone in Libya."

But Mr. Crowley said the U.N. could give a waiver to certain groups or the resolution itself could be amended if "at some point we decided it was appropriate to take a certain action."

The U.N. aside, the administration is cautious about providing military assistance to the rebels because Washington doesn't know what aid is needed, who their leaders are, and whether they can be trusted once Col. Gadhafi is gone. 

Stung by its past support for anti-Soviet mujahedeen who later turned into anti-American Taliban, the U.S. is wary of backing a force that could have links to Islamists.

Asked on Face the Nation last weekend if the U.S. should provide military assistance to opposition forces, Mr. Kerry said: "That's trickier. But I assume that a lot of weapons are going to find their way there."

Stephen Hadley, former national security adviser for President George W. Bush, said it would be "helpful" if the administration provided opposition forces with anti-aircraft weapons. Such weapons could be used against Col. Gadhafi's helicopters and fighters, possibly as part of a no-fly zone.

Alternatively, the U.S. could provide the rebels with non-lethal assistance, such as real-time intelligence and training. But officials said Washington must first complete an assessment of what equipment would be needed and whether the fighters are trustworthy.

Mr. Crowley said the U.S. was reaching out to opposition leaders. Eventually "within Libya a formal opposition will emerge," he said. "We're watching to see how that develops." 