WASHINGTON—President Barack Obama used the state visit by Chinese President Hu Jintao to send a message endorsed by Corporate America: The U.S. wants to do more business with China, despite differences over trade policy, currency and human rights.

"We want to sell you planes, we want to sell you cars, we want to sell you software," Mr. Obama said during a joint news conference with Mr. Hu, underscoring the importance of expanding commercial ties.

The White House amplified that message, trumpeting China's approval of a bundle of deals between U.S. corporations and Chinese partners it valued at $45 billion. Many of the agreements, including China's deal to buy $19 billion of airplanes from  Boeing Co.
BA


-0.33
%




, have been previously announced; the report of Chinese approval was something of a flourish to bolster Mr. Obama's message that expanded trade with China can create U.S. jobs.

A group of 14 U.S. corporate leaders and four Chinese chief executives expressed their eagerness to expand commercial ties during a private meeting Wednesday with Messrs. Obama and Hu at the Eisenhower Executive Office Building. The main issue in that gathering, according to participants, was barriers by both governments to business investment.

The day's events underscored China's economic rise and the extent to which the U.S. needs the world's second-largest economy to become a bigger customer for U.S. goods. China's work to expand domestic demand for goods "offers opportunities for U.S. businesses, which ultimately translates into U.S. jobs," Mr. Obama said.

Mr. Obama said China's rise holds enormous opportunity, and not just danger, to the U.S. economy. 

During the meeting with business leaders, Mr. Obama stressed the need for a "fair, level playing field" for businesses operating in China, and told them he wanted specific ideas on how to remove trade barriers and protect intellectual property. Lawmakers from both parties have complained that the administration isn't putting enough pressure on China over these issues.

For his part, Mr. Hu said he welcomes U.S. businesses to China and stressed U.S. firms will get "equal treatment." 

In the private discussion, it was clear that business leaders from both countries mainly want both governments to clear the way for their efforts to exploit a huge and fast-growing market, according to the meeting's participants. 

At one point, a Chinese CEO complained about U.S. rules that restrict foreign investments even in something as nonthreatening as building a road, said Boeing's CEO,  Jim McNerney. 

" 'The road isn't going anywhere,' " the Chinese businessman said, Mr. McNerney related. Mr. McNerney said the point was one often voiced by American executives: "We have too many regulatory hurdles that don't amount to much." 

CEOs said they were upbeat about the meeting, but recognize that it will take time for China to address market barriers.

"China moves at its own pace," said  Motorola Solutions,
MSI


0.39
%




 Inc. CEO  Greg Brown. "The relationship continues to evolve. I do think China is committed to making a level playing field."

"We voiced the concerns that we had," added  Aris Candris, CEO of Westinghouse Electric Co. "We also talked about the opportunities that exist in the markets both ways, both in China and the U.S., and what was said in the meeting was that all of these items are being worked on."

The White House, faced with concerns about U.S. unemployment, sought to show that its diplomacy is creating jobs at home, not just in China. U.S. officials said the $45 billion in business deals will support 235,000 American jobs. 

Mr. McNerney said Boeing was very pleased with the announcement of China's approval of the sale of 200 aircraft, which he said was helped along by the Obama administration. 

Boeing began listing the aircraft involved in this deal on its website in 2007, and the company was already counting on the sales in its own calculations, but Mr. McNerney said, "An order is not a final order until the [Chinese] government approves it."

Boeing is facing increased competition not only from rival Airbus, a division of EADS NV, but also from a homegrown Chinese plane being developed to compete against Boeing's 737. 

The visit may have helped break through bureaucratic hurdles for one U.S. company, truck maker  Navistar International Corp.
NAV


-0.40
%




 The White House said Navistar has received Chinese central government approval for joint ventures with  Anhui Jianghuai Automobile Co.
600418


-9.99
%




, or JAC, to make diesel engines and assemble medium- and heavy-duty trucks in China. That joint venture was announced in September but production was on hold pending Chinese government approval.

—Peter Sanders, Spencer Ante, James R. Hagerty and Martin Vaughan contributed to this article.