A group including former New York City Council member  Alan J. Gerson is attempting to block the sale of the former St. Vincent's Hospital campus to a developer, and says it has a deal in the works to establish a full-service hospital at the site. 

The group, which also includes attorney  Dudley Gaffin and  Dr. Robert Adelman, is protesting the proposed $260 million sale of the hospital's main Manhattan campus because the deal wouldn't bring a designated trauma center back to the area. St. Vincent's closed and filed for bankruptcy protection last year.

Earlier this month, developer  William Rudin and St. Vincent's Chief Restructuring Officer Mark Toney announced a deal for Rudin's RSV LLC to buy the site and turn much of it into a housing development. 

The objecting contingent, which calls itself the alternative purchaser group, said it will offer a rival bid for the hospital campus unless the would-be buyers commit to opening a hospital at or near the St. Vincent's site. 

"The residents and workers of the west side of Manhattan are desperately in need of a full-service hospital," the protesting group said in papers filed Wednesday with the U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan. 

 The alternative group said in court papers that a large New York City developer and a local hospital operator and medical school are preparing a deal that would match the Rudin offer and would guarantee to build a hospital. 

The group didn't give specifics of its deal. It only said that it is "presently raising financing" and will submit a written proposal to the bankruptcy court prior to an April 7 hearing to consider approving the Rudin deal. 

Mr. Gerson couldn't be reached.  John Gilbert, executive vice president for Rudin Management Co., declined to comment as did a spokeswoman for St. Vincent's.

As part of the proposed sale, North Shore-Long Island Jewish Health Care System has agreed to take over the former hospital's O'Toole Building and invest $110 million to create a health-care center with a freestanding emergency department. 

The alternative purchaser group and others, including Coalition for a New Village Hospital, panned the proposal and said it won't address the problem of overcrowded emergency rooms on the city's West Side. 

The proposed North Shore medical center at the St. Vincent's site wouldn't have the ability to admit overnight patients, so those with serious conditions must be transferred to a larger hospital. 

The proposed Rudin deal must be approved by a judge, but it won't be subject to a court-supervised auction as is often the case with bankruptcy sales. 

 Write to  Eric Morath at eric.morath@dowjones.com 