 The euro zone's inflation rate rose more than expected to a 30-month high in April, fueling expectations that the European Central Bank could tighten monetary policy again as early as June.  

 U.K. Prime Minister David Cameron and Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg denied speculation that this week's referendum to change the country's voting system has exposed a rift between their two political parties that will cause lasting damage to the coalition government.  

 The U.K.'s Prince William took Kate Middleton as his bride in London, with a million people cheering them on from Westminster Abbey to Buckingham Palace and an estimated two billion or so more watching around the world.  

 Britain's police and security experts managed giant crowds with barely a problem, a contrast to unruly scenes over recent months here where protests turned violent. But the U.K. struggled slightly with other logistics as some mobile data networks temporarily slowed under the heavy demand. 

 The bride's dress was a coup for fashion house Alexander McQueen—whose future was uncertain just a year ago in the wake of its British founder's suicide—and an inspiration for retailers who said the gown's polished style would set trends for wedding and evening wear. 

 Many Britons celebrated the nuptials in the time-honored tradition of holding street parties. In some cases the parties were genuine expressions of support for the Royal matrimony, in others they were simply an excuse to party, or even disparage the monarchy.  

 A French court of appeal cleared two French businessmen of charges of illicit arms trade with Angola, a ruling that could help to defuse lingering tensions between France and the oil-rich West African nation. 

 German authorities intensified their search for al-Qaeda linked terrorist suspects over the weekend after foiling what they described as an Islamist plot to detonate a large bomb in a crowded public area in the vicinity of Düsseldorf. 

 German retail sales dropped further than expected in March, as consumer confidence took a hit amid uncertainty from the earthquake and nuclear crisis in Japan and unrest in the Middle East and North Africa.  

 Spain's first-quarter unemployment rate soared to 21.3%, with the economy losing more jobs in the three-month period than in the whole of 2010, as the country's government said talks for much-needed labor market reform may soon result in a deal.  

 Pope Benedict XVI beatified predecessor John Paul II before a crowd of more than a million faithful who packed into St. Peter's Square to honor one of Roman Catholicism's most celebrated figures.  

 Russia's central bank unexpectedly raised interest rates across the board, in a move that boosted the ruble and signalled the country is serious about fighting rising prices ahead of 2012 presidential elections. 

 Days after they were pummeled by the worst storm system in decades, residents of tornado-ravaged towns across the southern U.S. started settling into a slow rhythm of recovery, installing generators, mastering open-fire cooking, and dispatching volunteers.  

 The U.S. dollar fell to a 2½-year low on Friday, but officials aren't showing signs that they are alarmed by the currency's descent or acting to stem it. 

Space shuttle Endeavour's launch is off until probably the end of the week, as NASA officials said there was no way it could blast off Monday on its final voyage because of work needed to repair a faulty heater system in the craft.

 China's official purchasing-managers' index fell to 52.9 in April from 53.4 in March, likely assuaging concerns somewhat that overheating and inflation pressures will require further tightening measures by Chinese policy makers.  

 China's latest push to ban smoking in indoor public venues came into effect, but the vaguely defined rules were not expected to dramatically reduce the country's heavy tobacco addiction. 

 Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao wrapped up his official visit to Malaysia and Indonesia, after signing multibillion-dollar investment deals as it seeks to expand bilateral trade with the two Southeast Asian countries.  

 Tokyo Electric Power said it will strengthen defenses at Japan's stricken Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant against any future earthquakes and triple the size of the available labor force to limit radiation exposure by individual workers.  

Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan had to defend himself in parliament after a senior adviser quit saying the government is ignoring law and making ad-hoc decisions as it goes along, prolonging the emergency. 

 Israel began imposing sanctions on the Palestinian Authority for its unity deal with Hamas, signaling a nose dive in ties that could eventually threaten security cooperation that has helped limit violence in the West Bank. 

 Egypt's Muslim Brotherhood said it will compete for more seats in this fall's parliamentary elections than the group had originally stated. 

 Col. Moammar Gadhafi's forces shelled the besieged city of Misrata, pressing a deadly offensive to dislodge rebels in the wake of North Atlantic Treaty Organization airstrikes that officials said killed a son and three young grandchildren of the Libyan leader. 

 Sustained economic growth in Africa has surfaced for the first time a broad middle class, one that cuts across the continent and as whole is now on par with other billion-person markets, China and India, according to a new report from the African Development Bank Group.  