A PATH train failed to stop at the end of a track in Hoboken Sunday morning, jolting the 50 passengers on board and sending 33 to area hospitals with minor injuries, a Port Authority of New York and New Jersey spokesman said.

The train, which originated at 33rd Street in Manhattan, was pulling into Hoboken Terminal at about 8:30 a.m, said the spokesman, John Kelly. It wasn't clear what caused it to overshoot the platform. 

The Port Authority was investigating the incident, and PATH service in and out of Hoboken was suspended for much of Sunday. But Mr. Kelly said the authority planned to start running trains on one track Sunday afternoon and planned to have full service in time for Monday's commute. 

"Thankfully there are no life-threatening injuries," Hoboken Mayor Dawn Zimmer said outside a hospital where some of the victims were taken. Most of those injured had bruises or cuts, officials said. 

Mahmoud Metwali, 26 years old, was on his way home to Jersey City after leaving his post at a Halal food cart on Sixth Avenue in Midtown Manhattan at 7 a.m. He was riding in the front of the second car, standing near a door.

"The train was moving well and all was right, but once we got to Hoboken, it all went wrong," he said, after being released from the hospital. "The first car slammed into the turnstiles and destroyed about four machines. People were stunned and there was a lot of smoke."

He said his head slammed into a wall in the train and his nose began bleeding profusely. He said it took about four minutes for the train doors to open and a crush of people ran out, knocking him down. His right leg, already injured in a previous car accident, was stepped on and cut.

"The force of the crash was incredible," he said. "It threw people forward violently."

Medics attended to him and took him to a hospital for X-rays. His nose was broken and he suffered a cut to his leg. He required a morphine drip to reduce the pain, he said.

"I became very dizzy and my nose was bleeding heavily from my face slamming into the wall," he said.

—Amber Benham Contributed to this article

 Write to  Andrew Grossman at andrew.grossman@wsj.com and Tamer El-Ghobashy at tamer.el-ghobashy@wsj.com 