It started with Pan Am Flight 1. I'm probably dating myself, but during the '80s I was a passenger (or should I say hostage?) on Pan Am Flight 1. 

My mother was practically living in Europe in those days: she had authored "Fear of Flying" in 1973, become a global superstar and was experiencing the sexual revolution with various and sundry Italian men. My family (that is, my nanny Margaret and I) would do Pan Am Flight 1 between two and four times a year. 

Flight 1 started in San Francisco and circled the globe westward. We would embark at JFK, often hours late. The sky would be pitch black. The pillows would have already been used. The rows in coach would be chock-a-block with families. We were only going as far as Heathrow, where we would connect to Venice. But that did not shield us from the chaos. It was a horrifying flight, rocked by thunderstorms and filled with crying babies. Often there were mishaps: emergency refuelings and defuelings, leaks, hours sitting on the tarmac only to be instructed to get off the plane. I remember the occasional chicken running around the aisles, but my shrink says this is highly unlikely.

Needless to say, for my entire adult life I have been plagued with a fear of flying that can only be described as epic. 

I have now done all the things that really neurotic people do on planes. I have had a full-scale panic attack (JFK-LAX). I have passed out and needed to be hospitalized in Queens (an experience I suggest skipping). I have buried my head in Brett Ratner's lap (much to the horror of his then-girlfriend). I have put a brown paper bag over my head (in my stepfather's single-engine Cessna). I have flown in the cockpit of a plane (the pilot hoped it might stop my crying). I have sat in the jump seats with the stewardess (the stewardess hoped it might stop my crying). I have taken a train home from Chicago (27 hours, felt like more). I have driven to Canada (multiple times). I have canceled vacations and TV appearances, not been in weddings and almost missed my own honeymoon, all because of my fear of flying. 


‘I saw a wacky behaviorist and a mad Russian hypnotist. I did virtual reality therapy and past life regression. ’


In my dark drinking days I would stockpile Valium and take handfuls with a white-wine chaser. At 13 years sober, the Valium isn't an option. To solve my aviophobia, I saw a wacky behaviorist who had famous patients and told me my mother had ADD. I took the train to Boston and saw a mad Russian hypnotist who did something that seemed very close to sneezing on me. I went to the Flying Without Fear program at JFK. My husband found it very amusing, and I am still flying with fear. I did virtual reality therapy where I wore a helmet and watched a video game take-off. I did actual hypnotism. I did past life regression (at Canyon Ranch in the '90s). I have been trying to get my nerve up to go to the "doctor" in Westchester who gives you an IV cocktail of sodium pentothal, but my husband says this is where he draws the line. 

Ultimately I have found a simple, elegant solution for my fear of flying: not flying.

For a while that worked just fine. I traveled the world in my youth. I had been everywhere I wanted to go. But having spent every summer since I was 3 in Venice, as soon as August rolls around I feel the pang. I miss the black bugs and fat American tourists. I miss the smell of the algae in the Grand Canal. I miss paying five times more for a pair of Prada shoes than I would one block from my house. My longing for Venice has become an additional sickness, a summer disease like poison ivy, but more neurotic. 

It's been almost eight years since I've been on a plane. I know that this is insane. Everyone I know flies multiple times a year. My 7-year-old son just returned from Rome. My mother had to have extra pages added to her passport. But here I am, stuck (in case you are wondering, this is not one of these essays where I solve the problem). I continue to be haunted by flying dreams, airplane anxiety dreams that perforate my brain with panic. So I'm not really sure what to do next. But I do know one thing: If I have to take another vacation in Vermont, I am going to scream. 

—Ms. Jong-Fast is the author of "The Social Climber's Handbook," "Normal Girl" and "Girl, Maladjusted." 