The Environmental Protection Agency and Pennsylvania regulators were at odds Monday over the water quality from hydraulic fracturing, a controversial drilling technique occurring throughout the state.

Pennsylvania regulators said Monday that sampling for radioactive materials in seven rivers late last year showed that water quality met or exceeded federal standards. The tests were conducted in November and December downstream from facilities that treat drilling wastewater.

The EPA, which urged more stepped-up testing, told Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection Secretary Michael Krancer in a letter that data provided by the state agency to the EPA "indicate that wastewater resulting from gas drilling operations...contains variable and sometimes high concentrations of materials that may present a threat to human health and aquatic environment." Those materials include radionuclides, organic chemicals, metals and dissolved solids, the EPA said. 

 "We deal in facts based on sound science," Mr. Krancer said. "Here are the facts: all samples were at or below background levels of radioactivity; and all samples showed levels below the federal drinking water standard for Radium 226 and 228." 

Both of those radioactive compounds can be found in drilling wastewater.

Later Monday, Mr. Krancer said he was reviewing the EPA's requests and would cooperate. 

Pennsylvania, once an afterthought for the oil and gas industry, has seen a frenzy of activity in recent years as drillers rush to tap the vast Marcellus shale formation, thought to be one of the largest gas reservoirs in North America. Production in the state topped 1 billion cubic feet per day last year, and is expected to continue to increase this year. 

The EPA's letter comes amid increased scrutiny of the impact of natural gas drilling on water quality, specifically hydraulic fracturing, the technique used to cull oil and gas from shale and other nonporous rocks. The EPA is studying the effects of hydraulic fracturing, or fracking, and expects to release its findings next year. 

The oil and gas industry says that fracking, in which a mix of water, sand and chemicals is pumped at high pressure deep underground to crack open the rocks and release hydrocarbons, has been safely employed for decades. Typically vast amounts of the chemical-laced water are pumped back out of fractured wells. 

In many cases, that wastewater is disposed of by injecting it deep underground into special wells. But in Pennsylvania large amounts of drilling wastewater is routed through local treatment plants that the EPA suggests may not be equipped to process it. 

Despite the results of Pennsylvania's tests, the EPA said that concentrations of radium might vary depending on the source and volume of the wastewater as well as the flow of the water body that receives the treated effluent. Therefore, the EPA said, "to ensure public safety, additional sampling is needed." 

The EPA also said that it planned to inspect wastewater treatment facilities in the state's natural-gas fields and would "utilize our federal authorities to require drinking water and wastewater monitoring if that becomes necessary." 

 Write to  Ryan Dezember at ryan.dezember@dowjones.com and Matt Day at matt.day@dowjones.com 

