DETROIT—Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder signed into law a measure that broadens state powers to intervene in the finances and governance of struggling municipalities and school districts, giving these local bodies a stronger hand in renegotiating labor contracts. 

The law also requires local government to send financial projections to Lansing, the capital, which could lead to the state stepping in earlier in hopes of averting a crisis.

Democratic state lawmakers and labor unions oppose the law, saying it undermines collective bargaining and threatens to subvert elected local governments. Republicans, who largely voted for the legislation, say cities at risk of financial collapse need the stronger provisions to force compromise at the bargaining table.

This comes as cities across Michigan try to squeeze concessions from their union employees in the face of slumping property-tax receipts and proposed cuts in state funding. 

The law, which the Republican governor signed late Wednesday, beefs up the 1990 Emergency Financial Manager Act by giving a state-appointed manager the power to set aside labor contracts, fire local officials and even dissolve a community or school district.

"The goal is to allow the state to intervene at an earlier stage, so an emergency financial manager can be avoided altogether," Mr. Snyder said in a statement. "If, however, an emergency manager is needed, then they need the tools to properly address these challenges."

Currently three Michigan cities—Pontiac, Ecorse and Benton Harbor—and Detroit's school district have emergency financial managers because they are in dire financial shape.

Many more are on the brink. This week, Flint received state backing for a $8 million bond issue to ease a cash shortage. Hamtramck, a small enclave surrounded by Detroit, is also seeking an emergency loan from the state.

The prospect of the new law motivated Raul Garcia, president of the Flint Firefighters Union, to put forward a list of new concessions, including increasing payments toward health-care premiums and giving up holiday pay, night-shift premiums and food allowances.

"I would rather give concessions that I would like than have an [emergency financial manager] or something of that magnitude come in and say this is what you are going to do," Mr. Garcia said.

 Write to  Kate Linebaugh at kate.linebaugh@wsj.com 