Silver plunged for a third consecutive day, ending below $40 for the first time in almost a month as investors continued to bail out of the market due to higher trading costs. 

Silver prices have lost 19% since Friday, when  CME Group Inc.
CME


0.54
%




 said it would raise the amount of money traders had to have on hand, known as margins, for the second time that week. The exchange raised margins again on Monday, and on Wednesday announced two more increases which come in to force at the close of business on Thursday and on Monday. 

"It's a continuation of the higher margins squeezing traders out," said Rob Kurzatkowski, senior commodities analyst at optionsXpress.

As expected, the increase in margin requirements has driven weaker traders out of the market. However, the exodus has also pulled silver prices down. 

Silver for May delivery fell $3.193, or 7.5%, to settle at $39.383 a troy ounce on the Comex division of the New York Mercantile Exchange. The last time the contract settled below the psychological threshold of $40 was April 7.

Arabica coffee futures for July delivery, which had been trading near 14-year highs, fell 3.7% on the IntercontinentalExchange, while cotton futures for July delivery dropped 3.8%. 

"There's a bit of commodity nervousness out there, and talk of large hedge funds liquidating positions is keeping buyers to the sidelines till they see some price stability," said  Sterling Smith, an analyst with Country Hedging.

Managed funds investing in the resources sector often hold a wide variety of commodities, leading to broad-based selling as they exit those markets.

"When they're long one commodity, they're long other commodities, and if they have a margin call they tend to sell a percentage of all their holdings," said  George Gero, vice president with RBC Capital Markets Global Futures. "Long" refers to a trading position aiming to profit from a rise in prices.

Silver miners also got smeared by the fall in futures. Shares of  Coeur d'Alene Mines
CDE


-3.98
%




 ended 24 cents, or 0.8%, lower at $28.49 after dropping 10% over the past five days.  Hecla Mining
HL


-4.31
%




 lost 11 cents, or 1.3%, to $8.31 after falling almost 11% since April 28's close. Both stocks are traded on the New York Stock Exchange.

Investors who purchased metal through physical-silver exchange-traded funds have been slower to shed their holdings. While silver prices tumbled 19%, metal held in trust by the largest silver ETF,  iShares Silver Trust,
SLV


-1.78
%




 declined just 1%, or 112.28 metric tons, to 10,909.06 tons.

Gold for May delivery settled down $25.20, or 1.6%, at $1,514.90 per troy ounce. 

A weaker dollar did little to stem gold's losses. Typically, demand for dollar-denominated gold appears less expensive to investors using foreign currencies when the greenback softens.

However, some traders worry the greenback is oversold and a "steep and sudden" correction in the dollar will trim commodity prices, Mr. Smith said.

—Matt Whittaker contributed to this article.

 Write to  Tatyana Shumsky at tatyana.shumsky@dowjones.com 