NEW YORK—U.S. stocks gained as investors shrugged off slides in Apple and  Citigroup
AAPL


0.00
%




 and materials shares gained on data confirming manufacturing strength. 

The Dow Jones Industrial Average closed 50.55 points higher, or 0.43%, at 11837.93, with  Caterpillar
CAT


-0.37
%




 and  Boeing
BA


-0.50
%




 making up more than half of the measure's climb. Boeing rose 3.4% after saying it expects to deliver its first 787 Dreamliner in the third quarter. Caterpillar climbed 2.8%, while  Alcoa,
AA


-0.84
%




 another proxy for views on global growth, rose 1.9%.

The Nasdaq Composite rose 10.55, or 0.38%, to 2765.85, despite a 2.3% drop in Apple. Shares of the consumer-electronics company stumbled after Apple disclosed that chief executive and company visionary  Steve Jobs would take another medical leave. Apple is the world's most valuable technology company, with a stock-market value of about $321 billion, as of Friday's close. 

Boosting materials and industrials, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York survey of regional manufacturing activity showed improvement in January, coming in just below economists' forecasts. But traders noted a significant improvement in the key new-orders index.

"Manufacturing has seen pretty good gains here over the last six to eight months, so I think just continuing with the trend shows the good sectors of the economy are still rolling," said  Todd Colvin, vice president at MF Global.

The Standard & Poor's 500-stock index closed 1.78 points higher, or 0.14%, at 1295.02, boosted by the energy and materials sectors. Specialty-metals company  Titanium Metals rose 4.7%, and fertilizer maker CF Industries Holdings gained 2.2%.

Meanwhile, bank stocks softened after Citigroup's fourth-quarter earnings report. Shares of Citigroup plunged 6.4% after the bank swung to a profit but its earnings missed analysts' estimates.  Morgan Stanley
WFC


0.61
%




 was off 0.8%, while  Bank of America
BAC


2.16
%




 shed 1.6%.

Still, some investors brushed off Citigroup's earnings in the larger context of banks' gradual improvement. "The trajectory of the banking industry is they're building their cash reserves to meet the capital requirements," said  Matthew Keator, partner at Keator Group, pointing to J.P. Morgan Chase's encouraging quarterly report last week. If banks "start to increase their dividends, we could see momentum back into their stocks," he said.

As the financial crisis recedes, expectations for companies' quarterly earnings are mounting rapidly, he said. Soaring expectations could have a "muting effect" on the market's reaction to earnings, he said.

Sentiment surrounding the fragile euro zone strengthened on the second day of a two-day meeting of European finance ministers, in the wake of a successful Spanish debt auction. The euro rose to its highest level in a month against the dollar on optimism that euro-zone officials may soon take measures to contain the region's debt crisis.

The euro was trading recently at $1.3388, up from $1.3284 late Monday in New York. The U.S. Dollar Index, which tracks the currency against a basket of others, fell 0.6%.

 Write to  Brendan Conway at brendan.conway@dowjones.com and Kristina Peterson at kristina.peterson@dowjones.com 