There's paper you want in your life: dollars, euros, yen. And there's paper you don't: company memoranda, receipts, notes to self. Our advice: Scan it or shred it. All of it. Or as much as you legally can.

This may sound like an ambitious undertaking, but once you start going through your piles, you'll be surprised at how much you can throw out (record-retention guidelines are available online to help you decide what's worth keeping). Gradually, you'll feel yourself becoming unburdened. Your workspace will become a wide open plain rather than a sepulcher of records of the past. That wad of receipts that's been crammed in your wallet for months, the pile of papers you cleverly labeled "Random," the binders of perfectly sorted brokerage statements—your scanner transforms the material into the immaterial. You lose nothing yet you lose everything. Namaste.

If you're serious about going digital and, most importantly, sticking with it for the long haul, scanning a document needs to be as fast and painless as dropping something in an inbox. Of course, you'll need the right tools, which we've compiled for you here. In this case, your samurai sword is a quality desktop scanner—one that's dedicated to converting any paper that finds its way onto your desk into a digital file. Feeding it should become second nature.

After a vigorous scanning session, forget about trying to give every document a meaningful title; it'll take forever. Instead, just convert your scans to searchable PDFs. (Most scanners come with software that can do this and Adobe Acrobat can handle it as well.) This allows you to search the body of the document you're looking for using the standard search function on your computer. 

Once you've conquered your backlog, be militant about preventing paper from entering your life. We've gathered a few essential apps for that as well. The path toward organizational nirvana takes some work, but the effort is worthwhile. One thing you are sure to discover: There is no paperwork in heaven. 

 —Michael Hsu 

Scanning may never be fun, but NeatDesk will at least make the process faster than you thought possible. This sleek little box has dedicated slots for the most common types of paper littering your life. Load up to 15 of each at a time and it will convert them to PDFs at warp speed, reading both sides in one pass. The included digital filing software lets you drag and drop text from your scanned documents into a handy database. $400, neatco.com  

After scanning every scrap of paper you've accumulated since birth, you're going to need an ultra-reliable disk drive to store it all. The LaCie 2big Quadra USB 3 is built like a tank. Its wide aluminum chassis houses two internal drives; data gets written to both drives simultaneously (geeks call this a RAID 1 array) so if one drive dies, you still have an up-to-the-millisecond copy on the other. $300, lacie.com  

The Kindle may be the best device for browsing and buying e-books, but when you need to plow through stacks of documents Sony's Daily Edition PRS-950 is the most elegant tool for the job. Its large 7-inch screen and uncluttered, keyboard-free body make it feel less like a bibliophilic novelty and closer to the printed page. The Daily Edition also has a touchscreen so you can turn pages by swiping, like on an iPad. $300, sonystyle.com  

 Instapaper 

Instapaper is an online service that let's you bookmark Web pages to read later across a slew of portable devices, including iPhones and iPads and Android gear. It reformats busy Web pages into a single column of text, free of banner ads, search boxes and other online distractions. It can also export Web pages to e-book-friendly files.  instapaper.com  

 Toodledo 

Nothing beats the satisfaction of physically crossing a task off a to-do list, but once you experience the flexibility of a digital, cloud-based list, it's hard to go back. Toodledo lets you add tasks via e-mail; sort lists by priority, due date and other criteria; hide items that you can't act on yet; and take it all with you. Free for a basic account, $15 for Pro and $30 for Pro Plus, which allows file uploads.  toodledo.com  

 DocScanner 

With DocScanner, you can turn any document into a PDF by simply snapping a photo with your phone's camera. The ability to scan anywhere, any time may fundamentally change your relationship to scraps of paper. Of the major scanning apps, DocScanner's image quality is a cut above the rest. $1 for iOS and Android, $10 for Symbian, docscannerapp.com 

 WorldCard Mobile 

This scanning app that parses business card data with surprising accuracy. As long as the design of the card isn't unconventional, the app can identify phone, fax and cell numbers, and e-mail addresses. The data it gleans can even be added to your phonebook. $6 for iOS and Android, $10 for Windows Mobile, worldcard.penpowerinc.com 