LONDON—U.K. and Chinese companies signed £2.6 billion (about $4 billion) worth of deals in the energy and automotive sectors Monday, the British government said. 

The deals were announced after a bilateral meeting between British Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg and Chinese Vice Premier Li Keqiang on the second day of Mr. Li's visit to the U.K. aimed at fortifying the two nations' commercial ties. 

Mr. Li, widely expected to succeed Wen Jiabao as China's premier next year, also held talks with U.K. Prime Minister David Cameron on Monday and is set to meet Prince Andrew, the Duke of York, and speak at a dinner banquet with business leaders Tuesday before concluding his nine-day tour of the European Union, China's largest export market. 

The deals signed include an agreement between BP PLC and the China National Offshore Oil Corp., or CNOOC Ltd., on deep-water exploration in the South China Sea.  PetroChina Co., China's largest-listed oil firm by capacity, agreed with Ineos Group Holdings PLC on the principles of a joint venture that will engage in crude oil refining and trading using assets at Scotland's Grangemouth refinery and France's Lavera refinery. U.K.-based Jaguar Land Rover, a unit of India's Tata Motors Ltd., committed to sell 40,000 Jaguar and Land Rover vehicles, valued at more than £1 billion, in China in 2011. 

Messrs. Li and Clegg discussed global issues in which the U.K. and China work closely together, such as international security and climate change, the U.K. government said. 

"Together, today's deals will safeguard 700 jobs in the U.K. and are estimated to have the potential to create many more," Mr. Clegg said in a statement. 



Mr. Li told Mr. Clegg that China will focus on rebalancing its economy toward domestic demand in its 12th Five-Year Plan, which will open up more trade opportunities between the two countries, the official Xinhua News Agency reported. 

It's "entirely possible" to double the value of bilateral trade between China and the U.K. by 2015 to more than $100 billion a year, a target raised during Cameron's visit to Beijing in November, Xinhua cited Mr. Li as saying. 

In 2010, the U.K. was China's third largest trade partner in the EU. Bilateral trade hit a record high $40.2 billion between January and October, up 30% from 2009, according to Liu Xiaoming, the Chinese ambassador to the U.K. 

The vice premier also reiterated that China is strengthening its intellectual property rights regime and hopes the EU will quickly grant it market economy status, Xinhua said. Such a status would give Beijing better protection against trade penalties and make it harder for the EU to levy special tariffs on inexpensive Chinese imports.

In a symbol of friendly ties, China also agreed to lend Tian Tian and Yuangguang, a breeding pair of pandas, to Edinburgh Zoo for 10 years. They would be the first pandas in 17 years to call the U.K. home. 

Mr. Li's EU tour took him to Germany and Spain last week as China looks to strengthen its relations with the euro zone, pledging to buy member states' debt and expand business ties. 

In an opinion piece published in the Financial Times Monday, Mr. Li said the "constructive role China has played in global governance is helpful in getting the world economy back towards full recovery and prosperity." He also repeated a pledge that Beijing would accelerate market-oriented reforms and provide a fairer and more transparent environment for foreign investors. 