SINGAPORE—Asian steelmakers reported shrinking margins in the fourth quarter of 2010 after a rise in raw-material costs, but the sector has largely recovered from the impact of the global financial crisis with most producers seeing solid gains last year.

Analysts said they are encouraged by the near-term prospects for the region's steel sector, particularly in India and China, citing rising product prices as well as strong demand from infrastructure, machinery, real estate, and automobile sectors.

"For Indian steel demand, the growth is very robust. I expect demand to grow about 8%-9% this year," Tata Steel Vice Chairman B. Muthuraman said in an interview Friday. "The India operation of Tata Steel is doing very well," he said on the sidelines of an industry event. Tata Steel, which acquired British steelmaker Corus in 2007, is the seventh-largest steel producer in the world.

Earlier in the week, Baoshan Iron & Steel, the listed unit of China's Baosteel Group Corp., said the company's net profit may have more than doubled to 12.81 billion yuan ($1.9 billion) in 2010, from 5.82 billion in the previous year.

Baosteel, China's second-largest steelmaker by output, is scheduled to issue its 2010 results March 30, but issued the guidance required of Chinese companies that expect profits to grow more than 50% during any reporting period. 

Analysts said Baosteel benefited from a rise in the price of high-end value-added products as China posted a 32% increase in auto sales last year. 

"[Baosteel] has a better product structure compared with its peers [in China], so it will continue to be better-positioned in the sector in the coming years," said  Wang Zhe, an analyst with China Securities Co. in Beijing. 

Domestic prices for hot-rolled coils gained 38% in 2010, peaking at 5,956 yuan a ton in mid-July, according to industry consultancy Mysteel. 

Analysts expect China's listed steelmakers to post an average 30%-50% earnings growth in 2010, slightly outperforming an estimated 25% earnings rise for all of China's listed companies taken together. 

That is generally in line with the earnings reported by other steelmakers in the region.

On Thursday, South Korean steel maker Posco said its 2010 net profit rose 32.5% to 4.203 trillion won. Operating profit jumped 60% to 5.047 trillion won and sales were up 21% to 32.582 trillion won. 

"Our annual performance was boosted by cutting costs through injecting cheaper raw materials and recycling of byproducts," Posco spokesman  Chung Jae-woong said. 

An increase in the sale of value-added products and capacity increases following the completion of the maintenance at Posco's fourth blast furnace in Pohang also helped, he said. 

The fall in profitability in the October-December quarter, however, indicates that rising raw-material costs, particularly as a result of widespread flooding in Australia's Queensland state, and excess steel-making capacity in some countries, can be a drag on the sector's performance in 2011.

"The Australian floods are a cause for worry. It's likely to push up coal prices, coke prices and perhaps (even) steel prices," Tata Steel's Mr. Muthuraman said. 

On Thursday, Posco, the world's third-biggest steelmaker by volume, said its bottom line took a hit in the fourth quarter, mainly on account of higher raw-material costs. 

For the three months ended Dec. 31, Posco's net profit plunged to 525.4 billion won ($472 million) from 1.275 trillion won a year earlier, and below the average forecast of 703 billion won by analysts. 

Operating profit dropped to 653.3 billion won from 1.587 trillion won, despite sales rising to 9.176 trillion won, from 7.288 trillion won. 

Another Asian producer, Steel Authority of Indian Ltd., posted a 34% drop in its fourth-quarter profit, also citing higher raw-material costs. SAIL's stock fell 6% in early trading on the Bombay Stock Exchange as poor earnings disappointed investors.

In China, the landed price of iron ore, the main ingredient in steelmaking, has more than doubled to around $142 a metric ton over the last year. The situation could get worse if Australia's heavy rains move farther south to the iron ore-rich Pilbara region, potentially flooding mines there. 

China's steel industry is also saddled with several inefficient small and medium-size producers despite Beijing's efforts to consolidate the sector and make it more energy-efficient.

"Low-end steel product makers have excess capacity to deal with, so they may have a tough time this year," said Feng Gangyong, an analyst with GF Securities in Guangzhou. 

At the end of 2009, China had a steelmaking capacity of around 700 million tons, with another 70 million tons to be added by the end of 2011. In November, a China Iron & Steel Association official estimated 2010 demand around 600 million tons, and said demand could grow by 40 million-50 million tons this year. 

—Yue Li in Shanghai, Chun Han Wong in Singapore and Kyong-Ae Choi in Seoul contributed to this article.

 Write to  Denny Kurien at denny.kurien@dowjones.com 