  My favorite books are novels like "McTeague" by Frank Norris and almost anything by Émile Zola and Theodore Dreiser. This style of writing is known as naturalism because the authors were not afraid to "tell it like it is." Can you recommend any authors who write in this vein today?  

—J.C., Cliffside Park, N.J.

Zola (1840-1902) is considered the father of naturalism, or the "apostle of the gutter," as some have put it. Naturalism, sometimes used interchangeably with realism, was decried by many early critics as a literature of the "sordid, squalid, dirty, slimy, repulsive, brutal and pathetic." Unlike the romantic idealism and humanism of many 19th-century writers, naturalists saw their characters as largely helpless against the sway of heredity (alcoholism, insanity) and external forces (poverty, disease). "Terrible things must happen to the characters of the naturalistic tale," Frank Norris wrote in 1896. The critic Oscar Cargill coined the term "pessimistic determinism" in 1941 to describe the genre.

Today, realism is alive and well—some say it has all but smothered more experimental or speculative genres like science fiction, fantasy or good old-fashioned escapist romance. Indeed, realism has become so dominant that it has split into subgenres like domestic realism, dirty realism (sometimes called Kmart realism) and what James Wood of the New Yorker has called "hysterical realism"—a manic fetishization of fact and social commentary at the expense of character development.

John Steinbeck was considered by some to be a naturalist, as were John Dos Passos, James T. Farrell (the Studs Lonigan trilogy), Kate Chopin ("The Awakening") and Norman Mailer. The critic David Trotter's definition of naturalism—"the plot of decline, of physical and moral exhaustion"—perfectly fit two books I read last year: "American Rust" by Philipp Meyer and "American Salvage" by Bonnie Jo Campbell. Both of these works, like the fiction of Bobbie Ann Mason and much of Russell Banks's work, focus on working-class characters. Richard Yates ("Revolutionary Road"), David Gates ("Jernigan") and John O'Hara ("Appointment in Samarra") explore the decline and exhaustion of the middle class. I love Richard Price's depictions of low-lifes ("Clockers"). It's no coincidence that Mr. Price was also a writer for the naturalist TV series "The Wire," whose perspective on life was articulated decades ago by W. R. Burnett, author of the 1949 naturalistic novel "The Asphalt Jungle": "You're born, you're gonna have trouble, and you're gonna die."

—Send your questions about books and reading to Cynthia Crossen at booklover@wsj.com.