LONDON—Growth in the euro zone's private sector strengthened in April as French output growth surged to a 10-and-a-half-year high, but prices charged rose at the fastest rate since mid-2008, a survey by financial information firm Markit showed Wednesday. 

Meanwhile, retail sales in the euro zone fell sharply in March, underscoring the weakness in consumer demand even before the European Central Bank began raising its key interest rate. 

Chris Williamson, chief economist at Markit, said the results of the private-sector survey were consistent with the quarterly rate of economic growth equivalent to the 0.8% expansion it expects to see in the first quarter. Euro-zone gross domestic product grew 0.3% in the fourth quarter of 2010. 

"This would represent the best start to a year so far since 2006. However, the worrying two-speed nature of the upturn shows no signs of fading, with soaring growth in France and Germany failing to spill over to stimulate similar buoyancy in the periphery," he said in a statement. 

The final Markit Euro-Zone Composite Output Index, a gauge of private-sector business activity based on a survey of some 4,500 manufacturing and services firms, rose to 57.8 in April from 57.6 in March. A reading above the neutral 50 level indicates an expansion in activity. Although the headline index was below February's four-and-a-half-year high of 58.2, the Aril reading has been exceeded only once since July 2006, Markit said. The reading was unchanged from the preliminary March reading published April 19. 

The survey found average input cost inflation slowed from March's post-crisis high, but remained elevated due to high oil and other commodity costs. Consequently, average prices charged rose at the fastest rate since July 2008, a sign the European Central Bank will face further pressure to tighten monetary policy in the months ahead. 

"A slight dip in the rate of input cost inflation will do little to steady nerves among hawkish policy makers, as the pace remained very elevated by the historical standards of the survey," Mr. Williamson said. 

The ECB raised interest rates by a quarter of a percentage point to 1.25% on April 7, the first increase since mid-2008, to prevent rising consumer prices from leading to broad-based inflation. The euro zone's inflation rate hit a 30-month high of 2.8% in April - far above the ECB's medium-term target of just below 2%. 

Economists don't expect the ECB to raise interest rates after its next policy meeting Thursday, but will be scrutinizing what ECB President  Jean-Claude Trichet says for any hint of the outlook. The central bank could raise rates another two or perhaps three times this year, they say. 

Further monetary-policy tightening is likely to make life even harder for several euro-zone member states that are facing severe economic and debt problems—such as Greece, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain. 

Portugal announced Tuesday that it had agreed a €78 billion ($115.7 billion) bailout package with the European Union and International Monetary Fund—the third euro-zone country after Greece and Ireland to require such emergency financial assistance. 

The PMI survey showed that France overtook Germany to become the fastest growing euro-zone state in April, with support from a surge in services. German growth hit a five-month low, but remained elevated by historical standards. 

By contrast, Italy and Ireland expanded at the weakest rate for three and four months respectively as moribund service sectors offset strong mainly export-led manufacturing performances. Spain managed only a near-stagnation of activity. 

Statistics agency Eurostat said Wednesday that retail sales in the 17 nations that use the euro were down 1% monthly in March. The largest decline was in nonfood items, suggesting households were reining in consumption of nonessential goods as their disposable income waned. Official data Tuesday showed that, after inflation, euro-zone household income fell 0.1% in the final three months of 2010. 

Eurostat said Wednesday retail sales fell 1.7% in annual terms, the largest decline since November 2009. Analysts had predicted no change in March from the corresponding month a year earlier. 

Sales in Portugal saw the biggest month-to-month fall in the euro zone in March, of 4.7%. However, retail sales also fell in Germany and France, the region's biggest economies. 

—Alex Brittain contributed to this article.

 Write to  Nicholas Winning at nick.winning@dowjones.com 