 Chinese President Hu voiced confidence in the government's ability to fight inflation, following a central bank move to curb lending that economists think is the first of what is likely to be a series of further tightening measures this year.  

 The conglomerate Lippo Group is trying to capitalize on surging valuations for Indonesian companies by selling its listed cable-television and Internet business.  

 Chinese lender ICBC will open five branches in Europe in the next two weeks, more than doubling its presence there.  

 Toyota signaled it may relocate unprofitable manufacturing capacity overseas, a possible shift in its commitment to maintaining its production base in Japan.  

 Citgroup said it is working out compensation for customers hurt in an alleged scam at a branch in northern India.  

 Sovereign-wealth fund China Investment Corp. has invested all the funds it had available and is seeking more from Beijing.  

 Asian steelmakers reported shrinking margins in the fourth quarter after a rise in raw-material costs, but the sector remains encouraged by rising demand.  

 Tata Steel set a price range for a stock offering that could raise $766 million. The deal is India's first big capital-rasing in 2011. 

 BP hailed its $16 billion share swap with Russia's Rosneft as a ground-breaking maneuver in the oil industry, but the deal has already drawn criticism in Washington over its potential implications for U.S. national security.  

 U.S. banks are expanding loans to consumers for the first time since the credit crisis erupted, as lending standards begin to loosen and demand edges higher.  

 J.P. Morgan Chase posted a 47% increase in quarterly profit, raising hopes that other U.S. banks will post improved earnings in coming weeks.  

 AIG repaid all its obligations to the New York Fed, positioning it to begin exiting U.S. ownership.  

 Hyundai Motor signed a preliminary agreement to buy Hyundai Engineering in a deal valued at as much as $4.72 billion.  

 A cabinet shuffle by Japan's Kan gave a slight boost to his government's tepid approval ratings, providing some breathing space amid his efforts to overhaul economic and fiscal policy.  

 Pakistan set a curfew in parts of Karachi, the country's biggest city and financial hub, after a week of ethnic and political violence left more than 30 dead. 

 Australia's flood crisis continued to spread, with parts of Victoria state suffering record flooding and forcing the evacuation of 3,000 residents.  

The death toll from flooding and mudslides in southeastern Brazil climbed to at least 626, as authorities struggled to reach areas north of Rio de Janeiro.

The U.N. said it will appeal for emergency flood aid for Sri Lanka, where 38 people have died, hundreds of thousands are homeless and rice fields are under water.

Irish Prime Minister Brian Cowen said he won't resign despite criticism of his management of the nation's budget deficit and its international bailout.

A car carrying an Afghan family struck a roadside bomb in northern Afghanistan, killing nine, a day after another roadside bomb killed six civilians in the south.

Somali pirates seized a South Korean freighter with 21 crew in the Arabian Sea, Seoul said. 