Handing out raises to civic officials rarely plays well with the public, especially during austere times like these. But dozens of counties, school districts and other entities are doing just that, citing a need to retain experienced people.

The mayor of Miami-Dade County in Florida lost his job this week in a recall election fueled in part by voter anger over raises he approved for top aides in the midst of a budget crisis.

In Sacramento, Calif., municipal union leaders are up in arms about raises granted to a handful of department heads at a time when rank-and-file city workers have been asked to take unpaid furlough days.

"Why are we taking a hit and they're getting raises?" asked Jaymes Butler, vice president of the local firefighter's union.

But the managers and elected officials handing out the pay increases say they are tired of waiting for the economy to improve or the budget picture to brighten. After several years of frozen salaries and other belt-tightening measures, they fear they will lose top talent to better-paying jobs elsewhere if they can't grant a few targeted raises.

"If we decided to wait until we knew the state wouldn't cut our funding, we'd probably be on a payroll freeze forever," said Stacey Johnson, president of the River Road Independent School District board in rural north Texas.

The tiny district laid off two assistant principals and two teachers last year, and is bracing for more steep cuts in state education funding as Texas grapples with a $4.3 billion deficit. Nonetheless, the board recently gave the superintendent a 7% raise, to $117,500 a year.

Some public officials who received pay raises amid fiscal duress

 Tim Greer  Executive Director

Colorado Intergovernmental Risk Sharing Agency

Previous salary: $248,971

Salary after raise: $265,483

 Eric Anderson  City Manager

City of Tacoma, Wash.

Previous salary: $200,450

Salary after raise: $235,373

 Fernando Gomez  Vice Chancellor

Texas State University System

Previous salary: about $235,000

Salary after raise: $273,642

 Scott Wood  City Manager

City of Canton, Ga.

Previous salary: $145,000

Salary after raise: $150,800

 Randy Owen  Superintendent

River Road, Texas, Independent School District

Previous salary: about $110,000

Salary after raise: $117,500

 Geri Hamby  Director, human resources and labor relations

City of Sacramento

Previous salary: $151,402

Salary after raise: $162,000

 Dan Hoins  City Administrator

Papillion, Neb.

Previous salary: $122,000

Salary after raise: $124,440

"We've got something good here," Mr. Johnson said, "and we're going to try to hold on to him."

Targeted raises have been granted in such urban areas as San Diego County, such midsize cities as Tacoma, Wash., and such small towns as Papillion, Neb., and Canton, Ga. They have gone to such highly visible officials as city managers—and to staffers at obscure public entities, such as the Colorado Intergovernmental Risk Sharing Agency, which provides insurance to municipal governments.

One measure of the trend: Last June, 67% of counties nationwide had imposed a blanket pay freeze. In a survey released this month by the National Association of Counties, that number was down to 45%, suggesting that some counties are loosening up a bit on salary.

Voters and public workers critical of the raises argue that giving more money to top managers sends the wrong message. A fiscal crisis demands shared sacrifice, they say. They point out, too, that especially in this economy, a manager may only be bluffing if he threatens to quit in search of a fatter paycheck. Those who do jump ship, moreover, are often fairly easily replaced.

The city of Avon Lake, Ohio, recently lost its parks director to a more lucrative job after the city council declined to give her a $10,000 raise. Within weeks, the city was flooded with more than 100 applications from people willing to do the job for her old salary—roughly $50,000. The city this month hired a new parks director with 20 years of experience running nature centers and educational programs.

Avon Lake Councilman Martin O'Donnell said the outcome vindicated his philosophy on raises. "I've voted against all raises since the recession started," he said. "Many of our residents have lost their jobs, lost their health insurance, their pension funds have been hit.…It's important that the leadership of the community shows we're trying to keep costs down."

In Sacramento, a fiscal crisis has forced the city to cut 900 jobs and slash services. During this period, the city finance director, Leyne Milstein, got a $19,304 raise, boosting her pay by 15%.

Ms. Milstein said that the raise was overdue, and that she earns considerably less than most of her fellow department heads. Last fall, she let it be known she would look for work elsewhere if she didn't get a bump, she said.

Interim City Manager Gus Vina said he couldn't let her leave. He needed her expertise to come up with another $40 million in budget cuts this spring. Plus, he said, it would cost $25,000 to hire a search firm to replace her.

Councilwoman Sandy Sheedy, who opposed the raise, isn't buying it. "Everyone," she said, "is replaceable."

 Write to  Stephanie Simon at stephanie.simon@wsj.com 