At the exit of "Picasso and Marie-Thérèse: L'Amour Fou" is an excerpt from a letter the artist wrote to his mistress and model Marie-Thérèse Walter in 1936. Rather than refer to her by name, Picasso interlocked the M and T of her first name to create a sign that functions as both monogram and symbol: "I see you before me my lovely landscape MT," Picasso wrote, "and never tire of looking at you, stretched out on your back in the sand, my dear MT I love you. MT my devouring rising sun. You are always on me, MT mother of sparkling perfumes pungent with star jasmines. I love you more than the taste of your mouth, more than your look, more than your hands, more than your whole body, more and more and more and more than all my love for you will ever be able to love and I sign Picasso."

 Gagosian Gallery  522 W. 21st St., (212) 741-1717  Through June 25

This poetic coda confirms everything you will experience in this astonishing, intimate grouping of more than 80 paintings, drawings, prints, photographs, sculptures and a tapestry spanning 1927 to 1940, several never before seen in the U.S. 

Curated by Picasso biographer John Richardson and Diana Widmaier Picasso, the granddaughter of Picasso and Marie-Thérèse, this show presents an outpouring of works created while Picasso was under the spell of a young French woman.

In 1927, Picasso, then 45 and unhappily married to the Russian ballerina Olga Khokhlova, met the 17-year-old Marie-Thérèse—a voluptuous and beautiful girl shopping on a Parisian boulevard. With blond hair, fair skin, big bones, piercing eyes and a Roman nose, she would become Picasso's lover whose facial features most closely resembled his own. 

Picasso opened with the line: "You have an interesting face. I would like to do a portrait of you. I feel we are going to do great things together. I am Picasso." Although she had never heard of the artist, soon great things they did do.

For Picasso, who changed and immortalized lovers as often as he reinvented his artistic voice, women were more than companions. 

The French artist Fernande Olivier, as model and muse, bridged Picasso's Rose Period to Cubism. Miss Khokhlova, in the 1920s, stirred his return to Neo-classicism. The photographer Dora Maar documented and inspired Picasso's involvement with the Spanish Civil War, including "Guernica" (1937). And the painter and author Françoise Gilot was his chief consort during his postwar period. From 1953 until Picasso's death, at age 92 in 1973, Jacqueline Roque attended the artist during his ferocious, erotic and peace-loving late phase, in which "Hippie" Picasso, anticipating 1980s Neo-Expressionism, reimagined the Old Masters.

That exhilarating late period was explored two years ago in Gagosian's museum-quality "Picasso: Mosqueteros," also organized by Mr. Richardson. "L'Amour Fou" is much more focused, personal, giddy and perhaps even devil-may-care than "Mosqueteros." But it is equally satisfying—a lover's leap; and then gleeful immersion in Picasso's Neo-Classicist, Cubist, Surrealist and Minotaur periods, including the masterful "Vollard Suite," of the 1930s, in which Ms. Walter is both springboard and pool for the artist's endlessly inventive voyage through love, eroticism and the organic relationship between artist and muse.

Though handsomely installed throughout, the show begins inauspiciously with an uneven mix of work in a set of small, underwhelming galleries. The exhibit isn't installed chronologically, and treats its first artworks as an overture. In the next and largest gallery, and beyond—in which masterpieces occupy the floors and walls like an armada—the curators take us far out to sea. 

The female form was always Picasso's greatest love. And he is perhaps most self-revealing when he depicts the nude. 

In the sculpture "Personnage féminin (La Métamorphose II)" (1928), Picasso starts with a profile of Miss Walter, small eyes and a prominent nose; but nose becomes body or breast; and chin transforms into clubfoot. He riffs here on human and animal forms; jester and supplicant.

Picasso treats Miss Walter (who loved swimming and the beach) as monument, acrobat and vessel; landscape, bather, crustacean and sandcastle. Sometimes he transforms her into Pietà; at others, into curled-up snakes or mirage-like mazes—hazy labyrinths in which to become lost. And who else but Picasso could see Miss Walter's nose as heavy phallus; her bug eyes as testes, and still maintain a feminine likeness.

In this exhibition, Miss Walter is a goddess, a little girl and an angel; a seductress, a claw and a 16th-century Spanish queen. 

Yet "L'Amour Fou" isn't merely a series of portraits or variations on a theme. The exhibition is an impassioned visual love letter, a poem from an artist to his model, mistress, muse and obsession—his l'amour fou, or "mad love." And it proves that the subject of Picasso, no less than that of love, is inexhaustible.

—Mr. Esplund writes about art for the Journal.