 CME Group halted trading in crude oil, heating oil and gasoline futures for the first time in more than two years due to a trading limit, amid high price volatility in the energy markets.  

 Toyota posted a 77% drop in its fourth-quarter profit and said uncertainty made it impossible to issue a forecast for the current fiscal year.  

 Japan's MUFG, Mizuho Financial and Sumitomo Mitsui Financial are set to report their best annual results since the financial crisis.  

 AIG plans to sell at least 300 million shares to raise about $9 billion, less than what the company and U.S. Treasury had hoped to raise.  

 ArcelorMittal said its world-wide production this year will be the highest since the recession began and posted a 67% surge in its first-quarter profit.  

 The U.S. trade deficit jumped 6% to $48.18 billion in March, as soaring oil prices caused imports to outstrip a record level of exports.  

 The rate of increase in China's consumer prices eased slightly in April to 5.3%, though the government is expected to continue its campaign of trying to contain inflation.  

 Xinhua Finance founder Loretta Fredy Bush and two associates were indicted on U.S. fraud charges tied to management of the Shanghai information-services firm.  

 Hitachi's latest quarterly profit quadrupled, but the Japanese group warned that the March 11 earthquake will continue to have a negative impact.  

 China Guangdong Nuclear Power Holding withdrew its $1.24 billion bid for a big stake in an African uranium deposit, after the Japanese crisis damped enthusiasm for nuclear power.  

 Hong Kong Exchanges reported a 10% rise in first-quarter net profit and reiterated plans to increase its ties with China.  

 Maersk's profit soared 85% in the first quarter, aided by the big shipping line's aggressive cost containment.  

 Germany's Merkel indicated she could support Italian central bank chief Mario Draghi as the next president of the European Central Bank.  

 U.S. stocks were pulled lower by the energy sector. Asian shares were mixed.  

 The euro fell below $1.42 as sovereign-debt worries were exacerbated by an antiausterity strike in Greece and S&P's new warning on Portuguese banks.  

 Syria escalated a countrywide crackdown on protesters as tanks shelled the outskirts of Homs and the southern town of Al Hara, killing at least 20 people, as the regime risked further international isolation.  

A Libyan rebel in the besieged western city of Misrata said Col. Moammar Gadhafi's forces have been pushed back, leaving behind weapons and ammunition and ceding control of the airport to the rebels.

Yemeni security forces fired on thousands of protesters marching to the Cabinet building, killing one and injuring at least 40, medical officials and protesters said.

 Tepco will accept government involvement in its management and won't cap total compensation for those hurt by Japan's nuclear crisis, as part of an agreement on conditions for assistance.  

India's Supreme Court rejected an appeal to reinstate stronger charges against seven people convicted of negligence in connection with the 1984 toxic gas leak in Bhopal that killed about 15,000.