A reporter approaches, and Mookie Wilson knows what's coming. He can sense it, in the way a canine can sense a slice of beef jerky within a nearby handbag.

"So, Mookie," the radio guy says, sticking out his microphone, "when the ball..."

Watch Mookie Wilson, languishing here along the Citi Field first-base line in the lead-up to a recent game between the Mets and Giants. Watch him closely. Before the lips curl into a smile and before the hands start moving with each word; before he cracks a couple of one-liners and before he recites the hackneyed details of a seven-second sequence from 25 years ago—there is a breath. It is slight and quick and seemingly unremarkable, but it clearly exists.

It always exists.

Without saying so much, the breath screams, "Really? You're asking me about this again? Really?"

On the one hand, Wilson, the Mets' first-base coach, understands. For millions of baseball fans, Game 6 of the 1986 World Series—and, specifically, Wilson's slow roller trickling its way through Bill Buckner's legs—stands as a definitive moment in the history of sport. "It was huge, and huge events last forever," says Hubie Brooks, a former Mets third baseman and Wilson's longtime friend. "But...''

But enough is enough. Over the course of a year's 365 days, Wilson estimates the topic of Buckner's ball is broached on "well over 300 of them." For those averse to mathematics, that means Wilson has discussed the game approximately 7,000 mind-numbing, soul-sucking times. He says he is asked by fans; by ballplayers; by strangers on the street; by taxi drivers and hot-dog vendors and even by family members.

"It gets to the point that you're talking about the story of the event, and not the event itself," he says. "It's so monotonous, it's so redundant. I know I have to tell the story, and I know people I'm telling it to have already heard me tell the story. It never changes. I'm trapped."

And yet, within this sentiment lies the simple beauty of William Hayward Wilson. For as much as he has tired of repeating the same tale ad nauseam, Wilson, 55 years old, never stops repeating the same tale ad nauseam.

"We've been together for more than 30 years, and Mookie's never turned down a request for an interview or shied away from an autograph," says Jay Horwitz, the team's veteran vice president of media relations. "He is probably the nicest, most decent man I've ever met."

Which explains why Wilson, an excellent-but-not-amazing ballplayer whose 12-year career, from 1980 to '91, compares most similarly (according to the Baseball Reference website) to Terry Puhl and Al Bumbry, has become an eternal Met; he is a symbol not merely of past glory, but of everything good and righteous about an oft-bumbling franchise.

Wilson's smile is a rainbow. His laugh is uplifting. His brown eyes, as wide as the fullest of moons, gaze intently. He looks directly toward you when he talks and slaps you on the back before walking away.

He has been known to sign baseballs for hours and will wisely discuss any subject, from sandpaper to stomach cramps to Bruce Berenyi. Wilson has been asked on more than one occasion to author a book, but he has no desire to sling gossip about former teammates.

"What's the point?" he asks. "In the name of money? No, thank you."

Whereas the cross-town Yankees can trot out, oh, 100 more decorated retired players than Wilson, none (even the beloved Yogi Berra) convey his warmth and enthusiasm.

That's why, when Terry Collins, the Mets' first-year manager, pieced together his coaching staff, he added Wilson. That's why, from 1997 to 2002, Wilson held the same position under Bobby Valentine. That's why Wilson managed the Mets' Rookie League team in Kingsport, Tenn., in 2003 and 2004 and why he managed the Class A Brooklyn Cyclones in 2005.

"The essence of the man is his sincerity," says Jeff Wilpon, the organization's chief operating officer. "When you talk with Mookie, he makes you feel like you're the only person in the world."

As hard as it is to conceive, Wilson insists he gets angry. Like that time, uh, well, eh…surely, he insists, there have been moments.

Growing up in tiny Bamberg, S.C., he recalls with great detail the racism that poisoned portions of his youth. There are memories of visits to the nearby doctor's office, when a physician would only touch him after donning gloves; memories of having to enter through the back doors of most businesses.

"One night my brother Collis and I went with some friends to a diner," he says. "We sat and sat and sat until we realized nobody was going to take our order. We left. It was humiliating."

Wilson says that while the experiences stung, they failed to darken his heart. "That's what the culture was, and people were only behaving as they were taught," he says. "Was it right? Of course not. But I refuse to let circumstances bring me down."

Four years ago, when Wilson found himself out of work and bored of fishing, he became a licensed trucker. Before long, the man with a .274 lifetime average and 327 stolen bases could be spotted cruising up and down the East Coast in an 18-wheeler, jabbering away on his CB radio and staring down the breathtaking sunrises while pondering the splendor that is life.

He cherished the open road, and genuinely believed that baseball was a thing of his past. Yet after a few years, Wilson began to miss the smell of the grass; the sound of a popped mitt; the banter and the sunflower seeds and (gasp!) even the talk of Bill Buckner and Game 6.

He spent last season as the Mets' minor-league outfield and base running coordinator, and jumped at the chance to return to New York.

"I am blessed," he says, grinning. "Here I am, long retired as a player, still in love with baseball and still getting to come to work every day. You wanna know what it's like being me? I'll tell you—it's beautiful."