When designing a dress out of chocolate, there are certain things to keep in mind, says Joelle Mahoney, who created a ruffled dark- and white-chocolate mini-dress worn by a model strutting down the runway at a fall trade show in New York. 

"Try to keep the chocolate away from the armpit area," advises Ms. Mahoney, a self-described "chocolate artist."





Such esoteric insight is useful for image-makers riding a wave of interest in clothing made out of food. Lady Gaga's "meat dress," concocted from strips of flank steak, is but the highest-profile example. The Barneys New York holiday catalog featured models in kale collars, necklaces of cherries and a hat, perhaps best likened to a ski cap, consisting of a droopy octopus. The Bravo television show "Top Chefs: Just Desserts" featured a challenge in which contestants made clothing from leeks and cookies. A Los Angeles costume designer created a floor-length gown for Cloris Leachman made of cabbage. 

Clothing made of food has taken off in culinary artistic circles with the growth of Le Salon du Chocolat, a trade show that takes place in eight countries and includes a fashion show, in which outfits must be made of chocolate. Designs have included a Xena Warrior Princess get up, gowns with enormous chocolate hoop skirts and carnival-style headdresses. 

"Food can be very surreal if you take it out of context," says Barneys New York creative ambassador Simon Doonan, citing paintings of eggs and sculptures of bread by Salvador Dali. "Food is something we have very preconceived notions of what it should be and what function it should be serving."

Take a look at some of the creations. 

Still, designers face difficulties in keeping these looks fresh, as do models who wear these tasteful outfits.

Lady Gaga turned heads—and perhaps a few stomachs—after showing up at the MTV Video Music Awards last fall wearing a dress and shoes made of raw steak. But the carnivorous costume was hardly groundbreaking. For a photography series entitled "Hunger Pains" commissioned by photographer Ted Sabarese in 2009, costume maker Ami Goodheart designed a skirt made of rump-roast slices cut into flower-petal shapes. 



Ms. Goodheart also designed a pasta body suit, waffle trousers and a cocktail dress, with matching hat and handbag, from bread and chocolate. She spent a week learning how to make challah for the shoulder pads and baguettes for the skirt.

One hazard of posing for a food-clothing photo shoot, says model Bridget Ploof, who donned the bread outfit: "I was getting hungry." She recalls, "the studio smelled like waffles and pasta and bacon." 

Though her dress included fresh croissants, Ms. Ploof resisting nibbling on them, but she did pilfer some chocolate from the sewing table before it was stitched on her. Ms. Goodheart, who trimmed 72 waffles into a pair of pants, says she indulged in the scraps.

For a painting unveiled at a Los Angeles gallery this month, artist Will Cotton dressed a model in candy. He bought 20 pounds of rock candy and hired a fashion student to help him make it into an outfit. Mr. Cotton, who recently exhibited works featuring people wearing cakes as hats, also painted a portrait of singer Katy Perry, partially draped in cotton candy, for her most recent album.

Each food poses unique challenges. To stave off melting, Ms. Mahoney stitches together thermal-shopping bags she buys at the supermarket to create an inner lining for chocolate clothes. Her most-complicated designs are sculpted over a wire-mesh frame to keep garments from drooping and breaking. To create the ruffled mini-dress, she blended one part corn syrup to three parts chocolate to make a pliable substance she says tastes like a Tootsie Roll. 

Artichokes are prickly in more ways than one, fashion designer Wesley Nault learned when assembling an artichoke dress for the Hunger Pains photo shoot. He knew the moment artichokes are cut, they start to blacken. Using an old kitchen trick, he doused the leaves of about 30 artichokes in lemon juice before the six-hour process of gluing them to an undergarment.

Halfway through, the team ran out of artichokes, so an assistant ran to Whole Foods to get more. As sections of the dress began to oxidize, the team raced to pin and staple on leaves so a portrait could be taken. 

The dress helped raise his profile in the fashion business, Mr. Nault says, but "I didn't want to see artichokes for quite some time." 

Los Angeles costume designer Mia Gyzander discovered different hurdles while creating a purple-and-green cabbage gown for Ms. Leachman, who wore it in an ad for People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals.

"I thought the deep burgundy was really pretty with her skin tone," Ms. Gyzander says. However, she soon realized that "the outside leaves are bigger and more flexible, but the inside ones are smaller and crumbly." It took three people 10 hours to select the biggest leaves off 70 heads of cabbage and sew them on. 

Le Salon du Chocolat, launched in Paris in 1995, now also takes place in Spain, the U.S., Japan, China, Egypt, Italy and Russia. It always kicks off with a chocolate fashion show. Russian designers have taken to it enthusiastically, says co-founder Sylvie Douce: In Moscow, one model wore a dress with a sleeve of chocolate roses and a headdress of six lit candles. A designer in Egypt created a dress that looked like the robes of ancient rulers. 

Some designers say they've had to abandon hopes of preserving their oeuvres after the food began to go bad. Ms. Gyzander and Mr. Nault watched their vegetable dresses wilt within an hour or so of photo shoots. Ms. Mahoney tried to preserve her first chocolate outfit, a pirate costume, with lemon-flavored lacquer—an edible spray used by bakers. Still, the chocolate eventually disintegrated and she had to toss it. 

Ms. Goodheart, who made the meat skirt, says she was never tempted to try to turn it into beef jerky. "I like making things out of paper and food and things that can't live on, so the clothing is kind of an extension of performance art," she says. All that was left after the photo shoot, she says, was a few bags of groceries. 

 Write to  Katy McLaughlin at katy.mclaughlin@wsj.com 