Is there nothing an investor can count on?

A long-held gold investing maxim appears to be breaking down.

It used to be that you could count on gold-mining stocks to do twice as well as gold itself when the price of the metal was rising.

The reason: Mining-company profits went up disproportionately when the gold price rose.

That leverage made gold stocks an attractive bet for investors wanting to benefit from a bull market in the metal.

But so far this year that strategy hasn't worked.

Since Jan. 1, gold-mining stocks have lagged behind the gains made by physical gold.

The Amex Gold Miners Index, which tracks a basket of large precious-metals mining stocks, is up less than 1% while gold itself is up close to 8%.

Why the reversal?

The cost of extracting gold is rising faster than the gold price itself, says  Evan Smith, co-manager of the $1.1 billion U.S. Global Investors Global Resources Fund (PSPFX).

Specifically, the cost of the diesel fuel necessary to run the big mining machinery is spiking. It's up a staggering 27% since the beginning of the year.

That has crimped profit margins and has made the metal itself more attractive to investors.

Owning only the metal rather than a mining stock eliminates all the risks associated with running a mine and retains the safe-haven benefits of gold. (Gold prices tend to rise during periods of financial and geopolitical uncertainty.)

Although rising costs are the major factor weighing on gold-stock prices, other reasons are playing a part as well.

The rate of production at the largest mining companies isn't growing much, says Mr. Smith. With nearly constant production and squeezed margins, profitability tends to suffer.

A related issue is the size of mining reserves -- or how much metal ore is still left in the ground.

Large mining companies are having a hard time expanding those reserves lately. In some sense, a mining company is worth the value of its reserves. So if those reserves aren't expanding, it weighs on the overall value of a company.

Changes in the investing world also have had a negative impact on mining stocks.

"The gold exchange-traded fund is reducing the attractiveness of gold stocks and has been a drag [on mining stocks]" says  Leo Larkin, an analyst at Standard & Poor's Equity Research in New York.

More precisely he means the SPDR Gold Shares ETF (GLD), which holds more than 1,200 tons of solid gold bullion. Since its introduction in 2004, the ETF greatly simplified the buying and selling of gold for most investors.

Prior to 2004, the relatively high costs of buying and selling physical gold were an impediment to many investors.

Still, if you believe that over the long term the price of gold will grow faster than the costs of mining, then it makes sense to invest in mining shares, says Mr. Larkin.

But he warns that gold stocks will generally be a riskier bet.

If you can't stand seeing their value gyrate wildly, try gold instead.

—Simon Constable is author, with Robert E. Wright, of "The Wall Street Journal Guide to the 50 Economic Indicators That Really Matter." 

—Email: simon.constable@wsj.com 