TOKYO—Japan appears to have turned the tide in its battle to stave off nuclear disaster, restoring power to parts of the Fukushima Daiichi plant and bringing down radiation levels with a marathon water-spraying operation.

Officials cautioned that many steps remain before the plant is fully under control, and the possibility of larger radiation discharges still exists. But for the first time, Japanese leaders voiced optimism that the worst of the crisis is over.

"We have achieved a certain level of success," Chief Cabinet Secretary Yukio Edano said on Sunday.

 Plant operator  Tokyo Electric Power 
9501


0.14
%




Co., known as Tepco, said reactors No. 1 and No. 2 of the six at Fukushima Daiichi have been reconnected to the power grid, and plans are under way to restart the cooling equipment that has been down since the March 11 tsunami knocked out the main power and backup generators. Tepco also said it was moving closer to reconnecting power at No. 3 and No. 4. The company said Sunday it wants to make sure all equipment inside these facilities functions properly before actually allowing power to start flowing.

Defense Minister Toshimi Kitazawa said the temperature in all of the pools that store spent nuclear fuel at the six reactors has fallen below 100 degrees centigrade, or 212 degrees Fahrenheit, a key advance after fears that the spent fuel could explode and spew large amounts of radiation into the air.

Tepco said Sunday the radiation level at reactor No. 3 fell to 2,758 microsieverts per hour Sunday morning, compared with 3,443 microsieverts Saturday morning, after hours of dousing it with water. By comparison, a full set of dental X-rays results in radiation of about 400 microsieverts.

Outside of Fukushima, the full scale of the damage from the earthquake and tsunami continued to unfold. More than 21,000 people were estimated to be dead or missing, and the toll could rise significantly.

Japanese health officials found abnormal amounts of a radioactive substance in spinach and milk grown in areas near the plant. They said the amounts shouldn't affect human health, but the finding could deal a blow to Japan's agriculture.

The advances at Fukushima came after repeated struggles in the early days after the quake. 

A critical moment came March 15 when Prime Minister Naoto Kan seized control of the response, effectively nationalizing a problem that had previously been left largely to Tepco to solve. Mr. Kan's early-morning ride to the company's headquarters galvanized a response by Japan's military and the Tokyo Fire Department.

The fire department's elite Hyper Rescue Squad and its Super Pumper water-spraying vehicle were at the heart of the effort to cool dangerously overheating spent-fuel rods.

Fighting its way through rubble in heavy protective gear, the Hyper Rescue Squad poured some three million liters of water in a 13 ½-hour operation that ended early Sunday, equivalent to dumping an entire Olympic-size swimming pool on the No. 3 reactor's area for spent fuel.

The squad was back on the scene early Monday continuing the spraying. "No matter what protective gear you have on, if you touch or inhale radioactive material, that means death," said Yukio Takayama, leader of a squad unit, in an interview. "That was on everybody's mind, and there was intense fear."

The head of the squad, Yasuo Sato, said at a news conference that his wife sent him a one-line email as the firefighters headed to the scene: "Please be the savior of Japan."

From the start, the battle at Fukushima Daiichi was about water. Without a way to pump large quantities into the plant, Tepco suffered a daily parade of disasters in the early days. Reactor No. 4 caught fire twice. Starting the day after the quake, explosions rocked reactors No. 1 through No. 3.

As the situation got worse by the hour, Prime Minister Kan grew increasingly frustrated with delays in communications from Tepco, aides said. The prime minister was particularly furious that he didn't learn about the first explosion, on March 12, for more than an hour, long after it was shown widely on television, the aides said. During that period, Mr. Kan had a meeting with opposition-party chiefs, where he was embarrassed by how little he knew.

Early on March 15, Mr. Kan decided to assert his government's authority. He summoned Tepco's president to his official residence at 4:30 a.m., said people familiar with the matter, and said he would establish an emergency headquarters to run the nuclear operation. Mr. Kan himself would be the chief. The Tepco president, Masataka Shimizu, would be a deputy.

Then Mr. Kan took another dramatic step. After the Tepco officials returned to their company office, the prime minister followed them a short time later as dawn rose. By 5:30 a.m. he was at a Tepco conference room, shouting at the company's executives, according to the aides. 

Since then, government officials have been a permanent presence at Tepco headquarters, and the operation has turned into a national effort by military, police and fire personnel. 

The day after the headquarters was set up, Mr. Kan called Tokyo Gov. Shintaro Ishihara to ask for dispatch of the Hyper Rescue Squad and got quick agreement. 

Officials later learned that Tepco had already sought to borrow some of the squad's vehicles. According to Mr. Ishihara, squad members drove up to Fukushima but had to come back to Tokyo after it became clear that the vehicles were too complex for Tepco's in-house firefighters to operate.

"Our fire chief was very disappointed that they weren't able to help earlier," Mr. Ishihara said at a news conference. "It's such a shame we had wasted a lot of time."

On Thursday, March 17, the new efforts began to bear fruit. A military helicopter dropped tons of water on reactor No. 3, helping stabilize radiation levels. Tepco officials said that helped clear the way for the restoration of power at the plant, and it even gave a boost to stock prices as a signal of government involvement.

By Friday night, the fire department's Hyper Rescue Squad was ready to head to the scene. That day they had undergone a long training session on the banks of Arakawa River in Tokyo to prepare for the operation, said Mr. Takayama, leader of one of the squad's units. 

To avoid a radiation overdose, they had to be ready to do everything quickly —get the water pump in the Pacific Ocean near the plant, lay the hose and connect it to the Super Pumper with its giant spraying arm. Once the water started pumping, they could retreat and watch from a distance. 

Saturday afternoon, the operation began. In Mr. Takayama's account, the squad got about 400 meters from the pier with their hose-laying vehicle, about halfway to reactor No. 3. 

But with fallen debris from an earlier hydrogen explosion blocking their way, most of his squad members, as well as those from the special chemical unit on the scene with radiation measuring devices—20 in all—had to figure out how to get the hose the rest of the way, another 350 meters or so.

"For a total of seven 50-meter lengths of the rolled-up hose, we had to push it physically to lay it out. All physically by hand. The hose was heavy, and we were wearing heavy protective gear that hampered our physical movements. With fear of radiation as well, it was a race against time," Mr. Takayama said.

That operation took "about 20 to 30 minutes" to complete, the 54-year-old unit leader said. After that the Super Pumper pumped for more than 13 hours, leading to a significant drop in radiation levels.

Combined with other water spraying by military units, the operation helped Tepco begin to restore power to the reactors. At reactors No. 5 and No. 6, which were less severely damaged, a rise in temperature in the pools for spent-fuel rods had worried officials, but with boosted power supplies, Tepco was able to pump new water into the pools and lower the temperature. 

—Kosaku Narioka contributed to this article.