TOKYO—As currency markets were whipsawed Friday, snaking lines formed outside Tokyo banks as individuals rushed to buy foreign currencies in exchange for their yen. 

Demand was so high at travel agents offering currency exchange that several ran out of dollars. Trading volume at many online currency-trading businesses more than doubled. 

Standing outside Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corp.,  Ayumi Suzuki, a 27-year-old employee at a Tokyo hotel, said she exchanged 200,000 yen for $2,400. "I really wanted to buy the dollars [Thursday] but they were all sold out," she said.

Amid the sense of grief and fear enveloping the country after last week's devastating earthquake and tsunami, Japan's army of retail currency investors—known as the "Mrs. Watanabes"—are becoming even more active in foreign-exchange markets. In some cases they are making moves to protect themselves, others are shaking off the worry about appearances of profiting off tragedy and seeking out opportunities in the markets. 

Many were buffeted by recent moves in the yen, which surged after the earthquake on expectations that companies and individuals would bring yen home to help rebuild. Trading became frantic on Wednesday night, amid a barrage of buying from individual investors, many of whom were being forced to buy yen to unwind some of their trades. The rise prompted the world's central banks to step in on Friday to buy yen, forcing the currency lower.

  Aki Ayabe, a 34-year-old trader who runs a beauty salon and an online accessory shop in Kobe, had a loss of 50,000 yen when the currency surged against the dollar. She was back trading online on Friday, earning 60,000 yen following the central-bank intervention, for a net profit of 10,000 yen.

"I took a wait-and-see attitude in the beginning because I had questions about doing trading at a time like now, but the market started moving actively and I thought it's about time I stepped in," she said.

In many ways these legions of Japanese retail currency traders—not hedge funds—are the very speculators the central banks are battling. Japanese individuals account for about 30% of yen trading, according to the Bank for International Settlements, enough to have a huge impact on the yen's moves.

  Yunosuke Ikeda, a senior foreign-exchange strategist at Nomura Securities Co., said individual investors have the potential to thwart the global effort to weaken the yen. Those who bought the dollar on expectations for an intervention may take their profit by buying the Japanese currency, he said.

"The actual amount [of the intervention] is unlikely to be large scale, but that amount will need to be big enough to trump moves by individual investors," Mr. Ikeda said.

Trading volume of the dollar/yen pair jumped 78% on Thursday from the day before, according to data released by the Tokyo Financial Exchange. Click Securities Inc. said volume spiked about threefold; Himawari Securities Inc. put it at nearly twofold.

"Some day traders view the earthquake as an [investment] opportunity," said  Satoshi Kitami, foreign-exchange sales manager at Himawari Securities.

Day traders said they were less enthusiastic about taking currency positions in the aftermath of the quake and the tsunami which landed in northeastern Japan, partially reflecting a cultural reluctance to be overt about profit-making.

"If I was a professional, I might be able to draw a clear line between work and emotion, but I just felt bad about trading," said  Yuki Nakamura, a 36-year-old mother of three children in the south of Tokyo in Kawasaki, Kanagawa prefecture.

She said she slept very little on Thursday to watch the dollar's plummet against the yen, but added she couldn't trade actively, distracted by a power outage in her area.

 Corrections & Amplifications 

Ayumi Suzuki, a hotel employee, said she exchanged 200,000 yen for $2,400. An earlier version of this article incorrectly gave the currency conversion as $240.