WASHINGTON—The Supreme Court ruled Wednesday that the government can require contractors to complete the same background checks it uses for federal employees.

The court rejected the distinction drawn by longtime workers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif. The laboratory has been owned since the 1950s by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration but operated under contract by the California Institute of Technology, whose scientists founded the facility in the 1930s.

Following recommendations of the 9/11 Commission, in 2004 the government extended its routine employee background checks to contractors with long-term access to federal facilities. After JPL announced that employees must comply to keep their jobs, 28 workers sued, alleging that questions about drug use or treatment, as well as open-ended inquiries sent to references, violated their privacy rights.

A federal appeals court in San Francisco agreed with the workers, but no justice of the Supreme Court did. 

Writing for the court, Justice Samuel Alito said that "the government has a much freer hand in dealing with" its employees than when it acts as a regulator or prosecutor. Even though the JPL workers weren't civil servants, Justice Alito wrote that no practical distinctions distinguished them from NASA employees working on similar projects. 

He noted that the workers challenging the requirement had important assignments on projects including the Apollo moon landings and the Kepler space observatory. 

"The government has a strong interest in conducting basic background checks into the contract employees minding the store at JPL," he wrote, joined by Chief Justice John Roberts and Justices Anthony Kennedy, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Stephen Breyer and Sonia Sotomayor.

Two conservative justices, Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas, agreed with the outcome but wrote separately to say the majority hadn't gone far enough.

The JPL workers' claim was based on brief references in a couple of 1970s cases to a privacy interest in "avoiding disclosure of personal matters."

Justice Alito wrote it wasn't necessary to decide whether such a right exists. Justice Scalia, joined by Justice Thomas, said it was time to say it didn't.

"Like many other desirable things not included in the Constitution, 'informational privacy' seems like a good idea," he wrote, observing that federal and state lawmakers have enacted privacy protections. "But a federal right to 'informational privacy' does not exist." 

Justice Elena Kagan, who as solicitor general represented the government earlier in the case, did not take part in the justices' ruling. 

 Write to  Jess Bravin at jess.bravin@wsj.com 