FRANKFURT—German industrial output and retail sales slumped in November, but imports reached a record high, indicating that while the economic recovery is slowing down, domestic demand is still gaining strength. 

Industrial production fell as both manufacturing and construction output dropped from the month earlier. But because output was up year-to-year and manufacturing orders remain solid, Germany's economy ministry said industrial production continues as an important growth engine in the longer term. "The last quarter [of 2010] should end positively" in industrial production, the ministry said. 

Industrial production and retail sales figures point to a slowdown in overall economic growth. Economic think tanks expect growth in Germany to drop to around 2.5% this year, from an expected 3.7% in 2010. 

Industrial output fell a seasonally-adjusted 0.7% in November from October, which was more than expected, but rose by 11.1% from a year earlier. Industrial production was 3% in October from a month earlier. 

"November's fall in German industrial production does little to alter the picture of rapid growth in the sector," said Ben May, European economist at Capital Economics Ltd. in London. "And since the industrial surveys are still at very high levels, there seems a good chance that the sector will continue to expand at a healthy rate at the start of this year," he said. 

But Mr. May also warned that unless the recovery spreads to domestic spending, growth may begin to falter later in the year. 

Retail sales declined 2.4% in November from the previous month, in price-adjusted terms, after increasing 0.1% in October, the Federal Statistics office said Friday. But retail sales were up 2.0% from November 2009, indicating that the positive momentum in Germany's export sector is slowly spilling over to domestic demand. 

The statistics office was quick to add that the estimates—based on figures from seven German states—will probably be raised. The data don't include car sales. 

Also, German Economy Minister Rainer Bruederle stressed that exports in November have practically reached the pre-crisis level of the autumn of 2008, while imports surged to an all-time high. 

"The strong rise in imports shows that German domestic demand continues to gain strength," Mr. Bruederle said. "With that, Germany is giving its contribution to a sustained recovery—in the European and international context." 

The statistics office said Germany in seasonally-adjusted terms imported 4.1% more total goods in November than a month earlier, while exports rose 0.5%. 

November imports surged 33.3% from November 2009 in unadjusted terms, totaling €75.1 billion ($97.74 billion). That was the largest amount of imported goods since records began in 1950, the statistics office said. 

The sharp increase in German imports in November occurred as the outlook for exports is weakening. Export growth is expected to slow during 2011 as the global economic recovery loses momentum, coinciding with sharp cutbacks in government spending. 

The development of export growth has calmed down, "as global trade has switched back a gear to [reach] a normal pace of growth," Mr. Bruederle said. 

. 





 Write to  Nina Koeppen at nina.koeppen@dowjones.com 