Democrats in the Senate are increasingly agitated by their lack of unity —especially on budget issues. They are also frustrated that the party's messaging has been so shoddy and even contradictory.

The rancor in the Democratic caucus became more public last week after Republicans corralled more votes for their budget proposal than Democrats garnered for theirs. Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid is having a tough time holding the votes of a handful of the 23 Democrats facing re-election in 2012—including Claire McCaskill of Missouri, Jon Tester of Montana, and Bill Nelson of Florida.

A big problem is the increasingly obvious power struggle between Mr. Reid of Nevada and New York's Chuck Schumer, the No. 3 in command. It's no secret on Capitol Hill that Mr. Schumer covets the majority leader job and sees himself as more qualified. Politico.com quoted a "senior Democratic senator" as saying that Reid is now a figurehead and that Schumer "has pretty much taken over as leader. But the problem is Harry Reid is the one that is speaking for us and he's not very good at it." That quote has caused quite a buzz in the halls of Congress. Republicans in the Senate wondered whether the "senior Democrat" spreading that rumor was Mr. Schumer himself.

After the midterm elections, Mr. Reid appointed Mr. Schumer as the head of Senate Democratic "messaging," which was seen at the time as a big promotion. But now many Democrats are grousing that the fault line in the Senate is with Mr. Schumer, whose messaging has been all over the map. One day Mr. Schumer vows that Democrats won't relent from their position that the budget should be frozen at 2010 spending levels. The next day he is saying that the Senate should put everything, including tax increases and entitlement reform, on the table.

"We love watching the spats on their side," a Republican Senate aide told me. "Right now, believe it or not, we are much more unified than they are —even our moderates are on board."

Democrats are also still furious that the White House seems AWOL in the very public budget fight. You have conservative Democrats like Sen. Joe Manchin of West Virginia griping on the Senate floor that the President hasn't put any serious cuts on the table. But you also have liberal Democrats like Sherrod Brown of Ohio, who are complaining that "The president needs to speak loudly and clearly about the direction of the country . . . we can't do all the cuts on a narrow band of the budget."

There is no doubt that the internal squabbling is working to the GOP's benefit right now. That probably means a better final outcome in the budget wars for Republicans—and taxpayers.

To read more stories like this one, please subscribe to Political Diary.