MUMBAI – Tata Consultancy Services Ltd. Monday beat market expectations with a nearly 30% jump in its third quarter net profit, as cost controls and demand for outsourcing of technology services offset the impact of a rising Indian rupee. 

The performance of India's largest software exporter by revenue is in sharp contrast to that of smaller rival Infosys Technologies Ltd., which last week reported a lower-than-expected increase in net profit, weighed by a rise in the rupee's value and muted growth in business volume. 

Based on U.S. accounting standards, Tata Consultancy Services posted a consolidated net profit of 23.3 billion rupees ($511.4 million) in the three months through December, compared with 17.97 billion rupees a year earlier. 

Revenue rose more than 26% to 96.63 billion rupees from 76.5 billion rupees. 

The average of estimates in a Dow Jones Newswires poll of 26 analysts was for a net profit of 21.96 billion rupees on revenue of 96.39 billion rupees. 

Net profit was boosted by a more than three-fold jump in other income to 1.82 billion rupees from 569.8 million rupees a year earlier, including foreign exchange income of 521.6 million rupees made through hedging gains. 

But, like bellwether Infosys, Tata Consultancy spoke of the risk of the rupee's gains denting profits of Indian technology companies. 

"We continue to live with currency volatility and have leveraged our cost management ability to deliver on margins," said Chief Financial Officer S. Mahalingam. 

The rupee rose an average of 3.5% against the U.S. dollar and about 1.6% against the pound in the October-December period, while it fell about 1.7% against the euro. 

Tata Consultancy, which gets more than 80% of its revenue from the U.S. and Europe, posted a robust 5.7% rise in business volume in the third quarter, riding on an uptick in global technology spending around the world. 

With a skilled, English-speaking and low-cost workforce, India remains one of the most preferred technology outsourcing destinations for clients in developed markets. 

"Demand environment continues to be strong," Chief Executive N. Chandrasekaran said in a statement. 

Research firm Gartner Inc. recently pegged global spending on information technology to be $3.6 trillion in 2011, up 5.1% from 2010 and better than the 3.5% growth it previously forecast. 

Gartner cited favorable U.S. dollar exchange rates for raising its view, but also flagged continued macroeconomic uncertainty and a slow global economic recovery as possible risks. 

Tata Consultancy, which doesn't give a financial outlook, said it has exceeded the 50,000 hiring target previously set for the current fiscal year through March, reflecting strong demand. 

Its operating margin in the third quarter rose 78 basis points from a year earlier and 7 basis points from the previous three months to 28.1%, helped mainly by cost controls which offset the negative impact of the rise in the rupee. 

The company added a net 12,497 employees in the quarter to take its total staff count to 186,914. 

