 The U.S. and its allies launched new missile strikes against Col. Moammar Gadhafi's forces as coalition officials work to ease divisions about the course of the military intervention in Libya. 

Coalition jets fired 12 more cruise missiles at Libyan missile, command and air-defense sites, said the U.S. commander in Africa.

U.S. President Barack Obama, at a news conference in Chile, said the U.S. took a larger role in the initial bombing stage of the campaign, and that there would be a transition to participation by a number of coalition partners in enforcing the no-fly zone.



 The European Union agreed upon a significant extension of its sanctions on Libya even while member states continued to express differences over military action in the North African country. 

The EU also announced it was slapping an asset freeze on former Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak and 18 other officials of his regime.

Following a foreign ministers meeting, the bloc agreed to extend the asset freeze and travel ban on Libya to 11 extra people and nine more entities in Libya.



 The organization that represents the six conservative Arab Gulf states, the Gulf Cooperation Council, defended military action in Libya by the U.S. and its allies, saying it doesn't constitute "intervention."  



 The Western-led military action in Libya provoked a rare public split in Russia's ruling tandem, as President Dmitry Medvedev appeared to scold his patron, Prime Minister Vladimir Putin, for publicly criticizing the effort. 

 Turkey said it secured the release of four New York Times journalists who had been held by Libya. The journalists are reporter Anthony Shadid, photographers Tyler Hicks and Lynsey Addario, and reporter and videographer Stephen Farrell. 



 Yemeni President Ali Abdullah Saleh's control unraveled precipitously as most of his military commanders joined the political opposition calling for his ouster, leaving the long-time leader with little keeping him in power other than elite units commanded by his sons and nephews.  



 Egyptians' embrace of a set of proposed constitutional amendments in this weekend's referendum is the clearest sign yet that leadership of the country's revolution may be passing from youthful activists to Islamist religious leaders, according to analysts. 



 Tokyo Electric Power continued to report progress in restoring order at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear reactors, but finishing the job is turning out to be a painstaking process plagued by damaged equipment and unexpected incidents. 

Smoke rose from two of the plant's six reactors Monday, forcing workers to retreat temporarily. The cause of the smoke wasn't immediately clear. Radioactivity returned to previous levels after a brief rise, officials said.

The power company has connected four of the plant's six reactors to the outside power grid, and it said it was closing in on restoring power to the central control room of reactor No. 2. 

 A severe fuel shortage has emerged as the primary problem hampering Japanese relief efforts in the northeastern pocket of the country.  

 The Japanese government moved to prevent tainted agricultural products from reaching consumers, after the number of cases of food and water being contaminated by radioactive materials in northern Japan expanded across a wider area. 



 Towns on the northeast coast have been overwhelmed by the number of corpses sitting in makeshift morgues, which has created a dilemma: What to do with the bodies? 



 Concerns are mounting about the economic fallout as supply-chain problems continued and uncertainty grew around insurers' liability. 

Asian markets reacted positively to news that power had been restored over the weekend to some of the Fukushima Daiichi power plant. Markets were also up across Europe.

The burden of a too-strong yen on Japan's export-dependent manufacturers is lifting as well, after a rare intervention by the Group of Seven leading economies last week to weaken the currency. 



 The head of the United Nations' nuclear-advisory body said the response to the accident at Japan's Fukushima Daiichi nuclear-power plant has raised questions about the effectiveness of the international nuclear-safety framework.  



 European Union energy ministers failed to reach consensus on how and when to conduct stress tests on nuclear-power stations.  

Meanwhile, Germany moved ahead with measures that would allow it to speed phasing out atomic energy. 



 The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission was expected to vote on a proposal directing officials to conduct a 90-day review of events at Japan's Fukushima power plant and to identify potential new rules for the U.S. nuclear industry. 



 European finance ministers sealed a detailed agreement establishing a new bailout fund able to lend €500 billion ($708.4 billion) to troubled euro-zone countries.  

Meantime, a political crisis flared in wobbly Portugal, whose prime minister promised to deliver budget savings in a bid to ward off a bailout. But the main opposition party has said it won't vote for the budget measures, which could precipitate a collapse of the government, and likely a bailout, as soon as this week.



 European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet signaled the ECB is likely to increase interest rates as soon as next month, saying he has "nothing to add" from the ECB's policy statement March 3, when it said "strong vigilance" was needed on inflation. 



 U.K. Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne will present his budget to the House of Commons on Wednesday, and seek to make the point that while the government is ardently sticking to the course of eliminating the budget deficit, there won't be additional pain for households.  



 Germany's economic growth continued early in the year, and should gain strength again throughout 2011, the finance ministry said in its monthly report. It noted the economy was on track to post growth near the official forecast of 2.3% in 2011.  



U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates held out the prospect of limited missile-defense cooperation with Russia, including a future deal to exchange missile-launch information, in an effort to ease longstanding concerns in Moscow about a planned U.S.-led system to protect European allies.



 Russia will invest $10 billion in a new direct-investment fund it is setting up to attract foreign investment in an attempt to help modernize the economy, a government official said.  



A group of human-rights activists, lawyers and media groups can bring a lawsuit challenging new procedures for approving U.S. government electronic surveillance of non-U.S. citizens overseas, a federal appeals court has ruled.



 Former Minnesota Gov. Tim Pawlenty took a formal step toward running for next year's Republican presidential nomination, announcing his intention to form an exploratory committee, which allows a candidate to raise money to investigate a potential run for the White House ahead of a more formal declaration of intent. 