If ever there were an example of how complex and intertwined the global wine village has become, it's Pinotage. The grape variety began life in South Africa in 1925, when Abraham Perold, a Stellenbosch University viticulturalist, crossed Burgundy's Pinot Noir with the Rhône Valley's Cinsault variety (then called Hermitage—thus the Pinotage tag). The cross created a grape intense in color, which, when aged in oak, produces a full-bodied red wine that can take on notes such as spice, ripe plum, red currant, leather, smoke and tar. 

Traditionally, identifying a Pinotage was pretty straightforward. As a general rule of thumb, if you stumbled across an example on a restaurant wine list or in a wine bar, you could be pretty sure it came from South Africa. Not any more. Brazil and California both produce interesting examples of the grape variety, as does New Zealand—which made for an exciting find when I came across a Pinotage from Hawkes Bay at a tasting in early February.

 Greywacke, Marlborough, New Zealand  Vintage: 2010  Alcohol: 13.6%  Price: About £12, or €14

Kevin Judd hasn't disappointed with his new venture Greywacke, his first since leaving Cloudy Bay after 25 years. He produces a number of wines, but if there is one in the portfolio that really excites, it is the Sauvignon Blanc, produced on soil that contains a high proportion of the greywacke stones from which the winery derives its name. A first sip and one is immediately reminded of what it was that Marlborough Sauvignon Blanc did to transfix our palates all those years ago. On the nose and in the mouth, the wine meets you with a massive intensity of flavor, stimulating the taste buds with a grapefruit zestiness and following up with notes such as lemongrass, passion fruit and a noticeable green herbaceousness. The finish surprises with its restraint and dry, tangy, mineral length.

The wine in question, Kidnapper Cliffs' Pinotage, is the latest venture from Neil McCallum, a vintner who has built his reputation on making outstanding Pinot Noir in a very European style. Dr. McCallum first planted a vineyard on free-draining soils in Martinborough, a region to the south of Hawkes Bay on New Zealand's North Island, in 1979. Establishing a precise viticultural system (he famously introduced reflective sheeting placed under the vines to achieve optimum ripeness), Dr. McCallum named the project Dry River; its wines are now recognized as some of the finest Pinot Noirs outside of Burgundy. He has since sold the winery but retains a presence. His new project, Kidnapper Cliffs, is a partnership between Dry River and Te Awa, a Hawkes Bay winery known for the quality of its Merlot. The wines will be released this spring and they are worth hunting down. Their Pinotage leans heavily on the Hermitage influence and reminded me of a northern Rhône Syrah, with its graceful pepperiness and soft, ripe plum character. It was seriously impressive and, placed in a blind tasting, would be sure to flummox the unwitting taster. A grape variety that began life in South Africa, now finds a home in New Zealand and recalls a wine produced in France.

Another grape variety that made its name in France but has now found a new lease on life in New Zealand is, of course, Sauvignon Blanc. Before it was planted in Marlborough, on the northern tip of the South Island, it was associated with a bone-dry taste and Sancerre, France. In New Zealand, it has taken on a marked tropical-fruit character in the form of gooseberry, lychee and lime. 

One of the early pioneers was Cloudy Bay, which in the late 1980s rapidly became the benchmark Sauvignon Blanc producer in the country. That was largely because of a young winemaker named Kevin Judd, who in 2009, after 25 years with the winery, left Cloudy Bay to go it alone as a photographer and winemaker at his own winery, Greywacke, on land he bought and planted in the mid-'80s. He has actually published two volumes of photographs: "The Color of Wine" and "The Landscape of New Zealand Wine." His first vintage at Greywacke, the 2010, has just been released and it marks a serious return to form for Mr. Judd, pulling off the old Marlborough trick of combining an intense explosion of fruit with a powerful, dry minerality on the palate. If anything, Greywacke characterizes the complexities of the modern wine world. It is made by a man who was born in England, grew up in Australia but makes wine in New Zealand from a grape variety that was made famous in a hilltop town in France, where it tasted of flint and nettles, but is now known for its tropical-fruit character and is produced on the slopes of Marlborough. Try and get your head around that.

 Write to  Will Lyons at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 