U.S. officials challenged the Japanese government's assessment of the radiation risks posed by the damaged nuclear complex, telling U.S. civilians and military personnel to stay at least 50 miles from the facility, in contrast to the 12-mile evacuation zone set by Japan.

Nuclear Regulatory Commission Chairman Gregory Jaczko indicated in remarks to a House committee that the U.S. believed the damage at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power complex was even graver than Japanese officials had outlined in public.

U.S. Energy Secretary Steven Chu told lawmakers he believed a "partial meltdown" had occurred at the Japanese nuclear power plant after Friday's earthquake and tsunami. Mr. Chu said he believed the accident was "more serious" than the 1979 partial core meltdown at Three Mile Island in Pennsylvania.

Mr. Jaczko said the U.S. was monitoring at least four of the reactors at the Fukushima plant, and outlined serious problems. 

The core-cooling process at the second unit "is not stable," though the primary containment apparatus continues to function, Mr. Jaczko said. 

At the third unit, he said, he believes there could be a crack in the spent-fuel pool, increasing the risk that water will drain from the pool and lead to overheating. 

At the fourth reactor, which wasn't operating at the time of the quake, he said, there had been a hydrogen explosion and the secondary containment apparatus had been destroyed. 

"There is no water in the spent fuel pool, and we believe that radiation levels are extremely high, which could possibly impact the ability to take corrective measures," Mr. Jaczko said, making his first appearance before Congress since the crisis began.

Given the risks, Mr. Jaczko said, the U.S. would recommend a "much larger radius" for evacuations than Japan had imposed. The Pentagon said Wednesday it had told U.S. military personnel aiding the earthquake recovery to stay at least 50 miles from the Fukushima power plants.

The comments came as Japanese officials struggled to extinguish smoldering spent fuel at the plant amid reports of high radiation levels. 

White House spokesman Jay Carney said at a separate briefing Wednesday that Mr. Jaczko had met with President Barack Obama around midday and told him of the new evacuation recommendation. Mr. Carney said Mr. Jaczko gave the president an update on the "deteriorating" situation. 

Mr. Carney said the U.S. was satisfied with the Japanese government's information. "The fact that our analysis may differ on some of what that data means, and the actions that we would take, does not mean that we have a problem with cooperation" or information, he said. 

The Obama administration has faced increasing questions about the safety of American citizens in Japan and the overall response to the nuclear emergency. The administration has said citizens in the U.S. are safe from radiation, as any leak from Japan would likely dissipate over the ocean.

Mr. Chu, at the House hearing, told the committee the U.S. is "trying to monitor [the situation] very closely" and is sorting through conflicting reports. "There are several reactors that are now at risk. I would not want to speculate on exactly what will happen," he said. 

Both Mr. Chu and Mr. Jaczko said the U.S. government had sent experts and equipment to help the Japanese. The Energy Department has sent 39 staff members to the country and deployed air and ground equipment to try to track radiation levels. The Nuclear Regulatory Commission has sent 11 staff members.

Mr. Chu, who has been a proponent of expanding nuclear power in the U.S. as an alternative to coal and oil power generation, said the U.S. would analyze the events at the Japanese plant to determine whether existing U.S. facilities need upgrades and whether new standards should be adopted for future facilities.

He said that the administration remained committed to building new nuclear power plants, and that he wanted Congress to approve an additional $36 billion in the 2012 budget to guarantee loans for new plant construction.

Late Wednesday, the U.K. advised its citizens in Tokyo and north of Tokyo to leave given the "evolving situation" at the Fukushima nuclear facility. 



 Write to  Tennille Tracy at tennille.tracy@dowjones.com and Jared Favole at jared.favole@dowjones.com 