HOUSTON--The head of the U.S. agency that oversees offshore oil production said Monday the agency would extend its ability to impose penalties not only against oil and gas companies, but also against the contractors they hire to work in offshore leases. 

Historically, the brunt of the regulatory oversight held by the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation and Enforcement has been solely focused on so-called operators, the oil and gas companies that own the leases where fossil fuels are found, and control the multibillion-dollar projects needed to extract them. 

After studying the issue, the agency concluded it has "broad legal authority over all activities relating to offshore leases, whether engaged in by lessees, operators or contractors," BOEMRE chief Michael Bromwich said in a speech to energy executives at the Offshore Technology Conference in Houston. 

In most cases, operators will remain fully or solely responsible for the leases, but the agency retains the ability "to pursue regulatory actions against contractors for serious violations of agency rules and regulations," he said. 

BOEMRE will be "careful and measured" in extending its authority to contractors, Mr. Bromwich said. 

The decision comes after a year of major revisions in offshore regulations following the Deepwater Horizon disaster, in which a deep-water blowout sank a drilling rig leased by  BP PLC (BP), killing 11 and unleashing the worst accidental marine spill in U.S. history. BP, which operated the well, assumed the clean-up and compensation costs and faces potentially billions of dollars in fines. But the company and its contractors-- Transocean Ltd.
RIG


-4.47
%




 (RIG), which owned the rig, and  Halliburton
HAL


-2.94
%




 (HAL), which cemented the failed well--have sought to lay responsibility for the incident on one another. 

In a meeting with reporters after his speech, Mr. Bromwich said no new rules are needed to extend BOEMRE's authority over contractors, and the agency could undertake enforcement actions or assess civil fines on contractors if it deemed they had broken its rules. 

Mr. Bromwich also said BOEMRE is developing improvements to the current process for submitting and processing drilling permit applications. New procedures to file these applications will be unveiled within a few weeks, he added. 

The guiding principles of the recommendations will be "greater clarity, transparency and consistency," he said. The oil industry has complained about the difficulty of the permitting process. 

Oil companies have also criticized the pace at which the government has approved new permits. Mr. Bromwich acknowledged that the new permitting process is time- and labor-intensive, but he said the agency is moving with "appropriate speed" when handling petitions to drill in deep water. 

-By Angel Gonzalez, Dow Jones Newswires; 713-547-9214; angel.gonzalez@dowjones.com