WASHINGTON—President Barack Obama will kick-start a Latin American trip Friday in Brazil, where White House officials say he will look to boost U.S. exports and expand other economic opportunities. 

"This trip is fundamentally about the U.S. recovery, U.S. exports and the critical relationship that Latin America plays in our economic future and jobs," said  Mike Froman, the White House's deputy National Security Advisor for international economic affairs. 

Mr. Froman said Brazil, and other countries in the region, have had tremendous economic growth in recent years. That growth, particularly the increase in the number of people reaching the middle class in Brazil, offers the U.S. strong opportunities. 

President Obama will be heading to the region at a time of growing trade between U.S. and Central and South America. U.S. exports to the region grew 86% between 2004 and 2009 and are on track to double in the next five years, the White House said. Exports to the region are estimated at about $161 billion in 2010, supporting nearly 900,000 U.S. jobs, the White House said. 

Brazil is the first stop on the trip, which will include a visit with the country's new president,  Dilma Rousseff. He will also be visiting El Salvador and Chile. While in the region, President Obama will meet with a group of Brazilian and U.S. chief executives. 

A sign of the economic importance of the trip is who Obama is bringing with him. Treasury Secretary  Timothy Geithner, U.S. Trade Representative  Ron Kirk, Environmental Protection Agency Administrator  Lisa P. Jackson and Energy Secretary  Steven Chu are among those scheduled to be in Brazil. 

Mr. Froman said the Obama administration sees potential for economic growth with Brazil in two major areas: energy and infrastructure. Brazil in recent years has discovered massive oil reserves and will host the World Cup and Olympics in coming years. 

Global economic concerns will also be raised, Mr. Froman said. He said it is in the mutual interest of the U.S. and Brazil that country's such as China have flexible, market-driven exchange rates. Brazilian officials have said they are concerned about China's yuan, but also about U.S. economic policies. 

Tariffs on ethanol will also likely come up, Mr. Froman said, though he doesn't expect any announcements on that front. Both countries produce significant amounts of ethanol. 