Magazine and newspaper publishers are reorienting themselves around a business model that has taken hold in other media: the bundle.



The result is a new ecosystem of pricing that turns aspects of the old model upside down. For many years, publications charged for print and gave away their digital content free. 

Increasingly, publishers are charging premium prices for digital content, betting on a new breed of media consumer willing to pay for content on devices such as  Apple Inc.
AAPL


0.96
%




's iPad, and throwing in print at little or no additional cost. 

Last week, for example, the New Yorker introduced a subscription that includes the magazine online and on the iPad for about $60 a year. For just $1 more a month, subscribers can get the magazine in print, too.

Some publishers are marketing bundled subscriptions as their primary offering. On Sports Illustrated's website, interested subscribers are directed to an offer for an "All Access" subscription, which includes the magazine online, on Android smartphones, on Android tablets and in print for $48 a year. Sports Illustrated, meanwhile, no longer sells print-only subscriptions through its website. 

The shift illustrates a broader effort by publishers to move away from their print-centric roots toward becoming consumer brands with many touch points. At the same time, it shows the new lengths media companies are going to hang on to print subscribers, which are still more valuable to publishers because advertisers pay significantly more for print ads than they do for digital ones. 

Traditionally, media companies have used deep discounts on subscriptions and other enticements to retain and increase their print audiences. As long as advertisers were willing to pay top dollar to reach a mass audience, it was worth it to publishers to do whatever it took to preserve that audience.

That model broke down in recent years as print advertising tumbled, pushing publishers to look for other ways to pick up the slack. Now they're trying to capitalize on the relatively high value consumers place on content for the iPad and similar devices. 

Publishers say bundling is a way to assign a higher value to print. For example, while the iPad edition of Condé Nast's Glamour in Apple's App Store is the same price—$20 a year—as the price of the iPad edition plus print, previously a print subscription to Glamour could be easily gotten for $10 a year.

"Historically, we have undercharged for our content," said  Monica Ray, executive vice president of consumer marketing at Condé Nast. "This is one of those moments of technology advancement that I think can help us get that appropriate value equation out there. And that's the plan." 

Some publications are making their iPad editions free for people already signed up for print, through a feature in the App Store that authenticates existing subscribers. Time Inc.'s Time, People, Sports Illustrated and Fortune recently added this option. 

 Write to  Russell Adams at russell.adams@wsj.com 