NEW YORK—Gold futures settled at a record high for the second consecutive session and silver posted a fresh 30-year peak Wednesday as worries about inflation persisted and intensified Mideast unrest boosted the metals' allure as refuge investments. 

The most actively traded gold contract, for April delivery, rose $6.50, or 0.5%, to settle at a record $1,437.70 a troy ounce on the Comex division of the New York Mercantile Exchange. March gold finished at a record, $1,437.20, while March silver's intraday peak of $34.930 was the metal's highest price since March 6, 1980. 

"The whole financial complex is being dominated by oil, the uncertainty surrounding the Middle East," said  Bill O'Neill, a principal with Logic Advisors. 

U.S. stocks slipped Wednesday after the previous session's sharp selloff, as crude oil rose above $100 a barrel. 

"Rather than running to anything else, particularly the dollar, people seem to be still flocking to gold" said  Dan Cook, chief executive of brokerage IG Markets Inc. 

The U.S. dollar fell to a record low against the Swiss franc as worry over the Libyan crisis intensified. The dollar's weakness supported gold and silver, which are denominated in dollars, by making the metals cheaper for foreign buyers, boosting demand. 

The dollar's diminished appeal as a refuge accentuated gold and silver's appeal as havens. Forces loyal to Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi pushed into oil-rich areas in the eastern part of the country, where they were met with heavy resistance from rebels. 

"The problems in the Middle East do not seem to be unwinding themselves very well," said  Sterling Smith, market analyst at Country Hedging. 

The resulting rise in oil prices raised worries about inflation. Gold and silver are considered hedges against rising prices.

The combination of ultra-low interest rates, which reduce the appeal of debt securities relative to gold and silver, and Federal Reserve purchases of Treasurys to stimulate the economy has caused concern about inflation in the long term. 

At the same time that gold and silver are surging as financial assets, silver is getting an extra boost because the economic growth that is sparking inflation fears also prompts a resurgence in manufacturing and consumer purchases. Silver is more widely used in manufacturing than gold. 

Meanwhile, other precious metals traded in New York also rose, with Nymex April platinum gaining 0.8% and June palladium on the exchange rising 0.7%. 

 Write to  Matt Whittaker at matt.whittaker@dowjones.com 