WASHINGTON—As House Republicans prepare for oversight hearings on the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, a lawmaker is urging White House adviser Elizabeth Warren to shed more light on the agency's budget projections, rule-making plans and staffing decisions. 

Rep. Randy Neugebauer (R., Texas) sent questions to Ms. Warren Tuesday in a four-page letter that provides further insight into GOP concerns. The letter comes as new House Republican leaders are considering when to hold their first hearings on the bureau and the Dodd-Frank regulatory overhaul that created it. 

Mr. Neugebauer, who met with Ms. Warren on Jan. 4., said he is "quite pleased" with her professionalism and enthusiasm. However, he remains critical of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, or CFPB. 

"I ... firmly believe that you are tasked with executing a fatally flawed plan, and I have many questions about the operations of the CFPB," wrote Mr. Neugebauer, who leads the House Financial Services Committee's oversight and investigations subpanel. 

Conservative Republicans have argued that the Dodd-Frank Act was a broad overreach that could stifle financial markets, and they have described the consumer bureau—a centerpiece of the new law—as a regulatory agency with excessive power. Republicans, who took control of the House this month, have pledged to keep heat on the agency through vigorous oversight and new financial rules. 

Meanwhile, Ms. Warren, whom President Barack Obama tapped to ready the bureau for its July launch, is working to ease concerns about the agency. She has been talking to bankers around the country and meeting with lawmakers, touting the agency as one that will help middle-class families avoid tricks and traps in financial markets. 

Mr. Neugebauer raises questions about transparency and accountability at the bureau as well as worries about Ms. Warren's authority. 

It is "unclear as to what specific responsibilities and supervisory authority" Ms. Warren has as she works to shape the consumer-watchdog agency, he wrote. 

Also, Mr. Neugebauer wants to know how the bureau plans to ensure that its rules will not harm banks and consumers. Additionally, he asks about the White House's timetable for naming a permanent bureau director. He also said the Obama administration never answered questions about whether Ms. Warren is willing to testify on Capitol Hill. 

Ms. Warren has said she isn't afraid to face congressional scrutiny and that a key goal for the bureau is to make credit markets more transparent for consumers. 

"We don't have anything to hide. We're trying to build an agency here, and we're trying to do it on behalf of the American people," she said in a recent television interview. 

Mr. Neugebauer asks for Warren's budget projections, noting that the financial overhaul authorizes the bureau to receive as much as $200 million a year for fiscal years 2010-2014, in addition to the roughly $400 million in funding it will receive from the Federal Reserve. 

"Do you anticipate the bureau submitting a request to use this optional authority in FY 2011 or FY 2012?," he asks. 

While Dodd-Frank Act structured the agency's funding in a way that would help protect the CFPB, Mr. Neugebauer and other critics have taken aim at the funding mechanism. The money comes from the Fed, which means it isn't subject to the congressional appropriations process. 

"I strongly believe that this arrangement, at a minimum, diminishes the likelihood of effective congressional oversight," he said. 

 Write to  Maya Jackson Randall at Maya.Jackson-Randall@dowjones.com 