Exotic skins like python, anaconda and alligator have become increasingly common in handbags and accessories. Generally more fragile than leather, these skins should be treated with special care, says  Steve Dumain, co-founder of the high-end Be & D handbag label.

Mr. Dumain, who uses exotic skins in both his main and bespoke handbag and shoe lines, says he enjoys using skins such as eel or ostrich, because their unusual patterns can " add depth, richness and texture." The designer, who has a personal collection of more than 600 bags, shoes and other accessories in all sorts of leathers and skins, says that if the skin is natural or untreated, the first thing he does is apply a light coat of waterproof spray. "This will help reduce dirt and water marks, as well as help preserve the natural characteristics of the leather," he says. He usually uses Collonil Waterstop Spray but tests it on a small section of the item first—and is careful not to "soak the product" in it, which could ruin the skin.

Generally, he is careful not to expose exotic skins to direct heat or sunlight for long, which "may cause uneven fading to occur," he says. He also avoids putting his bags on rough or sharp surfaces, as exotic skins can scratch easily. 

Exotic skins may dry out faster than leather. To prevent that, Mr. Dumain periodically applies a leather conditioner made specifically for exotic skins. Alligator and crocodile are less susceptible to drying and cracking than python and ostrich, "due to the shape of the skin and scales," Mr. Dumain says. "But all exotic skins need to be treated on occasion—every few months for snakeskin and less frequently for smoother exotic skins," he adds. 

Before applying the conditioner, Mr. Dumain thoroughly cleans the surface with a damp rag. (Mr. Dumain avoids using household cleaners, which can be particularly damaging.) He puts the conditioner on a lint-free or microfiber cloth, not directly on the item, and applies several light, even coats, letting the leather dry between applications. With shoes, which face more wear and tear, Mr. Dumain will often use conditioner more frequently, depending on their condition.

It isn't necessary to keep items made of exotic skins in the bag they came in, but storing them in some type of bag or box can help preserve them. Mr. Dumain keeps them in a place that's cool, dark and dry, since moisture "can lead to mold." If he spills something on an exotic-leather item, he blots it gently and then uses a little warm water on the stain right away. Once he is home, he applies a professional leather cleaner made for suede, which is more delicate than leather.

While all this care may sound like a lot of work, Mr. Dumain believes it has a long-term payoff. "Your exotic skins have the ability to last for many, many years—even decades," he says. "So take the time to give them the attention."

—Cheryl Lu-Lien Tan