PHILADELPHIA—Investigators combed through debris Wednesday searching for causes of a natural-gas pipeline explosion here that killed a Philadelphia Gas Works employee and injured six others who were responding to a call of gas odor in a residential area.

The Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission and the federal Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration are leading the investigation of the explosion of a 12-inch, high-pressure gas main Tuesday evening that sent a 50-foot fireball over a northeastern section of the city. About a dozen buildings were damaged, some heavily. 

At the time of the blast, utility employees and emergency personnel were on the scene trying to shut off a ruptured main discovered after a resident reported the smell of gas at 7:19 p.m. Tuesday Executive Fire Chief Daniel Williams said. 

Investigators are trying to determine whether a repair last month about 200 feet from the explosion site played a role. They will also examine whether the age of the cast-iron gas main, which dates from the 1940s, was a factor or whether there was a leak in a pipe joint. 

"There's always a concern about cast-iron pipe," said  Thomas Knudsen, chief executive of Philadelphia Gas Works, which is the nation's largest municipal gas distribution utility. 

Federal data for Philadelphia Gas Works show 18 incidents from 1985 through 2008 involving cast-iron pipes that resulted in death, injury or significant property damage. The pipes, on average, were 78 years old and half the incidents involved pipes put in service prior to 1912. The pipe that exploded this week was 71 years old. 

Iron pipes, which can become brittle as they age, are used in 45% of the utility's 3,000 miles of gas mains, Mr. Knudsen said. The utility has been replacing about 18 miles of cast-iron pipes a year with steel or plastic ones, depending on pressure requirements. The city's original gas network dates from the 1830s, making it one of the nation's oldest municipal gas-distribution systems in the U.S.

Craig White, the utility's chief operating officer, said the company does leak surveys to find problems and determine which pipes should be replaced first. He said the pipe involved in the explosion wasn't a priority "because there wasn't any indication of a problem." The utility inspects all of its pipelines every three years. The state utility commission requires inspections every five years. 

Tuesday's explosion came less than five months after a Sept. 9 deadly gas-line blast in San Bruno, Calif., that killed eight people and destroyed 37 homes. 

A quick evacuation of the Philadelphia neighborhood by firefighters likely avoided greater injury. At least 30 people had been evacuated before the explosion, said Mr. Williams.

Joe Thomas was in his northeast Philadelphia apartment nearby around 7:30 p.m. Tuesday when he heard and saw fire trucks arriving before the blast. He said he stepped away from the window, then heard the explosion. "The whole house shook and windows rattled," he said.

There have been 291 fatalities in gas-distribution incidents from 1990 to March 2010, according to the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration. During that same time period, there were 1,193 injuries. The incidents cover a variety of situations, not just explosions. 

Philadelphia Gas Works has had nine fatalities since 1984, according to federal records. Philadelphia Gas Works, like many of the country's utilities in urban regions, is grappling with aging infrastructure and extensive maintenance projects. It has recently improved its financial position, according to Fitch Ratings, which noted that PGW reported that its third quarter 2010 results reflected higher cash levels and improvement in customer collection rates.

Though PGW's cash position is still tight, fiscal 2009 and 2010 are expected to reflect the first two consecutive years in the past 15 years that it has had positive cash balances, Fitch reported. 

"The improved financial performance appears to be accompanied by a more supportive relationship with the Public Utilities Commission that regulates PGW's rates," according to Fitch. The utility reached a settlement in December 2008 with the commission allowing for a $60 million base rate increase.

Pennsylvania State Rep. Dwight Evans, a Democrat who represents Philadelphia, has been worried about leaky water lines and aging cast iron pipes, for years. He carried a bill, which died in the past session, which would have put a measure on the ballot authorizing Pennsylvania to issue up to $1 billion in bonds and use the proceeds to speed up utility pipe-replacement efforts. 

It estimated the cost of cast-iron pipe replacement for gas utilities in the state at $9 billion to $16 billion, alone. "Utilities can't make the rapid changes that are needed without help," he said Wednesday.

Mr. Evans said he couldn't get traction with the bill but may introduce it now that the explosion has focused attention on the dangers of aging infrastructure. 

—Peter Loftus and Daniel Gilbert contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Rebecca Smith at rebecca.smith@wsj.com and Robert Guy Matthews at robertguy.matthews@wsj.com 