  Ron Zeff, founder of real-estate investment company Carmel Partners, listed his San Francisco home for $32 million. 

The 16,000-square-foot neoclassical revival-style home was built in 1910 and restored and redesigned in 2002. The home has seven bedrooms, 11 bathrooms, two kitchens and an elevator. There's an indoor basketball court, a wine cellar and a large terrace on the top level that has views of the San Francisco Bay and Golden Gate Bridge. There's also a dining room with two 19th-century crystal chandeliers and a master suite that has separate his and hers bathrooms and dressing rooms. 

Mr. Zeff bought the home through the Clarmont Street Trust in 1998, according to public records.  Neal Ward and  Gael Bruno of McGuire Real Estate have the listing. 

Jeff Moorad, vice chairman and chief executive of baseball's San Diego Padres, and his wife, Jan, have officially listed their eight-bedroom, nine-bathroom vacation home in Paradise Valley, Ariz., for $17.9 million. The home had been quietly marketed for $28 million in fall 2009, say local brokers. 

The 55-year-old former sports agent bought the property in 2005 for $9.43 million and spent several million dollars expanding and renovating it. There's a 10,000-square-foot main house, a 2,500-square-foot guest house, a pool and basketball and tennis courts. "The goal was to create something unique that spoke to Arizona as well as our interest to create a Mediterranean-style home that fit in Paradise Valley," says Mr. Moorad, who lives in La Jolla, Calif.  Walter Danley of Walt Danley Group has the listing.

Jim Benson, the former chief executive of John Hancock Life Insurance, and his wife, Marlene, have listed their Boston-area home for $21 million. 

The Bensons spent four years building the 21,000-square-foot, Georgian Colonial-style home. The house, in Weston, Mass., has six bedrooms, 11 bathrooms. There is a 2,300-bottle wine cellar, a tasting room, a spa and a home theater. 

The Bensons bought the nearly four-acre property in 1997 from Queen Elizabeth II, who technically owned it, though it was occupied by Boston's Canadian consul general. Mr. Benson says he's selling because his children are out of high school and he and his wife plan to move into Boston.  Beth Dickerson of Gibson Sotheby's International Realty in Boston has the listing. 

—Candace Jackson and Alexandra Cheney

—Email: privateproperties@wsj.com 