A drive to overhaul the U.S. tax code got off to a quick start at a congressional hearing Thursday when an influential business group threw its weight behind the effort and lawmakers of both parties pledged to work together on a fix. 

The political challenge in rewriting the complex tax system remains daunting, however, and Thursday's hearing of the House Ways and Means Committee barely scratched the surface of the many difficulties.

New committee chairman Dave Camp (R., Mich.) said Republicans would consider eliminating a number of cherished tax breaks—always a painful task—to help counter the budget impact of reducing rates. Many Democrats have said offsetting lost revenue is a high priority, and House minority whip Steny Hoyer (D., Md.) even suggested in an op-ed Thursday that a tax overhaul should increase revenues to help close budget deficits.

"To really reform the tax code…we will need to make some tough choices," said Mr. Camp, who promised to work with Democratic lawmakers and the White House.

For their part, several Democrats on the panel showed willingness to consider a tax overhaul even for multinational corporations, which they have often accused of taking advantage of tax rules to outsource jobs overseas.

"Clearly, there is a need for tax reform," said Rep. Sander Levin of Michigan, the panel's top Democrat. He added that the effort would require "leadership" from President Barack Obama, "which I am sure will be forthcoming."

White House officials didn't immediately comment on Mr. Levin's remark. 

The president lately has signaled his interest in a tax overhaul as a way of improving U.S. competitiveness. The administration still appears to be weighing just how hard to push the effort this year.

There is a growing sense on Capitol Hill that the key elements of an overhaul—lowering tax rates and streamlining the rules—could be an effective way to boost the economy and jobs, particularly at a time when fiscal stimulus spending has fallen out of favor. 

A tax overhaul could become a rare area of bipartisan cooperation in the new Congress, as Democrats and Republicans remain sharply divided over health care and other issues.

Major U.S. corporations are particularly eager for a rewrite of the tax rules, although the overhaul appears likely to include many aspects of the individual tax code as well. 

The U.S. hasn't kept pace with a worldwide move toward lower corporate-tax rates and now has one of the industrialized world's highest rates at 35%. (The effective tax rate for many companies, after accounting for tax breaks, is often much lower.) 

The U.S. also is one of the few big economies that seek to tax corporate income earned overseas when it is brought home.

Speaking for the Business Roundtable, a group of corporate CEOs, Procter & Gamble Co. Chief Executive Robert McDonald said the "tilted playing field created by the U.S. tax system hurts the competitiveness of American companies" and hampers job growth.

Mr. McDonald said the best way to improve the system, from his company's perspective, would include lowering U.S. corporate tax rates and dropping the rules that seek to tax overseas profits. He sought to counter the idea that U.S. multinationals were pushing to expand tax loopholes overseas. "We're not talking about a tax break," Mr. McDonald said. "What we're talking about is paying the same as our foreign-based [competitors]," which don't face tax when they bring funds home. 

Rep. Lloyd Doggett (D., Texas) called the idea of exempting overseas profits "a sure-fire way to continue the export of more American jobs," because of the incentive U.S. companies would have to shift income offshore.

Some Democrats also questioned whether a tax overhaul could boost the economy if it were strictly offset by tax increases. Mr. McDonald confirmed that big companies have asked that the "revenue-neutral" standard be eased to "fiscally responsible."

 Write to  John D. McKinnon at john.mckinnon@wsj.com 