TOKYO—The Japanese government's cost of borrowing climbed, as did the price of insuring the nation's sovereign debt, following a downgrade of the nation's credit rating by Standard & Poor's.

The moves were modest, however. And market participants said they expect little dramatic market impact over the next few days.

Japan's bond market in the past hasn't reacted aggressively to rating shifts, largely because most of the debt is held by domestic investors. Foreigners hold less than 10%. 

Still, the first such marking down of Tokyo's bonds in eight years has shoved the country's burgeoning fiscal deficit squarely under the spotlight, as investors globally are on heightened alert regarding sovereign-debt risks after the bailouts of two European countries. Japanese yields have been rising in recent months, in part on concerns about the country's finances and a level of debt that is expected to surpass 200% of gross domestic product this year. Insurance costs against the risk of a Japanese default also rose in recent months.

Following Thursday's announcement, the annual cost of insuring $10 million of Japan's debt against default, using derivatives known as credit-default swaps, rose to around $80,000 to $85,000, from $80,000 before the ratings cut was announced, traders said. That matches levels seen last week, which were the highest since last July, when the European debt crisis raised concerns globally about sovereign-debt risks.

Bank of Japan Gov. Masaaki Shirakawa warned earlier in the week that it may not be appropriate to read too much into movements on sovereign-debt CDSs, as the market's volume is thin. "Regardless of short-term moves of CDS premiums, it is very important to make efforts to maintain the sustainability of the fiscal balance," he said Tuesday.

In after-hours trade, the benchmark 10-year yield rose 0.02 percentage point to 1.250%. It had eased 0.005 percentage point during the day, prior to the announcement.

The next big test of investor sentiment toward Japanese bonds—and a measure of whether the downgrade will affect that—will come Tuesday, when the Ministry of Finance auctions 2.2 trillion yen ($26.59 billion) worth of 10-year debt. Thursday, the government sold 2.387 trillion yen of two-year notes at a lowest price of 100.005 to yield 0.197%, within the range expected by the market. The auction received 12.712 trillion yen in total bids for a bid-to-cover ratio of 5.33, higher than the 3.50 at the last sale. 

Though foreign players may sell the government's debt in the wake of the S&P auction, pushing up yields, the 10-year yield should remain below 1.30%, said  Akito Fukunaga, chief rates strategist at RBS Securities Japan.The downgrade is unlikely to cause any major deterioration in the balance between supply and demand in either the secondary market or at upcoming auctions, he said.

Indeed, when S&P last January cut its outlook on the country's debt, a move that can precede a downgrade, the 10-year yield briefly rose 0.01 percentage point to 1.330% the following day but fell to 1.305% by the close.

Despite the change in outlook last January, Thursday's move came as a surprise to some market participants.

Citigroup Global Markets Japan's senior strategist  Maki Shimizu said the brokerage house expected any downgrade wouldn't come until later this year, such as the government's promised June deadline to come up with a tax-reform package meant to address the worsening debt situation.

 Write to  Megumi Fujikawa at megumi.fujikawa@dowjones.net 