PARIS— Renault SA
RNO


0.44
%




 Chief Executive  Carlos Ghosn apologized to three senior managers the company fired after wrongly accusing them of espionage. 

Mr. Ghosn also said  Patrick Pélata, chief operating officer at the French car maker, offered to resign over the dismissals but that the CEO refused. 

"I didn't want to add a crisis to a crisis," Mr. Ghosn said on national television. Instead, he, Mr. Pélata and other executives involved in the dismissal, will give up the bonuses they were awarded for 2010 and stock-option awards for this year.

Monday's apology came after the Paris state prosecutor said the espionage affair alleged in January by the company might have been fraudulent. 

Asked in the TV interview whether he had offered to resign, Mr. Ghosn said, "I presented an action plan, and the board agreed to it." 

He and Mr. Pélata weren't available to comment for this article.

Several top Renault managers in August received an anonymous letter accusing  Michel Balthazard, head of the company's development project, of having negotiated a bribe. 

He was fired in January along with his deputy,  Bertrand Rochette, and  Matthieu Tenenbaum, deputy head of the electric-vehicle program. All three denied the allegations. 

After apologizing to them on television Monday, Mr. Ghosn said he and Mr. Pélata would offer to meet the men and propose that they rejoin the company. They also would be offered compensation, "taking into account the serious hurt that they and their families have suffered," Mr. Ghosn said.

"I was wrong. We were wrong," he said. "And from the conclusions we heard from the Paris prosecutor, it seems that we were fooled." 

He said Renault would also rethink its security system.

An investigation carried out last year on behalf of Renault concluded that the three men held bank accounts in Switzerland and Liechtenstein, which were allegedly used to funnel payments to the men.

But state prosecutor Jean-Claude Marin on Monday said his investigation showed that the three didn't have bank accounts in those countries. He said it appeared that Renault had been the victim of an organized attempt to defraud the auto maker, though an attempt at industrial espionage couldn't be ruled out. 

Follow events surrounding the investigation.

"At this stage we do not know whether this is just fraud or a deliberate attempt to destabilize Renault," Mr. Marin told reporters. "If there was any espionage, it was not done through the networks identified by Renault." 

He said he still didn't know the identity of the person who triggered the espionage allegation.

  Xavier Thouvenin, a lawyer for Mr. Balthazard, said his client would meet with his former bosses. "He asked to meet them a long time ago. He wants to have a discussion eye to eye, man to man," Mr. Thouvenin said. 

Mr. Balthazard said last week that he wouldn't accept an offer to rejoin Renault. 

A lawyer for Mr. Tenenbaum said his client would consider a Renault offer. "It depends on what they propose," said the lawyer,  Thibault de Montbrial. He said his client was weary after his two-month ordeal but would meet with Renault as soon as possible. 

Mr. Tenenbaum felt "great relief at the recognition of his innocence and relief that Renault has extended its hand to him," Mr. de Montbrial said. 

Mr. Rochette wasn't available for comment.

The prosecutor's office said it was investigating  Dominique Gevrey, an employee in Renault's security department. Mr. Gevrey was picked up by French police Friday and held for questioning as he tried to leave the country on a flight to Guinea. He was in custody Monday and a lawyer for him couldn't be reached.

Renault handed hundreds of thousands of euros to Mr. Gevrey and others to pay for details of the supposed leaks and money transfers, Mr. Marin said. 

He said Mr. Gevrey's testimony over the weekend was "incoherent." 

The prosecutor said Renault had paid about €300,000, or roughly $400,000, to cover the cost of an internal investigation by its security department and had an additional €400,000 in bills waiting to be paid. 

Mr. Gevrey had asked for a further €924,000 to give his informant for details of signature cards for the Swiss and Lichtenstein bank accounts, Mr. Marin said. 

Renault security-department employee  Marc Tixador also was questioned by authorities Friday, and on Saturday the head of Renault's security department,  Rémi Pagnie, was interrogated, people familiar with the matter said. Mr. Tixador and Mr. Pagnie were subsequently released and neither could be reached for comment Monday.

In January, after Messrs. Balthazard, Tenenbaum and Rochette were fired, Renault said it suspected it had been the victim of an attempt by people outside the company to obtain information on its electric-vehicle program. 

Mr. Ghosn said at the time that the information was possibly related to the price of key components such as batteries and that the company had "multiple proofs" of wrongdoing.

 Write to  Sebastian Moffett at sebastian.moffett@wsj.com and David Pearson at david.pearson@dowjones.com 