NEW YORK—Renewed concerns about euro-zone sovereign debt pushed gold back above $1,500 and added to silver's recovery after last week's selloff provided what some saw as potential bargains. 

Concerns about the global economic recovery were heightened after Standard & Poor's downgraded Greece's credit rating by two notches and Moody's placed the debt on review for a possible downgrade. That boosted the allure of the precious metals as refuges during times of economic uncertainty. 

"The Greek downgrade reiterates the flight-to-safety role that precious metals play," said  Bill O'Neill, a principal with Logic Advisors. 

The most actively traded gold contract, for June delivery, rose $11.60, or 0.8%, to settle at $1,503.20 a troy ounce on the Comex division of the New York Mercantile Exchange. Nearby May gold added $11.70, or 0.8%, to $1,502.90. 

Gold had lost 4.8% last week through Thursday before stronger U.S. nonfarm payrolls renewed concerns that rising consumer and producer prices are in the offing amid easy monetary policy. Gold and silver are considered hedges against inflation. 

Meanwhile, rising trading deposit requirements, known as margins, had forced investors to flee silver, which lost 27% last week. 

"Silver had dropped so violently," said  Sterling Smith, an analyst with Country Hedging. "We're seeing a little more bargain hunting coming into silver." 

Comex July silver gained $1.829, or 5.2%, to settle at $37.116 a troy ounce, while the nearby May contract rose $1.827, or 5.2%, to $37.110. 

The downgrade of Greece built on existing worries about finances in the euro zone. 

The cost of insuring debt in the 17-nation currency bloc was higher, while banking stocks were lower after a report late last week that Greece was considering leaving the euro zone. That report, by the German magazine Der Spiegel, was later denied. 

Gold was also finding support on news that several central banks have recently increased their holdings in the yellow metal. 

International Monetary Fund data showed Mexico's central bank bought close to 100 metric tons of gold in February and March, while May data showed continued buying by Russia and Thailand, of 18.8 tons and 9.3 tons, respectively. 

Other precious metals also gained ground Monday. Nymex July platinum rose 0.5%, while June palladium on the exchange gained 1.8%. 

 Write to  Matt Whittaker at matt.whittaker@dowjones.com 