The dollar is drooping. Should Americans be worried?

Short answer: Not yet, but we're vulnerable. 

Some recent commentary on the dollar is breathless, even frightening. The very words convey a terrifying message: A "weaker" currency means a "weaker" nation. The talk and charts sometimes suggest the long-predicted crash of the dollar has arrived, and that the world is writing off the U.S. 

It hasn't—yet. And that's important.

At a time when exchange rates move freely, the decline in the dollar so far mainly reflects the fact that major individual economies move at different speeds.

The decline is no surprise: It's the anticipated result of the Federal Reserve printing lots of dollars (increase the supply, decrease the price) in its effort to resuscitate U.S. economic growth. And, because money flows toward higher yields, it's the inevitable result of the European Central Bank's eagerness to raise interest rates faster than the Fed. 

And stock and bond markets are, so far, unperturbed—a comforting sign that the dollar's recent fall doesn't mean the rest of the world is losing confidence in the U.S. 

A few facts: The chart with this column traces the history of the dollar against currencies of U.S. trading partners. One line shows then-current exchange rates, the other adjusts to reflect differences in inflation among countries, a more meaningful metric because it reflects the dollar's actual buying power.

This price-adjusted measure shows the spike in the dollar that led the Reagan administration to seek global help in pulling it down in 1985, the subsequent fall and rise of the dollar through the early 2000s and then a steady decline in during the expansion of the 2000s. That trend was interrupted by the flight to safety during the financial crisis but since has resumed. (Indeed, that is, in part, a welcome sign that the panic that had investors fleeing for the safety of the U.S. is over.)

Big picture: The dollar today is lower than at any time since major currencies began floating in 1973. It is 13% lower than it was 30 years ago and 28% below its 2002 recent peak. 

So what? A weaker dollar makes Americans poorer: It means U.S. paychecks buy less of what the world sells us. By pushing up prices of imports, it means more inflation, not much of a problem today but potentially one in the future. 

It also—and this matters—gives exporting U.S. factories a boost by making their goods cheaper to foreigners at a time when the U.S. game plan is to rely more on exports and less on construction and consumer borrowing and spending. 

After all, a very big reason the world embraced floating currencies was to give nations with persistently large trade deficits (U.S.) and those with surpluses (China) a way to rebalance rather than more painful alternatives. In the past, fealty to the gold standard—also known as fixed exchange rates—contributed to and, by some accounts, caused the Great Depression. Today, Greece, Spain and Ireland, unable to let currencies fall because they joined the euro, have no option but to cut wages and prices and suffer through recessions to regain competitiveness.

But none of this economics means the U.S. has nothing to fear. The dollar has come down a lot, probably enough to bring the trade deficit to sustainable levels. But once markets start moving, they often overshoot. A country dependent on borrowing so heavily from abroad, even one with the luxury of borrowing in its own currency, is susceptible to market mood swings.

If everyone believes the dollar is on a long-term downward slide (as seems to be the case), if the U.S. is widely seen as an empire in decline, it wouldn't take much to start an avalanche. Imagine gridlock in Washington, add rhetoric from China about diversifying out of U.S. Treasurys, throw in some talk—that doesn't even have to be true—about OPEC pricing oil in a basket of currencies instead of the dollar, all at a time when Europe (whose currency is the only rival to the dollar today) is getting its act together and— pow! 

Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner and Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke see this risk, and worry that loose talk that the U.S. is trying to push down the dollar increases the risk of a crash. So they choose words carefully, always advocating a "strong dollar," arguing that the strength of the dollar ultimately reflects the vitality of the U.S. economy and its commitment to low and stable inflation. They insist that the U.S. isn't (as it accuses China of doing) aiming to cheapen the dollar as a way to boost exports—but never suggest they will do anything push the dollar up. 

Rhetoric alone won't protect the U.S. economy if the dollar crashes, sending stocks and bonds down, pushing interest rates up and disrupting the distressingly slow economic recovery. 

Hence the Geithner-Bernanke prescription, one widely shared outside government: The best way to reduce the risk of a dollar crash is for politicians in the U.S. to demonstrate the will, skill and consensus to put U.S. fiscal policy on a long-run sustainable course. Soon.

 Write to  David Wessel at capital@wsj.com 