 Astoria, N.Y. 

With moving images now as close at hand as the nearest cellphone or iPad, it seems especially important to consider where they come from and how they may be transforming our reality. It's hard to think of a better place to address such questions than the Museum of the Moving Image, the only institution in the U.S. devoted to all forms of screen culture: film, television and digital media. It occupies a site cherished by cinéastes, the former Astoria Studio, which was once populated by glittering stars. Now an ambitious $67 million redesign and expansion, opening to the public Saturday, aims to rekindle some of that long-lost glamour while ushering the museum into the future. 

Visitors will be immediately reminded of how screen images can summon seductive alternate worlds upon entering the lobby, where the lush video mural "City Glow"—a cyclical vision of a toxic paradise in which wriggling skyscrapers sprout by day and bloody ghosts and sparkling fairies appear at night—fills a 50-foot-long projection wall with movement and color. Chiho Aoshima, who created it in collaboration with the New Zealand animator Bruce Ferguson, draws on sources ranging from Japanese Pop to Edo scrolls. Though the work dates from 2005, thanks to the panoramic screen it is being presented in an unbroken format for the first time.

The new projection wall is just one of several areas designed to showcase digital media. Another is a video amphitheatre in the center of the new grand staircase. Martha Colburn's "Dolls vs. Dictators" (2011), the scrappy stop-motion work now continuously screening there, incorporates photos of dolls, toys and other licensed merchandise from the museum's collection. It's open-ended enough to suit a theater that invites viewing by passersby, but much less compelling than some other works on view. 

Those include six moodily immersive installations—all involving digital technologies that have been developed for the entertainment industry—in the show "Real Virtuality," which fills a 4,100-square-foot space dedicated to changing exhibitions. Organized by senior deputy director Carl Goodman, it takes its title from a term used by the sociologist Manuel Castells. The works range from the OpenEnded Group's "Into the Forest" (2011)—a haunting, circular, stereoscopic landscape into which visitors can periodically appear to enter by means of motion-capture technology—to Bill Viola's first use of video-game technology, the spiritual quest "The Night Journey" (work in progress).

From the sleek digital-media galleries visitors can step into the heart of the museum: its permanent exhibition, "Behind the Screen," which occupies two floors and has been completely reinstalled. Hours could be spent here studying how moving images have been made and by whom, and the residue they've left in popular culture: spinning early optical toys such as a Phenakistoscope or seeing how Edison films were once viewed on a Kinetoscope, engaging with interactive exhibits and studying artifacts like makeup, set designs, scripts, costumes, fan magazines, cameras, projection devices and early video games. 

New additions include a multimonitor display that captures the art of recording televised sports by following director Bill Webb as he makes split-second decisions during a broadcast of a Mets game. Technological equipment in the interactive exhibits has been upgraded or replaced. Visitors will be able to email themselves copies of the digital flipbooks that can be shot at one station, and soon will be able to try their hand at recording sound effects in a Foley sound booth.

If "Behind the Screen" encourages reflection on the many facets of how moving images are created, the film programming invites one to revel in the wonders of cinematic illusion. Sweeping in its scope, the six-week-long inaugural series of screenings and special events, "Celebrating the Moving Image," organized by chief curator David Schwartz, highlights the diversity of programming that the new facility, with its 267-seat theater and 68-seat screening room (the latter will be used for public screenings as well as the museum's expanded education program), will make possible. 

Series scheduled during the opening weeks range from "Recovered Treasures: Great Films from World Archives" to "Avant-Garde Masters." Presentations in the large theater, which has been designed to resemble a floating blue space capsule and features a mini orchestra pit, will include a selection of Georges Méliès films with live music from one-man-band Sxip Shirey and screenings of Marcel L'Herbier's silent tour-de-force "L'Argent" (1928) accompanied by the Mont Alto Orchestra. 

The opening day's offerings will include a double feature of restored 70mm prints of two epic visual masterpieces, Jacques Tati's "Play Time" (1967) and Stanley Kubrick's "2001: A Space Odyssey" (1968). It's a fittingly dramatic way to relaunch a venue that has a grand-scale appreciation for the art of moving images.

 Ms. Jones writes about film for the Journal. 