BRUSSELS—After a delay of almost two years, the U.S. and the European Union appear ready to cement an air-safety pact that both sides say should improve aviation oversight and save millions of dollars annually by eliminating duplicate efforts.

The agreement was reached in 2008 but languished amid opposition in the U.S. Congress. That fight now appears resolved. As a result, the EU on Monday gave its final approval of the pact, which could come into force as soon as May 1.

Under the deal, U.S. and EU air-safety agencies will recognize each other's inspections and analysis. That should allow the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration and the European Aviation Safety Agency to share information and avoid duplicating efforts, officials said.

The coordination also will help harmonize air-safety rules in the world's two biggest aviation markets, reducing costs and confusion for airlines, pilots and manufacturers. 

No longer, for example, will a U.S. manufacturer need to submit paperwork to regulators on both sides of the Atlantic. The U.S. has separate safety agreements with about a dozen European countries. The new deal will replace those with a single accord covering the 27 members of the EU.

The deal is "a positive signal for broader cooperation" between the U.S. and EU in areas such as aircraft certification and pilot licensing, EU Transport Commissioner  Siim Kallas said through a spokeswoman.

"This safety agreement will allow the U.S. and the European Union to build deeper and broader working relationships in a range of areas, including aircraft design and maintenance," said U.S. Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood through a spokeswoman.

 Highlights of the U.S.-EU air-safety agreement: 

Reciprocal acceptance of safety findings in aircraft design and repair oversight

Broadens U.S. acceptance of products from the EU's 27 member states

Provides for cooperation in rule making and the exchange of safety data

Establishes bilateral board to consult on urgent matters, safety issues 

 Source: FAA 

A  Boeing Co.
BA


-0.77
%




 spokesman said the agreement "is extremely important" for the airplane maker because it eases safety approvals for airplane exports. Other U.S. and European aviation companies would get similar benefits.

The pact's enactment also will have an indirect benefit of improving the flow of safety data across the Atlantic. The FAA and EASA both collect and analyze vast amounts of information that allows safety experts to spot dangerous trends in such areas as cockpit procedures or incidents in which aircraft overshoot runways. Sharing such data had been impeded while the safety agreement was on hold.

The United Nations' International Civil Aviation Organization in October established a voluntary network to foster data sharing across borders. Industry officials said the network should get a boost from closer links between the FAA and EASA.

"There's no better way to create a safe system than to have two competent regulators looking at the same operator and sharing data," said  Bill Voss, president of the Flight Safety Foundation, a nonprofit group based in Alexandria, Va.

One of the most contentious elements of the U.S.-EU agreement had been the mutual recognition of safety inspections for aircraft-repair facilities. Commercial planes flying internationally often are maintained far from home, and countries for years have sent inspectors to assess foreign facilities. 

American and European air-safety officials earlier this decade agreed that their standards were comparable and they could trust each other's inspections so didn't need to duplicate efforts.

But some U.S. politicians said the plan to eliminate routine FAA inspections of European maintenance endangered safety. Former Rep. James Oberstar in 2009 proposed legislation mandating FAA overseas inspections, which would have violated the pending safety agreement and put it on hold.

The Minnesota Democrat lost his seat in November and his provisions were removed from draft legislation. The shift heartened EU transportation officials, who approved the air-safety deal late Monday. 

In coming days the two sides expect to exchange diplomatic notes, officially sealing the pact, the Agreement Between the U.S. and the European Community on Cooperation in the Regulation of Civil Aviation.

Industry executives said the U.S. has more to gain from the agreement than Europe because more European planes are maintained in the U.S. than vice versa. Roughly 1,200 U.S. repair shops have certification by foreign authorities on top of their FAA certification. About 400 European facilities are certified to maintain U.S. planes.

 Write to  Daniel Michaels at daniel.michaels@wsj.com 