  Narayana Kocherlakota gets his first crack at voting at Federal Reserve policy meetings later this month, and the wonky former academic said he is likely to support the Fed's controversial $600 billion bond-buying program.

"The bar for dissent from the committee is going to be pretty high for me," Mr. Kocherlakota, 47 years old, said in an extensive interview last week, his first with the national media.

Mr. Kocherlakota, who became president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis just over a year ago, acknowledged he was hesitant about launching the program and is reluctant to expand it. But he isn't likely to push for tightening monetary policy any time soon.

Mr. Kocherlakota (pronounced coach-er-lah-coat-ah), said he has grown more optimistic about the economy in recent weeks. And he believes the labor market may not be as loaded with spare workers as some other Fed officials assume.

The question of a formal dissent is important given the divisions inside the Fed that emerged as it launched the bond buying in November. Dissent would make it harder for Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke to stick to the program or to expand it if the economy weakens anew.

The Fed's decision-making body, the Federal Open Market Committee, consists of the Fed governors in Washington—seven when all the seats are filled—and 12 regional bank presidents. Only five of the presidents get to vote at meetings, the New York Fed president and four others, who serve an annual rotation.

Two of this year's voting members— Charles Plosser of Philadelphia and  Richard Fisher of Dallas—are potential dissenting votes, based on their past behavior. A third dissent would be seen as an insurrection, an event not seen since Reagan appointees dissented during  Paul Volcker's chairmanship in the 1980s.

"I want to have the committee moving in a good way," Mr. Kocherlakota said.

Mr. Kocherlakota has come out of his shell slowly since succeeding  Gary Stern at the Minneapolis Fed in October 2009. He maintains a strong interest in research, regularly attending Minneapolis Fed seminars conducted jointly with the University of Minnesota, in a research department conference room that the local PhDs call their "inner sanctum."

"He's smart but relatively new to the practical aspects of reading the economy and implementing monetary policy," said J.P. Morgan economist  Michael Feroli. "You can almost see his thinking evolve as he acquires more on-the-job learning."

Mr. Kocherlakota was born in Baltimore to two statisticians; reared in Winnipeg, Manitoba, and enrolled as an undergraduate at Princeton University when he was 15 years old. When asked what it was like to go to college at such a young age, the theorist responded that "it's hard to do the counterfactual."

He spent 22 years as an often-abstract economic theorist at the University of Minnesota, Stanford University, the University of Iowa and Northwestern University.

His assertion in August that the nation's unemployment problem might be at least partly immune to Fed action drew fire from  Paul Krugman, the New York Times columnist and Princeton economist. 

"The Fed does not have a means to transform construction workers into manufacturing workers," Mr. Kocherlakota said. Mr. Krugman assailed the argument as a flawed excuse not to act.

Mr. Kocherlakota accepted that the debate isn't settled on the depth of what he and others call "structural unemployment." But, he added, "I don't think I ever said in that speech that the level of structural unemployment should be used as an argument for inaction."

All along, he said, he has felt that the drawbacks of doing quantitative easing would be small, though the benefits would be small, too. His colleagues persuaded him it was worth doing anyway because the economy needed a push and the Fed could provide one.

He wants to stick with the program even though his outlook for the economy has strengthened since November. The data have improved since he revised down his growth forecasts for 2010 and 2011 last year. 

"I was unduly pessimistic," he said.

He now expects U.S. economic growth this year of between 3% to 3.5%, raised from his earlier forecast of less than 3%. But he said it would take a much bigger upturn in growth or inflation to compel a change in the Fed's bond-buying program, known by many as quantitative easing, or QE2.

"There's a credibility issue here," he said. "You want to be able to lay out a plan like that in front of people without them sitting there and worrying, 'Is it going to be $200 billion, is it going to be $100 billion?' "

"I do not contemplate stopping QE2," he said.

Still, he hesitates at the idea of ramping up the program as well. 

"I didn't think $600 billion would be enough...to really have much of a kick on inflationary expectations. If you start to get that number bigger, then I would worry a little bit more about that," he said.

His views on unemployment could come back to the forefront later this year. Many officials believe that there are so many unemployed people that the wages of those with work, and thus broader inflation, are likely to face downward pressure for years to come. Mr. Kocherlakota said the pool of qualified and available labor might prove to be shallower than expected.

"The recovery is going to be uneven across sectors and across regions of the country," he said. 

In some places and sectors, he said, that could mean upward wage and inflation pressure, even with high unemployment rates nationally. An unemployment rate somewhere between 6.5% and 8% could be inflationary in this environment, he says. As unemployment starts moving toward that range, he says, the Fed will need to start moving toward raising interest rates.

By the end of the year, he expects unemployment at 9% and inflation at about 1.5%, up from today's 1%. He sees unemployment staying above 8% through 2012, too. 

So action, using his calculations, looks a long way off. But he says the links between unemployment, inflation and the next tightening cycle could become a hot topic by year end.

 Write to  Jon Hilsenrath at jon.hilsenrath@wsj.com 