JUBA—Southern Sudan, on the eve of a historic referendum for independence from the north, faces a future with a fundamental difficulty: Finding southern Sudanese trained to run a fledgling country. 

When Sudan's last civil war ended in 2005, the leaders of the southern rebellion against the north rewarded many of its soldiers with jobs in the south's ruling party. Now the south's finance ministry, on the verge of overseeing a budget for a new nation, has a surfeit of rebels-turned-bureaucrats who can barely read.

Key events in Sudan's political development

"Their level of education is too low for them to perform," said David Deng Athorbei, southern Sudan's finance minister, who works from a generator-powered office in Juba. Many on his staff, he adds, have only a primary-school education.

Such is the case throughout the government of southern Sudan, which serves eight million people scattered across the lower half of Africa's largest country. About 85% of the population is illiterate. A 2009 study by USAID, the aid arm of the U.S. government, found that most government employees hadn't worked in an office before and had no idea what their responsibilities were. 

Decades of civil war with the northern regime ended in a peace agreement in 2005 that provided for southerners to cast votes in an independence referendum, which is scheduled for Sunday. It is all but certain that the southerners, who for years fought against what observers have said is neglect and violent oppression from the northern regime, will choose separation. They view this vote as a culmination of their struggle.

"The expectations are the biggest challenge," said Elijah Malok Aleng Mayen, the president of the Bank of Southern Sudan and a former rebel fighter in his seventies, who fought for independence. "People think there will be money and bread, and that honey will flow all around them."

The dusty capital of this region, Juba, is one of only a handful of cities that has electricity. A paved highway—southern Sudan's first—is only now being constructed. Most roads are of rutted dirt and impassable when it rains. 

Many regions have little or no access to medical care. An estimate by the United Nations and the World Bank found that about 90% of southerners live on less than $1 per day, which would place it among the poorest countries in Africa.

The most pressing issue in a newly independent south will be how to negotiate the split with the north, which would take place in July. The two sides have yet to agree on the official border between them. Nor have they decided what to do about Abyei, a tiny region on the border that is claimed by people allied with the north and others who are close to the south. Nor have the sides determined how or whether to share oil revenue that comes from the south. 

For now, the north receives half of the revenue from southern oil, which is pumped through a pipeline to the north, where it is refined and sold. Khartoum, the capital and seat of northern power, would prefer to keep that arrangement, according to people familiar with the negotiations. An independent south might be disinclined to share oil from its sovereign territory, the south's finance minister said. 

A tentative peace between the north and south could crumble if these contentious issues aren't resolved. For now, both sides appear anxious to ensure enough stability to allow the oil, and cash, to keep flowing.

To help tackle these challenges, southern officials say they will call on neighboring and Western countries to lend them technocrats to work in the south's ministries. To replace these temporary officials will require intensive training of Sudanese, and repairing a war-battered education system.

In this new era, the south's finance ministry will face some of the most formidable challenges, such as valuing currency and setting an inaugural national budget. The ministry, like others, is filled with former fighters who have become administrative foot soldiers— regardless of how prepared they were for their new duties.

Victor Garang, a 35-year-old former rebel, has worked as a tax collector in the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning in this provisional southern capital for six years. The job is hard, he says, because he still isn't sure what it entails. "Back then, there were no people who were educated, so they decided to call us [soldiers] to work for them," he said. 

The government also doesn't have enough money to buy out unwanted staff members. Mr. Athorbei, the finance minister, said he hadn't made an exact calculation but estimates it would take at least $500 million to offer packages to all the government's unqualified employees.

"We can't fire or retire them because they need handshake packages. Legally, they're entitled to pensions," said Mr. Athorbei, who studied business administration and development in Sudan's main university in Khartoum and later, development in Britain.

So for now, he tries to delegate to those who can do the work. That sometimes angers those who are passed over and feel top officials are playing favorites, he says, even as it frustrates those who take on much of the burden. "Sometimes it creates friction, but what can you do?" he said.

Anei Cieny Cieny, the deputy director for taxation and administration, said that employees who struggle with English, the southern government's official language, are paired with those who can read and write. "We cannot allow them to work alone," he says.

 Write to  Sarah Childress at sarah.childress@wsj.com 