DUBLIN—Ireland's new prime minister says he will push for flexibility in talks with European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso on his country's debt crisis. 

Ireland's coalition government, which took office Wednesday, has pledged to get better terms for Ireland's €67.5 billion rescue package from the European Union and the International Monetary Fund. The country is paying about 6% interest on the loans. 

"I'm going to say to [Barroso] that the process in which we are in here was designed to sort out a problem and in its current structure and in its current state it is not going to sort out that problem," Prime Minister Enda Kenny told reporters ahead of his first foreign trip as leader. He was heading to Brussels and preparing to meet Mr. Barroso in advance of Friday's summit of the 27-nation European Union.

"And I intend to bring to him directly now … on behalf of the country, what I believe are areas where some flexibility is going to be required here," he said, without outlining what those areas might be. 

Mr. Kenny also said he hopes to have more information on Irish financial institutions and the scale of their debt by the March 23-24 EU summit, when leaders hope to make progress on the region's debt crisis. 

But the coalition government has also said it won't settle on a banking policy until a new round of stress tests on Irish financial institutions is completed, expected in April. 

Mr. Kenny's center-right Fine Gael party formed a coalition government with the left-leaning Labour party after it failed to win an overall majority in elections in February. 

The prime minister, or taoiseach, named his cabinet Wednesday and pledged to nurse the country's battered economy and reputation back to health and be honest about the state of the nation no matter how unwelcome that might be. 

Ireland's economy is barely out of its deepest recession ever, the banking system is crippled, unemployment is high, and the new government has committed to a tough austerity drive to reduce the size of its budget deficit. 

Asked about the number of women in the cabinet and whether former Labour party finance spokesperson Joan Burton would have been better suited to a finance role, Mr. Kenny said he had consulted with his Labour deputy on appointments and was very happy about the number of women in his party. 

Ms. Burton's appointment as minister for social protection took observers by surprise as she was considered a front-runner for a new high-profile ministerial role managing government spending and public sector reform. 

"I've made it clear that in respect of ministerial appointments by me and in respect of other appointments to be made, that there will be changes in two and a half years' time and I do expect that numbers of women will compete for those places," Mr. Kenny said. 

 Write to  Nicholas Winning at nick.winning@dowjones.com 