  See Corrections & Amplifications below:  

TOKYO—Ventilators were switched on Thursday inside the highly radiated No. 1 reactor building at the crippled Fukushima Daiichi complex after workers entered the building for the first time since it was heavily damaged by a hydrogen explosion the day after the March 11 disasters. 

A spokesman for plant operator  Tokyo Electric Power Co.
9501


0.14
%




 said workers, including two of its own employees, completed installation of ventilation ducts as an initial part of operations to launch a new air-filtration system in the reactor building.

The latest repair work aims to reduce airborne radiation at the building so that Tepco can install a permanent cooling equipment, crucial to bringing the overheating in the reactors to a safe, so-called cold shutdown to end the nuclear crisis. 

In Thursday's operation, a total of 13 workers in protective suits and oxygen tanks entered the building, each for 10 minutes at a time to minimize their exposure to radiation. The maximum dose of radiation received by the workers was 2.8 millisieverts, according to another Tepco spokesman. 

Also on Thursday, Tepco filed a report to the government's Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency that concludes the containment vessel of the No. 1 reactor is strong enough to withstand being flooded with water to cool it down.

Recovery workers are expected to start flooding reactors with thousands of tons of additional water as soon as Friday, officials said late Thursday, although some still worry that leaks could result and exacerbate dangerous conditions at the site. 

The operation will start at reactor No. 1, and if plans go ahead at the other two, each could take up to 10,000 tons of additional water. 

Following the magnitude-9 earthquake and tsunami, the No. 1 reactor building suffered an explosion caused by a buildup of hydrogen after the cooling systems failed and fuel rods overheated, releasing radiation in and around the reactor building. 

Tepco expects the air-cleaning operation to lower radiation to 1/20th of preventilation levels within two to three days. 

"It is necessary to confirm a decline in the radiation level before any decision to open the double-entry doors" that block external and internal access to the reactor building, said Hidehiko Nishiyama, spokesman and deputy director general of Japan's Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency. 

"We will ask Tepco to provide radiation data," he added.

He didn't elaborate on what level is sufficient to go ahead with the next step in the process of opening the doors to allow the installation of the permanent cooling functions. 

In mid-April, radiation levels, assessed using an unmanned robot brought from the U.S., showed readings ranged from 10 to 49 millisieverts an hour on the ground floor of the No. 1 reactor. Radiation levels Thursday ranged from 8 to 100 millisieverts per hour. 

The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission sets the annual occupational dosage limit for workers who deal with radiation at 50 millisieverts at a time and the limit per nuclear event at 10 millisieverts. 

The Daiichi nuclear-power plant has become the site of the second-worst nuclear-power-plant crisis in history, after Chernobyl. Three of the six Daiichi reactors still pose a potential threat. 

Tepco, as the plant operator is called, plans to put its crippled Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant into a state of cold shutdown in six to nine months. The company has been pumping water into the three reactors to keep them cool. 

Separately, Mr. Nishiyama said the level of radioactive materials sampled from the bottom of the sea near the nuclear complex remains about 10,000 times as high as normal. 

The data showed that iodine-131, which has a half-life of eight days, stayed at 52,000 becquerels per kilogram. The amount of cesium-134 and cesium-137, with much longer half-lives, was 90,000 becquerels per kilogram and 87,000 becquerels per kilogram, respectively.

The high levels are tied to the gradual sinking and accumulation of elements released with contaminated water from the complex. 

—Mitsuru Obe  contributed to this article.

 Corrections & Amplifications  Tokyo Electric Power Co. has been pumping fresh water into three damaged reactors at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant to keep them cool. An earlier version of this article incorrectly said Tepco has been using seawater.

 Write to  Hiroyuki Kachi at hiroyuki.kachi@wsj.com 