Until recently, it was enough to double-check that an email would not be too embarrassing if it ended up on the front page of The Wall Street Journal. Now video and audio also spread in real time. We're in an age of radical transparency, for better and worse.

Technology has transformed every business lunch and phone call into potential violations of what people until recently considered their privacy. At the same time, these are also so many potential opportunities for unintended truth.

The big sting last week was aimed at National Public Radio. Conservative prankster James O'Keefe and his colleagues created a fake organization, the Muslim Education Action Center, complete with a bogus website identifying the group as part of the Muslim Brotherhood. They invited NPR executives to lunch at a restaurant in Georgetown, offering a $5 million donation. 

A secret camera caught NPR fund-raising Vice President Ron Schiller coddling what he thought were extremist donors. The 11-minute video is riveting. Mr. Schiller is on a sales mission with potential donors whose fictional website said the group's mission was to "spread the Sharia across the world." He called Tea Party members "not just Islamophobic, but really xenophobic. . . . They believe in a sort of white, middle-America, gun-toting—I mean, it's pretty scary." The lunch group chuckled over what the supposed Muslim extremists approvingly called "National Palestinian Radio." Mr. Schiller denied that Jews influenced NPR coverage, though they "own newspapers obviously." 

Mr. Schiller also said, "It is very clear that we would be better off in the long run without federal funding," playing into the hands of legislators who want to defund NPR. Part of the sting included emails from NPR on how a donation could remain anonymous. The video provided unfiltered proof of the worst nightmares of NPR's critics.

The NPR sting required sophisticated planning, but all it took on the other end of the political spectrum was a phone call. Ian Murphy, a blogger who goes by the handle Buffalo Beast, put in a call to Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, claiming to be David Koch, the libertarian businessman and philanthropist. They discussed the governor's efforts to get Democratic lawmakers back to Madison to vote on union reforms for public employees. 

The fake Koch tried to egg Gov. Walker on, at one point saying, "Now you're not talking to any of these Democrat bastards, are you?" Mr. Walker replied, "Ah, I—there's one guy that's actually voted with me on a bunch of things." When Mr. Murphy offered to call this Democrat, Mr. Walker demurred. "Well, actually, in his case I wouldn't call him, and I'll tell you why. He's pretty reasonable, but he's not one of us," Mr. Walker said. "He's not a conservative. He's just a pragmatist."

This makes for gripping eavesdropping, shedding light on how people converse when they think they're in private. Mr. Walker no doubt was embarrassed, but he comes across as trying to rein in the more provocative comments from the fake Koch.

For economic impact, the biggest unintentional disclosure came from outtakes from a documentary that plaintiff lawyers representing Ecuadorians had made to promote their case against Chevron. In a case that began nearly 20 years ago, U.S. lawyer Steve Donziger last month won a claim for $9 billion from a court in Ecuador for alleged damage from oil drilling in the rainforest. But last week U.S. District Judge Lewis Kaplan blocked any payment from any court in the world. "There is abundant evidence before the court that Ecuador has not provided impartial tribunals or procedures," he ruled. Exhibit A came from Mr. Donziger's own words, which Chevron lawyers managed to uncover, in unused parts of the 2009 documentary "Crude: The Real Price of Oil."

Chevron found film of Mr. Donziger that had been cut from the movie. He was caught saying it was the "birthright" of Ecuadorian judges to "be corrupt," that "the only language that I believe this judge is going to understand is one of pressure, intimidation and humiliation," and that "at the end of the day, this is all, for the court, just a bunch of smoke and mirrors."

In proceedings last year, Judge Kaplan wrote, "Donziger's own words raise substantial questions as to his possible criminal liability and amenability to professional discipline." Chevron lawyer Ted Boutrous told me last week, "When we started poring through the outtakes, it was truly stunning how many brazen and damaging things the lawyers said about the corrupt nature of their own case, all while the cameras were rolling."

Technology has quickly shoved aside longstanding expectations of privacy. There are enormous benefits from the information that we get from access to unscripted conversations, including a clearer understanding of what people really believe. Losing some privacy in the process seems to be a trade-off we're happy to take.