WASHINGTON—Top U.S. financial regulators charged with issuing recommendations on how to implement the "Volcker rule" appear to be leaning against suggesting precise rules for specific assets or trades, and instead might focus on the amount of risk being carried by a firm or trading desk, according to people briefed on the negotiations.

Included in the sweeping financial-overhaul law passed last summer, the Volcker rule, named for former Federal Reserve Chairman  Paul Volcker, seeks to prevent banks from putting capital at risk by prohibiting proprietary trading and banning certain relationships with hedge funds and private-equity funds. It left much of the details on how to do that with regulators.

After months of sometimes tense work, financial regulators reached a tentative deal in recent days on recommendations about how the Volcker rule should be implemented, said one industry official briefed on the situation. The study is expected as early as Tuesday, when the regulators who comprise the administration's Financial Stability Oversight Council meet.

Regulators have kept details of the nearly 80-page draft close, and its content is subject to change until the council votes to approve it. 

What is becoming clearer is that the document likely won't propose that regulators look at each and every trade, people briefed on the matter said. Instead, it will discuss reviews of large trades and the amount of risks firms are taking on a broader basis. Regulators would then decide whether trading desks are taking on too much risk. This approach would be seen as a win for the financial industry, and could irk Democrats who pushed the provision into law last year.

Another concept that could be aired: Giving Wall Street firms some say in defining what they do to meet clients' needs, an area of activity exempt from the rule. Federal regulators would adjust or reject the firms' approach and hold them accountable for sticking to their plans, these people say. As a result, a trade that sets off Volcker detectors at one firm might pass muster at another.

One of the hardest problems facing regulators is measuring the risk a firm is taking on. Among the factors likely to be discussed in the study are the size of the position, how long it will be held for and something called the Sharpe Ratio, people briefed on the discussions said. The Sharpe Ratio is a risk measurement developed by Nobel laureate  William F. Sharpe that shows the trade-off between risk and return.

While the report is likely to include some minor bright points in the eyes of Wall Street, analysts still expect the Volcker hit to be significant. J.P. Morgan for example predicted that the rule change will shave 14% off estimated earnings for  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
GS


0.97
%




 and  Morgan Stanley
MS


0.99
%




 in 2012 as "pure proprietary" trading desks are shut down. A few major Wall Street firms, including Goldman and Morgan Stanley, have seen high-profile traders depart or plan to start new firms in anticipation of the new restrictions. 

Critics of the Volcker rule warn its restrictions will put U.S. banks at a disadvantage compared with its foreign competitors. J.P. Morgan's report said European investment banks will be "the clear winners" since regulators there appear opposed to implementing Volcker-like rules. 

The study is likely to contain harsh language in the way it describes and analyzes proprietary trading, including a discussion of why it is risky and should be regulated, said people briefed on regulators' thinking.

Tuesday's study is far from the end of the process. Once the council issues its study, regulators have nine months to implement more specific rules for the institutions they oversee. They are required to consider the council's recommendations , but aren't bound by them. The Fed alone will write the rule for some of the nation's largest financial institutions.

Regulators still have to grapple with tough issues, including how to measure the difference between long-term investments and short-term trades. The Volcker rule targets trades designed to profit from short-term price movements, meaning that longer-term investments, such as Goldman Sachs's recent deal to buy shares of Facebook Inc., likely won't be an issue, said a person briefed on regulators' thinking.

Some meetings among council members on the Volcker rule study have been tense, with Treasury pushing for more prescriptive recommendations, while other regulators, including the Fed, wanted less specificity, said people familiar with the negotiations. The Fed and other banking regulators expressed concern that precise recommendations would circumvent the coming rule-writing process, including the period for public comments, people familiar with the negotiations said. 

 Write to  Aaron Lucchetti at aaron.lucchetti@wsj.com and Victoria McGrane at Victoria.McGrane @wsj.com 