DUBAI—Egyptian stocks plunged nearly 11% Thursday after falling sharply in the previous session, and the Egyptian pound hit a six-year low against the U.S. dollar, with investors spooked by escalating political tensions as antigovernment demonstrations continued. 

Egypt's stock-market index, which tumbled 6.1% Wednesday, fell another 10.5% to end at 5646.5—its lowest level in nearly 19 months. The selling frenzy continued Thursday despite a brief trading halt earlier in the session in an effort to calm nerves. 

The region's second-best-performing market in 2010 has now lost more than 21% in the past two weeks, hurt initially by concerns of a spillover of Tunisia's crisis, after Tunisian President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali fled the country following violent protests. 

Separately, Egypt's central bank left its key interest rates unchanged again, citing subdued inflationary pressures. The decision was consistent with analysts' expectations. The lending rate was held at 9.75%, the deposit rate at 8.25% and the discount rate at 8.5%—the same rates for the past 16 months. 

Though the central bank said underlying inflationary pressures remain constrained, it said it remains alert to the possible effect of higher food prices on other price levels. It added that it will continue to closely monitor this trend and "will not hesitate to adjust the key rates to ensure price stability over the medium term."

Urban consumer inflation rose to 10.3% in December, from 10.2% in November, according to government statistics, with much of the upward pressure due to rising food prices.

Late Thursday one U.S. dollar fetched 5.8325 Egyptian pounds, compared with 5.8279 pounds late Wednesday as investors looked to cut their risk. The cost of insuring the country's debt against default rose sharply again with the five-year credit-default swap spread quoted at 3.9 percentage points, 0.31 percentage point wider from the close Wednesday, and significantly wider from a level around 2.40 percentage points before the Tunisia crisis, according to data-provider Markit. 

"The [equity] market expected some weakness of perhaps 1% or 2% due to the expected protests and the spillover from Tunisia, but we do not believe that any market participant expected this move," noted a trader at Credit Suisse. With large protests due to take place on Friday, he said he foresees further market weakness. 

In terms of Egyptian stocks, market bellwether Orascom Construction dropped 15% Thursday to 216.15 Egyptian pounds and Orascom Telecom fell 9.6% to 3.57 pounds. Heavyweight Commercial International Bank was down 9% at 36.47 pounds and investment bank EFG Hermes ended 16.4% lower at 25 pounds. 

Citigroup analysts said while massive economic disruption as a result of political unrest in Egypt seems unlikely, the risk premium that investors require to hold Egyptian assets is likely to remain higher than it was. 

"Therefore, even if the current selloff does prove to be a buying opportunity, this is unlikely to be realized for some time," they added. 