A 379-acre ranch with a 1,200-square-foot, one-bedroom, one-bathroom home about an hour outside of Bozeman. 

DETAILS: Known as Twisted Stick Ranch, the property is home to wildlife like whitetail deer, antelope and upland birds. The small log home has mountain views and is built from recycled timbers. 

RIVER side: About a quarter of a mile of the Boulder River, populated with wild trout, runs through the property. 

nearby nosh: The Grand Hotel in downtown Big Timber has a restaurant that serves Montana rib-eye steak for $30.95 and Rocky Mountain trout for $17.95. 

FRIDAY'S FORECAST: Partly sunny, high 61.

SOURCE: Tim Murphy with Hall & Hall, 406-587-3090,  tmurphy@hallandhall.com. 

A 1,900-square-foot, three-bedroom, 2½-bath cooperative apartment on Manhattan's Upper West Side. 

DETAILS: Located in a small prewar building with a doorman, the apartment has 10-foot ceilings and 15 large windows. There's a hand-painted mural in the formal dining room as well as a kitchen with original wood cabinets and new granite countertops. 

river side: The apartment overlooks the Hudson River, which divides Manhattan and New Jersey, as well as Riverside Park. 

NEARBY NOSH: Tom's Restaurant, the diner made famous by the TV show "Seinfeld," is a short walk from the house. 

FRIDAY'S FORECAST: Sun with clouds, high 70. 

SOURCE: Andrew Phillips and Amelia Gewirtz at Halstead Property, 212-381-2227, aphillips@halstead.com.

A 4,300-square-foot, four-bedroom, 3½-bath home on about 0.6 acres in the Ortega neighborhood. 

DETAILS: Built in 1918, the two-story house is situated on a bluff overlooking the water. It has tall ceilings, large rooms and original millwork, crown moldings and hardwood floors. 

RIVER Side: The home is on the St. Johns River, which flows south to north. It's popular with sailboats and motorboats. 

nearby nosh: The Avondale area is home to restaurants like 'town, which serves black-truffle tater tots and pan-roasted duck breast. 

FRIDAY'S FORECAST: Thunderstorms, high 90. 

SOURCE: Caroline Powell and  Allison Steilberg, of Prudential Network Realty, caroline.powell@prudentialnetworkrealty.com, 904-463-1898; via Realtor.com 

—Candace Jackson