In the fledgling years of network TV, Sunday mornings and afternoons were reserved for serious news shows like Edward R. Murrow's "See It Now" and high-culture programs of various kinds, a practice so universally accepted that those time slots were collectively known to grumbling journalists as the "cultural ghetto." Little did the grumblers know that a half-century later, the fine arts would have all but vanished from the commercial networks—and would be increasingly hard to find on PBS, the noncommercial network that was originally founded in part to give high culture a safe haven.

I cut my artistic teeth watching TV on Sundays, and now that some of the long-lost programs of my youth have finally made their way to DVD, I find myself astonished by what ABC, CBS and NBC were willing to telecast all those years ago. For those who know PBS as the home of Lawrence Welk reruns and A&E as the network of "Dog the Bounty Hunter," I recommend a pair of releases from E1 Home Video, "Leonard Bernstein: Omnibus" and "John Gielgud: Ages of Man." Between them, they'll open your eyes to the unlimited possibilities of TV as a force for cultural good—and fill you with despair at the fact that such high-minded programming has largely disappeared from the small screen.

"Omnibus" was a cultural TV magazine underwritten by the Ford Foundation that shuttled among the three networks in the 1950s. Hosted by Alistair Cooke, it offered viewers glimpses of everything from Orson Welles's "King Lear" to Mike Nichols and Elaine May, but it is best remembered by historians of American music for having introduced Leonard Bernstein to TV audiences. Unlike his later "Young People's Concerts," Bernstein's seven "Omnibus" shows were made specifically for adult viewers, and they used the medium in a way that remains electrifyingly fresh to this day.

In his 1954 debut, "Beethoven's Fifth Symphony," Bernstein chats with the unseen TV audience in a studio whose floor is covered with a huge painting of the first page of the conductor's score of the symphony's first movement, walking from measure to measure to point out pertinent details with his foot. Most ingenious of all are the sections in which he shows what the Fifth Symphony might have sounded like had Beethoven incorporated his discarded sketches for the first movement into the finished work. Never has a music-appreciation lecture been more informative—or more exciting.

In a way, the most remarkable thing about "Beethoven's Fifth Symphony" and the other "Omnibus" shows is that Bernstein never talks down to the viewer. He says what he has to say in clear, direct language that, once heard, can never be forgotten: "This somehow is the key to the mystery of a great artist—that for reasons unknown to him or to anyone else, he will give away his energies and his life just to make sure that one note follows another inevitably."

If anything, "Ages of Man" is more remarkable still, consisting as it does of a 100-minute program in which the most admired classical actor of the 20th century, standing alone on a near-bare stage in a business suit, does nothing whatsoever but recite and talk about sonnets by and excerpts from the plays of William Shakespeare. Gielgud had performed this one-man show around the world between 1957 and 1966, when he brought its phenomenally successful run to a close by filming it for CBS. The black-and-white telecast, directed by Paul Bogart, is as devoid of high-tech gimmickry as a slab of rare roast beef: Virtually all of the show is shot in close-up, and Gielgud's comments are as unobtrusive as the dirt-plain set. Yet it is precisely because of this simplicity that "Ages of Man" is so priceless: It gives us a privileged glimpse of a supremely great performer at the summit of his powers.

One of the most memorable moments in "Ages of Man" comes when Gielgud speaks Caliban's lines from "The Tempest" about how the enchanted island on which he is trapped is "full of noises, / Sounds and sweet airs, that give light and hurt not." After briefly setting the scene, Gielgud pauses for an instant. All at once his bland, agreeable face is transformed into the twisted rictus of a hideous monster—and in the next instant, he starts to speak Shakespeare's lines in a voice so rich and melodious that you feel as though he might almost be singing them.

What an irreplaceable piece of film! Is it really possible that it aired on CBS one Sunday afternoon in 1966? It sure did, and Gielgud won an Emmy Award for it. Remember that the next time you find yourself stuck on the couch, hunting in vain for something halfway decent to watch.

—Mr. Teachout, the Journal's drama critic, writes "Sightings" every other Friday. He is the author of "Pops: A Life of Louis Armstrong." Write to him at tteachout@wsj.com.