ZURICH—Former  Julius Baer Group AG
JBAXY


0.73
%




 private banker  Rudolf Elmer was sentenced to two years' probation and a suspended fine for threatening an employee of the bank and breaching Swiss bank secrecy laws. 

Mr. Elmer, a former Cayman Islands banker for Julius Baer, rose to prominence after providing whistle-blowing website WikiLeaks with confidential data in 2008. 

On Monday, Mr. Elmer appeared at a news conference in London to hand over a fresh batch of data he said contained the names of about 2,000 clients, including individuals, companies and trusts, to WikiLeaks founder  Julian Assange. Mr. Assange said WikiLeaks would look to publish Mr. Elmer's data online in coming weeks. 

Appearing in Zurich district court two days after appearing alongside Mr. Assange, Mr. Elmer admitted some of the accusations against him, including leaking confidential bank data before the latest WikiLeaks transfer and threatening Julius Baer employees. 

Mr. Elmer's defense was based on depicting him as a whistleblower who released the data to expose tax evasion.

His lawyer said threatening, anonymous emails, which Mr. Elmer admitted sending, were spurred by the pressure of being under constant surveillance by detectives hired by Julius Baer as part of a campaign of "psychological terror" intended to pressure him into silence. 

Julius Baer, which said it had taken note of the verdict against Mr. Elmer, has dismissed the Swiss-born banker's accusations as baseless. 

The data from Mr. Elmer is the latest in a string of information leaks from the secretive world of Swiss banking, which has been forced into some concessions because of international pressure. Foreign nations seeking to fill budget deficits are becoming more aggressive in pursuing assets—often undeclared at home—held in offshore centers such as Switzerland. 

The U.S. clinched a major victory against Switzerland in extracting more than 4,000 sets of confidential data on wealthy Americans with accounts at UBS.

An additional 18,000 U.S. taxpayers with secret accounts overseas voluntarily came forward to the Internal Revenue Service under a leniency deal the tax-collection agency offered in 2009. 

  Credit Suisse Group AG has come under scrutiny in Germany, where prosecutors raided the Swiss bank's 13 offices searching for evidence that bank employees may have assisted clients in evading their taxes.

German officials have purchased several batches of Swiss bank data from an undisclosed informant, including paying €2.5 million ($3.3 million) early last year. 

The data purchases, which come as Switzerland scrambles to negotiate tax pacts with some of its European Union neighbors in order to maintain what it can of banking secrecy, show the pressure on financial havens isn't letting up. In 2009, Switzerland agreed to give up a long-held distinction between outright tax fraud and evasion, and now cooperates with nations seeking to crack down on either form of the tax crime.



 Write to  Katharina Bart at katharina.bart@dowjones.com 