SINGAPORE—Singapore's stock exchange is ratcheting up competition as Asian exchanges vie for more-prominent global profiles and a greater share of the flood of investor money pouring into the region.

On Wednesday, Singapore Exchange Ltd. set an Aug. 15 date for the start of what it said would be the world's fastest trading platform, a $195 million project called SGX Reach that could help push Asia into adopting the fast electronic-trading platforms that have already swept through the U.S. and Europe.

On Tuesday, the exchange said it will eliminate its 90-minute lunch period to give investors a bigger trading window. That came the same day that the Singapore Exchange got a shot in the arm from Hong Kong billionaire  Li Ka-Shing, whose  Hutchison Whampoa Ltd. chose to make an initial public offering in Singapore of its ports business, which it hopes will raise as much as US$6 billion. The Singapore Exchange normally struggles to attract major China-related IPOs. 

The week's moves are part of an effort by Singapore Exchange Chief Executive  Magnus Böcker to transform the exchange into a leading global platform. The company is pursuing a deal to acquire Australia's  ASX Ltd.
ASX


0.93
%




 for US$8.4 billion, which could broaden the combined business's presence in commodities, an area where Hong Kong's exchange has expanded in recent months.

In a statement, Mr. Böcker said SGX Reach "will help Singapore leap ahead of other global financial markets as a center for international fund raising and investment."

Though the Singapore Exchange has benefited from increasing Asian capital inflows, others have made greater strides. Hong Kong, through its connection with China, became the world's top market for IPOs last year, raising $53.2 billion, according to data provider Dealogic, as it drew listings from mainland China as well as from other companies drawn to China's orbit. Singapore ranked 16th, raising US$6 billion.

On Wednesday, Hong Kong's exchange got a further boost as people familiar with the matter said a Japanese company was seeking to sell shares there for the first time. Chinese companies also advanced plans to raise a combined $2 billion, others familiar with the matter said. 

"Reach is another step by SGX in developing the Singapore market and enhancing its attractiveness as a listing venue," said  Sachin Nikhare, an analyst at IIFL Institutional Equities. "However, technology is just one of the factors. Size, depth and liquidity of the market along with global market dynamics will influence how fast SGX can grow its business." 

The exchange, which will still clear all trades, said it hopes SGX Reach will enable customers to trade faster and at a lower cost, with a response time of 90 microseconds and the ability to handle one million order-book changes per second. 

By comparison,  London Stock Exchange Group
LSE


1.08
%




 PLC's Turquoise platform, currently the world's fastest, has an average response time of 126 microseconds, according to Turquoise. 

The move could help the development of fast electronic trading in Asia, which has lagged trading enhancements in the U.S. and Europe due to a lack of competition and regulatory barriers. 

Despite its trading success,  Hong Kong Exchanges & Clearing
0388


-2.40
%




 is also taking steps to be more competitive. The Hong Kong exchange plans to extend the trading session to five hours a day beginning in March and to 5½ hours beginning in March 2012, from four hours currently. 

HKEx also expects to multiply its trading capacity by 10 after introducing by the end of the year technology that can handle 30,000 orders per second (scalable to 150,000 orders per second if necessary) with an average order response time of nine milliseconds. 

"We are aware of the competition, and we are doing a lot of work strengthening our competitiveness," HKEx spokeswoman  Lorraine Chan said. 

Similarly, Tokyo Stock Exchange Group Inc. is considering extending trading hours by cutting 30 minutes off the current lunch-time break. A decision on the new trading hours is expected within two weeks. 

The exchange began a high-tech replacement to its notoriously creaky system last year and is in the process of combining its futures and options trading in a new platform that should reduce trading time by a multiple of 10, according to TSE.

"We don't know what other additional steps we are going to take at our exchange from here on, but we will pay close attention to any development at other Asian stock exchanges and will continue to study ways to make ours a competitive and attractive bourse," said  Kazuhiko Yoshimatsu, head of media relations at Tokyo Stock Exchange Group. 

On Tuesday, the Singapore Exchange reported a 14% rise in second-quarter net profit as increased trading volumes from big-ticket capital raisings in recent months boosted securities revenue. 

Under Mr. Böcker, who previously was the president of the Nasdaq OMX Group, the Singapore Exchange has also taken other initiatives to attract liquidity and strengthen its competitiveness. 

In October last year, a joint venture between the Singapore Exchange and Chi-X Global Inc. received approval from the Monetary Authority of Singapore to become a recognized market operator for an Asian-Pacific alternative trading platform, or dark pool, an electronic trading venue where money managers trade large blocks of shares anonymously. 

The Singapore Exchange also started trading in American depositary receipts of 19 major Asian companies in October. 

—Kate O'Keeffe in Hong Kong and Brad Frischkorn in Tokyo contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Gaurav Raghuvanshi at gaurav.raghuvanshi@dowjones.com 