BANGALORE – Biocon Ltd. Thursday said higher sales at its biopharmaceuticals and contract research businesses helped its third quarter net profit grow 25% from a year earlier, beating estimates. 

India's largest listed biotechnology company by sales said consolidated net profit for the quarter through December rose to 1.01 billion rupees ($22.1 million) from 808.9 million rupees a year earlier, while consolidated sales climbed 15% to 7.28 billion rupees from 6.35 billion rupees. 

Biocon was expected to report a net profit of 938 million rupees on sales of 7.08 billion rupees, according to the average of estimates in a Dow Jones Newswires poll of seven analysts. 

"We have seen very strong growth in our core [biopharmaceuticals] business. What we have also seen in this [October-December] quarter is a good turnaround in our research services business," Biocon Chairwoman Kiran Mazumdar-Shaw told Dow Jones Newswires. 

Biocon is a front runner among Indian companies developing biological treatments, which use proteins manufactured in living cells, rather than chemicals-based drugs. It sells biopharmaceuticals, including human insulin and monoclonal antibodies in India and overseas, and provides research services. 

The company is also working on developing new drugs, such as an orally administered insulin and a treatment for skin disorder psoriasis. 

The company's biopharmaceuticals business revenue rose 15% from a year earlier to 6.49 billion rupees. 

The segment's results included 770 million rupees in licensing income, up from 180 million rupees a year earlier, which helped Biocon's operating margin expand more than 300 basis points to 24%, Centrum Broking analyst Suryadeep Das said. 

Contract research revenue rose 14% to about 790 million rupees. The company carries out contract research mainly through units Syngene International Ltd. and Clingene International Ltd. 

Total costs rose 10% to 6 billion rupees. 

Biocon added that sales at its German drug distribution unit AxiCorp GmbH were pressured in the quarter as it stopped selling some low-margin products after the German government asked companies to cut drug prices by 16%. 

Germany is asking drug makers to provide this discount for the next three years as part of its efforts to drive down drug prices and make healthcare more affordable. 

Biocon's Mazumdar-Shaw said AxiCorp will restructure its portfolio to lessen the impact on its earnings, which could hurt sales in the current quarter. 

Biocon shares initially rose 3.4% on the better-than-expected results, but they closed down 2.1% at INR369.75 on the Bombay Stock Exchange. The benchmark Sensex ended the day 0.4% higher. 

Ms. Mazumdar-Shaw said preliminary data from a recent late-stage clinical study in India for Biocon's experimental oral insulin drug, codenamed IN105, showed encouraging results in patients with Type 2 diabetes. 

She said the company will immediately start talks to tie in a global partner to conduct more clinical trials and develop the oral insulin. 

"We hope to identify a partner in the next six months," she added. 

Type 1 diabetes is caused by the inability of the pancreas to produce insulin, while Type 2 results from the body's inability to use insulin to control blood glucose. 

Ms. Mazumdar-Shaw said recent trial findings suggested that IN105 was effective in lowering blood glucose levels, even though the desired difference of 0.7% in HbA1c levels of patients taking the active drug from those on a placebo was not observed. 

She said those on the placebo probably made lifestyle changes that resulted in an unexpected decrease in HbA1c levels, thus skewing the data. 

HbA1c is an indicator of long-term blood glucose levels as it measures the amount of a substance called glycated hemoglobin, which is formed in red blood cells when blood sugar attaches to hemoglobin. 

 Write to  Rumman Ahmed at rumman.ahmed@dowjones.com 