There are three people in my marriage: my husband, me -- and the baby sitter.

No, not like that. But when two parents work full time, a child-care provider becomes an important part of the family dynamic.

That became clear on a recent Friday morning, when the baby sitter called in sick. It didn't take long before her flu devolved into a referendum on the divvying of domestic responsibility and, to some degree, gender roles.

My marriage, it seems, had caught a 48-hour bug, too.

* * *

When the sitter called at 7 a.m. saying she didn't feel well, Joe was at the gym for a pre-office workout. I had an interview scheduled at 10 a.m. in New York City, about an hour from our house. I couldn't cancel the interview and still meet my deadline. So I immediately called a neighbor, who said my kids could walk home with hers after school and play for a few hours. Next, I got Joe on the phone. He said he was planning to leave work a little early anyway. He would pick up the kids. "I'll try to get home early, too," I told him.

I kept tabs to make sure all went according to plan. (Technology, Momma loves you!) It did. When I finished my interviews, it was about 4:30 p.m. I called Joe. He had picked up the kids and was heading home.

Clockwork! Interview, child-care crisis -- all handled perfectly. I was Supermom, and I headed for the bus and my commute home filled with a sense of accomplishment.

Then I did something on the spur of the moment. I was passing the salon where I have long gotten my hair cut. I walked in, and asked my stylist if she could squeeze me in. She could.

I needed a haircut. Badly. It had been months. I'd look in the mirror and see an exhausted woman with unkempt hair. Looking pretty matters to me: It affects my self-esteem, perhaps more powerfully than it should.

Yet grooming is tough to work into a frantic schedule. On weekends, I focus on the kids and the house. On weekdays, work leaves little time for hair.

So it seemed like the perfect moment to steal an hour. Until, that is, I called Joe afterward. "I'll be home in an hour," I said.

"I thought you finished your interview a while ago," he said. "You said you'd be home early."

"I got my hair cut," I said.

I arrived home, made dinner, fed the kids and got them off to bed, still oblivious to the fact that my cute bob was seen as a declaration of war.

With the kids asleep, Joe let me have it: "I have woken up at 4:30 in the morning every day this week and I was coming home early today to get an hour of quiet for myself -- not to take care of the kids while you got your hair cut."

Our daughter often starts her day before 5 a.m. Because I had been on deadline much of the week, I was locked in our home office with the door shut, leaving Joe with the early shift.

"Had you called and asked if you could get a haircut," he continued, "I would have said yes, but instead you decided on your own that your need to take an hour to yourself was more important than my same need."

"The haircut was spontaneous," I said. "But I do apologize. It was thoughtless of me."

Still, the more I saw how angry he was, the more angry I got. I had apologized. Besides, I didn't believe my misstep was that egregious. When the baby sitter said she couldn't come in the morning, I didn't call Joe at the gym and say, "The sitter can't come today, what are we going to do?" I would never. It is an unspoken rule that the child-care domain is mine to wrestle with. When one of the kids is sick, I stay home from work. When a baby sitter cancels at the last minute, I figure it out.

"I orchestrated the whole plan so that the kids were cared for until almost 5 tonight," I said. "You are rarely affected when a sitter can't come."

I couldn't believe that he felt so slighted by my getting a haircut. "I feel like your male ego is involved here, like you were asked to do women's work while I did a nonessential errand and that's why you're so put out."

I don't think Joe agreed that there was a gender issue at play. But he would have had to have been speaking to me for me to know for sure.

* * *

Sunday morning, Joe and I went to yoga together. On the drive home, we talked with the patience of a couple exhausted from being mad.

"You are way more help with the kids than a lot of other dads, and I appreciate it," I said. "I should have been more respectful of your time."

Joe took my hand. "I admit that when someone needs to stay home from work, sometimes I think about how I could probably manage to work from home but I still don't offer," he said. "I just see it as your job, and that's probably not fair."

Does that mean that there will be a different distribution of who does what? I doubt it. And I'm not sure I want a realignment: When the kids are sick, I want to stay home because I believe -- call me a sexist, if you must -- that I can nurture my feverish babies better than anyone. I just crave a little acknowledgement, now and then.

We spent the rest of the day at home. I did laundry and cleaned. Joe assembled a new recycling bin. Then I made dinner while he did a puzzle with the kids. Sometimes, responsibilities fall along stereotypical gender lines. But that doesn't have to be bad thing.

The baby sitter arrived on time at 7:30 on Monday morning, full of vigor. Joe and I kissed the kids goodbye, and then each other. "You look pretty," he said. "I like your hair." We all had been restored to health.

—Katherine Rosman writes about pop culture and technology for The Wall Street Journal; she and her family live outside New York City. Email: checksandbalances@wsj.com.  Twitter: @katierosman 