General Motors Chairman and Chief Executive Daniel Akerson said the U.S. auto industry isn't yet prepared to respond to a major surge in gas prices, though car makers are in a better position than when prices spiked in 2008.

GM aims to more than double its production in Russia to 350,000 cars a year and source 60% of components locally, after producing 146,000 cars in Russia last year. 

 General Motors and Toyota each said their U.S. auto sales jumped at least 42% in February, raising hopes that the economic upturn will lead the auto industry to report one of its strongest months in almost 18 months. 

Ford and Chrysler both reported volume gains of at least 13% while Nissan said its U.S. new-vehicle sales jumped 32% and Honda said its sales were up 22%.

 HSBC has suspended its foreclosure proceedings in the U.S. after a regulatory letter noted "certain deficiencies" in its processes.  

 Lloyds Banking Group's new Chief Executive Antonio Horta-Osorio said the bank will advance the sale of a 600-branch network that was slated for disposal by 2013. Advisers are to be appointed to handle the sale within the next few weeks, which analysts said should put the sale on track for completion in late 2011 or early 2012. 

Vnesheconombank, the Russian state-owned bank, will seek approval from its government-controlled board to sell some of its large equity holdings over time to raise money for its key development projects, VEB Chairman Vladimir Dmitriev said. 

Citigroup agreed to sell its Egg U.K. credit-card business to Barclays, the latest in a series of credit-card portfolio sales by the U.S. bank as it pulls back from consumer lending in Europe. 

Berkshire Hathaway's board has added a name to its top-secret list of potential successors for longtime Chief Executive Warren Buffett. The board now has identified four internal candidates it believes are capable of succeeding Buffett, according to a securities filing with U.S. regulators.

Persimmon, the U.K.'s largest house builder, reported pretax profit for 2010 before goodwill impairment and exceptional items jumped to £95.5 million ($155.2 million) from £7 million in 2009, as revenue climbed 11% to £1.57 billion due to a higher average selling price.

Russian oil producer TNK-BP International, part-owned by U.K. oil giant BP, said fourth-quarter net profit rose 51% from last year to $1.93 billion, mainly on higher oil prices. 

TNK-BP is still interested in buying BP's assets in Algeria, but doesn't expect a breakthrough in negotiations with the Algerian government any time soon, TNK-BP's Deputy Chief Executive Maxim Barsky said. 

TNK-BP also reportedly sold the Siberian Kovykta gas-condensate field, which has approximately 2 trillion cubic meters of gas reserves, to Russia's state gas firm Gazprom.

 Las Vegas Sands said it is being investigated by U.S. authorities regarding its compliance with the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act. The casino company said it believed the subpoena came from allegations in a lawsuit filed against it by its former head of Macau operations, Steve Jacobs, and that it intends to cooperate with the investigations.  

Gambling revenue in Macau rose 48% in February to a record 19.86 billion patacas (US$2.47 billion) from a year earlier, government statistics show. 

The Hong Kong-based Woo family has bought an 8% stake in Italian fashion house Salvatore Ferragamo. The luxury-goods maker also said it will increase its stake in its China-based distribution companies to 75% from 50% by acquiring shares from the Woo family. 

 Christian Dior is dismissing chief designer John Galliano in the wake of alleged anti-Semitic remarks he made in a Paris bar during an altercation with two patrons. 

 Goldman Sachs Group could lose as much as $3.4 billion in damages and other litigation-related matters involving securities it underwrote in the past few years for which the purchasers are now suing to recover losses or to force the firm to buy them back. 

The head of Highbridge Capital Management's Asia investments is leaving the multibillion-dollar hedge-fund firm owned by J.P. Morgan Chase, say people familiar with the matter. 

FrontPoint Partners completed its spin-off from parent Morgan Stanley, which is keeping a minority stake in the hedge-fund firm.

Carlyle Group is buying Japanese ball-bearing maker Tsubaki Nakashima from Nomura Holdings for 66 billion yen ($806.8 million) including debt, a rare buyout in a country where funds have long struggled to secure deals. 

Meggitt, which makes aircraft components, reported a 9% rise in adjusted full-year pretax profit to £256.1 million ($416.3 million). 

Publisher Pearson said the Libyan Investment Authority's 3.27% holding in the company had been frozen and that it won't pay a dividend on the stake until further notice amid ongoing unrest in Libya. 

 Vivendi swung to a fourth-quarter net profit of €559 million ($771.4 million), compared with a loss of €958 million a year earlier, driven mainly by growth at Brazilian telecom group GVT, which it hopes will offset increased competitive pressure on its French telecoms operator SFR this year.  

Rio Tinto said it again raised its stake in Riversdale Mining as it pushes ahead with its 3.9 billion Australian dollar ($3.97 billion) bid for the Africa-focused coal company. 

Roche Holding gained shareholder backing to appoint the chief executives of three major European companies to its board, though some investors asked the company to name more women to its top management level. 

J. Crew shareholders approved a controversial $3 billion buyout of the casual-apparel retailer by private-equity firms together with CEO Mickey Drexler. 

 French retail giant Carrefour said its board approved plans to spin-off its Dia discount chain and list 25% of its European property company in a bid to streamline the group and unlock capital to return to shareholders or invest in business.  

French retailer Casino-Guichard Perrachon said its full-year net profit slipped 7% to €550 million ($759 million) as it cut prices in France to bolster sales, a move that weighed on margins. 

 HMV Group, the U.K. entertainment retailer, said it will breach the terms of its bank-lending agreements as the troubled firm issued a profit warning for the fiscal year. 

 German software giant SAP isn't in talks to sell itself, dampening persistent market rumors of an impending deal, co-chief executive Jim Hagemann Snabe said in an interview. 

Sony Ericsson is open to partnerships such as joint ventures in China's gaming industry and plans to sell its new cellphone-and-videogame device, Xperia Play, in the country, Chief Executive Bert Nordberg said in an interview. 

 Enel's pilot carbon capture and storage plant will be used as a blueprint for a larger €1 billion ($1.38 billion) facility, an official said, as it attempts to make coal-fired electricity compatible with European emission targets. 