This week, investors will try to assess the economic damage to the world's third-largest economy, a country hard wired into every synapse of global finance's nervous system.

In the background of this tragedy are memories of the last monster tremor to strike Japan: In 1995, the port city of Kobe was hit by a quake that measured magnitude 6.8, much weaker than the 8.9 giant that struck Japan's northeast Friday.

Still in the record books as the costliest natural disaster ever, Kobe killed nearly 6,500 people and caused more than $100 billion in damage, nearly 3% of Japan's total gross domestic product at the time. The Nikkei 225 fell more than a thousand points the day after the quake hit, when Japan was already technically in a recession.

Now, with power grids severely damaged, Japan's car-making and other manufacturing facilities are facing total shutdown as power is diverted to essential services. There have already been mass evacuations from areas where nuclear power plants are in danger of meltdown or other damage.

Weekend futures markets suggested the Nikkei 225 is set to slide below the psychologically key 10000 level.

Indeed, the chance of this two-year old bull market surviving for a third birthday seemed to be receding by the day as things stood. Last week the Dow Jones Industrial Average eased by 1%, the Nikkei 225 by 4.4% and London's the FTSE by 2.7%. Ominously the FTSE is now below its starting point for the year.

Investors' nerves were already tested by renewed concerns over European sovereign debt, the escalating conflict in Libya and political protest in Saudi Arabia, along with signs in the data of a Chinese economic slowdown.

Moreover, international tension over Libya has been ratcheted up by the Arab League's support for a no-fly zone over the country.

At their summit in Brussels, meanwhile, European leaders agreed to extend the effective lending capacity of the European Financial Stability Facility, the special vehicle set up last May to help out embarrassed euro-using states abandoned by the markets. 

However, they stopped short of European Central Bank demands that they let it buy government debt in the secondary markets. The ECB had hoped the EFSF would take off its hands some of the €77.5 billion, or about $108 billion, in government bonds it has bought over the last 10 months to stop the debt markets of Greece, Ireland and Portugal seizing up. 

Ireland's hope for a less onerous bailout package has also been dashed, and the long-term future of the bloc remains as mysterious as ever, especially with higher interest rates looming. Investors will now look with trepidation to the next euro-debt get-together on March 24. 

Meanwhile, Portugal is still soldiering on without help from the EFSF.

If Europe escapes further opprobrium it will only be because investors are too focused on northeastern Japan.

Away from equity, Japanese government bonds may not sustain the big gains they posted Friday as investors fled to their safety. The vast clean up operation could well mean further issuance.

The yen might even strengthen as Japanese investors repatriate funds, but market watchers note it's already strong against major rivals thanks to haven bids; there may not be scope for new highs.

 Write to  David Cottle at david.cottle@dowjones.com 