Americans adopt British accents for many reasons, most of them annoying. Writer, actor and Queens native Sarah Jones put one on to survive. She was back in New York City after leaving Bryn Mawr College, looking for a job to support herself while she wrote poetry. One restaurant and music club off Union Square turned her away, saying it was only hiring English girls. She called back with an English accent and asked to speak to the manager. "When can you start?" he asked her.

Since then, Ms. Jones's impersonation skills have earned her a Tony award, an invitation to the TED lecture conference, and fans like Gloria Steinem and Meryl Streep. Her Tony-winning show of 2004, "Bridge and Tunnel," which Ms. Streep produced, featured a one-woman bouquet of immigrant voices—contestants in a poetry-slam being held in "beautiful South Queens."

Beginning this week and running through February, Ms. Jones, 37, is resurrecting some of these old characters—ranging from a Pakistani accountant to an elderly Jewish woman from Long Island—and introducing new ones in "New Year, Nuyorican," a series of improvisational shows at the Nuyorican Poets Café in the East Village.

Some of the performances feature special guests planted in the audience, such as Ms. Steinem, who laughed her way through the first few acts at Monday night's opening performance—only to get summoned onto the stage by "Bella," a college student whose narcissism (she preens in front of a Flipcam and plugs her personal YouTube channel) is belied by her thoughtful defense of third-wave feminism. Then Ms. Jones donned a Phat Farm jacket and a baseball cap and morphed into "Rashid," whose breathtaking inarticulateness ("It's like, etcetera etcetera, and whatnot") gave way to insightful questions for Ms. Steinem and astute observations about black male incarceration.

Ms. Jones, who earned a standing ovation, was clearly at home. She won the Grand Slam at Nuyorican Poets Café in 1997, when she was a young poet working her way around New York's spoken-word scene.

"I missed being on stage," she said recently, draped across a cushy banquette at Norwood, a members-only club a few blocks from her West Village apartment. Since "Bridge and Tunnel" ended its extended run in 2006, she has performed mostly in private settings and around the world as a U.N. Goodwill Ambassador on Violence Against Children. "I wanted to explore some new characters, but in a way that's not fixated on outcomes," she said. 

Dan Gallant, the executive director of Nuyorican Poets Café, said that because of the small size and intimate nature of the venue, it takes a certain kind of performer to thrive there. "If you're able to channel the energy of the audience, you can do amazing things in this space," he said. "Sarah has a tremendous rapport with the audience. You need to be a diplomat, an interpreter and a therapist, negotiating the needs of the different characters and of the spectators, and she's one of the best I've ever seen at filling those different roles."

Whereas most people ride the subway out of necessity, Ms. Jones mines her commutes for material. If she overhears someone or something inspiring, she'll follow them to the end of the line. "Usually it's somebody in a crisis," she said, "because that's when people tend to talk loud enough to pique my interest." 

She admits that her own neighborhood is "not so good for character-hunting," although there are some newcomers on the block. "Kiwis," she says, slipping into a New Zealand accent. To check in with the displaced, she heads to her childhood stomping ground of Queens, where her itinerary includes Jamaica Avenue and Jackson Heights. "I'd be lying if I said I don't also enjoy stopping to have some food," she said. "It's pretty convenient to do some research and also have the best and cheapest Indian food."

Ms. Jones's characters, though, go beyond research and subway stalking. They seem to live right underneath her skin, wandering in and out of her conversation. During an hour-long interview, she wheeled out her Jewish grandma friend Lorraine Levine, and brought back the English girl who got her that hosting job way back when. At one point she squeezed her eyes closed and shook her head to snap herself out of character.

As Ms. Steinem observed, Ms. Jones's characters are "very complete. She creates a complete human being. She knows their likes and dislikes, what they would like to read."

That's because, Ms. Jones said, her characters are based on an amalgamation of different people—people whom she knows and loves, has met and interviewed, or sometimes just overheard and folded in. For example, a middle-aged, female Jordanian character is based on the human-rights lawyer Asma Khader, but also five other people.

"I'm not an impressionist that way," Ms. Jones said. "I can't just borrow Asma's soul. I create a flesh-and-blood person, someone who can breathe their own air."