Mixed martial arts is about the least respectable, most interesting sport in the world. It is difficult to explain to the uninitiated how beautiful this martial ballet can be. Practitioners such as Jon Jones and Dominick Cruz use techniques from kickboxing, wrestling, jiu-jitsu and judo to create a subtle dance of feints, leverage and counters. It can be brutal, but put the idea of drunks brawling out of your mind.

The 29-year-old French-Canadian Georges St-Pierre, who holds the Ultimate Fighting Championship's welterweight title and has lost just twice in 24 bouts, represents this sort of fighting as well as anyone. He wins by denying his opponents the ability to do what they want to do, outwrestling wrestlers and outboxing strikers. And he's tough. On April 30, he beat Jake Shields, who hadn't been defeated since 2004, despite losing vision in his bloodied left eye during the fight.

 By Jerry Langton  Wiley, 236 pages, $26.95

A Quebec native who once worked as a bouncer and sanitation worker, Mr. St-Pierre now earns seven figures per year. Since 2004, he has transformed himself from an exceptionally talented but essentially ordinary young fighter into the very best wrestler in a sport bristling with NCAA champions and Olympians. A devoted fan of the sport, I was curious how he did it. Unfortunately Jerry Langton's biography is mostly blow-by-blow recountings of fights and provides little insight into training or strategy. A control artist who works spaces, angles and rhythms, Mr. St-Pierre is the most cerebral of competitors—an athlete and not a fighter, in rival B.J. Penn's formulation. This being so, the very title of the Mr. Langton's book—"Fighter"— betrays a fundamental failure to understand its subject. 

Criticizing a quickie jock biography for not delivering insight it doesn't promise to deliver might seem pointless. The real party deserving of criticism is not Mr. Langton but the sports journalism field in general. Most biographers writing about a popular athlete would have a rich vein of secondary sources to mine—newspaper accounts of matches, magazine profiles, television interviews. Mr. Langton has, largely, dispatches from websites like MMAringreport.com. 

Mixed martial arts was the first major sport to evolve in the online era and has given rise to a fan press. But the mainstream press continues to ignore it, largely because editors and reporters don't understand it or consider it beneath them. Given the rich history of boxing writing, as well as the struggles that print publications have had in attracting younger readers, this is a curious collective decision to have made. The genius of Georges St-Pierre is sitting there, waiting to be explained to an eager public. One wonders when those whose work it is to do so will notice.

—Mr. Marchman can be contacted at tlmarchman@gmail.com.