Scheduled to open in less than a month, "Spider-Man: Turn Off the Dark" still hasn't figured out its final scene and its lead producer has bought repeat tickets for audience members to get feedback on the show's many changes.

 The most expensive production in Broadway history was vaulted once again into the national spotlight Dec. 20 when Christopher Tierney, the primary Spider-Man stunt double, fell 25 feet during a performance. He ended up hospitalized with broken ribs, a hairline skull fracture and other injuries.

Producers canceled two shows as they worked out new stunt protocols that satisfied state and federal safety inspectors. The show has been running ever since to packed audiences during its extended preview. Last week, it narrowly surpassed "Wicked" as the top box office performer on Broadway.

Four actors in the show have sustained injuries as the production has prepared for its Feb. 7 opening at the Foxwoods Theatre. Emails obtained by The Wall Street Journal through the Freedom of Information Law from the New York State Department of Labor show inspectors raised serious concerns about the safety of the musical's complex aerial maneuvers. The day after Mr. Tierney's accident, state safety inspector Lansing Lord wrote in an email to six other labor officials: "May be time to do something here before someone is killed."

Lead Producer Michael Cohl said the musical—directed by Julie Taymor with a score by U2's Bono and the Edge—and state inspectors have worked cooperatively from the start to ensure the production is safe. "All that happened there was safety, safety, safety," he said.



Mr. Cohl hedged his bets when asked if the opening date, which has been postponed three times, remains Feb. 7. "It's life—I don't expect it to [change], but it's life," he said during an interview with fellow producer Jeremiah J. Harris in Mr. Harris's corner office overlooking an edge of the theater district. A spokesman for the show, Rick Miramontez, said Wednesday that "all systems are absolutely go" for the planned opening. 

One key element the show is still hammering out: the ending. Producers intend to replace the $65 million show's temporary finale—a scrim unfurling to reveal an image of Spider-Man—with a more elaborate scene, Mr. Cohl said. "The actual ending that we have planned is still not in the show," he said. "Nobody's seen it—including us, by the way."

The artistic challenges come amid investigations by the state labor department and the U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration into the technically complex production. Emails show that some labor department officials anticipated safety problems months ago.

"I hate to say I told you so...," wrote the department's safety and health inspection supervisor, Kevin Dillon, on Oct. 31, informing other labor officials of an accident earlier that month that catapulted an actor, Kevin Aubin, across the stage, leaving him with two broken wrists. "I again express to you my reservations and concerns regarding the speed of the flights and the effect upon the performer if an emergency stop must be made during the flight."

"Those concerns were very much heard, and they focused everything we did," the labor department's deputy commissioner for worker protection, Pico Ben-Amotz, said in an interview.

Labor officials were originally inclined to reject the show's request for permits needed for risky aerial maneuvers based on their conclusion that the computer system controlling the stunts "has demonstrated the ability to harm performers," a Nov. 1 email from the department's senior safety and health engineer, Edward A. Smith, said.

Inspectors eventually cleared the show as safe for performance on Nov. 24, four days before the first preview. 

In response to the concerns raised in the labor department emails, Mr. Miramontez said Wednesday: "The production worked closely with the Department of Labor throughout the process and never heard of any grave concerns. Any and all concerns and issues have always been addressed in a timely and appropriate manner."

"Spider-Man" last week beat "Wicked" by $58 in box-office receipts, grossing $1.59 million. "Wicked" had been No. 1 almost continuously since 2004. 

To pay back investors, "Spider-Man" must match that exceptional result for at least another two years, according to longtime Broadway producers. Mr. Miramontez doesn't dispute that assessment. Some of the show's backers, like Kathryn Sherman, aren't certain they will see a return on their money.

"It wasn't our intent to be as heavily invested as we are, but that's the way things have rolled," Ms. Sherman said. 

Meanwhile, the show's creative team is working to make the storyline clearer. While the first act is made up of moments familiar to fans of the "Spider-Man" films, the second act is an original story written as a dream sequence by Ms. Taymor and book co-author Glen Berger.

"Some people are confused, yeah," said Mr. Cohl, the lead producer. "It's hard to tell that it's all an illusion, it's all a dream." He says he's spoken with audience members to get their feedback and has bought tickets for a handful of them to get their opinion on revisions.

Safety changes also have altered at least one key moment in the show. Whereas Mr. Tierney was supposed to run almost to the edge of the elevated platform during the stunt that injured him when he went too far, the performer doing the move now has been instructed to halt four feet shy of the precipice. 

Mr. Tierney, who's recovering and hopes one day to return to the musical, has said that not running up to the edge can blunt the stunt's potency: "If you don't go for it, it just doesn't play," he said during a recent appearance on "Good Morning America." "It just doesn't look good."

Mr. Miramontez said the safety changes haven't affected the look of the show or its ability to excite audiences. He noted that no flying moments have been altered as a result of the new safety protocols. 

The production's weekly running costs have held firm at $1 million. The show is selling tickets through April, and the producers say they plan in the next few weeks to offer a new block of tickets for sale into the fall. 

Messrs. Harris and Cohl said they are fully dedicated to Ms. Taymor's artistic vision and attribute fascination with the musical's troubles partly to professional jealousy targeted at the director. "Why are they picking on Julie? It's probably personal," Mr. Cohl said. 

Mr. Cohl said he doesn't believe any audience members are there to see accidents, but he readily acknowledged that a sense of fear draws crowds. "Is it thrilling to see something dangerous?" he said. "Well, the circus has been around a lot longer than Broadway, and so the answer has to be a resounding yes."



 Write to  Ellen Gamerman at ellen.gamerman@wsj.com and Erica Orden at erica.orden@wsj.com 