ABBOTTABAD, Pakistan—For years, Osama bin Laden was thought to be hiding, possibly in a cave, in the remote tribal region that borders Pakistan and Afghanistan. Instead, he was residing in a large walled compound in a tony town populated with retired Pakistani army officers and founded by a British military officer in 1853.

Abbottabad—named after Gen. Sir James Abbott, who was a senior military official in the British Raj—is close enough to Pakistan's capital, Islamabad, to be a popular tourist getaway. It is located in a scenic valley surrounded by dramatic mountains.

Yet, as Pakistan has pressed its offensive against al Qaeda in the tribal regions and Central Intelligence Agency drone strikes have pummeled the Pakistan side of the Afghan border, the town of about 500,000 has seen an influx of jihadis of late. Residents spoke of seeing some Arabs in town.

Most notably, in January, Pakistani security forces captured Umar Patek, 40 years old, a key figure in al Qaeda's global operations. His arrest was made public in March. Mr. Patek links the movement's original command in Pakistan and Afghanistan with splinter groups and allies across Indonesia and the Philippines. The U.S. placed a $1 million bounty on the wiry Indonesian national for helping organize the 2002 nightclub bombings in Bali, Indonesia, which killed 202. 

Photos from around the world.

 "Justice has been done" and more.

A look at Monday's front pages of U.S. newspapers on the news of Osama bin Laden's death. 

On the ground

Diagram from the U.S. government

Photos inside and out

Two other al Qaeda operatives of French origin were also recently arrested en route to the town, a Pakistani official said.

That recent influx contrasts sharply with the sleepy, upper-crust reputation the town otherwise has enjoyed. It is a garrison town, home to the Pakistan Military Academy, the Pakistani equivalent of the U.S.'s West Point or Britain's Sandhurst, and a haven for retired military officials. 

Last month, Gen. Ashfaq Kayani, chief of Pakistan's military, was the chief guest at the graduation ceremony of newly commissioned officers, where he declared that the Pakistani military has broken the back of al Qaeda-supported terrorists. Abbottabad also is also known for the high standard of its educational institutions, some of them set up during British colonial rule.

Residents in the upper-middle-class, leafy Bilal district of Abbottabad said after midnight Sunday they were awoken by a huge blast as helicopters hovered above the large compound where, it turned out, bin Laden was hiding.

"Bullets were flying all over. It was very frightening," said Gul Zaman, a local trader who lives near the compound. The blast shattered glass windows of his two-story house.

"One of the helicopters came crashing down after it was hit by fire from inside the compound," said Mohsin Khan, another local resident who said he saw the action from his house terrace. U.S. officials have confirmed that one helicopter in the operation didn't take off on the return flight. Residents said the wreckage was removed by local army troops who cordoned off the compound.

The sprawling compound spread over an acre of lush green farmland covered with eucalyptus trees was occupied by bin Laden at least since August of last year, according to intelligence reviewed by Pakistani officials. Residents said it had been occupied since 2005.

A three-story building sits in the middle of the compound surrounded by concrete walls some 14 feet high that are topped by barbed wire and contained security cameras. Some residents also claimed it had an underground area.

Some residents said the house was known in the area as "Waziristan Mansion" as it was owned by a man from Waziristan tribal region—the mountainous Pakistani area where many assumed bin Laden had sought refuge.

Some Pakistanis living around the compound thought the activity there was unusual. Though residents couldn't see inside, they said they frequently saw one person entering the house, who gave contradictory stories about himself. At times, he said he was in the transportation business, at other times a contractor or a money changer. He introduced himself as Rashid, and they suspected he was from Waziristan.

From some 200 meters (660 feet) away the fortress-like building stood out from other surrounding buildings. The town's reaction was calm, if startled, Monday to find that bin Laden had been living there. Many residents said the first news they had of his presence in the town was television reports of his death. Some remained skeptical.

"Not only me but most of the people are stunned to learn the news that bin Laden was killed in today's operation," said Muhammad Jan, a fruit vendor. "I and most of the people still aren't ready to believe that such an important person was living—and subsequently killed—here because the city has no such examples in the past."

Video footage obtained by local TV channels showed a bloodstained bed in a room where bin Laden was reportedly killed. 

In Quetta, a better-known extremist hideout that is said to be home to the Afghanistan Taliban's ruling council, the Quetta Shura, hundreds of protesters from a hard-line Islamist group took to the streets, holding aloft banners with bin Laden's picture and shouting anti-U.S. slogans. The demonstration ended without any clashes with police.

—James Hookway in Bangkok and Tom Wright in Islamabad contributed to this article.