Unions and Democratic activists in Wisconsin and Ohio are opening new fronts in their opposition to state bills that would limit public employees' collective-bargaining rights.

In Wisconsin, committees have registered to target the eight Republican state senators eligible for recall this year, out of 19 Republicans in that chamber. State Democrats, liberal group MoveOn.org and the Service Employees International Union are raising money and soliciting help gathering signatures.

Conservative-backed groups, meanwhile, also have registered to target six of the eight Democratic senators eligible for recall.

Mark Jefferson, executive director of the Wisconsin Republican Party, said it was possible recall efforts could still be started for the two remaining Democrats who are eligible. "At the end of the day, taxpayers have real reasons to go after these A.W.O.L. Democrats," he said.

Reid Magney, a spokesman for Wisconsin's Government Accountability Board, called the number of recall campaigns "unprecedented." Voters in the state successfully removed two senators through recall elections in 1996 and 2003, Mr. Magney said.

Wisconsin elected officials are eligible for recall after a year in office. Supporters have 60 days to obtain 11,000 to 21,000 signatures to force a recall vote, depending on the district. Recalled senators must run in a special election to keep their seats.

Wisconsin's 14 Senate Democrats fled to Illinois on Feb. 17, thwarting a vote on Republican Gov. Scott Walker's "budget-repair bill" limiting state workers' collective-bargaining rights.

"From almost the day Scott Walker introduced this piece of legislation, people were on the ground thinking about recall," said Graeme Zielinski, a spokesman for the Wisconsin Democratic Party.

Mr. Walker said layoff notices would be sent to 1,500 state workers beginning Friday if Democrats didn't return for a vote. The notified workers would lose their jobs April 1, shaving $30 million from state payrolls, if the measure hasn't passed, Mr. Walker said. He said his bill is needed to close a $137 million shortfall in the current fiscal year, and to begin addressing a projected $3.6 billion two-year deficit.

"Just when we think the process is moving forward, we see no action," he told reporters Thursday night. "We're frustrated."

Democratic state Sen. Mark Miller called the layoff notices "a new level of hostility" and said Mr. Walker "is using human beings as political pawns."

The conservative group Americans for Prosperity launched a 10-city bus tour this week supporting Mr. Walker and an online petition that has attracted 100,000 signatures. On Friday, the tour held events in Green Bay, Rhinelander and Wausau.

"The governor is doing what he was elected to do, and we strongly support the budget-repair bill," said Phil Kerpen, the group's vice president for policy. The group hasn't taken a position on the recall efforts.

In Ohio, lawmakers said unions are likely to try a voter referendum in November to invalidate a bill restricting bargaining rights for public-employee unions, if the measure becomes law.

GOP state Sen. Bill Seitz, who opposed the bill when it passed the Senate Wednesday, said a referendum is "a dead certainty" if the bill clears the House in its current form.

Mr. Seitz said he supports "about 85%" of the bill, but not removing bargaining rights for police and firefighters or eliminating third-party arbitration when contract negotiations stall.

Ohio Gov. John Kasich, a Republican, has said he supports the bill as a way to help local governments rein in labor costs.

Unions would have 90 days after the bill passes, which could be in the next few weeks, to get about 230,000 signatures supporting a referendum.

Indiana lawmakers appeared no closer to resolving a standoff that started when House Democrats left the state Feb. 22 to protest bills that would curb union rights.

Tory Flynn, a spokeswoman for Republican House Speaker Brian Bosma, said Republicans hoped a $250 daily fine, beginning next week, would motivate absent lawmakers to return. Asked if Democrats would return Monday, Democratic spokesman John Schorg said, "I wouldn't count on it."

 Write to  Amy Merrick at amy.merrick@wsj.com and Kris Maher at kris.maher@wsj.com 