Anne Trubek's wry tour of about 15 literary house museums across the U.S. was born out of loathing: She writes that she first conceived of it as a "reverse travel guide, a guide to places you shouldn't bother to visit, to mis directed spiritual quests and middlebrow, wrongheaded approaches to reading and writing." By the end of her journey, her view softens to tolerance, even affection. It turns out middlebrow pleasures have their place. 

Ms. Trubek's initial cantankerousness, though, is understandable. Some of these sites, such as the Poe House in Baltimore (where Poe lived for two years early in his life), have only a tenuous connection to the author's most important work. Others try too hard: Mark Twain's hometown of Hannibal, Mo., has become a Twain-inspired theme park, where Ms. Trubek has difficulty finding something as basic as cold medicine. But for the most part these are modest institutions, struggling (often futilely) to keep a memory alive: At the Thomas Wolfe Memorial in Asheville, N.C., "interpretations manager" Chris Morton spends much of his time distinguishing the author of "Look Homeward, Angel" from the man with a similar name who wrote "The Right Stuff." Once, at the end of a 45-minute tour, a woman asked the guide: "When did he start wearing the white suit?"

By Anne Trubek  Pennsylvania, 166 pages, $24.95 

In a succession of well-reported chapters, Ms. Trubek takes the reader to all these places, as well as to the Walt Whitman House in Camden, N.J. (where the poet lived for the last eight years of his life) and to more obscure destinations, such as the former home of the African-American poet Paul Laurence Dunbar in Dayton, Ohio. Along the way, she notes the vagaries of the real-estate market and the caprice of the literary canon. On occasion, Ms. Trubek even slides toward memoir. Upon visiting the Sonoma Valley ruins of Jack London's so-called Wolf House, which burned down the day he was to move in, she links the event to her own recent separation from her husband. Reflecting on London's ambitions for the place—he hired a fancy architect and used supposedly fire- and earthquake-resistant materials—Ms. Trubek remarks: "All that longing, all that work and then—poof!"

Even at her darker moments, Ms. Trubek is a bewitching and witty travel partner. The reader's only qualm may be that she has brought too much ammunition, too much sophistication, to a pastime that is, in the end, a relatively innocent pleasure. At Ernest Hemingway's house in Key West, Fla., the author chats with a guide who happens to prefer Twain to Hemingway. (She has a way of coaxing skepticism out of docents.) He had visited the humorist's home a while back and muses, "I went hoping to learn something I didn't know before." She asks whether he did. "Nope," he says. "But I had a good weekend." In the end, that's all most literary tourists require.

—Ruth Graham