FOXBOROUGH, Mass.—Danny Woodhead hasn't ever been troubled by his size compared to the rest of his NFL teammates. So when Patriots linebacker Rob Ninkovich, a strapping 6-foot-2, 255 pounds, freely admitted Patriots coach Bill Belichick still sometimes makes him nervous, Mr. Woodhead nodded. And said there are ways to cope with that.

Like, um, staying out of Mr. Belichick's sight?

"No," the generously listed 5-foot-8, 185-pound running back said with a chuckle. "I know it's not hard for me to do, but no, I don't go hide. I think with Coach Belichick you just have to work."

Jets coach Rex Ryan tried at the onset of the week to position this Sunday's AFC Divisional playoff game as a Bobby Fischer-Boris Spassky chess match, with him and Mr. Belichick as the two grand masters.

 Mr. Belichick hasn't let him, blandly insisting little in this meeting is about him, even as almost all of it is.

Up here at Gillette Stadium, the Patriots are cool, flat with their emotion and toneless in their public moments. They've refused to be baited by the hot words slung their way from New York. The one maybe-jab receiver Wes Welker offered—repeatedly referring to feet in a press conference—was so subtle, no one knows if it was really a jab. In other words, the Patriots are their coach.

Five winters have passed since Mr. Belichick won a Super Bowl, three since the Giants ended New England's bid for perfection in the Super Bowl capping the 2007 season. Mr. Belichick has at least in part gutted and rebuilt his Patriots and now, in his 11th season here, he has a team that again fits him as comfortably as his trademark hooded sweatshirts. 

"Coach Belichick is a 'players' coach' too," Mr. Woodhead said, namelessly referring back to his first coach this season, Mr. Ryan, a bombastic one-of-the-guys sort. "Everyone has different ways of doing it."

Mr. Belichick's way is hard, for sure. The rookies he starts on defense, linebackers Brandon Spikes and Jermaine Cunningham and cornerback Devin McCourty, come from Florida and Rutgers. Their college coaches were noted disciplinarians, and Mr. Belichick praised the grinding nature of both programs when talking about the rookies this week.

Aaron Hernandez, a rookie tight end also out of Florida, said, "It's just like Coach (Urban) Meyer. Everything is strict and ordered."

Plenty of NFL coaches are strict and orderly, and the linebacker, Mr. Ninkovich, played for two, New Orleans' Sean Peyton and Miami's Tony Sparano, who are of the same Bill Parcells coaching tree as Mr. Belichick.

"There's similarities in practices and how hard we work in training camp. They're all guys who believe the only way to get better in football is to wear full pads and actually play football," he said. "What sets Coach Belichick apart is his knowledge of the game, the way he prepares us every week and the way he keeps us focused on the next game and nothing else."

Each week starts with a quiz for the players; a wrong answer might net "a little ripping" from the coach, safety James Sanders said, and then a more stern, "You need to know this." Every game plan is different and every Monday film breakdown is the same, heavy on details and points to fix.

Kevin Faulk has spent his entire 12-year NFL career with the Patriots. He says the only coach he knows is Mr. Belichick and he swore nothing has changed in the man from his arrival in 2000 to now. 

He agrees with fellow running back Fred Taylor, who says that with Mr. Belichick, "it's either black or white, no gray," but he says he has also gotten praise from the coach. When Mr. Faulk does, he definitely will run home and say, "Honey, you have to hear what Bill said." 

And what he said?

"No one would really understand it," Mr. Faulk said. "With Bill, it's about the little things." 

Mr. Belichick is not prone to the grand gesture. He does laugh, his players say, and several insisted he was even funny. ("Very funny actually," receiver Brandon Tate said.) But when he talks, he doesn't ever bother with the flowery or the effusive. Friday, when mention was made of the role of emotion in football, he scoffed. 

"Playing well is playing well," he said. Standing in the usual sweatshirt with the sleeves cut off, this one navy blue, he sighed and said, "You can break it down into 17,000 adjectives, but it's doing your job."

Mr. Belichick offered that same simplicity in a message to Mr. McCourty's Rutgers team back in 2008. The Scarlet Knights had opened 1-5, Mr. Belichick's son was a lacrosse player at the school and when football coach Greg Schiano asked if he'd address the team, he acquiesced and said, "If you want to be better, be better." 

Rutgers finished that year with seven straight wins.

"I don't know why it works, but it does," Mr. Taylor said. "He's—I have to be careful by saying great because he might call me in and say, 'Hey, we're talking just football, we're not talking about me'—but he is great."

And in the end, that's not worth hiding from.

 Write to  Aditi Kinkhabwala at aditi.kinkhabwala@wsj.com 