PARIS—European drug regulators Friday launched a review of French drugs giant Sanofi-Aventis's heart treatment Multaq following two cases of acute liver failure in patients taking the drug. 

The European Medicines Agency said its Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use will conduct the review. The investigation in the worst case could result in the withdrawal of the drug's authorization for use in Europe by the EU drugs regulator. 

Multaq, a treatment for irregular heartbeats, is an important new product for the pharmaceutical company, which needs new products to replace key medicines that are losing patent protection and face competition from cheaper generic substitutes. 

Such EMA investigations on authorized drugs, known as Article 20 procedures, generally take a couple of months depending on the amount of data available.

They determine whether the regulator should maintain, change, suspend or even withdraw a drug's authorization. The drug regulator's committee will review existing information to weigh the benefits and risks of the drug. 

Sanofi said it will send European healthcare professionals a letter detailing the two liver failure cases and give recommendations on liver function testing for patients who have been prescribed the drug. 

"We confirm we are issuing the letter as of today," a company spokesman said Friday. He added that the prescribing information on Multaq will be revised to include the guidance in the letter, once it has been reviewed and approved by the European Medicines Agency. 

Sanofi sent out a similar letter to healthcare professionals in the U.S. last week. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration required that labels for the drug include warnings of a possible liver risk. European authorities were expected to follow suit. 

The European Medicines Agency earlier Friday said that the committee, or CHMP, recommended changes to the drug's product information to help manage the possible risk of severe liver complications. 

While the two patients requiring a liver transplant were also taking other medications, the EMA committee said a causal relationship with Multaq could not be excluded and called for "urgent regulatory action" to help manage a possible risk of liver complications. 

Sales of the drug were expected to reach as much as €1.7 billion by 2016, said the Royal Bank Of Scotland, which forecasts the drug's sales at €1.3 billion that year, according to a research note published last week. 

Multaq was first launched in 2009, and is sold in 16 countries in Europe, as well as in the U.S. and Canada. In the first nine months of 2010, Multaq sales totaled €109 million. 

 Write to  Mimosa Spencer at mimosa.spencer@dowjones.com 