WASHINGTON—A group of top Pentagon officers is close to completing a review designed to reduce civilian casualties in Afghanistan, one of the biggest sources of friction between Washington and Kabul.

The Civilian Casualties Working Group, which draws representatives from various military services and commands, has the job of refining training and setting common procedures to reduce civilian harm. It is expected to brief findings to senior military leaders in the spring. 

Adm. Michael Mullen, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, ordered the creation of the group to examine the military's "kill chain"—the procedures for calling in airstrikes or artillery fire—following an aerial bombardment in Farah province in May 2009 that claimed a large number of civilian lives. "We cannot afford to lose the support of the Afghan people," Adm. Mullen wrote in a 2009 memorandum related to the effort. 

The study is the latest bid to get a handle on a problem that has stoked popular resentment and prompted protests by Afghan officials. 

A July 2009 tactical directive issued by Gen. Stanley McChrystal, then the top U.S. commander in Afghanistan, set strict limits on the use of airstrikes, aiming to rein in civilian casualties as part of a broader bid to win support of Afghans. 

But the limits caused concern among American troops, who feared it would also crimp their ability to strike at the enemy and defend themselves. 

Gen McChrystal's successor, Gen. David Petraeus, is a proponent of a strategy that calls for avoiding civilian casualties but eased restrictions on airstrikes last year.

Many of the working group's efforts have focused on standardization and training—for instance, determining what kinds of weapons can be used in which situations to avoid what the military euphemistically refers to as "collateral damage." Military schools responsible for training troops in targeting and estimating collateral damage have revised their curricula. 

"There's more standardization across the board, so when a combatant commander gets someone who has been to targeting school, he has now been through the same set of training that everybody else has been in," said Navy Lt. Cmdr. Sam Tanner, who coordinates the working group. 

The United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan reported a surge in civilian deaths last year, a rise attributed in part to insurgent roadside bomb attacks. But the working group has tracked a 70% decline in civilian casualties caused by U.S. and allied war planes since 2008.

Cmdr. Tanner said the military had tracked a 20% decrease in the overall number of civilian casualties caused by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization-led International Security Assistance Force, or ISAF, and by American troops, even as military operations escalated. But, Cmdr. Tanner added, civilians would always be a risk in a conflict where insurgents blend easily with the local population.

"We'll never hit zero," he said. "War's not about making sure that no one gets hurt. It's about making sure that the objective gets met."

Proponents of counterinsurgency doctrine, which emphasizes protecting the civilian population in order to win their support, find pushback from those who say it limits their ability to protect troops and target insurgents.

"I think the problem for ISAF is that even though they are driving down the number of civilian casualties, the fact that the enemy is killing more [civilians] doesn't seem to have as negative an effect on the enemy as it does on the ISAF effort," said Charles Dunlap, a former deputy judge advocate general of the Air Force.