BEIJING—As increasing numbers of Chinese go online, China's state media outlets are aggressively expanding beyond their traditional roles as propaganda outlets and competing with private Internet companies.

Xinhua, the state-run news service, recently launched a search engine, Panguso.com, in partnership with state-owned telecommunications carrier  China Mobile Ltd.
CHL


1.03
%




 The move comes a few months after People's Daily, a big state-run newspaper, started its own search engine, Goso.cn. The paper has also started its own Twitter-like messaging service. 

Meanwhile, China Central Television has launched its own online video platform, CNTV, which provides content from the monopoly broadcaster's 20 channels, as well as content from other online-video sites.

But the state-run giants face challenges as they scramble to catch up with companies such as  Baidu Inc.,
BIDU


-1.64
%




 which operates China's largest search engine;  Sina Corp.
SINA


-3.22
%




, which runs China's most active Web-based messaging service; and  Youku.com Inc.,
YOKU


-4.36
%




 China's biggest video website.



"Expanding into Internet services is both an opportunity and challenge for state-owned media," a CCTV spokesman said in a written response to questions from The Wall Street Journal. "Since the Internet market is a fully open and competitive area, state-owned media face difficulties and problems with low marketization and so on, compared with newly emerged private Internet companies."

Although state-media outlets have long tried to commercialize, there appears to have been a renewed push to do so online, says  Jeremy Goldkorn, founder of Danwei, a website about Chinese media. He is skeptical of these outlets' ability to win over China's 457 million Internet users.

The news business in China is "overwhelmingly state-owned and controlled," while "private companies built the Chinese Internet. It's different, and it requires a very different set of skills," Mr. Goldkorn said. Internet "is not all about news, it's about user experience, it's about technology."

Some users praised the government's efforts while others poked fun at the idea of searching for information on a website run by a propaganda organ. The search engines set up by Xinhua and People's Daily currently return far fewer search results than Baidu or  Google Inc., but some experts say they have innovative features, showing that with more time and investment, the search engines have potential.

Panguso, for example, has a search function dedicated to "commentary" which returns real-time results from Chinese microblogs. It also allows users to send search results from their computers to their cellphones via text message and includes a music search. 

Goso displays a real-time news feed on its homepage that includes reports from commercial Chinese media outlets such as iFeng.com, the portal of Phoenix Television.

"They're way behind in terms of products and content," but some of these Internet ventures shouldn't be outright dismissed, said  Bill Bishop, a Beijing-based investor who watches the China Internet. "I don't expect them to get a lot of share anytime soon, but if you're playing a longer game, like the government here usually plays, three to five years from now people might be surprised."

State media outlets also have more resources at their disposal. As a monopoly nationwide broadcaster, CCTV has exclusive licenses for major events like the 2010 World Cup, and enormous advertising resources. In January, Xinhua unveiled a massive Beijing research center called Xinhuanet Industrial Park in Beijing where it plans to develop media products. And last month, People's Daily hired an ex-Google research executive to be its chief scientist for Goso.

"State-owned media companies have capital advantages, content advantages, and human-resources advantages … but lack influence," said  Yu Guoming, a journalism professor at Renmin University in Beijing. "They are restricted by the traditional" communication patterns while private companies can respond to market demands. State media outlets "will never keep up with private companies," he said.

CNTV, which was launched in 2009, has a 7.1% share of online-video ad revenue, ranking fifth in the market. The top two video sites, Youku and Tudou, have 21% and 17%, respectively, according to research firm Analysys International.

CCTV said it possesses the "irreplaceable advantage of resources," while Xinhua said it is facing "the same challenge and transformation issue" as other traditional media. Both CCTV and Xinhua declined to disclose the amount of traffic to their websites, but Xinhua said it is growing steadily. People's Daily didn't respond to requests for comment. 

Baidu—which had a 76% share of search-market revenue in China in the fourth quarter, according to Analysys International—said it welcomed state media's efforts. "We're always happy to see more competition," a spokesman said. "It keeps us on our toes." 

  Victor Koo, chief executive of Youku, said on a conference call that CCTV and CNTV—which have partnerships to broadcast their content on Youku—"have been trying to do online video for a while" but "if you look at the market share they're still a very small player in the overall market. And it's not for lack of putting together a large effort behind it." 

—Yoli Zhang and Kersten Zhang contributed to this article.

 Write to  Loretta Chao at loretta.chao@wsj.com 