Connecticut didn't need six overtimes. This time, one was enough.

Kemba Walker had 33 points and 12 rebounds in another phenomenal performance and the No. 21 Huskies held off No. 11 Syracuse, 76-71, in overtime Friday night in the Big East tournament semifinals. Two years ago, the same teams played a six-overtime game for the ages.

The Huskies (25-9) improved to 10-3 in Big East semifinals with their fourth win in four days and will play Saturday night for their first tournament championship since 2004.

Scoop Jardine had 20 points for the Orange (26-7), including a pair of 3-pointers at the end of regulation that sent the game to overtime.

—WSJ wire services

Amar'e Stoudemire will avoid a one-game suspension—-for now—as the NBA on Friday rescinded the technical foul that would have been his 16th and would have resulted in a suspension. Stoudemire can now play Sunday against the Indiana Pacers at the Garden. 

The technical was called on in the second quarter of Thursday night's against the Dallas Mavericks, on a double-technical with Mavericks center Brendan Haywood, whose technical also was rescinded. 

—Kevin Clark

Mets relief pitcher Ryota Igarashi still has family members, including his parents, in Japan, but he did confirm their safety in the wake of Friday's devastating earthquake and tsunami, he said. Most of Igarashi's family, he said through an interpreter, live in Chiba prefecture, about 200 miles south of where the quake hit, and he spoke with them Friday afternoon. Yankee pitcher Kei Igawa's hometown of Orai was also hit hard. The Yankees have let the Japanese pitcher leave camp to continue efforts to contact his family, Yankees GM Brian Cashman said. 

—Daniel Barbarisi, Mike Sielski

St. John's senior D.J. Kennedy tore an anterior cruciate ligament in his right knee during the Red Storm's 79-73 loss to Syracuse on Thursday in the quarterfinals of the Big East Tournament, the school announced late Thursday night. Kennedy will be out an "indeterminate amount of time" and unable to play in the team's first NCAA Tournament appearance since 2002. The statement said that his post-surgery recovery could take six to eight months. "This is a real blow," Kennedy said in a statement. "I've wanted to play in the NCAA Tournament since I picked up a basketball in grade school."

—Sophia Hollander