PORT AU PRINCE—Deposed dictator Jean-Claude "Baby Doc" Duvalier made a startling return to Haiti late Sunday, ending almost 25 years of exile and throwing yet another wild card into the turbulent politics of this devastated country, which is trying to recover from a killer earthquake, a cholera epidemic and violently contested elections.

Mr. Duvalier—whose ouster in 1986 after massive protests and U.S. pressure ended a brutal and kleptocratic father-and-son dynasty—arrived in a plane from the French Caribbean island of Guadeloupe. There was chaos at the Port-au-Prince airport, where hundreds of sympathizers shouted "Duvalier, Duvalier" as they pressed their faces against the airport fence and waited to greet Mr. Duvalier and his second wife, Veronique. 



Also waiting at the airport were hundreds of supporters of former President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, a Duvalier foe who was also deposed in 2004, and now lives in exile in South Africa, who tried to drown out the Duvalier supporters, shouting "Aristide, Aristide!" 

A United Nations truck carrying Jordanian troops tried to enter the airport but was turned away. Mr. Duvalier eventually ducked the crowd and escaped in a convoy of SUVs, to a hotel in the mountains above the capital. 

"He is a Haitian and as such, he is free to return home," said Prime Minister Jean Max Bellerive in an email. "I'm not aware he has presently any political activities." 

Mr. Duvalier's return caught most Haitians by surprise. 

"I find it incomprehensible, dangerous, and completely bizarre," said Robert Fatton, a Haiti expert at the University of Virginia. Mr. Fatton said the return of Mr. Duvalier is yet another factor that will ratchet up the political instability in which Haiti has been mired since it held widely criticized elections in November. Among other things, it is likely to anger partisans of Mr. Aristide who still commands a wide following in Haiti, and who will now demand Mr. Aristide's return. "It will make Lavalas furious, and that would be real trouble," said Mr. Fatton, referring to Mr. Aristide's political movement. 

It isn't known what the future holds for Mr. Duvalier. In 2007, President René Préval told reporters that Mr. Duvalier could return to Haiti, but he would have to face charges for embezzling millions of dollars and the murder of many Haitians. But there are no known outstanding warrants for his arrest.

During their 29-year rule, first Mr. Duvalier's father, Francois "Papa Doc" Duvalier, and then Mr. Duvalier terrorized Haiti, using a paramilitary group called the Ton Ton Macoutes to kill and torture opponents. Haitians danced on the street after Mr. Duvalier was forced out of office with his wife in 1986. Both men looted millions from the national treasury of the Western Hemisphere's poorest country. 

Human rights groups such as Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch urged Haiti on Monday to prosecute Mr. Duvalier, saying he should be held accountable for the torture and killing of civilians under his rule.

Mr. Duvalier has been living quietly in France since his ouster, which was followed by two decades of political instability, military coups and two U.S. interventions.

"It's a joy," said Ernest Dossous, 35. "I haven't seen him since I was small. I don't know why he's come." 

No one seemed to know the reason behind Mr. Duvalier's return. But many suspected the worst. "I view it as creating chaos and distraction," said a senior Haitian government official. 

Mr. Duvalier appears to have little political support, says a Haitian government official. On May 22, the anniversary of the government takeover by his father in 1957, only about 100 old supporters rallied in Port au Prince, the official said. 

Mr. Duvalier's return comes as Haiti tries to sort out its political future after disputed presidential elections in November ended in rioting, and widespread charges of fraud when electoral authorities declared that Jude Celestin, who has the backing of Mr. Préval, had placed second, behind former first lady Mirlande Manigat, and just ahead of crooner Michel Martelly. 

The protests led the Organization of American States to send a team of election specialists who recommended that Mr. Celestin be dropped in favor of Mr. Martelly. Mr. Préval has said he has "reservations" about the report, which he received last week. The decision about whether Mr. Martelly or Mr. Celestin advances to the second round, originally scheduled for January 16th, must be made by Haitian electoral authorities.

OAS Secretary General Jose Miguel Insulza is scheduled to visit Port au Prince Monday to discuss the situation with Mr. Préval and other Haitian officials. Many fear the unsettled political situation could hold up billions of dollars in aid promised by the international community to help Haiti recover from the earthquake that killed more than 230,000 people a year ago.

Mr. Duvalier's unannounced return may not have that strong an impact, since half of Haiti's 10 million population is under 18 years old. 