JERUSALEM—Construction began on Sunday on the first new Jewish housing project in the predominantly Palestinian East Jerusalem neighborhood of Sheikh Jarrah since the land was conquered in 1967, despite longstanding objections from Washington.

The decision to go forward with the project deals a further blow to U.S. efforts to revive the moribund peace process, which collapsed last year after Israel refused to end settlement building on land claimed by Palestinians.

"While [Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin] Netanyahu continues his public relations campaign regarding the peace process, on the ground he is rapidly moving to prevent the establishment of a sovereign Palestinian state," Palestinian chief negotiator Saeb Erakat said.

A spokesman for Mr. Netanyahu defended the right of Jews to live in all neighborhoods of Jerusalem.

"The idea that Jews should be forbidden to buy property in certain neighborhoods of Jerusalem is not something that is acceptable to the Israeli government," the spokesman said.

Bulldozers began demolishing the building, known as the Shepherd Hotel, early Sunday morning, culminating a roughly 25-year effort by the site's Jewish American owner, gambling and bingo magnate  Irving Moskowitz to develop the controversial site with 20 housing units for Jews. Mr. Moskowitz's lawyer refused to comment.

U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton criticized Sunday's move.

"This disturbing development undermines peace efforts to achieve the two state-solution," Mrs. Clinton said. "In particular, this move contradicts the logic of a reasonable and necessary agreement between the parties on the status of Jerusalem."

The Shepherd Hotel, built in the 1930s for Jerusalem's then-mufti,  Amin al-Husseini, sits in the heart of Sheikh Jarrah, a Palestinian neighborhood just north of the sacred Old City, which is home to some of Judaism and Islam's most sacred sites.

Israel took ownership of the property after it conquered and later annexed East Jerusalem from Jordan in the 1967 war. In the mid-1980s it sold the property to Mr. Moskowitz. Since then, Mr. Moskowitz's plans to develop the site have slowly but steadily advanced, though successive Israeli prime ministers have avoided giving it final approval.

In July 2009, shortly after President Barack Obama called for a full freeze on Jewish building in the West Bank and East Jerusalem, Mr. Netanyahu allowed final approval for the project to go ahead.

Jewish settler groups ramped up efforts to populate Palestinian neighborhoods of East Jerusalem with Jews after former U.S. President Bill Clinton released his parameters for a peace deal after the collapse of peace talks in 2000. Those parameters called for the division of Jerusalem, with predominantly Jewish neighborhoods going to Israel and predominantly Palestinian neighborhoods going to a future Palestinian state.

Until recently, Sheikh Jarrah was one of the only East Jerusalem neighborhoods which Jewish settler groups had failed to penetrate. But in the past couple of years, a handful of Jewish families have moved into the neighborhood after Israeli courts upheld their claims to homes that had belonged to Jews before 1948 and evicted the Palestinian families living in them.

With bulldozers roaring beyond him,  Daniel Luria, director of Ateret Cohanim, an organization backed by Mr. Moskowitz that works to settle Jews in East Jerusalem, said the project marked a significant step forward for his organization which has settled hundreds of Jews in Palestinian neighborhoods throughout East Jerusalem in the past decade.

"The reality is today there is no Arab East Jerusalem," Mr. Luria said. "Dividing this city is impossible because of projects like this. The whole discussion of land for peace is dead."

A few feet away,  Abdel Qader al-Husseini, a relative of the site's original Palestinian owner, found a rare point of agreement with Mr. Luria.

"Building a settlement here means the center of East Jerusalem will be split and divided, and this will kill any chance for peace," he said.