Middle East governments watched uneasily as events in Tunisia snowballed to a stunning climax Friday, while millions of their citizens followed on satellite television and the Internet the sudden departure of Tunisia's long-time leader amid growing street protests.

Tunisia's strong-man president, President  Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali, fled the North African country yesterday after a month of popular protests gained strong momentum in recent days. His departure was broadcast to the region across a collection of media outlets, such as al Jazeera, that hardly existed a decade ago, as well as on the Internet and social networks such as Twitter and Facebook. 

Scores of Arab Facebook users have changed their profile pictures to the Tunisian flag and sent congratulatory messages to the Tunisian people. One message asked, "can we Egyptians dare to dream of freedom next?"

Immediate official reaction was limited around the region. Qatar, a small Gulf emirate that has tried to exercise a voice in the region despite its tiny population, released a statement saying: "Qatar respects the will and wishes of the Tunisian people."

Response from other regional players was muted. Some of these countries, especially Egypt, Syria and Iran, share similar festering social and economic problems similar to those in Tunisia: high youth unemployment, lack of affordable housing and political freedom.

Last week in Algeria crowds of young people rioted over rising food prices and concerns about jobs. On Tuesday, the Jordanian government attempted to pre-empt possible public outcry by cutting fuel taxes and imposing food price controls. And on Wednesday, Egypt's trade minister was quoted in local press as saying he ruled out a "Tunisia Scenario" in his country.

On Thursday, the Arab League held a hastily called special session on the developments in Tunisia during their regular meeting in Qatar, reflecting concern about the instability there, according to an Arab official.

  Mr. Ben Ali arrived early Saturday in Saudi Arabia, after what appeared to be a scramble to find a country to host him. 

"The government of Saudi Arabia has welcomed the arrival of His Excellency President  Ben Ali and his family to the Kingdom," the Saudi royal court said in a statement. "The Government of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia announces that it stands fully by the Tunisian people and hopes, God willing, that its sons  will overcome this difficult phase in its history."

In Iran, opposition websites followed events in Tunisia closely, often drawing parallels to the street uprisings there in 2009 following the disputed election of President  Mahmoud Ahmadinejad. 

One difficult response to predict is how the U.S. will be perceived. Many Middle East governments have used complaints of U.S. interference in domestic affairs to neutralize internal opponents and democracy advocates. U.S. officials have performed a balancing act as they tracked events in Tunisia, which caught the U.S. and its closest European allies off-guard. 

The State Department last week called in Tunis's ambassador to Washington to raise concerns about reports the country's security forces were using excessive force and blocking the Internet.

 On a tour through the Middle East this week, Secretary of State  Hilary Clinton blasted Arab leaders for the lack of democracy in the region. But yesterday, she made sure to take a neutral position on Tunisia. "We are not taking sides in it, we just hope there can be a peaceful resolution of it," she said Tuesday in an interview with Al Arabiya.

 Write to  Margaret Coker at margaret.coker@wsj.com, Summer Said at summer.said@dowjones.com and Jay Solomon at jay.solomon@wsj.com 