HOUSTON—Rep.  Gabrielle Giffords is making "leaps and bounds" in her recovery from a gunshot wound in the head on Jan. 8 in Tucson, Ariz., her doctors said Friday.

Ms. Giffords's speech is improving and she is able to walk with assistance, doctors said at a press conference here at TIRR Memorial Hermann Hospital. It was the medical team's first public update on the Arizona Democratic congresswoman's progress since she was transferred to the rehabilitation institute from intensive care Jan. 26.

Calling Ms. Giffords's progress "spectacular," doctors said she was able to do more things on her own, and that her speech indicated the brain's primary language areas were intact. The doctors said there was a "good possibility" that Ms. Giffords would attend the April 19 launch of the space shuttle that her husband, astronaut Mark Kelly, is commanding, but they declined to elaborate.

Mr. Kelly said on Feb. 4 that he discussed his decision to return to space with his wife, and that she was comfortable with it, though he would not say how she communicated this. The next week, Ms. Giffords's congressional staff confirmed that she was talking and one day asked for toast.

Doctors also said Friday thatMs. Giffords had been told about the Jan. 8 shooting that left six dead and 13 wounded, including the congresswoman, but that she had no memories of the rampage outside a Tucson supermarket. Dr. Dong Kim, director of the Mischer Neuroscience Institute at Memorial Hermann, said this was normal, and that he did not anticipate she would have any memory problems.

"I can pick up from where I was the last time I talked to her," Dr. Kim said. "She remembers everyone who is coming into the room."

Ms. Giffords has been upbeat in rehab that ranges from three to five hours a day, reacting to her own progress with gestures of enthusiasm. When doctors recently removed a breathing tube in her neck, she gave a "pumped-fist response," said Dr. Imoigele Aisiku, Mischer's director of neurocritical care.

Asked if Ms. Giffords would have any permanent damage from her injury, Dr. Kim said it was "too early to talk about that at this point, but I do think she's going to make an excellent recovery." Doctors do not have a timeline for discharging her.

Separately, in Tucson on Wednesday, the man accused in the shootings pleaded not guilty to 49 federal charges, including the murder of two federal officials.  Jared Lee Loughner, 22 years old, will undergo a psychological exam and a hearing to determine whether he is competent to stand trial.