 New York 

When not writing plays of his own, David Ives writes plays based on the works of other men. Sometimes, as in his English-language version of Georges Feydeau's "A Flea in Her Ear" or the many musical-comedy books that he has freshened up for City Center's "Encores!" series, these are more or less straightforward adaptations meant to make the works on which they are based more accessible to modern audiences. "The School for Lies" is something else again, an uncategorizable rewrite of Molière's "The Misanthrope" in which Mr. Ives has done the seemingly impossible: He has taken a beloved masterpiece of Western theater and created a parallel version which, though unmistakably based on the original, is both wholly personal in tone and similarly dazzling in effect.

At the center of both plays is a disillusioned curmudgeon (called Alceste by Molière and Frank—a nice touch—by Mr. Ives) who has resolved to tell the truth to everyone he meets, no matter how disconcerting or offensive they may find it. This being a comedy, Frank (Hamish Linklater) is diverted from his high-minded path by his love for Celimene (Mamie Gummer), an aristocrat with an equally sharp tongue. In "The School for Lies," though, Mr. Ives transplants into "The Misanthrope" the fully articulated plot that Molière eschewed, showing how Frank and Celimene fell for one another in the first place, in the process transforming what began life as a high comedy of bad manners into a slapstick-laden farce whose flavor is more Anglo-Saxon than French.

All this is far more than clever enough—one expects no less from so accomplished a farceur—but what makes "The School for Lies" so memorable is its author's virtuosic use of language. Like "The Misanthrope," "The School for Lies" is written in rhyming couplets, and Mr. Ives, an amateur poet of no mean accomplishment, has got a million of 'em. What's more, it was his ingenious conceit to write his play not in a pastiche of pseudo-French circa 1666 (the year in which "The Misanthrope" was written and "The School for Lies" is set) but in a completely contemporary English that derives much of its sparkling charm from being pressed into the incongruously tight mold of iambic pentameter:

• "Our daughters dress like whores, our sons are rude, / These kids can't scratch their own initials, dude!"

• "What I say in my home is my own doing. / Besides, those boneheads begged for barbecuing."

• "My name's, like, B.? My skull's like full of air? / Maybe it comes from twirling my, like, hair?"



Brilliant though "The School of Lies" is, it's Walter Bobbie's apply-foot-A-to-banana-peel-B staging that makes the play take wing. Mr. Bobbie, who speaks Mr. Ives's idiosyncratic theatrical language fluently, is very much in tune with the high-low contrasts that drive "The School of Lies," and has put together a cast that pushes every comic button at all the right moments. Mr. Linklater froths with the violent hauteur of a man who does nothing but suffer fools all day long, while Ms. Gummer, one of New York's most accomplished young actresses, is lit from within by a sexy glamour that will come as a surprise to those who saw her startlingly intense Sonya in the Classic Stage Company's 2009 production of "Uncle Vanya." The supporting cast is without flaw, and William Ivey Long's luscious not-quite-period costumes and John Lee Beatty's minimalist set underline Mr. Ives's then-vs.-now conceit with consummate subtlety.

Though "The School for Lies" is not a "translation" of "The Misanthrope" in the ordinary sense of the word, Mr. Ives's crackling wordplay is not infrequently worthy of direct comparison to Richard Wilbur's famously lucid and elegant verse rendering of Molière's play. Moreover, the two versions contain enough parallel passages to make such comparisons both feasible and illuminating. Take, for instance, this familiar couplet:

Wilbur: "Esteem is founded on comparison: / To honor all men is to honor none."

Ives: "What's yours or mine or any friendship worth / If handed out to every fool on earth?"

Advantage, Mr. Ives.

Mr. Wilbur is, of course, a major poet who has brought off the astonishing feat of giving us an English translation of "The Misanthrope" that is at once stageworthy, faithful to the original and beautiful in its own right. But Mr. Ives is a major playwright with an uncanny knack for versification, and it seems more than likely that many regional companies that have heretofore shied away from the formidable demands of "The Misanthrope," even in so easily speakable a rendering as that of Mr. Wilbur, will now decide to take a shot at mounting Mr. Ives's streamlined version. If they do, they'll have a hit on their hands.

Well-meaning pedants may wonder why so gifted a verbal prestidigitator as Mr. Ives has resorted so often to imperfect rhymes, each one of which diminishes the hectic glitter of the play's verbal surface by a tiny but measurable increment. This is, however, a counsel of perfection, and unless you're being paid to notice such Sondheimian niceties, you'll be laughing so hard that you won't notice when Mr. Ives yokes "coyote" with "toadies" or "multiple" with "gullible."

A word to the wise: If you're sitting in the first two rows of the theater, watch out for flying canapés.

—Mr. Teachout, the Journal's drama critic, blogs about theater and the other arts at www.terryteachout.com. Write to him at tteachout@wsj.com.