 Toronto 

Making the kind of decision that reveals its full merit only in hindsight, Steve Fernandez and Steve Clarke chose to leave cushy jobs in the music business to, of all things, start a band. As one of the 2,000 acts in Austin, Texas, this week for the 25th annual South by Southwest Music Festival, Freedom or Death will discover how far it's progressed.

As a national marketing manager for Sony Music in Canada, Mr. Fernandez was responsible for promoting artists such as John Legend, Prince, Justin Timberlake and the Wu Tang Clan. He studied classical piano at the University of Toronto as a child and considered a career in medicine. Instead, he majored in television and radio at Ryerson University. An internship in Sony's Toronto office led to a full-time post.

Mr. Clarke, who performs as Sway, was in charge of Sony's street-level marketing. He reported to Mr. Fernandez and didn't much care for him. "I thought he was cocky," Mr. Clarke recalled.

Mr. Clarke grew up in public housing in Toronto. "My thing was I wanted to be a rapper, but my parents wanted me to finish school," he said. "I studied computer networks." An internship at a local rock and pop radio station kept him close to music, but not close enough. "It was all technical stuff. I sat in front of a computer from 2 a.m. to 6 a.m."

In 2006, Messrs. Fernandez and Clarke traveled to the CMJ Music Marathon in New York City to scout talent for Sony. They stayed at the posh Tribeca Grand Hotel, one of the many perks to which they'd become accustomed on the business side.

"You couldn't believe the free tickets and the CDs," Mr. Fernandez, 37, said. "My friends could see any concert they wanted."

"I was the coolest dude on the block," Mr. Clarke, 30, added. "I had a company vehicle, I was meeting artists. I was a rock star to my friends."

Listen to a clip from Freedom or Death's self-titled debut:

But in 2007, Mr. Fernandez visited Nepal. "I saw people with nothing who were ecstatic. I saw that I didn't need a six-figure salary to be ecstatic." Two years later, he left Sony. "I lost that love of music. It was an assignment. It lost its luster."

Mr. Clarke decided to depart, too. He went to Germany while Mr. Fernandez took a job in real estate. A year passed before they decided to work together again, this time as musicians. 

"When he said he wanted to make a record, I thought it was weird," said Mr. Clarke, who'd moved back to Ontario and started a band. "I was apprehensive. I didn't know if it was a fly-by-night decision."

Messrs. Fernandez and Clarke decided they'd be a self-contained unit, using Justin Vernon's Bon Iver solo studio project as a model. But the duo needed to bone up on their digital-recording capabilities. "I have an iMac," Mr. Fernandez said, "but I had no idea how to produce. I read up until my eyes were red. . . . In a few months, we were producing full orchestral pieces."

Freedom or Death's debut disc, a self-titled five-song EP, declared the group's burgeoning strengths—melody, an affinity for space in the arrangements, Mr. Clarke's voice, Mr. Fernandez's easy way with keyboards. But though the musicians brand themselves an electro-folk group, their second release included covers of songs by Jay-Z, Nas and others, introducing Mr. Clarke's rapping amid Mr. Fernandez's lush arrangements.

Some have criticized the group for lacking a signature sound. "That's the freedom or death part," Mr. Fernandez replied. "We picked that name for a reason. It's on our own terms. Who says things have to be genre-based?" He cited Gorillaz and LCD Soundsystem as bands that defy easy categorizing.

"We'll always push the music to be a little abnormal, to push our own relevance," Mr. Clarke said. Their next album, "Ego," which will be released in late April, updates 1970s Britpop and is another step in the group's evolution.

On stage, Freedom or Death is a quartet with Mr. Clarke out front, supported by Adam Doige, Ryan Mercier and Dan Miller. To keep focused on writing and producing, Mr. Fernandez doesn't perform with the group, but he'll be at SXSW along with their manager. To preserve their budget, all six men associated with Freedom or Death will share a single motel room. They'll fly in and out of Dallas, remaining until Monday to avoid a weekend surcharge; that will save them $2,000.

Mr. Fernandez said that given the changes in the music industry, having once been a part of the marketing machine at a major label no longer helps much. "We're trying to unlearn 90% of what we knew. Now it's not about sales or radio. It's about building a fan base. Check Facebook, check Twitter. Do we have new followers?" 

Said Mr. Clarke, "You've got to take more chances, because there's no formula."

"I have an 8-month-old son, a wife, a mortgage," said Mr. Fernandez. "Knowing what I know, I must be insane. Or completely rational in my belief in our music."

 Mr. Fusilli is the Journal's rock and pop music critic. Email him at jfusilli@wsj.com or follow him on Twitter: @wsjrock.  