It's getting easier to buy and sell mutual funds on the go, as fund companies and brokerages roll out smartphone applications.

Read the full  Investing in Funds report .

Emily Glazer explains how it's getting easier to buy and sell Mutual Funds and why the technology is finally available.

Vanguard Group and  Charles Schwab Corp.
SCHW


-0.24
%




 added fund trading to their iPhone apps in December, and both plan to offer similar apps for phones using  Google Inc.'s Android operating system by this summer. Previously, fund trades on mobile devices weren't an option for clients of either firm.

Last year, Fidelity Investments rolled out fund trading on an iPhone app in February and an Android app in December. Fidelity first offered mobile fund trading back in 1999 on its mobile website (www.fidelity.mobi). But apps make portable access easier, says  Jim Burton, president of Fidelity's brokerage-services unit. Indeed, while early mobile websites in general were criticized as being difficult to navigate, and many still are stripped-down versions of their counterparts on the World Wide Web, apps help companies enhance customers' mobile experience by giving them more tools.

Schwab's iPhone app, for example, in addition to letting users buy and sell mutual-fund shares, has a "relationship view" feature where customers can group all of their Schwab accounts and easily flip through them, says Diane Russell, Schwab's senior vice president of platform services.

Mobile services and apps grew rapidly in much of the financial world, but mutual funds were long left out of the mix because fund trading wasn't viewed as an on-the-go necessity. After all, orders are executed based on end-of-day price calculations of the per-share value of the fund's holdings.

By contrast, investors have had more options for on-the-go trading of exchange-traded funds, which change hands all day long at fluctuating prices, like individual stocks.

Some fund companies are also trying to enhance website features for their customers who use  Apple Inc.
AAPL


0.92
%




's iPad. Fidelity introduced an iPad app last August that includes trading. The home page features a world map that tracks key market performances around the globe. The app also incorporates tapping and swiping navigation capabilities.

Vanguard and Schwab plan to add iPad apps this year. These and other investment and fund companies say they will consider apps for additional tablet computers depending on how successful those tablets prove to be.

At least one fund-research company is putting more resources into apps, too. In December,  Morningstar Inc.
MORN


-0.23
%




 beefed up its mobile capabilities on iPhone, BlackBerry and Android applications (more than 260,000 have been downloaded) to help users track their portfolios, read market news and access analyst research.

The upgrades play a part in Morningstar's desire to keep up with its growing base of mobile clients. The company found the number of Morningstar pages people view on a mobile device per visit is comparable with, if not slightly greater than, the number of pages they view per visit on the regular Web, says  Kunal Kapoor, Morningstar's president of individual software.

While mobile is still a fraction of how financial firms communicate with clients, it is ballooning. Fidelity's mobile user base is in the hundreds of thousands and doubled in 2010; the use of all mobile platforms for securities trading grew 40% in 2010 from a year earlier.

"People like to stay in touch with their money," Fidelity's Mr. Burton says. "The rate of growth has been rapid."

Still, some mutual-fund firms aren't convinced that investors need or want to execute transactions while sitting at a coffee shop or waiting in line at the grocery store.

"People use mobile devices to fill up little vacuums in their life," says Chip Weldon, vice president of interactive strategies for  T. Rowe Price Group,
TROW


0.00
%




 which in September launched a mobile site that lets customers on the move check their accounts and read about funds—but not trade.

"Mutual-fund trading is not a standing-in-line activity," he says. "It takes a lot of concentration." For mobile customers, says Mr. Weldon, viewing accounts and researching funds are "much more logical" activities.

Ms. Glazer is a staff reporter  for The Wall Street Journal in  New York. Email her at   emily.glazer@wsj.com.