ISLAMABAD—A Saudi security official working at the Saudi Arabian consulate in Karachi was shot dead Monday by two armed men on a motorcycle, amid continued protests against the kingdom's regional policy and rising sectarian tensions.

Police officers in Karachi, a port city of 18 million people and Pakistan's financial capital, are working on the assumption the murder was likely carried out by a Shiite sectarian group angered by Saudi Arabia's decision to send troops to Bahrain earlier this year to put down largely Shiite-led antigovernment protests there.

"There is a certain resentment among the Shiite community. But we can't say yet it's the only motive," said Tariq Dharejo, a senior police officer in Clifton Town, an area of Karachi where many consulates are located. 

The security official, whom Mr. Dharejo named as Hasan al-Khattani, was shot as he drove himself to work. Attempts to reach Saudi officials in Pakistan were unsuccessful. 

The consulate was the target of an attack last week, when unidentified assailants threw stun grenades at the building. 

Shiite protesters have taken to the streets in Karachi in recent months to protest Saudi Arabia's decision to send troops to Bahrain, where a ruling Sunni monarchy has violently put down protests led by the country's Shiite majority. 

Shiites in Pakistan, who are a minority, also have been angered by Pakistan's decision to send police recruits this year to help Bahrain maintain order. Most of Bahrain's police force is made up of foreign Sunni mercenaries, many of them poor Pakistanis. 

Any escalation in sectarian violence in Pakistan would further destabilize a nation fighting a homegrown Taliban insurgency on its northwestern border with Afghanistan, riddled with support for extremism. The U.S. has raised questions about how al Qaeda founder Osama bin Laden, who was shot dead in a U.S. raid earlier this month, was able to live for years in a Pakistani garrison town.

Many of the anti-Shiite sectarian groups, such as Lashkar-e-Jhangvi, that have their roots in Pakistan's Punjab province, the nation's political heartland, have migrated to the northwest and teamed up with the Pakistan Taliban in recent years. The Pakistan Taliban claimed responsibility for a wave of attacks in 2010, many of them on religious processions in Karachi and Lahore, the capital of Punjab province. 

Shiite communities in Kurram, one of the seven semi-autonomous tribal regions along Pakistan's northwestern border with Afghanistan, say they too have come under increasing attack by Pakistan Taliban and its allies in the past year.

Karachi was the scene of violent clashes between radical Sunni Muslim groups, funded by Saudi Arabia, and Iranian-backed Shiite militants, in the 1980s and early 1990s. The violence ebbed but picked up recently. 

The extent of the two countries' meddling in Pakistan today is unclear. 

Shiite groups say Saudi Arabia continues to fund extremists who target them. Pakistan's mainstream media are filled with stories about Iranian support for Shiite groups. 

 Write to  Tom Wright at tom.wright@wsj.com 