ROCKVILLE, Md.—A review of U.S. nuclear safety found equipment that might be needed in an emergency wasn't in working condition at some plants, but regulators said the problems were fixed and didn't pose significant risks.

Emergency readiness at nuclear plants is drawing greater scrutiny after Japan's Fukushima Daiichi accident, where backup generators failed and reactors overheated.  Tokyo Electric Power Co.
9501


0.14
%




 said Thursday that fuel rods at one of the Fukushima reactors have likely more than half melted. 

The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission on Thursday released its first findings from its post-Fukushima safety review, and overall gave the 104 U.S. nuclear reactors a clean bill of health on safety and emergency planning.

Officials said the problems, identified at fewer than a third of the plants, involved equipment and procedures for major disasters such as an explosion or loss of power.

"None of the observations posed a significant safety issue," said commission official Marty Virgilio. "It's our understanding that whatever has been found has been corrected." 

Mr. Virgilio said inspectors identified some equipment that wouldn't start or hadn't been maintained. Fuel for cooling pumps "wasn't always readily available" and equipment was sometimes stored in areas where it could be affected by an earthquake or flood, said Eliot Brenner, a spokesman for the nuclear commission. 

In at least one case, "modifications that have been made to the plant had affected the ability to implement the strategies," Mr. Brenner said. "This is an indication that we need to go back and take a much broader look with an eye on putting these into the proper configuration." 

On Wednesday, the nuclear agency ordered U.S. plants to show they had the proper equipment and staff in place to execute emergency plans.

Rep. Ed Markey (D., Mass.) released a report Thursday challenging the readiness of backup power systems. It said diesel generators had been reported inoperable at least 69 times at 33 U.S. plants during the past eight years. Six of the failures lasted longer than a month, Mr. Markey's office said, citing regulatory documents. 

Emergency diesel generators can be used to power pumps that send cooling water to reactors, preventing the release of dangerous radiation. Plants generally have multiple backup generators so the failure of one wouldn't mean a total loss of backup power.

Asked about the Markey report, Mr. Brenner of the NRC said: "We are aware that emergency diesel generators occasionally will not start if you ask them to. That is no surprise."

Mr. Markey said his office's findings were evidence enough to delay pending licensing applications for nuclear plants in the U.S. Gregory Jaczko, chairman of the nuclear commission, has said the current schedule for applications doesn't need changing.

The commission's staff is in the midst of a 90-day review of nuclear safety after Fukushima, which the five commissioners will use to determine whether changes are needed. The next public briefing on the review is expected in mid-June.

 Write to  Ryan Tracy at ryan.tracy@dowjones.com 





