Deepening its already close ties with Russia,  BP PLC unveiled a share-swap agreement with OAO Rosneft, that will give the state-controlled Russian oil company a 5% stake in BP and allow the U.K. oil giant to jointly explore and explore and develop parts of the Russian Arctic. 

The accord represents one of BP's boldest corporate moves since the Gulf of Mexico oil spill, a disaster that nearly destroyed it. BP will get 9.5% of Rosneft's shares in the transaction and access to an oil-rich swath of Russia's South Kara Sea. 

The stakes being swapped are each valued at about $8 billion. The deal will make Rosneft BP's single largest shareholder. So far there has been no discussion about giving Rosneft representation on BP's board, CEO  Bob Dudley said in an interview.

The deal comes after months in which BP scrambled to raise enough funds to cover the costs of the Gulf spill, which it estimates at nearly $40 billion. Last year it announced it was selling up to $30 billion of assets to help pay for the disaster.

The deal will further entrench BP in Russia, where it already has a much larger presence than any other Western oil major, and it could potentially unlock access to some of Russia's vast reserves of oil and gas. Mr. Dudley said the agreement marks the "first time in the history of our industry" that there's been "a significant cross shareholding between a major international oil company and a major national oil company."

Rosneft and BP will jointly explore three blocks in the South Kara Sea, in the Russian arctic. The companies said they will spend $1.4 billion to $2 billion on seismic tests and drilling wells in the initial exploration phase.

In explaining the logic of the share swap, Mr. Dudley said both companies believe they are undervalued, and now their interests are aligned to increase the value of both companies' shares.

"From our point of view this agreement is key, even historic," said Igor Sechin, Russia's deputy prime minister, speaking after the signing of the agreement. Analysts estimate that the South Kara Sea contains some of the largest untapped oil and natural gas reserves in the world.

"Ultimately international oil companies have to go where the oil and gas is," said  Jason Kenney, an oil analyst at ING Bank. "Russia is resource-rich, with a need for technology and logistical capabilities to extract that resource efficiently. BP knows Russia better than most."

In an interview, Mr. Dudley said discussions with Rosneft on joint exploration of the arctic had been going on since 2005. 

He said that the idea of a share swap was first raised at a meeting in Moscow last fall between him, the head of Rosneft, Eduard Khudainatov, and Mr. Sechin. He said the idea was initially proposed by Mr. Sechin. 

For Rosneft the deal would also be positive. Russian Prime Minister  Vladimir Putin has sought to expand the reach of Russian oil companies internationally, a project that has scored few successes in recent years.

Previous attempts to create strategic partnerships between Russian state energy companies and Western oil majors have failed. BP and Gazprom signed a global joint venture in 2007 in which each side planned to contribute assets valued at $1.5 billion, but it came to nothing.

TNK-BP, BP's 50-50 joint venture with a group of Russian billionaire businessmen, has also had a troubled history. The company, which accounts for a quarter of the British oil giant's global production and nearly a fifth of its reserves, was rocked by a shareholder dispute in 2008 that cost BP some of its control over the company. Mr. Dudley, who was then chief executive of TNK-BP, was forced to flee Russia after authorities there refused to renew his visa. He took over the role of BP CEO from  Tony Hayward last October, in the aftermath of the Gulf spill.

BP's relationship with Rosneft goes back to 2006, when it purchased $1 billion of shares in the Russian oil company's initial public offering, equivalent to a stake of 1.25%. The Rosneft IPO was controversial at the time because the company was in possession of significant assets appropriated during the Russian government's breakup of Yukos, once Russia's biggest oil concern. 

Former Yukos shareholders contested the legality of the IPO, and BP's involvement lent the offering considerable credibility.Last year BP struck a complex deal to effectively borrow against its stake in Rosneft when it was scrambling for funds to pay for the Gulf spill.

BP and Rosneft explored for oil and gas together near Sakhalin Island in Russia's far east, but with little success. The companies have relinquished two oil exploration licenses in the area after failing to make commercial hydrocarbon discoveries, but they still have a third license. 

For Rosneft, an agreement could be an opportunity to pick up BP's shares while they are still depressed following the Deepwater Horizon disaster. Many analysts believe that the ultimate liabilities BP faces will not be as great as earlier feared.

Though they have recovered much of the sharp decline they suffered as the spill crisis grew last spring, BP shares are still nearly 25% below where they were when the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig blew up last April. 

BP will issues new shares to execute the deal. The two companies agreed to hold each other's equity for at least 2 years prior to any stock sales.

In London BP shares fell 4.20 pence, or less than 1%, to 499.5 pence Friday. Its American Depositary Receipts rose $1.71, or 3.6%, to $49.25 at 4 p.m. on the New York Stock Exchange.

—Dana Cimilluca  and James Herron  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Guy Chazan at guy.chazan@wsj.com 