WASHINGTON—Senators will weigh legislation to create a scaled-down version of the Build America Bonds program as a way to encourage public-private partnerships for highways, ports and other infrastructure projects. 

Sen. Ron Wyden (D., Ore.) plans to introduce legislation that would create a Build America Bond-like program, but would limit overall issuance to $50 billion and restrict proceeds from the bond sales to transportation and infrastructure. 

The five-year program, which would be called Transportation and Regional Infrastructure Projects, or TRIPs, is expected to have bipartisan support, according to Jennifer Hoelzer, Mr. Wyden's deputy chief of staff. 

Build America Bonds were created in the 2009 stimulus law and allowed states to receive a subsidy payment equal to 35% of the interest costs of their bonds. 

The program, which had no annual caps, expired at the end of 2010 after states and municipalities sold about $186 billion of the bonds, far more than the federal government originally expected. 

Republicans objected to renewing Build America Bonds at the end of last year, partly out of concern that the program encouraged the federal government to subsidize projects primarily in New York and California that would not have otherwise been financed. 

To counter those concerns, Mr. Wyden's TRIPs bill would create a Transportation Funding Corp. to allocate the $50 billion TRIPs cap among the states, with at least 1%, or $500 million, allocated to each state. 

"This isn't a big new bureaucracy, just an independent authority that will make sure that each state gets a portion of the funding and that states aren't using the funds for non-transportation budget items," Ms. Hoelzer said. 

Rather than carry a fixed subsidy rate, the TRIPs subsidy rate would be based on a daily index maintained by the Treasury Department. The subsidy also would flow to the investor, not the issuer or borrower. 

At a hearing earlier this month, Mr. Wyden said he was working with Sen. John Thune (R., S.D.) on the proposal. A spokesman for Mr. Thune didn't respond to requests for comment. 

Mr. Wyden's proposal would come just after fellow Democrat Sen. John Kerry of Massachusetts introduced a bill Tuesday to create a $10 billion infrastructure bank. The bank proposal has the support of Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison (R., Texas) and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. 

Both Mr. Wyden's bill and the infrastructure bank bill are expected to face an uphill political battle. However, Mr. Wyden's idea to renew Build America Bonds with what are known as taxable tax credits appears to reflect the general direction of federal policymakers. 

For instance, the Congressional Budget Office released a report this week that said the federal government could save up to $143 billion over 10 years by killing the tax-exempt municipal market and switching to a market in which states and municipalities sold taxable bonds but received a federal tax credit or subsidy equal to 15% of their issuance costs. Such tax credits are believed to be more efficient subsidies. 

In the House Rep. John Mica (R., Fla.), chairman of the Transportation Committee, has said he would like to renew Build America Bonds for transportation projects. A spokesman declined to comment on Mr. Wyden's bill, saying only that the committee "will be examining various proposals for financing infrastructure projects in the coming months in order to develop a major fiscally responsible transportation reauthorization."

House Democrats have introduced at least two bills that would renew Build America Bonds, including Rep. Sander Levin of Michigan, the ranking member of the Ways and Means Committee. In a statement this week, Mr. Levin said renewing the program would ultimately save the federal government money, create jobs and bring new investors to the municipal-bond market. 