After running into heavy community opposition, New York University unveiled a modified expansion plan for its Greenwich Village campus on Wednesday.

The school wants to construct four high-rises on two large blocks that are bounded by West Houston and Washington Square Village and by LaGuardia Place and Mercer Street. NYU also wants to develop three acres of green space on the site.

NYU's original plan called for acquiring seven strips of city land. Now it only wants four of them. In November, the university scrapped plans for a 38-story building that had run into heavy community opposition. Now it's planning on constructing more modest buildings spread throughout the two blocks.

"We've really came up with a new plan that we think will be pretty attractive to the community," said  Alicia Hurley, vice president of government affairs and community engagement for NYU. 

NYU intends to grow its campus by six million square feet by 2031 in Greenwich Village and in other parts of the city like Brooklyn and Governors Island. The additional space will add a mix of academic buildings, housing and other buildings for student services. 

It's not clear whether the new NYU plan will win over critics. "NYU is seeking to re-arrange the deck chairs on the Titanic," said  Andrew Berman, executive director of the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation. He said the high-rise building contemplated by NYU would make more sense among the towering edifices of the Financial District, not in the low-rise village.

  Andrew Brent, a spokesman for Mayor  Michael Bloomberg, said the city is discussing selling some land to NYU to provide access to open spaces. But he said that "it's still very early in the process."

NYU said it would begin the city's land-use process for its new plans. If approved, NYU said it could start construction in as little as three years. 

The university wants to replace its gymnasium with an 800,000-square-foot mixed-use building dubbed the "Zipper Building" because of its zigzag shape. It will include faculty and student housing and a 275-foot hotel. 

On that same block, NYU plans to replace the existing Morton Williams supermarket with a 14-story structure that will include a public school and dormitories. The grocery store will be moved into the Zipper Building. 

On the northern block, the school intends to build two boomerang-shaped buildings, one 14 stories high and the other eight stories, for classrooms or administrative space. Within that block, the school plans to add a new public open space to be called "Philosophy Garden." 

Opposition to NYU's plans for the neighborhood has been fierce. The university spiked plans for a 38-story story after neighbors and architect  I.M. Pei, who designed three nearby towers, objected. 

Instead, its 275-foot hotel will be the same height as Mr. Pei's towers. "We understand that height was an important factor for our neighbors," said  Lori Pavese Mazor, associate vice president for global facilities, planning and policy at the school. 

Neighborhood dog owners were also angered over the schools proposal to move a dog park at Mercer and West Houston streets to another spot near the Zipper Building. 

NYU officials say that perceptions about the university's expansion plan may change once more people understand what the school will be doing to improve open space in the area.

"I'm not sure that in December that our plans were clear on our intentions for the open space," Ms. Hurley said.

 "I think we were showing buildings and a new light garden at the time. So now everybody will have a chance to review the updated plans and decide whether or not we did a good job."

 Write to  Joseph De Avila at joseph.deavila@wsj.com 