 New York 

With the glass ceiling in museums long a thing of the past, it is extraordinary that Sonia Delaunay (1885-1979) has never received a proper retrospective at an institution of the stature of the Guggenheim or the Museum of Modern Art. Throughout her long, prolific life Delaunay produced hundreds of masterly easel paintings and gouaches. Yet she also designed revolutionary murals, theater sets, costumes, books, fabrics, rugs, posters, ceramics, clothing, furnishings, playing cards, typography, stained glass, neon-light sculptures and even the abstract color schemes of automobiles. A thorough evaluation of her career and invaluable contributions to art and design is long overdue.



Yet the last U.S. retrospective of her work, which focused on her paintings, was back in 1980, originating at the Albright-Knox Art Gallery in Buffalo, N.Y., and traveling to the Grey Art Gallery here. That neglect is just one reason why the gorgeous "Color Moves: Art & Fashion by Sonia Delaunay," at the Cooper-Hewitt National Design Museum is such cause for celebration.

Born Sarah Stern in Russian Ukraine near Odessa into a poor Jewish family, she was adopted by her wealthy and bourgeois St. Petersburg uncle when she was 5. She took his name, Terk, studied art in Germany, moved to Paris in 1905 and, in 1910, married the abstract painter and theorist Robert Delaunay (1885-1941). When her family's fortune was seized in 1917 during the Russian Revolution, Sonia Delaunay took up design full-time to support her family. Eventually she had successive fashion houses in Madrid and Paris, and she designed extensively for the Dutch department store Metz & Co.

Organized by Matilda McQuaid, the Cooper-Hewitt's deputy curatorial director, and assistant curator Susan Brown, this exhibition offers a lively array of more than 300 works of Ms. Delaunay's garments, accessories, gouache studies for fabric designs, fabric samples and photographs from the 1920s through the '40s. (It also includes notable furnishings and examples of graphic design by some of her European contemporaries.)

Most of Delaunay's designs are abstract. (In the 1910s she and Robert invented Modernist French Abstraction, what they called "Simultaneity.") But in her textiles she veers between a vocabulary of pure abstraction and organic forms, such as fruit, flowers, raindrops and leaves. Yet even at their most representational, her forms are felt first as rhythm and color—their identities as "things" are forever playing catch-up. And those forms sometimes take on multiple identities simultaneously, as if they are changing from petals to teardrops to feathers to tongues right before our eyes. Uncannily, Delaunay's patterns, whether stripes, spirals or flowers, rarely feel "designed" and then "applied"; rather, they are experienced as energies, as families of forms relating to one another—actively living and working out their fates within the fabric.

But long before Delaunay was a flourishing designer, she had already created the first purely abstract, Modernist works of textile and graphic design, including a baby blanket (1911) and the cover and book for Blaise Cendrars's epic poem "La Prose du Transsibérien et de la petite Jehanne de France" (1913), the latter on view at the Cooper-Hewitt. A monumental and innovative achievement, Delaunay's 6½-foot illuminated folding-scroll book design, utilizing abstract forms and numerous typefaces in several sizes and colors, "translates" Cendrars's poem into painting, or pure color movements.

Delaunay, who referred to color as "the skin of the world," saw the whole world as her canvas. Her abstract easel painting and design work flowed one out of the other. As a fashion designer (she and Robert, along with clients such as Gloria Swanson, wore her creations), she saw the body not merely as an armature for pattern, but as a set of rhythmic sculptural volumes—forms in motion. Breasts, shoulders, legs, waist, knees, front and back were all treated as dynamic shaped canvases. Moving bodies activate Delaunay's discs and polka dots like jugglers' balls and trigger her zigzagging color like lightning. At times she treats the head as the center of a target, at other times as an abstract fruit beautifully arranged on the "platter" of the shoulders. In her beachwear, Delaunay sometimes repeats the same patterns across bathing suit, jacket, purse and umbrella, creating overlapping and interweaving interactions. And in a one-piece woman's bathing suit from 1928, color dives into and breaks across the body like waves. 

In her oil paintings (only one of which is included here), Delaunay worked almost exclusively with flat primary colors and simple geometric shapes, contrasting movement with countermovement. These extremely economical, brightly colored paintings can look deceptively naive, almost childlike. But she was a brilliant and poetic painter. Her vibrant and ebullient combinations of precisely measured color, like instrumental music, are felt as pure emotion.

For those of us who love Delaunay's work—the easel painting and designs—"Color Moves" may not be the show we wished for. Like the 1980 painting survey, this exhibition—which features designs from only two of her eight prolific decades—presents barely half the story. But that makes it no less a visual tour de force. Hopefully it will inspire a major museum to give Delaunay the full retrospective she deserves.

 Mr. Esplund writes about art for the Journal. 