 Officials in Afghan President Hamid Karzai's administration, in the wake of Osama bin Laden's killing in Pakistan, are urging the U.S. to strengthen its commitment to Afghanistan and get tougher with Pakistan. 

The U.S. and Afghanistan have begun negotiations into a long-term strategic partnership that will shape their relations beyond 2014, when the bulk of U.S.-led coalition troops are set to leave the country.

 Pakistan's prime minister, Yousuf Raza Gilani, sought to assuage spreading anger at home over the U.S. raid that killed bin Laden in a defiant speech to parliament, rejecting accusations that Pakistanis shielded the al Qaeda leader and suggesting the terror network was created by the U.S. 



The world's largest economies are set to grow at different speeds, with the U.S., Germany and Russia performing strongly, while Italy, Brazil and India will experience slower growth than they are used to, according to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development's composite leading indicator.



 A cut to Greece's credit rating pushed down the euro and the bonds of indebted countries on Europe's periphery, as it heightened perceptions that the region's debt crisis is coming to a boil once more.  

Standard & Poor'scut the Greek government's long-term credit rating to B from BB-minus, thereby ranking Greece as less creditworthy than several third-world countries. S&P said the risk is rising that Greece will push its bondholders to accept a delay in the repayment of its bonds. 



 The European Union will take steps Tuesday to eliminate trade concessions for wealthy emerging economies, part of a shift in global trade terms as the EU and U.S. adapt to the rise of Russia, Brazil and other new export powers. 

Karel De Gucht, the EU's trade commissioner, is proposing new rules that would roughly cut in half the list of countries that receive special trade concessions for developing countries. 



The sharp fall in global commodity markets was a "healthy" development for the world economy, European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet said, summarizing a discussion with his peers from around the world.



U.K. retail sales rose at their strongest pace in five years in April as the combination of Easter, the royal wedding and warm weather provided retailers with a boost following a month of dire sales in March.

The survey followed news that U.K. house prices experienced their largest annual fall since October 2009 in April, while a survey from the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors also recorded an increase in sellers.



German exports shot to a record-high in March, the Federal Statistical Office said, recording a second consecutive month of gains and signaling continued strength in the country's economy.

Exports rose by 7.3% monthly to €98.3 billion ($141.1 billion) in March, according to calendar- and seasonally-adjusted data, its highest level since the office began tracking such trade data in 1950. 



 A boat carrying more than 600 migrants capsized off the coast of Libya on Friday and many of the passengers are believed to have drowned, the United Nations said, marking what might be the deadliest chapter yet in an escalating immigration crisis. 

Migrants arriving at the tiny Italian island of Lampedusa, just off the coast of Tunisia, over the weekend told staff of the U.N. refugee agency that they witnessed a boat brimming with hundreds of migrants—who were predominantly Congolese, Eritrean, Nigerian, Ivory Coast and Somali nationals—sink near the port of Tripoli, said a spokeswoman for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

 The U.S. and China squared off on the issue of human rights at the beginning of a key conference bringing together the top American and Chinese officials overseeing trade, foreign policy and defense. 

The third round of the Strategic and Economic Dialogue between the Obama administration and China is particularly important, said U.S. officials, due to the participation for the first time of senior members of Beijing's military.



 The Obama administration announced $2 billion in grants to build and improve intercity passenger-rail service, including projects in the Northeast, Midwest and California. The money was freed up when Florida's governor canceled a fast-train project earlier this year.  



Heavy strains on the Mississippi River flood-control system and concerns that floods are getting more frequent and damaging are sparking a re-examination, with some experts and some states saying that trying to control the river won't do the job.



China banned an outspoken writer and government critic from leaving the country to attend a literary festival in Australia, and warned him not to publish any of his controversial works overseas, event organizers said. 

Liao Yiwu, who the Chinese government has repeatedly barred from traveling abroad, was told he could not attend the Sydney event for security reasons, said the Sydney Writers' Festival's artistic director. 

 Chubu Electric Power gave in to Japanese government pressure and agreed to temporarily shut down the nuclear reactors at its Hamaoka power plant in central Japan over earthquake safety concerns, a move that could worsen an expected electricity shortage. 

The decision means its two operating reactors will go into a planned shutdown at a date not yet set, while a third reactor won't be brought back online from its current scheduled maintenance period. 

The reactors won't be restarted until additional safety measures against massive earthquakes and tsunami are in place, which the company estimates could take two or more years.

Meanwhile, at the Fukushima Daiichi plant, where the crisis began, workers and a nuclear inspector entered the No. 1 reactor building early Monday, the first onsite inspection of the worst-affected unit. 

Tokyo Electric Power, the operator of the plant, estimates that 55% of its fuel rods were likely damaged from severe overheating in the early days of the crisis, when pumps couldn't provide coolant due to a lack of power.



Government of Singapore Investment Corp. Deputy Chairman Tony Tan said a major financial and economic crisis could erupt if the U.S. loses its AAA credit rating in a disorderly manner while significant structural problems still plague the global economy. 



 The Thai government set national elections for July 3 after securing royal approval to dissolve Parliament on Tuesday, paving the way for what is expected to be a fiercely contested campaign. 



 Two rival Palestinian factions prepared to hash out the details of a unity pact, as a debate over who will be prime minister and the release of prisoners loomed as the most sensitive issues. 



 Switzerland's federal prosecutor opened a criminal investigation into alleged money laundering by the regime of former Ivory Coast President Laurent Gbagbo, the first such move against any of the recently deposed Middle Eastern and African leaders.  

Meanwhile, a Swiss lawyer raised allegations that Gbagbo diverted the proceeds of the sale of a luxury Swiss villa that belonged to the Ivory Coast state.



The South Pacific island nation of Samoa plans to jump forward in time by one day by shifting west of the international dateline in a bid to boost its trade and economy with regional partners Australia and New Zealand, 119 years after it went the other way.