WASHINGTON—The U.S. military would have to launch pre-emptive strikes to destroy Libya's air defenses should President Barack Obama order imposition of a no-fly zone over the North African country, Defense Secretary Robert Gates said Wednesday.

Testifying before Congress, Mr. Gates criticized "loose talk" about military intervention in Libya, where military rebels and civilian demonstrators are trying to topple the country's strongman leader, Col. Moammar Gadhafi.

"Let's just call a spade a spade," Mr. Gates said. "A no-fly zone begins with an attack on Libya."

Mr. Gates noted that last weekend's United Nations Security Council resolution imposing sanctions on Libya hasn't authorized the use of force. Such authorization would presumably be necessary before the U.S. attacked Libya's air defenses, and Security Council member Russia has already voiced opposition to imposing a no-fly zone.

There has also been resistance within NATO, where some officials have worried about the danger, cost and effectiveness of establishing a no-fly zone, concerns that echo Mr. Gates's.

Some analysts have suggested Libyan air defenses may not be particularly robust. But Adm.  Michael Mullen, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said if the U.S. were to try to establish a no-fly zone, the military would have to assume Libyan defenses pose a serious threat.

"You have to assume they are very capable until proven otherwise," Adm. Mullen said. 

Mr. Gates' comments echoed remarks on Tuesday by Marine Gen.  James Mattis, the commander of U.S. forces in the Middle East.

"My military opinion is, sir, it would be challenging," Gen. Mattis said at a Senate hearing. "You would have to remove the air-defense capability in order to establish the no-fly zone so it—no illusions here—it would be a military operation. It wouldn't simply be telling people not to fly airplanes."

Libyan rebels and dissidents have called on the U.S. to use military pressure to push Col. Gadhafi from power.

A no-fly zone wouldn't necessarily prevent the Libyan military from attacking the rebels or protestors. It would prevent the country's air force from attacking rebel positions or protestors.

Adm. Mullen noted that the U.S. has so far been unable to confirm reports that Libyan aircraft have fired on protesters or the rebel army.

