Chelsea began luring artists to the neighborhood during the 1990s, and has since become one of the centers of New York's art world. On the west side of the neighborhood, dozens of galleries have sprung up in converted warehouses and new buildings. In the process, it has become one of the most desirable and expensive places to live in the city. 

In 1999, the neighborhood was rezoned to allow for more residential housing and was rezoned again in 2005 to allow for the redevelopment of the High Line, the old elevated-rail structure that is now a pedestrian walkway running through the neighborhood's west side. 

The rezonings paved the way for Chelsea's condo boom during the last decade. Chelsea's popularity also has drawn major corporations.  Google Inc.'s New York headquarters is in the neighborhood as well as the IAC building designed by  Frank Gehry. 

Of the 517 residences currently listed on real-estate site StreetEasy.com, the median asking price is $1.15 million. The median square price per foot is $1,102. In Greenwich Village, the median price per foot is $1,049 and in SoHo it is $1,346, according to StreetEasy.

Among the new condo towers erected in the neighborhood is the Onyx Chelsea, an 11-story building with 52 units at 28th Street and Eighth Avenue. Bronfman Haymes Real Estate Partners built the project in 2006. It has a 24-hour doorman, two rooftop terraces, a bike room and a gym. 

There is also private storage and onsite parking. The Onyx is mostly full, but there is an available three-bedroom, 2½-bathroom on the market for $1.895 million.

There are also a fair amount of new rentals in the neighborhood. One unique building is the Beatrice, a 54-story glass tower at 29th Street and Sixth Avenue. The bottom half of the building is occupied by the new Eventi Hotel and there are 301 rentals that start at the 26th floor. About 85% of the rentals are currently leased, said  Evan Stein, president of J.D. Carlisle Development Corp., the developer of the project. Studios start at about $3,500 a month and the penthouse units, available this April, will be priced at $20,000.

Despite the influx of new condo towers in the neighborhood, Chelsea still has a sizable historic district with many pre-war co-ops and brownstones. On West 23rd Street there is a duplex in a five-story brownstone that is on the market for $1.85 million. The prewar building was previously a townhouse and was converted into condos in 2007. The duplex has a garden, a solarium and a pre-wired speaker system. 

London Terrace, built in the early 1930s by real-estate mogul  Henry Mandel, is one the city's largest apartment buildings with more than 1,600 units made up of both rentals and co-ops. The red-brick complex occupies a whole city block. A one-bedroom apartment measuring 850 square feet is for sale at $800,000, said Ari J. LeFauve of the Real Estate Group New York. 

 Schools: Chelsea's schools are in District 2. It includes Landmark High School, Liberty High School Academy for Newcomers and James Baldwin School, a high school. There is also the New York City Lab Middle School for Collaborative Studies, the William T. Harris Elementary School and Chelsea Prep, an elementary school. 

In 2009, 92.6% of District 2 students in grades three through eight received a proficient score on the math exam, and 85.8% of students received a proficient score on the English Language Arts exam. In 2006, the results were 78.5% for math and 73.8% for reading.

Private schools in the neighborhood include Corlears School, a nursery and primary school; New York Hebrew, an after-school program; and Kids Korner Preschool. 

 Parks: The High Line opened as an elevated park running from the Meatpacking District to Chelsea in 2009. It includes viewing platforms, a sun deck, art exhibitions and educational programs. On the elevated park there are planted gardens with more than 200 plant species.

Also in the neighborhood is Chelsea Park. The park, measuring about four acres, was acquired by the city's Department of Parks and Recreation more than 100 years ago. It has basketball courts, baseball diamonds, handball courts and a multipurpose asphalt surfaces. There is also access to the Manhattan Waterfront Greenway, a 32-mile route for bikers, Rollerbladers and pedestrians. 

 Entertainment: West Chelsea is home to dozens of art galleries including the Icosahedron Gallery, the Gagosian Gallery and the Jonathan LeVine Gallery. Also in the neighborhood is the Upright Citizens Brigade Theatre, an improv comedy and sketch group. Chelsea Piers features a bowling alley, golfing facilities, an ice rink, a health club and a spa. 

 Shopping: Chelsea Market has several retail and food options including Posman Books, Chelsea Wine Vault and the Manhattan Fruit Exchange, which sells produce. There are high-end department stores like Barneys Co-op and vintage shops like Housing Works Thrift Shop. The neighborhood also has an Apple Store. 

 Dining: Chelsea is home to several upscale restaurants such as Del Posto, serving Italian cuisine, and Buddakan, which serves modern Asian cuisine. Also in the area is Morimoto, the Japanese restaurant of "Iron Chef" star  Masaharu Morimoto. Cafeteria is famous for its varieties of macaroni and cheese and Tía Pol serves Spanish tapas. Have a glass of wine next to the fireplace at the Drunken Horse. 

 Write to  Joseph De Avila at joseph.deavila@wsj.com 