The battles roiling state capitals are being largely ignored by the municipal-bond market, which has been coasting through a period of relative calm.

The stability of the market for bonds issued by state and local governments is in contrast to late last year, when a selloff spooked investors and led to tens of billions of dollars of redemptions from municipal-bond funds. 

That selloff, one of the biggest in decades, appears in retrospect to have been driven at least in part by little-noticed factors not directly connected to the financial condition of government borrowers—including a downgrade on a November day that the bond market was closed. 



Over the past month, municipal-bond yields, which move opposite to prices, have been inching down. And panic appears to have subsided, with investors withdrawing a fraction of the amount from municipal-bonds funds that they took out at the start of the year.

Questions remain about whether the newfound stability will stick or whether it is a temporary response to so-called technical factors, such as a low supply of new bonds coming to market. 

"We are still in this fragile environment," said  James Ahn, a muni portfolio manager at J.P. Morgan Chase & Co.'s asset-management unit. 

The selloff last fall brought the issue of government finances into focus, and credit-worthiness continues to worry investors. 

But, early on, other factors including the ratings-firm downgrade and forced selling by funds, fueled the downdraft more than concerns about whether states like Illinois and California would pay their debts, fund managers say.

Some market players point to Veterans Day last year, when the bond market was closed, as a key juncture.

That day, ratings firm Standard & Poor's downgraded a large number of obscure municipal bonds known as "tobacco bonds" to "junk" status. Tobacco bonds have been sold by states and backed by payments from tobacco companies that flow from legal settlements in the late 1990s. 

When the market reopened on Nov. 12 and in the days that followed, investors began dumping their tobacco holdings at steep discounts, lowering prices across all types of municipal bonds and fueling a cycle of selling and redemptions by mutual-fund investors.

The downgrade was "the defining moment" of the three-month decline in municipal bond prices, said Municipal Market Advisors, a Concord, Mass. research firm, in a January report.

Though the bond market was closed for Veterans Day, exchange-traded funds—stock-like funds, the shares of some of which are tied to municipal bond prices—were trading on the New York Stock Exchange on Nov. 11. Some ETF prices, already trending down before the downgrade, declined sharply, yet the underlying bonds couldn't react.

  John Miller, a municipal-bond portfolio manager at Nuveen Asset Management, was in his Chicago office that day. "It was a one-way trade," said Mr. Miller of the ETF price declines. "It created the exaggerated impression that the municipal market was going down hard that day."

In a statement, an S&P spokesman said the firm had signaled in August that the tobacco bonds could face a near-term downgrade. The firm also pointed out that "while November 11, 2010, was Veterans Day in the U.S., S&P was open for business in the U.S. and around the world."

The downgrade came after the municipal-bond market had already weakened considerably. After hitting a 30-year low in August, municipal-bond yields began rising gradually in September and October.

The Republican takeover of the House of Representatives in the first week of November signaled that additional federal support for fiscally troubled state and local government was less likely.

Other issues weighing on the market included the year-end expiration of the Build America Bonds program, which led to a flood of new supply into the market before the federal subsidy ended. Treasury rates, which municipal bonds tend to track, also were rising.

Also, the Veterans Day downgrade came as inflows from individual investors into municipal-bond mutual funds had slowed to a trickle. In the first week of November, inflows were just $192,000 down from $432 million the previous week.

"We were due for a correction," says  Jim Colby, a senior portfolio manager at Van Eck Global, who oversees about $600 million in municipal bond ETFs. "It was either going to happen gradually or quickly. The downgrade was the flashpoint."

One early tobacco trade following the downgrade was a multimillion dollar slice of Ohio's approximately $5 billion "Buckeye" tobacco bond. The yield increased nearly 1.00 percentage point, traders say. Other state tobacco bonds were selling at steep discounts.

Portfolio managers say some of the biggest sellers were so-called high-yield muni-bond funds, which specialize in risky municipal debt and have large tobacco-bond holdings.

Other big sellers included plain-vanilla mutual funds that were forced to jettison tobacco bonds that had been downgraded to junk because the funds were forbidden in their offering documents from owning noninvestment-grade debt.

Within a week of the downgrade, the net asset value of some large municipal-bond mutual funds with big tobacco holdings dropped 6%, huge moves in the municipal-bond market.

When many individual investors saw these declines, they began pulling money out of mutual funds, fund manager say. That forced funds to sell high-quality assets to meet redemptions. In the week ended Nov. 17, investors had withdrawn an unprecedented $3 billion from muni-bond mutual funds.

"This was the most frenzied period I have ever experienced," says Mr. Miller, an 18-year investment veteran, who estimated his daily trades that week were four times their usual level.

Wall Street dealers, which act as intermediaries between the mutual funds, were requiring higher yields in order to buy the high-quality bonds, traders say.

"The dealers were bidding you cheap," says  Thomas Doe, CEO of Municipal Market Advisers. "They know you need capital."

More than a month after the tobacco downgrade, in late December, independent analyst  Meredith Whitney made her controversial prediction that there would be 50 to 100 sizable defaults, "totaling hundreds of billions of dollars."

The market continued to fall through early January, as credit concerns intensified.

But since late January, the market appears to be stabilizing. Yields on a benchmark 30-year general obligation bond have fallen 7%—only part of the way toward erasing the 22% rise between Veterans Day and Jan. 14.

A few individual investors have been willing to test the waters.  Rick Tronvig, 63 years old, who lives outside of Denver, hasn't owned municipal bonds for many years but recently upped his holdings to 6% of his portfolio. "It got cheap enough that it discounts the risks of default," he says.

 Write to  Michael Corkery at michael.corkery@wsj.com 