Archer Daniels Midland's fiscal third-quarter earnings rose 37% to $578 million as the grain-processing giant reported strong growth at its oilseeds- and corn-processing businesses. 



 General Motors, Ford, Chrysler and Hyundai reported strong April sales of passenger cars in the U.S. as buyers shifted to more fuel efficient vehicles. 



Volkswagen said the heavy-truck and bus segment is a "highly attractive strategic business area" and reiterated its desire to become the world's leading automotive company.

The German auto maker also confirmed that talks over a tie-up between its Swedish Scania brand and MAN still are ongoing.



Saab Automobile said it reached an agreement with Chinese auto maker Hawtai Motor Group for medium-term funding, a lifeline that secures its immediate future and could enable the ailing Swedish car maker to restart production as soon as next week.



General Motors plans to spend around $100 million to upgrade its Corvette factory in Kentucky, people familiar with the situation said, the latest sign that its penny-pinching days are behind it. 



 French air-crash investigators said they found and retrieved the cockpit voice recorder from an Air France jetliner that crashed in the Atlantic Ocean almost two years ago, less than two days after searchers found the plane's flight data recorder.  



Korean Air Lines posted a 50% year-on-year jump in first-quarter net profit under new accounting standards to 282.1 billion South Korean won ($264.6 million), as a stronger won helped reduce borrowing costs and offset the effects of pricier oil.

It will also invest 1.685 trillion won ($1.6 billion) to purchase seven passenger jets—two B777-300ERs from Boeing and five A330-200s from Airbus—by September 2015. 



 U.S. authorities sued Deutsche Bank and a mortgage subsidiary for allegedly lying repeatedly about the quality of mortgages to be included in a government insurance program, so that they could profit from the resale of those mortgages. 



 Banks in emerging markets report strong and growing demand for loans from consumers and businesses, a sharp contrast with weaker demand in developed countries, a first-of-its-kind survey found.  



The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries should produce more crude oil—even of the sour, heavy quality—because refineries would use it at a lower price, the executive director of the International Energy Agency said.



 BP agreed to pay a $25 million fine and beef up its Alaska pipeline network as part of a settlement with the U.S. government over two major oil spills in 2006, according to court documents.  



World-wide sales of luxury goods are expected to rise 8% to €185 billion ($274.4 billion) in 2011, fueled by double-digit growth in China and a resurgence in the more mature markets of the U.S. and Europe, according to a new study from Bain & Co. 



 Hermès International sold its 45% stake in fashion label Jean-Paul Gaultier to Spain's Grupo Puig for €16 million ($23.7 million). Designer Jean-Paul Gaultier, who owns 55% of the fashion house he founded in 1976, will reportedly reduce his stake by 10%,relinquishing the majority control of the business to Puig.  



 After more than six decades in fashion, 88-year-old designer Pierre Cardin is hanging the "for sale" sign in his shop window, though the price he wants—€1 billion, or $1.48 billion—is a stretch, industry watchers say. 



 An arbitration panel in April ordered a unit of AIG to pay $86.7 million to a U.S.-based subsidiary of a Belgian bank. The payout was tied to a dispute over insurance on loans that were made to an investor who purchased older people's life-insurance policies.  



MasterCard's first-quarter profit rose 24% to $562 million, topping analysts' expectations, and revenue also beat views. Revenue jumped 15% to $1.5 billion.



 Man Group said it raised $1.5 billion from Japanese investors in about a month for a new fund, in an encouraging sign for analysts who have been concerned about how the recent choppy performance of the fund's flagship futures strategy might hit sales of products tied to it.  



Hannover Re, one of the five largest reinsurers worldwide, said first-quarter net profit fell to €52.3 million ($77.6 million) from €151 million a year earlier, hit by high claims costs from natural catastrophes and prompting it to lower its full-year earnings target. 



Fresh Del Monte Produce's first-quarter earnings rose 52% to $55.2 million, as it benefited from higher banana prices amid production shortages.



 Nasdaq OMX Group and IntercontinentalExchange announced their intent to go hostile with their $11 billion takeover offer for NYSE Euronext, taking the rival bid directly to shareholders.  



Pfizer, the largest drug maker in the world by sales, posted a 10% rise in quarterly profit to $2.2 billion as it reported fewer charges, though revenue was down amid slumping Lipitor sales.



ProLogis European Properties dismissed a takeover bid from U.S. industrial real-estate giant ProLogis that values the Euronext-listed warehouses developer at €1.2 billion ($1.78 billion), saying the offer is inadequate.



 News Corp. and Italian holding company Exor, which controls Ferrari owner Fiat, are looking at creating a consortium of investors that would bid for ownership of Formula 1 motor racing.  



 Yandex, a major Russian search engine seeking to raise nearly $1 billion in a U.S. stock offering, said it gave the Kremlin's security service information on donors to an anticorruption group. 



 The use by police of navigation equipment maker TomTom's data to position speed cameras looks to have been limited to the Netherlands, but the company still has to lay out more clearly how it protects the privacy of its customers, its chief executive said.  



German chip maker Infineon Technologies said fiscal second-quarter profit jumped to €572 million ($848.3 million) from €79 million a year earlier, on a gain from the sale of its mobile communication business, and raised its full-year outlook for the second time. 



Chinese online social-networking company Renren suffered another embarrassment ahead of its public listing in the U.S., after a member of its board who heads its audit committee said he had resigned following allegations of fraud against a company where he works as a senior executive.



South Korean police raided Google's office in Seoul as part of an investigation into whether the search giant's local unit has been illegally collecting individuals' private location data through its AdMob mobile advertising platform. 



U.S. buyout firm Bain Capital is poised to bid for U.K. software company Micro Focus International, a person familiar with the situation said. The value of the bid is unclear but recent reports suggested the offer could value the company at up to £890 million ($1.48 billion). 



France Télécom posted a 1.3% decline in its earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization to €3.73 billion ($5.53 billion) and confirmed its full-year forecast. 



A team of private-equity firm Cerberus Capital Management and real-estate investment trust Chatham Lodging Trust prevailed in a bankruptcy auction for 64 of Innkeepers USA Trust's hotels.