Standing feet from Rep. Gabrielle Giffords last Saturday, aide Pam Simon leaned across a table covered with legislative bills Ms. Giffords had introduced.

She instructed a photographer to capture the congresswoman talking to an elderly couple, the second two people in line. "Then everything went very badly," Ms. Simon, a community outreach coordinator, recalled in her first interview after being released Thursday from the hospital. She was treated for gunshot wounds to her wrist and chest sustained in the Saturday rampage that left 6 dead and 14 wounded.

Also Thursday, investigators found 9mm ammunition—the same type used in the shooting—in a black bag that Randy Loughner, the father of suspect Jared Lee Loughner, had earlier told them he saw his son carrying Saturday morning.

Ms. Simon, 63 years old, said that within three seconds of shots ringing out her thoughts ran from disbelief—"this is not happening; that's a toy gun; it's happening"—to the realization that she was hit. 

Crumpled on the ground, she lay face down and remained very still, pretending to be dead, because she did not know if the shooter was still there. 

She saw the congresswoman on the ground and colleague Ron Barber, as well, and knew that they had been shot.

A man she calls the Good Samaritan crouched beside her, asked her if she could feel her fingers and toes, who he should call, where her purse and car were. He vowed to stay by her side until the ambulance arrived and made good on that promise. By the time the ambulance came, she was racked with pain. 

Time sped up in the emergency room. Her pain intensified, and doctors pumped her with morphine, then rushed her into surgery. 

The bullet that entered her chest came to rest by her hip, missing all her vital organs. She is expected to make a full recovery. "You are one very lucky lady," she says the doctor told her.

In the hospital, surrounded by her husband, a daughter who lives in Oregon and a son from New York, she was visited by a grief counselor, a congressional counselor, and a team from the hospital psychiatric department.

They urged to "go on a media holiday," to avoid the news that would have footage from the event, which could re-traumatize her. She had a steady stream of visitors—several senators, the FBI director, a retired general and President Barack Obama and his wife Michelle, who sat at the foot of her bed.

Ms. Simon taught English for 25 years at a Tucson middle and high school—the same ones where the Jared Lee Loughner was a student. 

She didn't know him, but knew students like him, she said—angry and isolated students who needed help. She told Mr. Obama and his wife that more needs to be done to help teachers help students like Mr. Loughner.Ms. Simon said that she will devote herself to the same goal when she recovers.

Before leaving the hospital, she went to see Ms. Giffords, who squeezed her hand. "She will be back in the saddle," she said of Ms. Giffords.

And so will Ms. Simon. She said the bullet wounds she now has will give her credibility with the veterans she works with in her job.

On Friday, Ms. Simon plans to go to the office and have what she said will be an emotional reunion with her staff. And then she is going to call "my Good Samaritan and say 'Thank you'." 

 Write to  Ann Zimmerman at ann.zimmerman@wsj.com 