There are really only two forces that can create a ballet body: God and ballet class. Or, to be more specific, 20 years of ballet classes taken daily at the very least. And even then, prayer is probably a good idea.

Still, regular-shaped people who have sedentary jobs—such as arts reporters—do what they can to attain that body shape. Actresses, too, occasionally try to turn their already tiny frames into long, lean figures.

And that's where former New York City Ballet dancer Mary Helen Bowers comes in. Ms. Bowers is the person responsible for training Natalie Portman for "Black Swan." At their max, the two were working out five hours a day, six days a week, in between Ms. Portman's rehearsals and shooting, including on other films.

For the rest of us, Ms. Bowers has created Ballet Beautiful, a workout that can be taken privately in person or online through Skype. Classes run 30 or 60 minutes, individually or in a group with the others all logged in via Skype from their own locations.

Neither deity nor time-traveler, Ms. Bowers is an Upper West Sider who claims a lithe, graceful physique is within reach: "The ballet body is attainable," she said. "It's about having the right approach."

The workout is in no way a ballet class: all you need is enough space for a yoga mat and a computer with a camera in it. But the movements are designed to strengthen the muscles you would use if you were taking a ballet class.

"I'm targeting the muscles that define a ballerina's body," said Ms. Bowers. "The muscles that ballet dancers use are specific to ballet. That's why ballet dancers have such a specific body type."

Key words here: Inner and Thighs. "When you are working on the inside and back of your legs you are getting away from your quadriceps, which can bulk up. The inside and back of your leg helps lengthen the line," said Ms. Bowers.

The movements, somewhat similar to a Pilates workout, only more focused and more repetitious, are also about working the upper body to support better posture, according to this rail thin former dancer: "It's not just holding your shoulders back. It's building that strength."

All of this is work that you would also do in ballet class. But attending adult class in New York requires overcoming obstacles such as the timing of classes, lack of technique and, you know, the general humiliation of watching yourself next to 90-pound college students.

Ms. Bowers's workouts are unforgiving, but at least you can suffer the humiliation at home. Even if you take a group class, your picture is pretty small. Then again, pride comes at a price. A 60-minute Ballet Beautiful class is $40, whereas a 90-minute ballet class at most studios costs about $17.

By far the easiest part of the workout is the online sign up: Ballet Beautiful uses a software program that Ms. Bowers had created for her needs. She started shifting her workouts to the Web in 2008 when she headed to Los Angeles to work directly with Ms. Portman.

She's also developing a video that can be purchased and accessed online via computer or devices such as an iPod Touch. "If you are not at home or traveling, you are still able to log in and take the workout," she said.

But here's the thing: If you dive into Ballet Beautiful, after a while, you'll probably build enough strength and body confidence to take an actual ballet class. And ultimately, there's nothing like the pleasure of working toward that double turn and finishing it with a flourish.

 Write to  Pia Catton at Pia.Catton@wsj.com 