AJDABIYA, Libya—Rebel forces are full of fighting spirit, but appear weak on preparation and experience.

Rebel commanders said they are confident they can defend eastern Libya against any counterattack by Moammar Gadhafi's forces and launch an offensive on territory in the West.

At bases around eastern Libya, recruits are learning to march and follow orders, and are being dispatched into newly formed units. But the effectiveness of the rebel army, made up of defectors from Col. Gadhafi's army and swarms of volunteers, is an open question.

"We are not ready. We are not well prepared," said Hani al-Ubeidy, a 39-year-old electrical engineer who just joined the rebel forces in the eastern town of Benghazi. "We don't have much weaponry but we have the courage and the youth who are willing to do anything."

A rebel convoy that said it was headed for Tripoli on Tuesday night ground to a halt before it reached Benghazi's city limits when one of the vehicles got a flat tire. A dump truck filled with weapons leaving Benghazi and headed west Tuesday burst into an inferno when something in its cargo exploded, according to witnesses helping put out the fire.

At the Huniya Base, a massive weapons storage facility on the outskirts of the eastern rebel-controlled city of Ajdabiya, 35 warehouses and at least a dozen underground armories were filled with heavy weaponry, including helicopter-mounted anti-tank rockets, anti-aircraft missiles and 122-millimeter Katyusha rockets, along with thousands of rounds of small-arms ammunition.

"It's an extremely large amount of weaponry," said David Stocks, who served 27 years as a commando in the British Royal Marines, and visited the base Tuesday as a security contractor working for a Western media organization.

But it was barely guarded by a few young men who seemed more interested in mugging with looted rockets.

Col. Gadhafi is clearly aware of the weapons stores left in rebel hands. On Monday evening, a pair of fighter jets tried to bomb the base, according to witnesses and rebel commanders. Their payloads missed and fell in the desert.

Estimates put the rebel army in at least the thousands. Analysts say Mr. Gadhafi's forces are also in the thousands. But Libya is a massive country, and a rebel army advancing from eastern Libya to Tripoli would need to cross vast swaths of barren desert, and pass through Mr. Gadhafi's tribal stronghold of Sirte, his birthplace.

 Write to  Charles Levinson at charles.levinson@wsj.com 