 STATS: A 9,500-square-foot, four-bedroom home with four full baths and three half-baths asking $5.9 million, or $616 per square foot. Property taxes in 2010 were $24,164.14. The asking price was recently lowered from $6.5 million.

3017 Gates Road N.W., Washington

 DETAILS: A contemporary home built in 2007-08, it includes a black-bottom saltwater pool, a cabana, a home theater with multilevel seating, 12-foot ceilings and a catering kitchen with a padded rubber floor (less breakage if someone drops the china). In the family kitchen, the owner chose Caesarstone counters as he says he wanted a surface so durable that his guests could go-go dance on it (and they have). The Swarovski orbs in the dining room also come with the house.

 SELLER:  Ron Ginsburg, a principal at Meadowbrook Partners, a real-estate finance firm in Washington.

 THE NEIGHBORHOOD: The house is in the Forest Hills neighborhood, a five-minute drive to the Obamas' school Sidwell Friends and 12 minutes to the duck-fat fries at Bourbon Steak in Georgetown's Four Seasons Hotel. 

 WHAT I PAID:$1.3 million for the land in 2005 and Mr. Ginsburg estimates $750 per square foot, or $7,125,000, building the house. "Building the house was a creative exercise rather than a financial one," says Mr. Ginsburg, who plans on a stricter budget for his next house.

 WHY I BOUGHT: "Scarcity. There are virtually no vacant lots in D.C.," says Mr. Ginsburg, who looked for a building site for a year.

 WHY I'M SELLING: Mr. Ginsburg wants to build another home, one that's even more modern.

 WHAT I'LL MISS: The location and the pool, where Mr. Ginsburg says he does most of his living in the summer. And he may miss the Caesarstone counters as his partner, a professional chef, now wants a Molteni kitchen in stainless steel.

 WHAT I WON'T: "The dining room. No one wants to sit in a dining room anymore, everyone wants to be in the kitchen," says Mr. Ginsburg. 

 OTHER BROKERS SAY: "It has been higher, but now, given what else is selling at this price point, that's the right number, " says  Liz Lavette Shorb, an associate broker at Washington Fine Properties. Ms. Shorb says that while the real-estate market in D.C. has held up better than most, the house could have gone for $7 million before the recession.  Jason Skipworth, an agent with DC Living Real Estate, says the asking price is right. 

 I BET: Listing agent  William F.X. Moody, executive vice president of Washington Fine Properties, expects the house to sell in the next eight months in the mid-fives.

 —Post your guess as to what the house will sell for—and when—in the comments section. Listings will be followed for six months. 

 Write to  Sarah Tilton at Sarah.Tilton@wsj.com 