Center was supposed to be a need. So was linebacker. Instead the Giants stayed in character, drafted value over obvious need and ended up filling perhaps the biggest need of all: special teams.

The three days of the NFL Draft closed Saturday night and, with a temporary stay reinstalling the lockout, the usual flurry to sign the players that went undrafted is on hold. So with time to step back, and the dust having settled at least a bit, we take a look at the Giants' 2011 draft:

 The need-filling: No, the offensive line isn't any better than it was Thursday morning. At 6-foot-6, 323 pounds, fourth-round pick James Brewer is, as general manager Jerry Reese said, "a gigantic man." But even with absurdly long arms (35.5 inches) and basketball-player feet, the offensive tackle out of Indiana is a developmental player; he's relatively new to football, needs to learn proper position technique and won't be contributing any time soon.

Still, the Giants did fill a huge need by buttressing what were largely woeful special teams units with a lot of speed. First-round cornerback Prince Amukamara ran a 4.3 40 at the NFL Combine. Seventh round pick Da'Rel Scott, a 5-foot-11, 211-pound running back, ran a 4.34 40, the fastest time at his position at the combine. Sixth rounder Jacquian Williams ran a 4.63 on slower grass at South Florida's Pro Day, exceptional speed for a 6-foot-3, 235-pound linebacker. 

Fellow sixth rounders Tyler Sash, the safety from Iowa, and linebacker Greg Jones, a three-time All Big Ten pick at Michigan State, should immediately contribute on coverage and kick teams. And then there's third-rounder Jerrel Jernigan, an explosively fast receiver who returns punts and kicks and left Troy with an absurd 5,972 all-purpose yards.

"All of those guys will play on special teams," Reese said. "That's a little bit of the method to the madness up there."

 The steal of the draft: Forget Giants' steal—Amukamara may have been the steal of the entire draft. The top cover corner in the entire pool of players available, a consensus top-10 pick and so eager a student, he was harassing coach Tom Coughlin for a playbook on his Friday visit to Giants' headquarters. (The Giants, Coughlin said, couldn't give him one because of the uncertain labor situation.)

 Steal of the draft No. 2: Before he said anything else about Jones, Reese recalled one of the first adages Tom Boisture, the Giants' late director of player personnel, taught him as a young scout: "respect production." Tally 465 tackles, 16.5 sacks and two All-American nods and there won't be any more productive linebacker out there. Going so late likely only because of his height, the 5-11 Jones will "come in with a chip on his shoulder," Reese predicted. 

 The brilliant or bust pick: Purely in terms of on-the-field, football-worth, North Carolina defensive tackle Marvin Austin should've been a top 15 pick. Get suspended for two games in 2008, benched for two in 2009 and spend the entire 2010 season sidelined because of improper contact with an agent and the first round is a longshot. So maybe the bright lights of New York pull Austin and his colors don't change. Or maybe the Giants' veteran linemen keep him in line and that remorse Reese said he saw in Austin makes him a matured monster in the middle. 

Prince Amukamara

Marvin Austin

 Write to  Aditi Kinkhabwala at aditi.kinkhabwala@wsj.com 