Multinational companies with operations in Egypt told some workers to stay home, struggled with disrupted phone service and assessed the impact as unrest mounted. 

Companies have been warning employees to be on guard or work from home since earlier in the week. Some had trouble reaching employees because the country's telephone service was disrupted.

So far, the business impact appeared limited. Major industries like petroleum and many manufacturing facilities are located well away from trouble spots in the capital and elsewhere. Still, the U.S. embassy said that special flights are being organized starting Monday to get U.S. citizens, including tourists, out of the country.

Few multinational companies count on Egypt for a major portion of their revenue. Still, Egypt's strategic position in the Middle East has drawn interest. 

See where key events took place in Cairo Friday.

A succession of rallies and demonstrations, in Egypt, Jordan, Yemen and Algeria have been inspired directly by the popular outpouring of anger that toppled Tunisian President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali. See how these uprising progressed.

  Marriott International Inc.
MAR


0.28
%




 has heightened security at its seven Egypt locations, which remain open, says a company spokeswoman. The hotel chain has two locations in Cairo and 1,400 employees. To protect employees and guests, hotels have increased screening through metal detectors, increased the amount of security personnel on premises and are screening vehicles that enter hotel premises, says a spokeswoman.

Telecom providers saw business disruptions as service was shut down. At  France Télécom SA, where Egypt is its biggest market in Africa in terms of revenue, a spokesman said the company would typically shorten work days to help employees observe curfews and encourage them not to travel. 

But contacting its 1,600 staffers, who mainly work in call centers and research labs, was proving complicated due to network problems.

  Alcatel-Lucent
ALU


0.14
%




 advised its 600 employees in Egypt to stay at home beginning Thursday and is discouraging travel, a company spokeswoman said.

  Procter & Gamble Co.
PG


-0.14
%




 has also told its employees in Cairo to work from home until further notice. The consumer-products giant has 1,500 employees in Egypt, including contractors. 

Production at the company's two plants which produce diaper, detergent, bar soap and feminine hygiene products outside of Cairo hasn't been interrupted, a spokeswoman said.

Oil companies operating in Egypt said they weren't affected by the protests, largely because their oil and gas fields are far away from population centers like Cairo, in remote reaches of the Western Desert or off the coast of the Nile Delta.

  BP said the unrest in Egypt had no impact on its operations and had no plans to evacuate expatriate staff, though it was advising local employees to take steps to ensure their personal safety. 

—Paul Sonne, Max Colchester and Guy Chazan  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Dana Mattioli at dana.mattioli@wsj.com 