Few aspects of American life better exemplify the glories and miseries of our culture than the college-admissions rat race. The glory is that our system of higher education is the envy of the world. America's best colleges and universities excel all others, yet the system is vast and flexible enough to offer a place to almost anybody who wants one, whether at the local community college or all up the way up the ladder to the Ivy League. And make no mistake: A brilliant kid without money really can go to Harvard.

On the misery side: Most students (and their parents) have no clear idea why a university is the reflexive next stop after high school, and yet roughly 70% of American high-school graduates go on to college. Are they supposed to marinate themselves in the best that has been thought and written? Is the point to learn how to think? To gain marketable skills? To make social connections? Or merely to signal to potential employers and spouses that here is a person with the patience and cleverness to navigate a great deal of folderol on the way to a degree? Although nobody can quite agree on what college is for, Americans and their leaders have embraced higher education with cult-like devotion—which is one reason the cost of tuition at many institutions has climbed into the stratosphere.

The desperate scramble for admission to America's very best universities makes our contradictory national ideals glaringly apparent. We desire equality of opportunity, of course, and so insist on meritocratic admissions. Yet we also hope fervently for equality of outcomes, leading us to undermine the very meritocracy we had so eagerly promulgated. Thus our ambivalence toward the SATs, once an implement of fairness that became, to later critics, a pernicious tool of privilege.

The result of these tensions, for countless teenagers and their parents, is a frantic struggle to gain the approval of inscrutable college-admissions officers. It's hard to imagine a more amiable Virgil to guide us through this infernal process than Andrew Ferguson, who embarked on it when his son came of age. Mr. Ferguson reports his findings in "Crazy U," a book that I read—as the father of twin boys who are three years away from this dismal rite of passage—with horrified fascination.

Mr. Ferguson is not the first author to chronicle the horrors of the SATs, the runaway cost of elite universities or the mysteries of the admissions process. But having taken what his subtitle calls "One Dad's Crash Course in Getting His Kid Into College," he has succeeded in pulling the whole thing together through a single family's experience, enriched by much authorial homework. This is a guy who doesn't just delve into the history of the SAT. He also takes the test himself. ("Close to a disaster," he says of the results, with a math score so bad that he won't divulge it, other than to say "somewhere below 'lobotomy patient' but above 'Phillies fan.' ")

"Crazy U" is compulsively readable, unusually vivid—and thoroughly dispiriting, even though the author's son ends up doing just fine. Approaching the subject with genial savagery, Mr. Ferguson begins his journey by attending a meeting between a college consultant and a roomful of well-heeled Connecticut moms. The consultant charges—better sit down for this—$40,000 to shepherd a single kid through the admissions process and so naturally works only with, as her assistant says, "high net-worth individuals."

A series of enervating campus visits is marked by interchangeably chirpy undergraduate tour guides united by their ability to walk backward while extolling the school's a capella groups and reassuring parents about the high priority placed on security. On a swing through New England, the Fergusons narrowly miss Dartmouth's Second Annual Campus Sex Screening, a supposedly health-promoting event where, the flyers promised, "sexperts" would be giving "free demonstrations!" and the party favors included dental dams, glow-in-the-dark condoms and Ben & Jerry's ice cream. Mr. Ferguson muses: "I may be showing my age, but back when I was a college student we didn't need free ice cream to get us to come to a sex demonstration."

 By Andrew Ferguson  Simon & Schuster, 228 pages, $25

But the author is no killjoy. On the contrary, he has a darned good idea of what most teenagers are all about—their unformed nature, their insecurities and, yes, their interest in sex—and if anything he resents the way the admissions rat race warps them into becoming, or at least pretending to be, something else. We see, for instance, Mr. Ferguson's son agonizing to deliver the requisite self-revelation for a college application essay (the author calls this process "the Great Extrusion"). Burdened by a normal suburban teenage life and needing some drama to write about, the boy at first suggests that his parents divorce and then wishes that he'd been a drug addict. Finally he gets something down by inflating a minor personal episode into a transforming moment of illumination. The most darkly humorous aspect of this often hilarious book is its depiction of an admissions process that corrupts everything it touches.

It's a process that discourages reticence by requiring students to write revealing and disingenuous personal essays; discourages thrift by regarding parental savings as fair game in the financial-aid evaluation; discourages intellectual curiosity by encouraging students to pursue grades rather than knowledge; and discourages honesty by transforming adolescence into a period of cynical calculation.

"At its most intense," Mr. Ferguson writes, "the admissions process didn't force kids to be Lisa Simpson; it turned them into Eddie Haskell. . . . It guaranteed that teenagers would pursue life with a single ulterior motive, while pretending they weren't. It coated their every undertaking in a thin lacquer of insincerity. Befriending people in hopes of a good rec letter; serving the community to advertise your big heart; studying hard just to puff up the GPA and climb the greasy poll of class rank—nothing was done for its own sake."

This stressful process practically demands cynicism from all parties. To "climb the page" in the closely watched U.S. News & World Report rankings, schools solicit applications so that they can increase the numbers they reject, thereby appearing more selective. Elite institutions claim to be open to all but devote wide swaths of their entering classes to athletes, the offspring of donating alumni, members of minority groups and others with "hooks" that give them an edge.

Matters have been complicated in recent years by the success of girls, who persist in outperforming boys academically in high school and outnumbering them in college. But a university may admit so many girls that a tipping point is reached, making boys even less likely to apply or, as Mr. Ferguson notes, "attracting the wrong kind of boys for the wrong reasons."

Admissions officers have tried to rectify this problem by making schools more appealing to male applicants, expanding math and science departments, adding sports—and lowering admission standards for males, most of whom are white. Asian boys generally don't need any such help. "After several generations of vicious racism," Mr. Ferguson says, "followed by protest marches, civil rights lawsuits, accusations of bigotry, appeals to color-blindness, feminism, and eloquent invocations of the meritocratic ideal, the latest admissions trend in American higher education is affirmative action for white men. Just like the old days."

Mr. Ferguson doesn't mention his son's name or the college that eventually accepts him—the author dubs it BSU, for Big State University. But the lack of specificity doesn't mar "Crazy U" because the book is otherwise wonderfully detailed in its reporting and because it is the story of countless parents and students across the land. Most of them, one infers, would do well to focus on state schools and avoid the siren call of gold-plated, "brand name" schools. But "the college mania won't subside anytime soon," Mr. Ferguson writes. "Too many people, too many institutions and businesses, have an interest, financial and ideological, in keeping it going."

—Mr. Akst is a member of the editorial board at Newsday.