When does it make sense to close an exchange?

The Tokyo Stock Exchange's decision to stay open in the aftermath of an earthquake, tsunami and nuclear accident earlier this month has stoked new debate over that question.

In hindsight, the TSE made a smart call. Stock prices plunged, to be sure, but the market remained orderly, volume was high and bargain hunters eventually helped recoup losses. The Nikkei Stock Average ended last week 8% off its level before the crisis began, but 3.9% above its lows.

As the disaster was unfolding, however, opinion as to whether regulators should have shut down trading was sharply divided. At least two foreign banks pushed the exchange to call a "market disruption event" and suspend trading.

An executive at one bank favoring a suspension told the TSE it should consider a cooling-off period to avoid a market meltdown that would ultimately damage Japan's economy.

Last week,  Atsushi Saito, the exchange's president, condemned foreign investors who called for a closure, calling them "selfish" and accusing them of "wanting to run away."

Leaving aside the loaded language, there is, of course, a good reason not to implement a closure lightly. Circuit breakers and daily price limits can temper extreme stock movements without cutting off market access. More important, what may seem uninformed panic to some, will be viewed by others as the beginning of worse to come. Confidence in a market can wither quickly once those who manage it appear to make arbitrary decisions on when and how investors can dispose of their holdings.

A market, by definition, "is a place where you can buy or sell, regardless of whether it's rational or a good move," says  Charles Li, chief executive of Hong Kong Exchanges & Clearing Ltd.

When Black Friday struck in 1987, Hong Kong's exchange made the widely criticized move to suspend trading for four days, undermining investor confidence there for years afterward.

With stocks listed on multiple exchanges, exchange-traded funds and derivatives that allow people to bet on market movements overseas, an exchange closure doesn't have the effect it once had, either, says  Thomas Balk, president of Fidelity International's Japan office.

Mr. Balk says Fidelity International encouraged the TSE to stay open, noting that his firm's clients expect their funds to be liquid and priced properly, something that wouldn't have been possible in the event of a market suspension.

In rare cases, as with Wall Street in the immediate aftermath of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, opening an exchange isn't physically possible.

However, a suspension of trade might be justified for other reasons, such as the loss of a critical mass of market players. If enough traders fear showing up to work might expose them to radiation, an exchange might have no choice but to close. One TSE official said some foreign bankers cited radiation data and raised the risk to their employees' health as a reason to halt trading.

Was that an unreasonable point? Today, it might sound like it. At the time, perhaps not. Either way, the TSE never lacked the human software to run a market, as attested to by record trading volume in the days following the earthquake and tsunami.

"You end up always having hindsight," says Mr. Li, "but we have to make decisions without foresight." When it comes to deciding on something like when to close an exchange, he notes, "we have to all recognize this is going to be a very big judgment call." 

—Kana Inagaki contributed to this article.