Since the beginning of civilization, human beings have dreamed of the ideal society. "Searching for Utopia: The History of an Idea" (Thames & Hudson), by Gregory Claeys, traces various images of these better worlds in art, religion and philosophy. 

In the "Republic," Plato famously described a community ruled by philosopher-kings and a guardian caste that shared wives, children and goods. Thomas More's "Utopia" featured a six-hour workday, and everyone ate and dressed the same. And in the 1800s, rapid industrialization led to a movement for creating "garden cities." Here are some renderings of these fanciful locales.

A variety of architectural plans in the 15th and 16th centuries attempted to combine Renaissance ideas of order, balance, harmony and beauty. Filarete's star-shaped plan for the ideal city of Sforzinda, from 1457 (pictured here), included a circular moat and 16 radial spokes. It was intended to be a contrast to the cramped and dirty conditions of medieval cities. Circular piazzas with radiating spokes soon became popular.

Western utopianism has roots in Christianity as well as in classical thought. The Christian notion of Eden has generally come to mean a garden oasis, and the subsequent ideal of a rural or pastoral retreat has been a dominant theme in utopian thought. In this image from a 1483 German translation of the Bible, rolling green hills and a variety of animals (including a unicorn) provide the background as Eve emerges from Adam's rib.

In the early 20th century, the United States was a beacon of utopian aspiration, and the Statue of Liberty was one of its most powerful symbols. Over the years, the U.S. also has been home to many communitarian movements that have tried to recapture a lost sense of simple, upright living, including the Shakers, the Hutterites and the Amish (depicted in a promotional poster for Pennsylvania, pictured here).

In film, portrayals of dystopias have been far more common than utopias—ideal worlds, after all, have little action and minimal drama. In "The Wizard of Oz," utopia is represented by the Emerald City, but the wizard turns out to be a charlatan manipulating his subjects with trickery. In the end, Dorothy comes to appreciate the innocent, spartan virtues of her Kansas home.

The Word "utopia" comes from Thomas More's book of the same name, first published in Latin in 1516. In his utopia, all citizens pursued agriculture and learned an additional skill, and households were not permitted to accumulate wealth. But slavery also existed. The book's frontispiece (above) is one of the most iconic utopian images, depicting the island described in More's book as a balance of isolation and good order.