HONG KONG— Wharf (Holdings) Ltd.
0004


-1.80
%




 said Wednesday its underlying profit rose just 1.2% last year because of modest growth in property sales and a high comparison base after selling a property in China last year.

The Hong Kong-listed company said it plans to increase its investment in mainland China's property market over the next two years, and is targeting a 59% rise in contracted sales in China to 14 billion yuan (US$2.13 billion) for 2011. 

However, the company also said it may need to lower its sales target as it expects its sales to slow in the coming months because of Beijing's recent measures to cool the property sector. March already saw slower sales. 

The property-to-ports conglomerate said its underlying profit for the 12 months ended Dec. 31 rose to 7.91 billion Hong Kong dollars (US$1.01 billion) from HK$7.82 billion a year earlier. 

Net profit rose 86% to HK$35.75 billion from HK$19.26 billion, due to a 10% increase in revenue to HK$19.38 billion from HK$17.55 billion. 

Analysts generally use underlying profit, which excludes gains from investment property revaluations, rather than net profit to gauge the performance of Hong Kong property companies. 

On the Hong Kong Stock Exchange Wednesday, Wharf shares rose 2.2% to HK$51.20.

Wharf operates Hong Kong shopping malls Harbour City in Tsim Sha Tsui and Times Square in Causeway Bay, which represented 51% of the group's business assets as of the end of last year. 

The group said its China properties, located in cities such as Chengdu, Chongqing, Wuxi, and Shanghai, constituted 34% of its business assets at the end of 2010. Its land bank in China totalled 10.6 million square meters. 

Property investments remained the core contributor to the group's operating profit in 2010, rising 6% to HK$6.55 billion from HK$6.19 billion. Harbour City's contribution rose 7% last year, while that of Times Square increased 8%. 

The operating-profit contribution from mainland China properties fell 30% last year as a result of the 2009 sale of Beijing Capital Times Square, a retail and office complex in the Chinese capital. The disposal generated a profit of HK$1.39 billion in 2009. 

Wharf said it hopes to eventually increase its mainland assets to 50% of its overall assets, but didn't give a time frame. 

China introduced a slew of tightening measures for the property market in late January, including more limits on home purchases and another increase in down-payments for second-home purchases, highlighting Beijing's determination to rein in overly fast rises in property prices. 

"Although there will likely be a slowdown in China's residential market over the next few months, we have sufficient capital to help us stay afloat. In the long term, the [property] market will rebound," Wharf Deputy Chairman  Stephen Ng said at a news conference. 

Wharf announced plans last month to raise HK$10.05 billion through a rights issue in Hong Kong to fund property and related investments in China. 

Wharf's businesses also include pay-television company i-Cable Communications Ltd., fixed-line telecommunications provider Wharf T&T Ltd., and ports operator Modern Terminals Ltd.