Secretary of Defense Robert Gates is expected to unveil substantial cuts to weapons programs Thursday, according to government and industry officials, part of a plan to better position the Pentagon for slower growth in its budget.

The Pentagon has kept the details under wraps. But defense observers expect all military services to take significant hits to their procurement accounts, even as overall military spending holds steady.

Congressional aides said Mr. Gates would brief key leaders of defense appropriations and oversight committees on the proposal Thursday morning. 

The proposed cuts come as a new Congress takes office amid increasing concerns about the federal deficit. On Tuesday, new House Majority Leader Eric Cantor (R., Va.) indicated that Republicans, traditional supporters of robust defense spending, may target the Pentagon.

At risk of cancellation: the Expeditionary Fighting Vehicle, a high-speed landing craft being developed for the Marine Corps by  General Dynamics Corp.
GD


0.51
%




, of Falls Church, Va. The Marines now plan to buy 573 of the new vehicles, which would be used for storming beaches. 

An industry official said the Pentagon had already spent $3.3 billion on developing the vehicle. "If it's an affordability issue and the Marine Corps has the requirement, there's an alternative, and that's reduce the quantity of the buy," he said.

Also targeted for trims: the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter, a stealthy, supersonic fighter designed by  Lockheed Martin Corp.
LMT


0.59
%




 that is supposed to replace a wide range of aircraft now in service with the both U.S. and allies. The F-35, the costliest procurement project in the department's history, already has seen delays and cost overruns.

Defense insiders expect the F-35's production might be slowed or its numbers reduced.

Defense analyst  Jim McAleese said the Pentagon may cut the production rate for the aircraft, which is being developed in parallel with flight testing. A planned doubling of production quantities in 2013, he said, "has never been credible." 

Other programs that are seen as vulnerable are the Joint Light Tactical Vehicle, a family of bomb-resistant trucks designed to replace the military's ubiquitous four-wheel drive utility vehicle, the Humvee, and the Surface Launched Advanced Medium Range Air-to-Air Missile, an air defense system made by  Raytheon Co.
RTN


0.04
%




 

Dakota Wood, a senior fellow at the Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, said decisions about cutbacks likely were put on hold during the recent election cycle. "With the economy the way it was, nobody wanted to talk about program cancellations leading to job losses," he said. "Now that we're past that, people are serious about putting together 2012 budgets."

A larger issue remains about the overall size of the Department of Defense budget request for fiscal year 2012, which is expected to be made public in February. Budget forecasts included in the administration's fiscal year 2011 estimates project a Department of Defense 2012 "base budget"—excluding the costs of military operations in Afghanistan and Iraq—of $566 billion. 

Carl Conetta, co-director of the Project on Defense Alternatives, a group that examines defense budget policy, said Mr. Gates may propose a lower number, but one that still represents an increase over the current base budget of $549 billion. 