TOKYO—The battle to bring the troubled Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant in Japan under control may have turned a corner, with cooling functions at two reactors apparently working again, a development that could ease a nuclear emergency that has gripped the nation for more than a week. 

The plant's operator,  Tokyo Electric Power Co., said it got cooling functions at reactors No. 5 and No. 6 working and that temperatures at the spent fuel storage pools at these reactors are closer to regular levels.

Also Sunday, the utility reported some success in hosing down the troubled No. 3 reactor, the focus of the most intense efforts to keep the temperature of radioactive material under control. The radiation level there had fallen to 2,758 microsieverts per hour late Saturday versus 3,443 microsieverts earlier in the day. The more recent level is just above the highest recommended level of exposure per year, according to U.S. guidelines.

Officials also said they restored power cables to the troubled No. 1 and No. 2 reactors and hoped to restore power later Sunday.

Japan's Self Defense Force started shooting water Sunday at the plant's No. 4 reactor, though this operation was later halted. The SDF was trying to direct water into the reactor's spent fuel tank to help cool fuel rods and keep them immersed in water to prevent them from overheating and releasing more radioactive material. 

The United Nation's nuclear watchdog said Saturday that the nuclear accident at the plant hasn't widened in the past three days and that the risk of a worst-case-scenario meltdown is now reducing day by day, though the situation still is very serious.

"I prefer not to speculate about the future, but as days go by, the risk of a total meltdown is reducing," said Graham Andrew, special adviser to the International Atomic Energy Agency's director general, at a press briefing in Vienna, adding "there are still risks that it could get worse." 

Underscoring the lingering risk, Tokyo Electric, known as Tepco, said Sunday morning local time that high radiation levels are delaying the restoration of power to the No. 3 and No. 4 reactors, which have been the main focus of concern in recent days because of the fear that pools of spent fuel rods stored there could overheat, resulting in the release of radioactive material.

While the No. 5 and No. 6 reactors are the least problematic of all of the reactors that were slammed by a tsunami after a magnitude 9.0 quake rocked northeastern Japan on March 11, the fact that Tepco has managed to make progress in keeping their temperatures down is a major step in helping to contain the threat of overheating and the possibility of further radiation leakage. 

As of early Sunday, the temperature in the pool at reactor No. 5 was 37.1 degrees Celsius, while the temperature for reactor No. 6 was 41.0 degrees, Tepco said. Japan's nuclear regulatory agency said that the temperature in the pool Saturday at reactor No. 5 was 48 degrees and 67 degrees at reactor No. 6.

A typical spent fuel pool is kept at a temperature below 25 degrees Celsius under normal operating conditions. 

Power for reactors No. 1 and No. 2 were initially expected to be restored Saturday afternoon, but moved back the timing as workers had to shield many pieces of equipment from the water spraying operations.

Another Tepco spokesman said on Saturday that in order to supply power to all of the reactors all of the cables need to be connected and checked along with other equipment. 

Even if cables and other equipment function properly, to operate the reactor's cooling system the company will first have to check that all the equipment used in the system still works, the spokesman said. 

—Mari Iwata, Juro Osawa and Flemming Emil Hansen contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Juro Osawa at juro.osawa@dowjones.com 