Elementary-school children relish the challenge of finding visual clues in picture books, hence the popularity of intricately designed puzzle series such as "Spot Seven," "I Spy" and "Where's Waldo?" Younger children enjoy the hunt too but, being smaller, generally need less complicated images on which to test their wits. Stephen Savage's picture book "Where's Walrus?" (Scholastic, 32 pages, $16.99) is an especially funny and stylishly retro-looking option for this nursery-school crowd. In its clean, colorful pages, a walrus escapes from a pool at the zoo while his keeper snoozes. When the man eventually gives chase, the walrus eludes capture by cleverly blending into various city scenes. On the cover, for instance, we see him wearing a fedora, smiling tuskily at us from a diner counter, where he is getting a cup of coffee. He poses with mannequins in a shop window, lays bricks with a row of workmen, insinuates himself into a line of firemen and dances onstage in a string of showgirls. The keeper catches up just in time to see the walrus infiltrate a diving team and perform a somersaulting high-dive (which little children will enjoy tracing with their fingers). When the walrus wins both applause and a gold medal, the keeper conceives of a brilliant idea—think big pool and diving board—for keeping both the animal and zoo visitors happily entertained in the future.

Many children know the injustice of hearing their friends playing outdoors on summer evenings when they themselves have been put to bed early. In Brett Helquist's "Bedtime for Bear" (Harper, 32 pages, $16.99) the injustice runs the other way. It's dusk after winter's first snowfall and poor, yawning bear has just snuggled beneath the bedclothes to hibernate when his two hoodlum pals show up—at least they look like hoodlums, being raccoons with black masks and a swaggering manner—and try to entice him outdoors. "Please? We won't see you again until spring," they beg. Bear turns them down, but it's hard for him to drift off when snowballs keep thwacking on the window. Stepping outside to ask their forbearance, Bear catches a snowball right in the head. Furious, he lunges at his assailant but trips and takes a long tumbling slide down the hill. "Bear was wet. He was covered in snow. He was . . . " (at this point young children listening to the story may be worried) " . . . laughing!" The three friends end up romping all evening in the snow before, at last, it is bedtime for Bear. Children probably know Mr. Helquist best as the illustrator of the droll "Series of Unfortunate Events" books, and here, as in that series, he favors a particular shade of greeny-blue. It gives his exuberant paintings an old-fashioned, oddly comfy feeling, as though he is showing us the world through an old glass Coke bottle. 

If the world really is divided into Cat People and Dog People, I hope those of you in the canine half will forgive me for briefly catering to the feline. You certainly won't want to hear that Bruce Ingman's gleefully colorful picture book from 1995, "When Martha's Away" (Candlewick, 32 pages, $16.99), was recently reissued so that a fresh generation of cat lovers can enjoy its wry wit. The book takes its title from the old proverb "When the cat's away, the mice will play," which, on the first pages here, we read and then see vandalized by a naughty cat so that it says: "When Martha's away, Lionel will play." Martha is a little girl for whom the reader becomes, effectively, a stand-in, and Lionel is a suave, ginger-haired cat-trickster who only pretends to spend his days napping on the sofa. In reality, as he explains: "I have my own newspaper delivered to keep myself up-to-date with the goings-on in the cat world." Furthermore, Lionel lifts weights ("to make sure the dog next door can't catch me"), cooks himself lunch ("my favorite is a nice bit of salmon"), uses the phone to call his cousin (Albert, in Atlantic City), paints portraits, plays the piano, and takes a race car "for a quick spin" around Martha's room. The audacious Lionel is rendered in deliberately unsophisticated paint strokes on bright backgrounds, which heightens the comic effect of his domestic exploits.

Finally, young naturalists will appreciate the variety of avian life rendered in Susan Stockdale's gently rhyming picture book, "Bring On the Birds" (Peachtree, 32 pages, $15.95). Each page carries a snippet of verse beneath a vivid acrylic painting of the bird in question. Because the poem is broken up, page by page, and because children will want to linger over the colorful images of ptarmigans, penguins, roadrunners and grouse (along with puffins, boobies, pigeons and a scarlet-bosomed frigatebird), this is a bedtime book that will require reading at least twice. Children will want to go through it slowly at first, so they can pore over the pictures; and adults will want to read it again at speed to get the full swing of the poetry, which ends: "Dull or dazzling colors, / long or little legs. / All of them have feathers, / and all are hatched from eggs." In an afterword, the author shows each bird once more and shares brief details about its attributes and habitat.