

Another night, another black-tie gala at the Waldorf. But the Jackie Robinson Foundation's annual ROBIE Awards, which "pay tribute to individuals who embody the humanitarian ideals of Jackie Robinson," felt more earnest than your usual affair, even if they honored P. Diddy and a few billion-dollar investors. Notably, Bill Cosby hosted the evening, though he appeared onstage for approximately nine minutes. But the comic legend managed to draw more laughs and endearment during his fleeting cameo than the entire recent Oscar ceremony.

"One cannot express the joy and wonderfulness of what Jackie did to racists," Mr. Cosby emphasized. "He did what was real good for them and it felt so delicious."

Everyone from Citi Group to Ciroc Vodka hosted a table in support of the foundation. Even the cash-strapped New York Mets ponied up. The night's honorees included Sean "Diddy" Combs, Ingrid Saunders Jones of the Coca-Cola Company and Joseph R. Perella of Perella Weinberg Partners. 

Rachel Robinson, the baseball legend's 88-year-old widow, dripped in diamonds as she greeted the honorees as well as Mr. Cosby and Mayor Michael Bloomberg in the lavish event hall. 

"Did anyone catch me in that new Matt Damon movie?" the mayor quipped about his appearance in "The Adjustment Bureau." "I've been training for nine years as a public official for that cameo." 

More than 100 sharply dressed, underage scholars were also invited to the ceremony, leading the trophy-getters to muse on their own adolescent years. 

"When everyone had crew cuts, I had long hair," said Mr. Perella before dining on filet mignon and chocolate-mousse cake. "When the Beatles came along and everyone went long, I chopped my hair short." 

Mr. Combs recalled, "I wanted to be a football player before cruelly breaking my leg in high school. So I decided to dominate music."

"I was too high to remember," said Def Jam Records founder Russell Simmons, who honored Mr. Combs. Wasn't he busy with those legendary early business missions? "Okay," he added, "so I was high and hustling."