Just after 11:30 p.m. Sunday, as President Barack Obama announced  Osama bin Laden's death, the streets around Ground Zero were nearly empty. A few people milled around near a small memorial at the southeast corner of the site. 

Frank Cantwell, a 64-year-old operating engineer who works on the construction of the new tower finally rising rapidly there, slipped out of a gate. He said there were only a few people in the fenced off site when the news broke. He walked across it alone to head home.













"It's long overdue," he said. "You can sort of hear the silent cheers of 3,000 ghosts."

Meanwhile, a loud celebration was brewing.

  Tom Dowd-Warren, a 28-year-old bar manager was among the first to arrive. He heard the news while at dinner at the Odeon in nearby Tribeca, bought a bottle of champagne from the bartender and headed downtown.

"I told my girlfriend, I was like, we've to go down there," he said. "This is such a great thing for the world."

Hundreds soon joined him. As midnight neared and the president finished speaking, a boisterous crowd grew quickly at the corner of Vesey and Church streets. Traffic was stopped, and a block full of honking cars had to back up down the street.

They climbed lamp posts and waved flags. Patriotic chants turned to patriotic songs. 

One man sitting on top of a street sign sprayed champagne on the cheering crowd.

The celebration continued well into the night. Chanting and singing continued past 2 a.m. and showed little sign of letting up. Revelers posed for pictures with a Navy sailor on reserve from Borough Park who was holding a sign that said "Obama 1 Osama 0".

The crowd came from across the city. Among them was  Fabrizio Goldstein, a 29-year-old West Village television personality who put on his American flag windbreaker for the occasion. He walked from Prospect Heights, Brooklyn, to his parents home on the Upper West Side on the day of the attacks.

"For New Yorkers, it has been an open wound," he said. "Even the most jaded New Yorkers are feeling a little emotional right now."

Just after 1 a.m., bagpipes sounded. A group of men wearing New York Fire Department sweatshirts walked with the piper toward the celebration, holding an American flag aloft.

  Emilio Malave, 49, a retired New York City police officer, drove to Lower Manhattan from the Bronx with a bouquet of white flowers in hand. He thought he might just pay his respects, leave the flowers and go home.

"If I came down here I figured I wouldn't be alone," he said.

Instead, he found the firefighters.

"As I was walking toward the site, I saw these guys with the bagpipes and I just got in line and here we are," he said as the crowd chanted around him.

 Write to  Andrew Grossman at andrew.grossman@wsj.com 