SENDAI, Japan—After confirming the safety of family, friends and co-workers, a growing number of people here are wandering the streets in search of another key component of their former lives: their cars.

The giant tsunami on March 11 was a rarity among natural disasters: It struck one of the richest countries in the world—and scattered unprecedented volumes of private property. For many families, the quest to reclaim that property is turning into an important part of the recovery process.

And often it begins with a search for the car. Many survivors fled the approaching tsunami on foot, leaving vehicles to be swept up by the sea. Thousands of crushed cars now litter coastal cities, sitting just where the waves left them—on roofs, in rice paddies, sticking out of restaurants and stuck in trees.

The Nissan Lafesta that belongs to  Kazumi Ochiai's wife didn't travel that far: The blue hatchback had been pushed about two blocks across the mall parking lot where she'd left it and where this week he was trying to break into it. Large rock in hand, he tried and failed three times to smash through the driver's window. When he tried on the passenger side, the rock bounced out of his hand. Then he discovered the car's soft spot: the back window. It broke with one blow, and he climbed in.

"The car's never going to run again," he said as he crawled through. "I just want to get what's inside."

Out came an umbrella, a golf bag, a broom and a bag containing his wife's workout outfit from a morning game of volleyball. There were also two small rolling bags that belong to a friend of Ms. Ochiai's and the friend's daughter, who had come shopping with Ms. Ochiai. Finally, there was a present in a pink bag and some flowers the daughter was carrying—she had just come from her high-school graduation ceremony.

Mr. Ochiai opened up the spare-tire well. It was still filled with water.



The searching is likely to intensify in the coming weeks—not just for cars but for boats, bikes, photo albums and even homes, as people scrounge for pieces of their previous lives, now lying shattered and scattered along the coast.

In some of the worst-hit cities, Self Defense Forces personnel that have been helping with search and rescue, road clearance and rubble removal have been told also to collect personal items. Some city offices now hold piles of muddy wedding photos, diplomas and sports medals.

The government hasn't yet decided what to do with all the cars, but at the very least it plans to return some of the taxes people paid on them. That will require a system to connect wrecked vehicles with their owners, said  Yoshiteru Sakaguchi, who is in charge of car disposal at the Ministry of Environment. With many cars at the bottom of the ocean and others miles away from where they were last parked, he added, that is not going to be easy.

"We're still working hard to come up with some concrete measures to reach [owners] as quickly as possible," he said.

Ms. Ochiai and her friends, shopping in Mitsui Outlet Park—near Sendai's bustling port—when the earthquake hit, ran outside to the parking lot with everyone else to wait out the aftershocks. Then they heard a tsunami was coming. There was already a traffic jam, so the three took off on foot, stopping at a sturdy grade school a few blocks from the sea and seeking refuge on an upper floor. They were all saved.

When the wave hit the mall, it not only washed out most of the cars parked there, it also brought in cars from as far as a mile away, adding to the wreckage. The mall's Ferris wheel sat empty and motionless, while below it a Thomas the Tank Engine ride that had escaped its rails seemed to be smiling at a chewed-up silver car. Other than the occasional person looking for their car, there was only the guards around.

  Yuriko Makino's Toyota Prius also ended up in the mall lot, after a much longer trip. The last she'd seen of it, from the roof of a nearby office where she had fled before the tsunami hit, it was stuck in a cluster of trees, being swept along with hundreds of other cars.

She and her son then searched for five days, starting by looking up and down the two-block line of trees, now filled with hundreds of cars, some stacked three high. Then someone else hunting in the car forest told her others had been dragged much farther, all the way to the mall about half a mile away. That's where Ms. Makino found it, the back fender bent around a steel sign that had brought it to a violent stop. 

"I just got the Prius last September—I am still paying a big loan on it," she said, as she emptied the back seat of plastic shopping bags, hangers, work documents and seat cushions. "We called to ask the insurance company about coverage and they said we aren't covered because we do not have tsunami insurance."

Insurance companies estimate that's the case for up to 99% of car owners. 

"Japanese have special relationships with their cars," said  Junichiro Aizawa, 64, who spent two days hiking around Mistui Outlet Park before he found his daughter's car.

"I recognized it right away," he said. "It was sitting in the parking lot of a convenience store like someone had just plopped it down there." Mr. Aizawa took his daughter's insurance documents out of the car and left it there. He doubts they will get even $150 for it as scrap.

Nearby is a long wall of cars, neatly piled two high. None have license plates because they are all brand-new: They were sitting at port awaiting export when the waves hit. Now the Yaris, Porte and Prius carcasses are mangled almost beyond recognition.

  Toyota Motor would not say how many of its cars were destroyed or what it plans to do with them.

—Miho Inada contributed to this article.

 Write to  Eric Bellman at eric.bellman@wsj.com 