The music of Nik Bärtsch's Ronin has been dubbed "zen funk." Mr. Bärtsch, a 39-year-old Zurich-born pianist, doesn't mind the term, at least not much.

"We have to invent terms so we can find philosophical interpretations of music," he said by phone recently. "The term is a bit short. It's a label, but it shows the energy and paradox of our music. In Zen, you have to train to find meditative calmness and you have to train to find a groove. Yes, I can live with this term."

Audiences will discover the limits of that label Tuesday when the quintet performs at (Le) Poisson Rouge on Bleecker Street. Ronin's hypnotic music is mysterious and full of motion, repetitive in the way funk and modal music can be. But because each of Mr. Bärtsch's hands seems at times only marginally interested in what the other is doing, and drummer Kasper Rast delights in altering time signatures and adding accents and colors, the songs are ever engaging and quietly provocative. 

Mr. Bärtsch focuses on the band as an organism. He speaks of the marriage of emotion and intellect in its music, and takes care to explain that though the groove can be so deep as to seem automated, it is the result of controlled passion.

"It's a matter of keeping the rhythm alive through a human, repetitive way of playing," he said.

Across the course of six Ronin albums, including the latest, "Llyrìa" (ECM), Mr. Bärtsch has titled each of his songs "Modul," followed by a number, suggesting that they are all parts of a whole. But aside from the term "zen funk," it's not easy to describe the repertoire that spans these discs. Perhaps it sounds like Keith Jarrett's modal improvisations, if he were accompanied by the Grateful Dead's rhythm section or, when saxophonist Sha steps out, like an acoustic version of Weather Report riffing off the theme to "The Twilight Zone." Abetted by percussionist Andi Pupato, Ronin has a vast rhythmic vocabulary, and on occasion Mr. Rast will play a variation of New Orleans's second-line drumming or straight-ahead rock over Mr. Bärtsch's cyclic themes.

  Follow Jim Fusilli on Twitter  

"I worked with Rast since we were kids," Mr. Bärtsch said. "He was 8 and I was 9. It's a gift that we stayed together and developed our interests together. We both, early as kids, were playing jazz standards and the blues. It wasn't usual. There were no schools to teach it. We were only interested in rhythmic and groove music."

Mr. Bärtsch began composing at an early age, too. "It was a natural process to record ideas and react to them," he said. "I became interested in one voice, in less is more, and impressionism." Funk continued to serve as an influence, as did world music, especially from Japan. Meanwhile, he was enrolled in a conservatory in Zurich.

"I felt not very rooted, not very authentic, when I played jazz standards," he recalled. "During my studies, I felt the need to philosophically reflect why I play each note. The idea of taking the core of compositional material and the potential of using as little material as possible took hold."

Mr. Bärtsch yearned for tranquility when he played piano. "I admire Beethoven, but I felt too much tension in my body. I enjoyed experimenting for hours, days, weeks, on patterns that flow against each other."

As revealed on the 2006 album "Nik Bärtsch's Ronin: Live," the band's pursuit of calm at the center leaves ample room for chaos at the edges. The pleasing sterility of the studio albums vanishes on stage, and the platform established by Mr. Bärtsch on piano or electric keyboard turns out to be a springboard for Mr. Rast and the darting electric funk of bassist Björn Meyer. Listerners' thoughts then turn to Miles Davis's "Bitches Brew," as well as Medeski Martin and Wood, and the term "zen funk" begins to lose some of its relevance. A jam band of the first degree emerges, directed by a composer of extraordinary discipline and vision.