SAITAMA, Japan—A week after a massive earthquake and tsunami sent thousands of evacuees fleeing from Japan's northeast coast, the country is seeing a new wave of refugees: those running from radiation.

Tens of thousands of refugees are streaming away from the stricken Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant, where overheating reactors have been leaking at times dangerous levels of radiation into the air. 

The Saitama Super Arena north of Tokyo, normally home to concerts by Japanese pop artists and football games, had initially planned to house as many as 5,000 radiation refugees. By Saturday evening, it had taken in around 2,500, as people brought entire families and bigger-than-expected luggage. 

Other municipalities are throwing doors open as well, from Yokohama south of Tokyo to Matsudo city to the east, where hundreds of evacuees are being housed in everything from elderly care centers to local temples.

Many of the refugees are from the hot zone within a 12-mile radius of the Fukushima plant, 150 miles north of Tokyo, where the Japanese government has deemed it unsafe to stay. Others lived in a radius that stretches six miles farther out, where people were ordered to stay inside their homes. An estimated 136,000 people lived in that 18-mile radius alone. 

But as fear of radiation spreads, evacuee camps are being swelled by people from beyond the 18-mile perimeter—including those from the city of Iwaki, population 341,402, where officials extended their own order for people to avoid radiation by staying in their houses.

"There are people who are fleeing because they're afraid,'' said Ryohei Takahashi, a city official from Matsudo. Mr. Takahashi said the first Iwaki refugees contacted people they knew in Matsudo asking for help, and their pleas were relayed to the mayor, who opened space in a city facility for them. 

When the news was broadcast on Japanese TV, Matusdo started getting a flood of calls from Fukushima, said Mr. Takahashi. "The phone was ringing off the hook,'' he said.

Some of the towns most affected by radiation—at first dispersed to numerous facilities in Fukushima prefecture, or state—are starting to move as a block. Some 1,200 residents of the town of Futaba-machi, neighboring the Fukushima reactor, on Saturday moved to the Saitama Super Arena in a convoy of 40 buses.

Hundreds huddled in groups around the 27,000-seat arena Saturday evening, holding plastic bags with blankets and food, waiting for officials to tell them where to go. On the wall where the buses unloaded their passengers someone had taped signs reading "Otsukare-sama,'' a phrase of encouragement used for someone who's gone through a long, tiring ordeal. 

On the arena's upper levels, hordes of volunteers stood behind folding tables dispensing everything from hot water to mushroom soup to free newspapers. The PA system blared announcements in Japanese, English and Chinese, because it is a concert hall and they have a lot of tourists—though the people who have evacuated from Fukushima are mostly Japanese. 

Empty cardboard mandarin-orange boxes were piled head high by one gate. Late-arriving evacuees were setting out sleeping gear and their few possessions on bright orange blankets in a corridor, with some constructing makeshift walls and shelves from cardboard boxes and tape.

Setsuko Hangai, 63, stood on the sidewalk next to the arena with her 85-year-old father, who uses a wheelchair. The Futaba-machi resident said her house had survived the earthquake and tsunami. The townspeople had been told to evacuate, she said, but she stayed because she didn't have the gasoline to get out of town, and she felt her father was too frail to move.

The next day, Ms. Hangai, who at the time was in a town building about 2.5 miles from the Fukushima Daiichi plant, heard a crash so loud she thought a helicopter had landed on the roof. It was the concrete building surrounding the No. 1 reactor exploding. When Ms. Hangai ran out of the building, she could see smoke rising from beyond the trees. "I thought 'Ah, it's exploded—this is it,' " she recalled.

Soon after, the Japan Self-Defense Forces arrived, and Ms. Hangai and her father were airlifted out by helicopter, along with some of the patients in a town hospital who also had stayed behind. 

They went to the base, then to a town farther inland where they were checked for radiation and told their levels were fineFor the next four days, the two were shunted around to three different evacuee camps, before being put on the bus to Saitama on Saturday.

Ms. Hangai was headed to her younger sister's house in the area, so she and her father didn't have to join the masses inside the arena. But she guesses she might never go back to Futaba-machi, where her family had lived for generations. Radiation levels near the town were too high, at 2.51 microsieverts an hour on Sunday morning. A normal level around this area is around 0.05 microsieverts an hour.

The nuclear plant had been a support for the townspeople for 40 years, supplying jobs and buoying the economy. Ms. Hangai's late husband had been a subcontractor there as well. Now, some are saying that nuclear plants had a normal lifespan of 20 years and that operator  Tokyo Electric Power Co.
9501


0.14
%




 had been trying to stretch out its tenure too long.

"We've lost everything—our house, our memories,'' she said.

— Kana Inagaki contributed to this article.

 Write to  Phred Dvorak at phred.dvorak@wsj.com 