TOKYO—Authorities are likely to cast a much wider net for possible food contamination in Japan after elevated levels of radioactivity were discovered in more milk and spinach near  Tokyo Electric Power Co.
9501


0.14
%




's stricken Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant Sunday, drawing intense scrutiny over the safety of the nation's agricultural products. 

Early Monday, the Fukushima prefecture was distributing bottled water to the village of Iidate, about 20 miles from the plant, after radioactive iodine-131 was found in tap water. The level was not enough to cause immediate health risks but would be problematic over an extended period, officials said.

Compounding matters, the discovery of higher-than-standard levels of iodine-131 in shungiku, or garland chrysanthemum, sold in Tokyo may stoke fears that contamination of the nation's food supply has expanded far beyond the perimeters of the nuclear facility. 

See all the graphics on the situation in Japan -- from before and after photos to the status of the reactors to survivors' stories.

The search for such elevated levels is being hampered by a shortage of equipment and facilities necessary for accurately measuring radioactivity in food. Also slowing the process is the absence of a central authority that can oversee the wide-reaching investigation and decide what steps should be taken. 

The radiation levels are too low to have a health impact, Japanese officials said. But they represent a blow to another part of Japan's economy resulting from the March 11 earthquake and tsunami and the resulting crisis at the Fukushima Daiichi plant.

Chief Cabinet Secretary Yukio Edano said Sunday that elevated radioactivity was detected in raw milk collected from four locations in Fukushima prefecture and one spinach sample in neighboring Ibaraki prefecture.

From one milk sample from Iidate—the same village with the tainted water—5,200 becquerel per kilogram of iodine-131 was detected, about 17 times the 300-becquerel limit set by law. 

From a sample from the town of Kunimi about 40 miles northwest of the plant—the most distant among the four locations—1,400 becquerel per kilogram of iodine-131 was detected. 

Even if consumed, these levels "don't affect human health," Mr. Edano said, adding that Japan's radioactivity standards for food are very strict. 

Any impact on Japan's agricultural sector will mostly be concentrated on the domestic market. 

Japan imports far more food than it exports, and even some of the most basic ingredients in Japanese cuisine, such as soybeans, are mostly imported. In 2009, the total value of the country's food imports stood at $53.5 billion, while its exports came to only $3.27 billion, said the Japan External Trade Organization. 

Later Sunday evening, Tochigi prefecture said it had detected higher-than-standard amounts of iodine-131 in spinach at seven locations. The Tokyo government also said it discovered higher-than-standard iodine-131 in garland chrysanthemum—a leafy vegetable commonly used in Japanese food—that was grown in Chiba prefecture, north of the capital. 

Also on Sunday, Gunma prefecture detected higher-than-standard iodine-131 in spinach from one location, and higher-than-standard cesium in kakina, a Japanese leafy vegetable, from another location.

Although the detected amounts don't pose an immediate health threat, farmers and prefectural governments are increasingly concerned that consumers may start avoiding all domestically grown farm products.

But municipal government officials say they are in tough position on how to break the news that certain agricultural products have been contaminated without pushing the panic button. 

Consumers could be put off if any radioactive material is detected, even when the amount is well below the standard set by law. The latest detection of radioactive materials followed similar cases Saturday, also involving milk and spinach. The Japanese health ministry and agricultural ministry are working with municipal governments to conduct more tests to get a better grasp of the impact of the nuclear accident on farm products. 

For the most part, the health ministry is taking the lead by collecting test results from each prefecture. But officials said the ministry isn't in the position to decide based on the data what measures, such as restrictions on shipments and consumption, should be taken. Instead, it takes the compiled test data to the special disaster-management office set up at the prime minister's office. 

The health ministry so far lets each prefecture decide how widely they want to test their farm products. 

"Radiation is invisible, so the only way to determine the safety of food products is to conduct scientific tests," said Norikazu Suzuki, an agricultural ministry official. "We need to provide consumers with accurate data, so they can make informed decisions, and that will in turn help gain their trust," he said. The ministry has been providing municipal governments with technical advice on how to test radioactivity in food. 

But another major hurdle is the fact that there aren't enough research facilities in Japan that can conduct highly accurate radioactivity tests on food. 

"If we are to fully inform consumers, the tests have to be conducted properly and accurately, and there just aren't many places in Japan that can do that," said Mr. Suzuki. Prefectures wishing to test their vegetables may have to transport the samples to a distant research lab. In quake-hit areas, just to drive to those distant locations may already pose a challenge, he added.

One such research facility is the Ibaraki Prefectural Environmental Radiation Monitoring Center, which has been testing some vegetables from the prefecture. 

Under normal circumstances, iodine-131 is rarely detected in vegetables, said the center's researcher, Kazuko Hashimoto. Spinach, which has leaves spread out, may be more likely to collect particles from the air, than cabbage, for example, she said.

The big question about contaminated food sources and health risk depends on overall consumption rather than the exact dose in any given quantity of the product, and any health consequences would be long-term risks associated with cancer rather than immediate health concerns, said  Peter Caracappa, a clinical professor of nuclear engineering at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Troy, N.Y. (Without knowing exactly the numbers that the Japanese are using to estimate typical consumption of milk and spinach, it isn't possible to verify their comparisons of how much radiation that would correspond to, he said.)

"The assumption we always make is that any dose brings some amount of associated risk," said Dr. Caracappa. Estimated cancer risk from radiation is assumed to be 4% per sievert, he said. With iodine-131, if one were to reach the oral ingestion limit set by the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission of 30 microcurie, which is roughly 50 millisievert per dose, there would be an estimated total increase in cancer risk of 0.2%.

"The risk associated with a glass of this milk is extremely tiny," said Dr. Caracappa. Constant ingestion, however, would add to one's cumulative risk. If the food testing at the levels of the samples detected in Japan were necessary for survival, he would eat it, he said. "The immediate benefit to me is far, far greater than the risk." But if there are other food options from nonaffected regions, it would be better to go with those options instead, he said.

After Chernobyl, radioactive iodine in contaminated milk was linked to higher rates of thyroid cancer. Cows are efficient at picking up the iodine from eating contaminated feed, and it appears to pass easily into their milk, said  Murray McBride, a professor and soil chemist at Cornell University who studies food-chain contamination. In humans, iodine tends to accumulate in the thyroid and raise the risk of cancer in the organ.

There is a question of how the food measurements have been collected, said Dr. Caracappa. If the iodine is detected only on the surface of the spinach leaves, it could potentially be washed away. Of more concern would be if the iodine was detected in the plant, he said. Plants can take up radioactive material into their structure by ingesting contaminated nutrients.

The Food and Drug Adminstration's screening at U.S. borders "will remain vigilant and will be augmented with radiation screening of shipments," the agency said.

The "FDA's import tracking system has been programmed to automatically flag all shipments of FDA-regulated products from Japan" and it "will be paying special attention to shipments from those companies in the affected area," the agency said.

—Shirley S. Wang in New York contributed to this article.

 Write to  Juro Osawa at juro.osawa@dowjones.com 