The Dow Jones Industrial Average came within a hair's breadth of 12000 as investors embraced positive corporate earnings and looked ahead to this week's State of the Union address.

On the heels of its eighth straight week of gains, the Dow advanced 108.68 points, its biggest jump in almost two months. The blue-chip averaged ended at 11980.52, just off the day's high and shy of the 12000 level last seen in June 2008. 

Stocks have been on an upswing for the past five months, buoyed by the Federal Reserve's injection of new money into the financial system. Individual investors have been putting money back into stock mutual funds after withdrawing money for months. Recent earnings from  General Electric
AA


-0.84
%




 and  International Business Machines
INTC


0.99
%




 and positive economic data have so far helped retain the momentum. 

Monday's rally was aided by expectations that President Obama may have a pro-business tilt in his annual State of the Union address to Congress on Tuesday.

"The State of the Union has the potential to give some direction to policy," said  Alan Gayle, senior investment strategist with RidgeWorth Investments. "Valuations are reasonable, and the downside risk to the macro environment are lower than they were in 2010." 

Earnings season has also been robust, with 73% of Standard & Poor's 500 companies beating analysts' earnings estimates, according to Capital IQ. The S&P 500 added 7.49 points, or 0.58%, to finish at 1290.84 on Monday.

The Dow's advance on Monday was powered by strong gains at IBM and GE, which gained 2.7% and 1.5%, respectively. IBM's gains pushed it to a new high, while GE finished above $20 a share for the first time in more than two years.

Technology stocks were generally strong, after chip-maker  Intel
INTC


0.99
%




 announced plans to increase share buybacks. Intel gained 2%, and helped push up the Philadelphia Stock Exchange's Semiconductor Index by 2.5%. The Nasdaq Composite Index rose 28.01 points, or 1.04%, to finish at 2717.55.

As stocks advanced, the dollar gave ground to most of its major rivals, falling against the euro for the 10th time in 11 sessions. Comments by European Central Bank Chairman Jean-Claude Trichet that the bank will be aggressive in combating inflation helped drive the common currency higher.

European stocks advanced broadly, with the French stock index leading the way to bring its January gains to 6%.

In the U.S., some analysts cautioned against expecting outsize gains in the near future. The rise on Monday came amid the lowest trading volume so far this year, with just over 4 billion shares changing hands in New York Stock Exchange composite volume. The run-up also came amid an absence of domestic economic data. And earnings after the close received a lukewarm response:  Texas Instruments
TXN


-0.04
%




 fell 2.9% in after-hours trading and  American Express
AXP


0.03
%




 slipped 1.2%.

For now, individual investors are pouring money into stock mutual funds. According to statistics released last week by the Investment Company Institute, net inflows to domestic equity mutual funds hit $3.8 billion for the week ended Jan. 12, the most recent week for which data is available. That increase was the biggest one-week spike since May 2009.

"It's the end of the month now, and people may have said, 'I don't want to miss this,' and they're buying these stocks," said  Kim Caughey, portfolio manager at Pittsburgh-based Fort Pitt Capital Group. 

  Nvidia, a maker of computer graphic chips, surged 11% to make it the best performer among the S&P 500's constituents, after Barron's said the shares could rise 80% over the next year.

  Apple,
DAR


-1.48
%




 which uses Nvidia technologies, gained 3.3% to recoup about half of last week's 6.2% tumble.

A pair of mergers and acquisitions also boosted broad market sentiment.  Rock-Tenn announcing it would buy packaging firm  Smurfit-Stone Container in a $3.5 billion deal.  Novartis said it will spend $470 million in cash to buy Genoptix to strengthen its diagnostics operations. Rock-Tenn rose 3.7%, Smurfit-Stone jumped 27%, Novartis added 1.9% and Genoptix surged 26%.

  RadioShack
SEE


-0.80
%




 fell 11% after the electronics retailer projected fourth-quarter earnings below analysts' estimates and said Chief Executive Julian Day will retire in May.

  J.C. Penney
JCP


0.07
%




 jumped 7.2% after the department-store retailer outlined plans to close underperforming stores, wind down its catalog, and named activist investor  William Ackman to its board.

—Donna Kardos Yesalavich contributed to this article.

 Write to  Jonathan Cheng at jonathan.cheng@wsj.com 