New York City Ballet is set to become one of the country's first major performing-arts companies to govern its employees' posts on Twitter, Facebook and other social-media outlets.

And Devin Alberda, a member of the company's corps de ballet, is part of the reason why. 



After news of his boss's drunk-driving arrest was made public, Mr. Alberda tweeted: "Thank goodness riding the subway while intoxicated isn't a misdemeanor offense," adding the hashtag "#dontfireme."

In another tweet, he mocked a character in a production with a reference to the presidential executive order that paved the way for Japanese internment camps: "Yellowface character in NYCB's 2010 revival of The Magic Flute the worst thing to happen to the Asian American community since EO 9066."

Plenty of professional ballet dancers have Twitter accounts, parting the curtain on a long-cloistered world with details on their backstage warm-up process or what they're snacking on during intermission. 

But some, such as Mr. Alberda, go a step further, posting the kind of workday gripes or jokes dancers might say to each other but that are rarely aired publicly.

The company now is negotiating a social-media policy as part of contract talks with the dancers' union, the American Guild of Musical Artists.

The ballet's executive director, Katherine Brown, said in a statement: "Because social media usage has dramatically increased and will continue to do so, like many organizations the company is exploring the development of social media guidelines for all artistic and administrative employees with respect to their professional lives." 

The union's national executive director said it doesn't see the need for a social-networking policy but wouldn't object as long as rules don't over-police the dancers.

"In part, City Ballet is a public trust, and because of that employees have the right to use social media to praise or criticize what it does," said Alan Gordon, AGMA's national executive director.

The proposed policy doesn't differ significantly from those at many large corporations, although it would be among the first to be enacted by a major performing-arts company. Boston Ballet is negotiating a similar agreement.

In New York, the policy would require dancers to include a disclaimer specifying that their comments are not employer-sanctioned, according to a copy of a draft reviewed by The Wall Street Journal. 

It would also ban them from disclosing another dancer's injury or illness, and from posting photographs of company events, or of "persons engaged in New York City Ballet business without their consent."

"Additionally, in order to protect its interests, NYCB reserves the right to monitor...postings that are available to the general public or those that are not privacy-protected about the company, its employees and its activities," the draft says.

But while comparable to corporate policies governing employees' online conduct, the rules would be a departure from the laissez-faire approach taken by the ballet until this point.

That attitude appears to have shifted, in part because of cases such as Mr. Alberda, 24 years old, who says his public tweets have caused "rumblings of discontent" in the ballet's administration.

In an interview with the Journal, he said his September tweet about the "Yellowface character" in "The Magic Flute" prompted a member of management to warn him that he was "playing with fire" by criticizing ballet master in chief (and Magic Flute choreographer) Peter Martins.

Mr. Alberda also went on Twitter to poke gentle fun at company benefactor David Koch. Mr. Koch declined to comment. 

Dancers' online musings can advance the company's interest by attracting a younger demographic, a goal it has tried to achieve through other tactics. 

But the transparency enabled by Twitter and Facebook is a new frontier for a profession that is often seen as placing a premium on orderly conduct.

Still, the proposal, if implemented, is unlikely to have much effect on one of the more outlandish NYCB-related Twitter feeds: a fake account for Mr. Martins. 

"Got a call from @backstreetboys + @NKOTB asking to perform this w us next season," the fake Mr. Martins tweeted earlier this month. "Considering it."

 Write to  Erica Orden at erica.orden@wsj.com 