BANGKOK—Thailand's Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva said he plans to dissolve the House of Representatives by Friday and call what he described as a landmark election for the Southeast Asian country, which has been plagued by deep and sometimes deadly political divisions. 

"This is a real opportunity for Thailand to get out of this cycle of violence," he said in an interview Friday at Government House in Bangkok. "For too long I think we've been held back." 

Mr. Abhisit said despite persistent political uncertainty—including monthslong protests in central Bangkok last year that left 91 people dead in some of the worst political violence in Thai history—the country managed to come through the global economic crisis strongly, adding that the momentum of the recovery is continuing. 

However, he said that challenges remain and that high oil and commodity prices present threats to the outlook for Southeast Asia's second-largest economy. In addition, Thailand and Cambodia's armies have clashed repeatedly at their disputed border over the past week, resulting in the deaths of at least 16 soldiers from both sides and triggering speculation that the conflict might delay Mr. Abhisit's election announcement.

Mr. Abhisit was adamant that the border dispute would not delay a national election. Going to the polls now might provide Mr. Abhisit with a fresh mandate to pursue fresh policies to help buttress the country's economic progress, analysts say, and he is choosing to call the election several months before the end of his term in December in order to provide Thailand with a firmer sense of direction and to remove the shadow of uncertainty that still hangs over the country.

Oxford-educated Mr. Abhisit, 46 years old, was elevated to power by Parliament in December 2008 after a Thai court dissolved a government that was backed by former populist Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra because of vote buying. The ruling came amid intense political pressure on the existing government, including protests by conservative demonstrators that forced the closure of Bangkok's international airport for nine days. 

Political analysts believe the planned election will be a close race and opinion polls suggest the main government and opposition parties are neck-and-neck. Mr. Abhisit's return to power will be complicated by the still-lingering appeal of Mr. Thaksin, a 61-year-old telecommunications mogul who was ousted in a military coup in 2006 and who now lives abroad to escape imprisonment on a corruption conviction that he describes as politically motivated. Mr. Thaksin's supporters among the Red Shirt protesters who staged last years often-violent protests may also ramp up their rallies during the election campaign. 

In addition, Mr. Thaksin is playing a key role in managing the election campaign of the For Thais Party, the main opposition group. He has pledged sharp increases in the minimum wage and tax cuts in order to breathe fresh life in Thailand's domestic, consumer-driven economy and reduce its dependence on volatile export markets.

In some ways, Mr. Abhisit's strategy is similar, though he says it is better thought out than Mr. Thaksin's plans. His campaign platform includes a proposal to increase minimum wages by 25% over the next two years to help poorer pockets of the country to cope with fast-rising prices. 

The consumer-price index rose 3.14% in March and is expected to show further acceleration when data for April are released Monday. 

Mr. Abhisit said without the increase in the minimum wage, "there is a real fear that this recovery would not be as strong as it should be." 

"Clearly some of the wages would feed through to prices, but prices do not make up that big proportion of costs. And the fact of the matter is we need to help people to get through this crisis," he said. 

Mr. Abhisit said his administration is also continuing to waive the bulk of the excise tax on diesel to ensure that the retail price is capped at 30 baht, or roughly $1 per liter. While this subsidy is costly for the government, he stressed that allowing prices to increase would do much more damage to the economy by pushing up the prices of all goods. 

The Thai leader said his government has introduced a series of other measures to help strengthen the economy over the past two and a half years, including introducing free, 15-year education programs, providing income support for the elderly and also income guarantees for farmers. "We need to do more, and the people want more," he said.

In the lead-up to the election, the government, which analysts say might lack the widespread support of low-income workers, has been gradually unveiling a series of populist policies in an effort to woo them over. Along with the minimum wage increase, he has also started offering low-interest loans to taxi drivers, the permanent exemption from electricity charges for low-income households, and the extension of social security fund coverage for informal laborers. 

 Write to  Leigh Murray at leigh.murray@dowjones.com, James Hookway at james.hookway@wsj.com and Almar Latour at almar.latour@wsj.com 