UNITED NATIONS—Britain and France pushed to hold a U.N. Security Council vote on Thursday that would authorize airstrikes and possibly other military action against Libya but Russia said it needed more time to decide on the resolution. Some officials suggested Arab nations would play a key role.

U.S. Ambassador Susan Rice said the U.S. believed preparations should be made for military action that goes beyond a no-fly zone to protect Libyans under threat from forces loyal to Col. Moammar Gadhafi. "The situation on the ground has evolved and…a no-fly zone has inherent limitations in terms of protection of civilians," Ms. Rice said. 

Washington was "interested in a broad range of actions that would effectively protect civilians and increase the pressure on the Gadhafi regime to halt the killing," she said. 

Options for going beyond the no-fly zone could include the use of drones, either to monitor events on the ground or to strike at select targets. The U.S. was hopeful for Security Council action Thursday.

A British diplomat said the resolution "would not have been credible…without some kind of cast-iron commitment to adopt further measures that could help civilians." 

Vitaly Churkin, Russia's ambassador, expressed disappointment that Moscow's proposal of a cease-fire before military action came into effect was rejected. China also has been skeptical about use of force. Both countries hold vetoes and can block any resolution.

French Foreign Minister Alain Juppé said earlier that several Arab countries were ready to take an active role in a military operation, after the Arab League requested Saturday that the U.N. authorize military action. Nawaf Salam, Lebanon's U.N. ambassador, said a "number" of Arab nations would join in enforcing a no-fly zone, not specifying which Arab nations would participate. 

Ms. Rice said the U.S. was in "discussion with Arab and other partners about what role they are prepared to play."

"The request for action came from members of the Arab League and as a consequence of that they ought to be ready and willing to contribute in very meaningful ways," Ms. Rice said.

The resolution would also authorize members of the Arab League and other states to "take all necessary measures to protect civilians and civilian objects in Libya." This phrase could also be interpreted as authorizing the use of force, diplomats said.

The resolution would also give countries authority to "use all measures" to inspect air and sea cargo bound for Libya that might be carrying arms. 

"The turning point was the Arab League statement. As we speak there is an intense debate in New York, and they are looking at the details of what Arab participation will be," said Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said, on a visit to Cairo.

Last month the Security Council imposed an arms embargo, but it had little effect on halting Col. Gadhafi's forces.

The resolution would also extend asset freezes to "economic resources which…are owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by the Gadahfi regime or by individuals acting on their behalf."

Last month's resolution froze only the assets of Col. Gadhafi and 21 family members and close associates.

—David Gauthier-Villars, Keith Johnson and Jay Solomon contributed to this article.

 Write to  Joe Lauria at newseditor@wsj.com 