 Cairo, Egypt 

Alaa Al Aswany, the bestselling novelist in the Arab world, wears blue surgical garb and chain smokes through a pack of Davidoffs. A dentist with a practice in Cairo's fashionable Garden City, he says with a laugh that he ought to know better, but has other priorities these days.

Mr. Al Aswany is one of the few prominent faces of Egypt's so-called leaderless revolution, a Vaclav Havel for this Arab Spring. Except for a few hours to change clothes, he was in Tahrir Square each of the 18 days before Hosni Mubarak fell from power two months ago. "It was unbelievable," he says, "but now I am worried."

Many Egyptians are concerned about what comes next, be it instability or an Islamist usurpation. Mr. Al Aswany sees a counterrevolution brewing. "There is deviation, compromising," he says in English after office hours at his clinic. "They want to stall the change in the middle, they want to resist it."

"They" are the remnants of the Mubarak regime, the country's interim military rulers, Saudi Arabia and the U.S. None of them, Mr. Al Aswany says, wants Egypt to clean out the old system and put down a proper democracy. He still recalls U.S. Vice President Joe Biden's remark during the uprising when Mr. Biden said that President Mubarak wasn't a dictator.

Unlike many politically outspoken writers, Mr. Al Aswany's words and actions have impact. Last Friday in Tahrir Square, he helped mobilize thousands of demonstrators, calling on the ruling military to investigate the Mubarak family for corruption. Prosecutors soon opened an investigation into the family's financial affairs, and on Tuesday President Mubarak received a summons to appear in a Cairo court.

A month ago, Mr. Al Aswany confronted Interim Prime Minister Ahmed Shafik on a live evening chat show. In a memorable scene, the prime minister, appointed in the last days of the Mubarak era, lost his temper under persistent grilling from the novelist. "You don't understand anything! Don't try to play the patriotic act! I'm more of a patriot than you are!" he shouted. Mr. Al Aswany shot back, "I am an Egyptian citizen and I have the right to ask you [such questions]!" Egyptians had never seen a ruler dressed down so severely by a civilian in public before. The next day, Mr. Shafik was fired by the generals.

For the past decade, Mr. Al Aswany's various roles have complemented one another. His dentistry brings him into contact with the kinds of Egyptians who feed his fiction. Writing now pays the bills after his breakout hit, "The Yacoubian Building" (2002), but he says that "success could be as dangerous as failure for a writer, because you can be separated letter by letter from the ordinary people."

Born in 1957, Mr. Al Aswany has a paunch and wears a thick ring on his left index finger; he looks people hard in the eye. For a writer who is so political, he says he dislikes the idea of a political novel, and likes putting his own work in that category even less. "There is a good novel and a bad novel," he says.

"The Yacoubian Building" captured the corruption, hypocrisy and social tensions of Mubarak-era Egypt in ways that now look prescient. Looking back on Tahrir Square, Mr. Al Aswany says that "when people said, 'We are here because of what you wrote,' that is the highest honor any writer could get." He calls it "a revolution of readers."

The other night, Mr. Al Aswany sat down at one of the weekly literary salons he has held for years. He recently moved this prerevolutionary staple of Cairo intellectual life to the more capacious Opera House. Speaking to the audience in his throaty baritone, he implores Egyptians to stay true to a "real revolution . . . that accepted no compromises." Mr. Al Aswany helped found, in 2004, one of the first grassroots democratic opposition movements, Kefaya (or Enough). 

In spite of his current apprehensions, Mr. Al Aswany offers an optimistic, possibly overly rosy, view of Egyptian society. He plays down the danger of a takeover by the Muslim Brotherhood, the well-organized Islamist group. "I disagree with their ideas, but they are not terrorists. They are conservatives—religious people," he says. "In a democratic state they will never take more than 15% of the voters."

A self-described secular Egyptian, Mr. Al Aswany writes openly about homosexuality and other Islamist vices. "The Islamists are against me," he says. "They don't have a taste for literature." He jokes, but only so much: One of his friends, the late Egyptian Nobel Laureate Naguib Mahfouz was stabbed in 1994 by an Islamist supposedly angered by the novelist's literary portrayal of God.

The Al Aswany take on Egypt stresses its liberal traditions. Going back to the pharaohs, Egypt always took in immigrants and invaders. Before World War II, it stood at the vanguard of Arab modernism. "For centuries you go out in Egypt, you find the bar, the prostitute, the church and the mosque—and you are the only one who decides your lifestyle," he says.

This cosmopolitan tolerance is fading. During the era of Gamal Abdel Nasser in 1950s and '60s, Egypt's Jewish and foreign communities were decimated; under President Anwar Sadat in the '70s, Islamism flourished. But Mr. Al Aswany prefers to dwell on the signs of the old Egypt visible in Tahrir Square. "You could see the liberal atmosphere," he says. "Everybody was accepted." Egypt's uprising passed with little violence compared with similar events in Libya, Yemen and other Arab countries this spring.

Mr. Al Aswany once published a piece on "Why Egyptians do not revolt," but he says he always knew they would. "Egyptians are like camels," he writes in "On the State of Egypt," his new collection of essays. "They can put up with beatings, humiliation and starvation for a long time, but when they rebel they do so suddenly and with a force that is impossible to control." 

Tahrir Square, he says, represents "a mental revolution" as well. "The revolution is a human achievement itself. The revolution means that you go in the streets and you are willing to die for freedom, and this makes out of you a better human being. I wrote that a revolution is like a love story. When you are in a love story, you become a much better person. You have all the good qualities enhanced."

But then, I note, comes the glare of the morning after. Mr. Al Aswany laughs. 

"Democracy is not a paradise and Egypt will have problems," he says. "I feel that for the first time in my life my country is on the right track. It is a matter of time, fine, but we are on the right track." 

 Mr. Kaminski is a member of the Journal's editorial board. 