Webster Hall

125 E. 11th St., (212) 353-1600

Saturday-Sunday

Over the span of a few feverish and extremely prescient years, the Dismemberment Plan coursed through a slew of styles and sounds that would resonate in the rock underground for a long time to come. With albums like the 1999 classic "Emergency & I," they fused punk energy with emo sensitivity, and somehow managed to make the unlikely union danceable and fun. They were early in a surge of bands that looked back to the Talking Heads for different kinds of rhythmic cues, and their lyrical and melodic stamp affixed to such timely groups as its one-time tourmates Death Cab for Cutie. The Dismemberment Plan called it quits in 2003, but after reconvening to remaster "Emergency & I," they decided to play a few shows together—much to the hyperventilating joy of a fan base as fervent as any in rock.

w/ Levon Vincent

Public Assembly

70 N. 6th St., Brooklyn

(718) 384-4586

Friday 

Of the many kinds of electronic dance music made since synthesizers came into fashion in the 1980s, the strain known as Chicago house remains the most sinuous and irresistible. Derived from disco, it curried special favor with human spirit and soul. But like the earliest forms of techno born around the same time, it delved deep into the mysteries of machines. Virgo, a reunited duo performing at the recurring dance party known as "The Bunker," is among the best practitioners of the form. Last year, a reissue of preternaturally funky Virgo recordings from 1989 lured the duo back into the spotlight to perform for crowds eager to move. Virgo will have ample aid, too, from Levon Vincent, a younger DJ and producer who has played an integral role in establishing what's been called a new-school house sound of New York.

w/ Edie Brickell

Radio City Music Hall

1260 6th Ave., (212) 247-4777

Saturday

Future archaeologists curious about the millennial swell of bearded indie-folk troubadours should pay special attention to Iron & Wine's Sam Beam. When he started releasing songs in 2002, he came on like a throwback to a time when singer-songwriters stared in wonderment at streetlights and spent a lot of time thinking about how to condition their boots. His acoustic sound was gentle and spare, and his lyrics surveyed subjects held out in song titles like "The Rooster Moans" and "Muddy Hymnal." Mr. Beam's aural palette has expanded greatly since, drifting into electricity and electronics on the new album "Kiss Each Other Clean," but his spirit remains rooted in a style that stretches back to old Appalachia—as does his beard, which makes him look like Zach Galifianakis without the guile. Iron & Wine will be joined here by the rootsy songstress (and wife of Paul Simon) Edie Brickell.



Music Hall of Williamsburg

66 N. 6th St., Brooklyn

(718) 486-5400

Wednesday

Liz Phair has made no shortage of questionable career moves in recent years, beginning with her protest-stoking swerve toward radio-friendly pop on 2003's "Liz Phair" and continuing through last year's roundly lambasted digital curio "Funstyle." But then, those same moves have certainly kept Ms. Phair current—and arguably a bigger part of the musical conversation than she ever was before. Her masterwork continues to be her beloved 1993 debut LP "Exile in Guyville," which widened indie-rock's purview to allow for more than just plaints from sensitive and sarcastic young boys. It's been a long time, but many of that album's most enduring qualities—its brassy brattiness and insouciant sneer among them—remain very much in Ms. Phair's arsenal. Indeed, it's only natural that talk of her supposed obsolescence is often followed by subsequent wondering if, actually, she simply continues to play one or two moves ahead.

w/ Buke and Gass 

The Bell House

149 7th St., Brooklyn

(718) 643-6510

Saturday

Mission of Burma is one of the bands around which the notion of "post-punk" multiplied. When they formed in Boston in the early 1980s, they were a punk band, to be sure. But they were also smart, studied and too meticulous to invest much of their enterprise in a style meant to be dumb and raw. With all of that established at the start, Mission of Burma proceeded to shape much of the angry, angst-ridden rock that would follow, with rigorous precision and an almost machine-like devotion to rhythm and low-end throb. They have enough of a legacy to get by on now, but since reuniting and starting to write new material in 2002, they remain a formidable threat in the present. Opening duo Buke and Gass live in Brooklyn and make a bewitching, cathartic racket with a modified baritone ukulele (the Buke) and a self-made guitar/bass contraption (the Gass). 