As we have noted, the New York Times's response to last weekend's murders in Tucson was to instigate a witch hunt against Republican politicians and "particularly" against members of the independent (nonliberal) media. This appealed to what one might call the Manichaean wing of American liberalism: those who mistake political disagreement for enmity, who are so strongly prejudiced against conservatives as to regard them, in some sense, as less than fully human.

Yet that is not what one would call a broad appeal--a point powerfully made by a USA Today news story:

This is an astonishing finding. Only 35% of those surveyed think the New York Times's position is even legitimate. And although President Obama, in his speech last night, did not go so far as to call it illegitimate, he did make his disagreement clear:

"It did not." With those three truthful words--an improvisation or a late addition, as they were not in the prepared text--the liberal president rebuked the out-of-control liberal media that have, under the leadership of the New York Times, been engaging in a vicious campaign of lies and smears.

The Times's response, in an editorial this morning, could hardly have been weaker:

The newspaper that seized upon a horrific crime to demonize its political opponents--and to demonize "particularly" those in the media who reject its worldview and its presumption of moral authority--is now applauding the president for being able to "transcend the debate" that it instigated with its yellow journalism. 

The Times expresses a desire to change the subject, to "gun safety laws and improvement to the mental health system" before taking another shot (just a figure of speech, people!) at Sarah Palin, this time for her "especially disturbing" description of the Times-led smear campaign as a "blood libel"--a term that, as we shall see below, the Times itself has used more than once other than in reference to the traditional anti-Semitic smear.

Obama's speech reinforces our observation yesterday that, in general, liberal politicians have behaved far more decently than liberal journalists in the aftermath of Saturday's atrocious crime. Reader Don Rubottom offers some insight as to why:

In the case of the New York Times editorial page, they are rabid yet toothless chihuahuas. They lack both the integrity to renounce their scurrilous slanders and the courage to attempt a defense.

"Decent people of whatever political stripe must say enough is enough," we wrote on Tuesday. When Barack Obama said, "It did not," that was his meaning. This column has found much to criticize about the president and his policies. We expect to find much more over the next two years. Last night, however, he committed an act of decency for which Americans can be grateful.

  For Bernard-Henri Levy   To understand the story behind the title of this item, tune in to CNN's "Fareed Zakaria GPS" this Sunday at 10 a.m. or 1 p.m. ET. The subject is Sarah Palin's statement yesterday that "especially within hours of a tragedy unfolding, journalists and pundits should not manufacture a blood libel that serves only to incite the very hatred and violence they purport to condemn." 

Palin-haters have zeroed in on the phrase "blood libel," which usually refers to the ancient anti-Semitic claim that Jews kill Gentile children and use their blood in the baking of matzohs for Passover. The haters claim to be shocked by her tasteless appropriation of the term.

This column takes no position as to whether the phrase was well-chosen, and we acknowledge that some people who are not haters, such as John Podhoretz and Jonah Goldberg, are uncomfortable with it. In substance, the analogy seems suitable: The New York Times and its followers in the media are seeking to blame Palin and other "outside" media figures for murder, including the murder of a child. Her outrage is entirely justified. But that does not answer the question of whether her choice of words was tasteful.

The outrage of the Palin-haters over the use of the term, however, is phony. Many of the outraged haters have themselves used the term "blood libel" in similar metaphorical senses, including the New York Times. Here are a couple of examples:

From a Dec. 5, 1989, Times book review: "During the yellow fever plague a form of blood libel is imposed on the blacks in Philadelphia; they are said to be both responsible for and immune to sickness because of the color of their skin."

On Sept. 14, 1990, the late Abe Rosenthal penned a column in response to Pat Buchanan's assertion, after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, that "there are only two groups that are beating the drums for war in the Middle East - the Israeli Defense Ministry and its amen corner in the United States." Rosenthal countered: "We are not dealing here with country-club anti-Semitism but with the blood libel that often grows out of it: Jews are not like us but are others, with alien loyalties for which they will sacrifice the lives of Americans."

 Andrew Sullivan, whose Palin obsession is extreme even by the standards of Palin-haters, wrote yesterday:

Here is the same Andrew Sullivan, showing his typical level of self-awareness, responsibility and composure, in a post of Oct. 12, 2010:

Our favorite example comes from Josh Marshall of TalkingPointsMemo.com, who wrote yesterday, albeit with more smirk than dudgeon:

On Nov. 21, 2000, Marshall quoted then-Rep. Peter Deutsch, a Florida Democrat, as complaining on CNN's "Crossfire" of "almost a blood libel by the Republicans towards Al Gore, saying that he was trying to stop men and women in uniform that are serving this country from voting. Marshall's response:

Deutsch's analogy is far more of a stretch than Palin's. No one was accusing Gore of killing children, or anyone else. OK, Deutsch said "almost," but does anyone think Marshall or the other Palin-haters would have been satisfied had she used the same qualification?

The only element Marshall cites that arguably makes the accusation against Gore worse than the accusations against Palin is "the divisions already existing in American society." In 2000, the country really was split down the middle between Bush and Gore--hence the election dispute. Today, as that USA Today poll shows, the country is largely united against the libel (blood or otherwise).

On CNN Sunday--we taped the show earlier this afternoon--Levy, a French intellectual, will declare it "obscene" to use the term "blood libel" in a metaphorical sense. This may reflect the standards that prevail in France, which of course has a much worse history of anti-Semitism than America does. In American intellectual and journalistic circles, however, the term has been used with some frequency. As a foreigner, Levy may not know better. But American Palin-haters lack that excuse.

  For the Record   Jonathan Chait of The New Republic has generally been a voice of reasoned liberalism this week. We certainly never thought we'd write that, but it's been a strange week. Whether carelessly or deliberately, however, Chait misstates our position in a blog entry from this morning:

In fact, what we called a lie was Krugman's characterization of the Bachmann quote as "eliminationist rhetoric," which Chait does not acknowledge, much less defend. We conceded that Bachmann's words were ill-chosen and that one might reasonably regard them as irresponsible, as Chait appears to.

Chait owes us a correction. We emailed him just after noon ET to ask for one. So far, he has not replied.

  One Man's Tiramisu Is Another Man's Fruitcake   Ex-Rep. Paul Kanjorski, the Pennsylvania Democrat who said in October of now-Gov. Rick Scott of Florida that "they ought to . . . put him against the wall and shoot him," is defending his eliminationist rhetoric, reports the Citizens Voice of Wilkes-Barre, Pa.:

Perhaps Kanjorski should heed this recommendation, from an editorial in the Seattle Times:

Although come to think of it, only fruitcakes would take rhetorical advice from a writer who turns phrases like "high-caliber heinous vitriol."

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Brian Kalt, Michele Schiesser, Dan O'Shea, Terry Holmes, Michael Keller, T. Young, John Sanders, Don Stewart, Rebecca Billings, Zack Russ, Danny Brown, Abe Beyda, Ethel Fenig, Aaron Spetner, Jared Silverman, Randy Smith and Jim Miller. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)