LONDON—British police arrested a 30-year-old man in Glasgow, Scotland, in connection with a suicide bombing in Stockholm in December, marking the first arrest related to the high-profile terror attack.

In a dawn raid Tuesday, officers from the Strathclyde police arrested the man at a residence near Glasgow's city center, authorities said. Police didn't identify the man but said he was a foreign national. Scottish police continued to search two other premises in connection with the man, who remains in custody but hadn't been charged as of midday Tuesday.

Strathclyde police said the operation was the result of intelligence and "relates to allegations that this individual has been involved in aiding terrorist activities" outside of Scotland. People familiar with the matter confirmed that it was related to the Stockholm bombing. 

Swedish authorities previously have said they are treating as a terrorist attack two explosions near Christmas shoppers on Stockholm streets on a Saturday afternoon in December. The blasts killed the suspected bomber, who police have said they believe to be Taimour Abdulwahab, and injured two others.

Mr. Abdulwahab, a 28-year-old Iraqi-born Swede, had spent at least several years in the U.K., including attending college. He had lived in the U.K. as recently as the past year or two. 

London's Metropolitan Police service, which takes the lead on national terrorist investigations in the U.K., has carried out its own inquiries, including searching a house where Mr. Abdulwahab lived in Luton, about 30 miles north of London. A spokeswoman said it is liaising with police in Scotland and Swedish authorities. 

The arrest is a result of the investigation in Scotland and cooperation between Scottish and Swedish police. Swedish authorities said they had received a request for mutual legal assistance from Scotland and were cooperating with that request.

"So far, the investigation shows that there may be a link to the arrested person and the terrorism crime in Stockholm on Dec. 11," the Swedish police service said, adding that Strathclyde police are in charge of the preliminary investigation.

 Write to  Cassell Bryan-Low at cassell.bryan-low@wsj.com 