Suggestions that the suspected gunman in the Arizona shootings suffers from a psychological disorder have raised the question of whether the mentally ill should be allowed to buy guns. But defining mental illness is so difficult and controversial that it might give pause to anyone seeking to rewrite gun laws.

Just how many people are mentally ill is the subject of considerable dispute. As many as one in four U.S. adults suffer from mental disorders, according to the field's most prominent study. 

To come up with that number, researchers survey people in their homes, seeking evidence of symptoms commonly associated with mental illness. But the surveys are expensive and infrequent; the last to produce estimates for individual disorders in the U.S. is nearly a decade old. And the efforts are complicated by the nature of mental illness, where little sometimes separates those considered ill from the healthy. 

"We do our best, but we know there is a lot of inaccuracy," says  Ronald Kessler, professor of health-care policy at Harvard Medical School, who has led two national surveys of mental illness. "We're getting better," he adds, but "we don't really have a clue."

Dr. Kessler and colleagues last attempted to count mentally ill U.S. adults starting in 2001. They constructed a detailed questionnaire using the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, which lays out criteria for various illnesses. Then they dispatched researchers to a representative sample of U.S. homes.

Over the next two years, the researchers persisted in trying to get as many responses as possible. They offered $50 to participate. They came back when told the person they wanted to interview was in the hospital, in prison, or overseas with the military. They visited some homes at least 15 times to reach those who weren't in. The tactics eventually yielded a response rate of 71%, even though the full survey took, on average, more than two hours per person to complete.

The study had drawbacks. For one thing, respondents had to tell interviewers to their face about mental illness, and other studies suggest that people are likely to be more forthcoming in a less intimate survey format, such as entering the answers into computers themselves. Also, homeless people and those in long-term institutional care weren't included, because the surveys took place in homes. 

Efforts to test the reliability of the findings have produced troubling results. For instance, respondents sometimes give different answers when interviewed a second time.

The Harvard study nevertheless yielded a count of the mentally ill that is widely cited, including by the National Institute of Mental Health, a division of the federal National Institutes of Health. It found that 26% of U.S. adults had a mental illness in the previous year, including 7% who had major depressive disorder and 18% who had anxiety disorders. These were largely in line with previous estimates, derived from a similar study led by Dr. Kessler a decade earlier.

Some researchers think the prevailing estimates overstate the number of mentally ill people in the U.S.  Jerome Wakefield, professor of social work and psychiatry at New York University, says that many people counted as mentally ill according to the DSM are instead reacting sensibly to stressful life events, such as the loss of a job. 

"We have had so much trouble distinguishing disorder from stress and eccentricity," Prof. Wakefield says. "We need to focus on the ones that are more severe, and really need help."

The differing estimates highlight the challenge of pinpointing what constitutes a mental illness. The DSM continually is undergoing revision as psychiatrists learn more about illness.  Darrel Regier, executive director of research and education at the American Psychiatric Association and vice-chair of a task force that is working on a new version of the diagnostic manual for 2013, says the committee is developing a system to assign point values to different degrees of symptoms, "so it's not just a yes-or-no question," Dr. Regier says.

Messy, evolving definitions are perhaps inevitable for illnesses that, for the most part, don't have biological markers, unlike many physical ailments that can be identified by a blood test or X-ray. 

Nor is it clear that people with mental illness are more likely to commit violent crime. Some studies have found a link only when certain symptoms, or substance abuse, are present. Even then, the difference in risk is no greater than other disparities that people, and gun laws, tolerate, including the increased chance of violence by men compared with women, according to Bruce Link, an epidemiologist at Columbia University's Mailman School of Public Health. 

Limiting gun purchases by people with substance-abuse problems, for example, makes sense, says psychologist John Grohol, founder of the mental-health website Psych Central.

Still, he says, "it's easy to go overboard…and generalize to anybody who has mental illness."

 Write to  Carl Bialik at numbersguy@wsj.com 