 Terminal 5  610 W. 56th St., (212) 582-6600  April 19

The most revered female rocker in a decade filled with them, Polly Jean Harvey burst onto the scene in 1992 with her cocksure mixture of guttural blues and grungy punk on "Dry." In 1995 she began smoothing it out with "To Bring You My Love." From there, Ms. Harvey has offered something different with every release, a trend that continues with this year's jangly and jarring "Let England Shake." Taking her lyrical cues from British poets such as WWI casualty Wilfred Owen and current poet laureate Carol Ann Duffy, Ms. Harvey shows an acute awareness of our endless wars, and here ties the violent theme back to the Great War. She eschews the growl and guitar that defined her previous decade, accompanying herself instead on piano and autoharp, and delivering her lines in a nerve-rattling high keen. 

 Guggenheim Museum  1071 Fifth Ave., (212) 423-3587  Thursday

As history buffs (and Leonardo DiCaprio fans) are well aware, Thursday marks the 99th anniversary of the sinking of the Titanic. The tragedy has inspired visual artist Dominique Gonzalez-Foerster's installation "T.1912" within the rotunda of the Guggenheim, with the museum and its various levels transformed into the great ship itself, with the audience "boarding" for departure. At the heart of this staged conceptual work is a performance, by the Wordless Music Orchestra, of British composer Gavin Bryars's somber minimalist elegy "The Sinking of the Titanic," which is based on the report that the ship's house band played a hymn as it plunged into the icy Atlantic. Too often, minimalist compositions elide emotion in favor of emphasizing process (see classics like "Drumming" and "Music With Changing Parts"), but Mr. Bryars's piece, some 40 years after its premiere, remains a profoundly moving work. 

 Radio City Music Hall  1260 Sixth Ave., (212) 247-4777  Wednesday

After surviving and thriving through the dark days of the early 21st century with brooding, bristling, and ultimately redemptive albums like "Return to Cookie Mountain" and "Dear Science," TV on the Radio sounds triumphant on its latest, "Nine Types of Light." To make the album, the band wrote a fine batch of love songs and displayed a luminous touch in its productions, to where it finally sounds comfortable (or perhaps less guilty) in its own skin. Then came the sobering news that bassist Gerard Smith was undergoing treatment for cancer and would not join the band on its new tour. For a group that thrives on adversity and resilience, expect TVOTR to transcend such difficulties at this album release celebration at Radio City. That trace of the bittersweet tucked within the ecstatic is part of the its strength.

Le Poisson Rouge  158 Bleecker St., (212) 505-3474  Saturday

The name is the thing with British musician Pete Kember. Better known as Sonic Boom, Mr. Kember was a founding member of hallowed underground band Spacemen 3, which took the drugged drone rock of the Velvet Underground to the furthest reaches of outer space. When that group dissolved (with member Jason Pierce forming Spiritualized), Sonic Boom reveled in the more extreme aspects of sound with projects like Experimental Audio Research and Spectrum—the former being abstract, the latter more straight-forward. Of course, "straight-forward" for Mr. Boom still means humming modular electronics, dreamy melodies and body-erasing volume levels. It's been a few years since the last Spectrum release, but Sonic Boom has stayed busy in the interim, serving as producer for albums by MGMT and Panda Bear. That said, Spectrum will no doubt be, to borrow a song title, "Ecstasy in Slow Motion." With Crystal Stilts.

 The Stone  Avenue C and Second Street  Saturday

Meg Baird and Fursaxa's Tara Burke are two of Philadelphia's consummate yet unassuming folk artists, each taking a distinct path to reach her muse. For the early set here, Ms. Baird will meld her finger-picking guitar with her gentle voice in a way that feels at once traditional and outside of time, as evidenced on her gorgeous 2007 album "Dear Companion." As on that album, in performance Ms. Baird slots her own songs alongside well-chosen covers and British ballads to make a seamless whole. In the later set, Fursaxa might be the more gnomic act, utilizing her uncanny voice and harmonium to create a tranced-out state. But despite such meager means, she still enchants. On Saturday she'll be supported by Philly instrumentalists Helena Espvall on cello and Mary Lattimore on harp. They all appear as part of Thurston Moore's Ecstatic Peace curation series.