The Game Plan takes a look at how individuals and families are saving for retirement—and then asks financial advisers to comment on those strategies. You're invited to share your own retirement-savings plans by sending an email to reports@wsj.com.



Read the complete  Wealth Adviser report .

Jason and Olga Kelly make enough money to live well—but they've also been conscientious about saving. 

The Lafayette, Calif., couple, both doctors, sock away money for retirement, their kids' college costs and unforeseen emergencies. They also vacation in Hawaii and Palm Springs, attend opera and ballet performances in nearby San Francisco and eat out a few times a week.

Mr. Kelly, 44, is chief of radiation oncology at Kaiser Permanente East Bay in Oakland. Ms. Kelly, 47, works part-time as a pediatrician at the Contra Costa County Pediatric Clinic. Combined, they bring home paychecks in the mid-six figures.

The Kellys tithe 10% of their earnings to their church and keep $40,000 to $50,000 in cash savings. They don't keep a strict budget, but "we try to have the overall goal of living within our means," says Mr. Kelly.

Because Ms. Kelly doesn't work enough hours to qualify for retirement benefits, the couple invests in every savings vehicle that Mr. Kelly's employer offers. He contributes $16,500 a year to his 401(k) and the company contributes an amount equal to 5% of his salary to a money-purchase program. Those accounts have a combined $345,000. Mr. Kelly also has a defined-benefit pension plan.

In addition, Mr. Kelly has an IRA with about $118,000, money that came from rolling over retirement savings from his former employer, the University of Texas.

Mr. and Ms. Kelly had an accountant advise them on asset allocation, but they haven't rebalanced the funds in three years. The accounts currently are invested two-thirds in stocks, nearly 30% in bonds and the rest in short-term investments.

While they say their savings aren't enough to retire on now, Mr. Kelly says that if he works until his early 60s and they continue to save at their current rate, "We'll have enough to be comfortable if the market doesn't tank."

But the family has substantial expenses for their five-bedroom, four-bath house, including more than $6,000 in monthly mortgage payments. They bought a $1.55 million fixer-upper in 2005 and invested north of $160,000 in kitchen and bathroom remodels and other renovations. The house was recently assessed at $1.66 million.

Next on the house to-do list is a new driveway and yard, which are expected to cost as much as $50,000.

Mr. and Ms. Kelly also contribute a combined $9,600 a year to their two children's 529 college savings plans, which now have a combined $83,000. The kids are 10 and 12, so the accounts won't need to be tapped for quite a while. Still, Mr. Kelly is doubtful the 529s will cover all college costs, even at an in-state school.



 ADVICE FROM THE PRO: Mr. and Ms. Kelly are well-disciplined in saving for retirement, but they could do more to shore up their short-term finances and to cut costs, says  Dave Campbell, a principal at San Francisco-based wealth-management firm  Bingham, Osborn & Scarborough
BPFH


0.15
%




 LLC.  

 Mr. Campbell, a fee-only financial planner, says it's "terrific" that the couple is taking advantage of so many retirement options and Mr. Kelly is maxing out his 401(k) contributions.  

 "They already covered a lot of ground at relatively young ages," Mr. Campbell says.  

 He recommends they continue to be on the aggressive side in terms of asset allocation, putting between 60% and 80% in stocks. The Kellys are still young enough, he says, that they can withstand some riskier holdings. 

 Mr. Campbell is less enthusiastic about the Kellys' more immediate financial future. Given the significant amount of leverage the couple took on for their house, Mr. Campbell suggests they focus on lowering the monthly costs of that debt—and fast. 

 "This is one of the areas that they've got to start addressing right away," Mr. Campbell says. "The world is deleveraging. It's time for them to start deleveraging, too." 

 Mr. and Mrs. Kelly should try to refinance their home-equity line of credit, as its current 6% interest rate is relatively high by today's standards. Because they have just 15% equity in their house the couple might not be able to refinance their main, adjustable-rate mortgage into a fixed-rate vehicle. Instead, Mr. Campbell recommends they pay down some of the mortgage aggressively and then try to refinance. 

 "There's no question that interest rates will begin rising," putting them in danger of sharply higher monthly payments, he says. 

 In addition to speeding up their mortgage payments, Mr. Campbell says he would like to see the Kellys beef up their after-tax savings. Their current emergency fund likely would only last a few months, and because there's only one main breadwinner they should have at least six months of funds in the bank. Mr. Campbell recommends the couple set aside funds on a monthly basis, possibly even pulling back on contributions to their kids' 529s in order to more fully fund their own accounts . 

— Melissa Korn 



About two years ago, Diane Thole achieved one of her long-held financial goals—owning a co-op by age 30.

The New York City high-school math teacher realized that goal, thanks in part to careful saving, favorable interest rates and shopping around for the right co-op.

"I looked at about 40 to 50 co-ops before I decided on the one I wanted," she says. Her decision: a one-bedroom close to mass transit in the New York City suburb of Bronxville.

Ms. Thole used to rent but opted to spend about two years living at her parents' home in order to save up for her own place. Still, her parents charged her $600 a month in rent, including food and utilities.

"Some people think that's [$600 a month] steep or strict," she says. "But if I have a child someday, I think I'd charge them rent, too." Ms. Thole says her parents were instrumental in teaching and reinforcing important financial lessons such as saving and investing.

Now that she's an owner, the 32-year-old still manages to save. She has no school debt from either of her master's degrees, thanks in part to academic scholarships, work-study programs and the benefit of living at home while she obtained one of her degrees. 

Ms. Thole socks away 18% to 20% of her take-home pay despite her mortgage, maintenance and car expenses.

She has a voluntary tax-deferred annuity account from her prior teaching job, a tax-deferred annuity through New York City and a supplemental retirement plan through the teachers union. In addition, she makes automatic transfers into her Roth IRA once a month and has about two months of emergency savings in the bank. 

She describes herself as a "conservative" investor. "Still, I don't sit here freaking out if I lose money," she says.

Ms. Thole typically makes her own coffee, brings her own lunch, and doesn't spend money on the latest gadgets—even though she may be tempted. She's also willing to cut out "extras" she doesn't need or use too frequently. "Little tweaks like canceling my phone landline added up," she says. 

And if she knows she has a larger expense in the future—such as her brother's wedding in Austin, Texas, later this year—she'll factor that into her overall spending plans for the year.

In the next 10 years, Ms. Thole would like to double-up her mortgage payments in order to own her co-op outright sooner.

When she retires, Ms. Thole hopes to teach part time. She'd also like to own a summer home in another state. 



 ADVICE FROM THE PRO: "Diane is a financial superstar. She's adhering to the golden rule of keeping your inflows greater than your outflows," says  Scott Brewster, a Brooklyn, N.Y.-based fee-only certified financial planner. 

 Mr. Brewster says she's "mastered" saving to methodically reach her goals. He suggests Ms. Thole beef up her emergency fund, however. Given the lingering economic uncertainty, he suggests she have about one year or more of emergency funds. 

 He says her goal to pay off her mortgage sooner is admirable. But due to low interest rates, she may be better off putting more into her retirement accounts.  "If her mortgage is costing her 3.5% after tax and she can get a guaranteed 8.25% in her NYC [tax-deferred annuity] fixed-investment option, for example, it makes no sense making extra payments to her mortgage," he says. This may allow her to save up more quickly for a down payment on a summer home that she could also use as a rental property, he says. 

 Ms. Thole should also make sure she has tackled her estate planning, including writing a will, designating a health-care proxy and making sure the beneficiary designations on her retirement accounts are up to date. 

— Veronica Dagher 

It wasn't until the birth of their son that Ryan and Aleasha Williams started to seriously focus on their financial future. When Ms. Williams became pregnant with Colton, now age 2, the family decided they needed to start saving, not so much for college tuition as for emergencies that could arise well before then.

The St. Michael, Minn., couple looked at their bills and figured out where they could shave costs; for example, by downgrading their phone and cable plans.

They set up a money-market account and "became a little more stingy, which is easy when you're sitting around the house with a kid," says Mr. Williams, 32.

They have $100 automatically transferred each month from their checking account to the money-market account. It boasted a 3% interest rate when the couple opened it two years ago, but now it earns just 1%.

Ms. Williams, 29, was laid off before her son was born, quit a subsequent sales job that required extensive travel, and more recently has worked two or three jobs at a time. The couple wants to have money put away "to make sure we're set as a family to make it through those tough times if they happen again," she says.

Ms. Williams started a new job in October as a school district special services secretary, which brings the couple's combined paycheck to about $75,000 and helps them save more. They are hoping this year to increase their monthly deposit into the money-market account to $150 or $200.

Mr. Williams adds that when his car is paid off next May, he plans on putting the $292 monthly payment into savings as well. And the couple would like to start a separate savings account for their son but are unsure of the best approach.

Mr. Williams, the offensive and recruiting coordinator for Concordia University's football team, also contributes 4% of his salary to the school's 403(b) retirement plan. The school matches 1% of his contribution. Ms. Williams hasn't worked for the Wayzata school district long enough to be eligible for its retirement plan, but intends on starting as soon as she is able.

Mr. Williams, a former college quarterback, earns extra money at football camps and Ms. Williams, also a former college athlete, coaches volleyball.

They describe themselves as conservative when it comes to their finances. They don't overspend or take extended vacations, they say, but do splurge a couple of times a year by going to a concert, getting a hotel room and having a night out.

The Williams family bought their townhouse five and a half years ago for $169,000, but it was valued at about $128,000 last summer. The couple say that because of their home's depreciation during the recession, they couldn't afford to move if they wanted. However, they say they are still happy in the home and would have enough room for another child.



 ADVICE FROM THE PRO: The Williamses are on the right track by saving every month for emergencies, says  Rod Roath, a fee-only certified financial planner in Edina, Minn.  

 While there are options that would produce a higher level of income for the couple than their money-market account, Mr. Roath says, including putting their savings into a brokerage account, the overriding factor is their feeling of safety and security. 

 "If they don't feel secure in something other than a bank account, then the $30 or $60 or $90 they would earn in addition to what they're earning today is a small price for them to pay to sleep at night," he says. 

 Given their income and steady types of employment, Mr. Roath says a minimum of $4,000 to $5,000 in a savings or other readily liquid account should suffice for an emergency fund. But he cautions not every bump in the road should be defined as an emergency. 

 Mr. Roath also suggests that once the couple reaches that level, further savings be put into a brokerage account or other investment that produces a higher return. 

 In terms of saving for their son, Mr. Roath suggests the Williamses each open a Roth IRA. After the first five years of ownership they could make a tax-free withdrawal, he says. They could put in just $50 now and begin the countdown on the five-year clock. 

 "They can't withdraw time and time again, but can withdraw once from their IRA for special purposes, like their son's education, an emergency, or just hold [the account] until retirement. It is flexible," he says.  

 Mr. Roath also says the couple could start a Coverdell education savings account. He noted the account, with a maximum contribution of $2,000 per year, doesn't reduce taxable income like a 403(b), but the earnings accumulate tax-free if they are used for education purposes. 

 If Colton should earn an athletic scholarship like his parents, the savings could be used for college expenses other than tuition, like a computer, or transferred to a family member. 

 Mr. Roath also notes that because Ms. Williams doesn't have a 403(b), she is eligible for a tax-deductible IRA and could set it up by April 15 to deduct the contribution from last year's taxes. 

—  Caitlin Nish 

 Ms. Korn, Ms. Dagher and Ms. Nish are reporters for Dow Jones Newswires in New York. They can be reached at melissa.korn@dowjones.com, veronica.dagher@dowjones.com, and caitlin.nish@dowjones.com. 