BRUSSELS—European Union regulators preparing a new round of bank stress tests are unlikely to examine what would happen to the region's banks if a euro-zone government defaults on its debt, a European official said Monday. 

Most of the EU's national regulators at a meeting of the European Banking Authority last week in London opposed a plan to stress-test euro-zone government debt held on "banking books", where accounting rules allow banks to place debt that is supposed to be held until it matures, the official said.

The tests will only examine "trading books," where banks hold debt that they are planning to sell before it matures.

Testing held-to-maturity euro-zone government bonds might be seen as an implicit acknowledgment that some of the debt issued by euro-zone governments may not be repaid in full.

Regulators fear that would contradict the EU's pledge to stand behind the weaker euro-zone nations and prevent a default on any government debt issued before June 2013, the official said. 

The tests are supposed to determine how well Europe's banks could withstand sharply higher loan losses, falling securities prices and other potential results of a sharp macroeconomic slowdown. The scenario for that slowdown will be designed by the European Central Bank and then be applied to the portfolios of the region's banks by national regulators, the EBA said in a statement last week. 

The results of the tests will be published in June, the EBA said. Officials say the exact test methodology, including how to address the sovereign debt issue, is still being debated. 

Investors have become increasingly worried that Greece and Ireland, the two countries that have received emergency financing from the EU and the International Monetary Fund, ultimately won't be able to repay their large debts. That has left regulators in a bind, because they want the tests to be credible but don't want to suggest that governments are backing away from their pledge to guarantee repayment of the euro zone's debts. 

"There is no real satisfactory way to get out of it," said Nicolas Veron, a scholar at the Bruegel think tank in Brussels. "The second-best result should be total transparency on sovereign risk exposure with better quality numbers than last year." 

That would allow investors to run sovereign-default simulations on their own without regulators creating doubt about the euro-zone's commitment on guaranteeing government debts, Mr. Veron said. 

The stress tests published last year required most banks to disclose how much EU government debt they held in their trading books and their banking books, even if the stress scenarios only applied to the trading books. But doubts were raised about whether banks properly disclosed all the EU debt on their balance sheets. 

 Write to  Matthew Dalton at Matthew.Dalton@dowjones.com 