Plaid is done to death. Long live plaid. 

The casual plaid shirt has been ubiquitous in menswear for more than a year—an eternity in fashion. From high-end labels like Band of Outsiders, Rag & Bone and Richard Chai to chain stores like Gap and American Eagle and fast-fashion retailers such as H&M and Topman, plaid has become unavoidable. 

But with a new spring season on the horizon, is the plaid trend fading away? Exactly the opposite. More plaid is heading for stores, and it's expanding into new domains. Leaving behind its associations with lumberjacks and '90s grunge rock music, plaid showed up on suits, blazers, dress shirts, overcoats, and accessories—not to mention pants—in the spring 2011 collections of designers such as Etro and  Tom Ford, as well as more traditional clothiers like Brioni, Canali, Paul Stuart and Thomas Pink. 

Some of these brands have showed plaids on dressy clothing before—but rarely plaids this loud. Designers are experimenting with bolder, brighter colors. The January issue of GQ magazine highlighted colorful plaid ties as one of its top style trends for spring.

The plaid mania says a lot about how retailers think when it comes to menswear. A genuine hit that can be sold to all types of men—from those who never read fashion magazines to those who watch live-streamed runway shows—is truly rare. When retailers stumble on something popular, like colorful striped shirts in 2004, they run with it—to the point of oversaturation—on the theory that men don't like drastic change. That's quite different from women's trends, which last for a season or even less. Trends take longer to penetrate a wide swath of men and, consequently, longer to die.

"We've probably peaked with plaid as a fashion trend," says Durand Guion, men's fashion director at Macy's. But, he adds, in men's fashion, a peak doesn't signal the end. Men who are early adopters, he notes, have already moved onto other kinds of patterns like "Fair Isle" and "Navajo" and "Aztec."

Hickey Freeman plans to introduce suits with a glen plaid pattern over herringbone, which makes the normally subtle pattern stand out more, for fall 2011. Designer  Michael Bastian's spring 2011 runway show featured plaid shirts in poplin, worn with suits and ties, instead of rugged shirts with jeans or chinos and work boots. "I feel like the heritage movement is losing a little bit of steam," says Mr. Bastian, referring to the craving for classic work-inspired clothes. "So what's the next way to wear [plaid]?"

Mr. Guion notes that Macy's is "going on our second year of plaid being key." J. Crew plans to launch more madras and plaid flannel styles in coming weeks. 

Indeed, the market is so full of plaid at every price that a number of retailers are wondering if they should move on. "We feel like, 'OK, we need to balance plaids,' you don't want to overdo it, so we are doing amazing stripes for spring," says Ari Hoffman, chief executive of Gant USA, a preppy line that has long specialized in plaid shirts. (Which is not to say that it won't be doing more plaid, including a winter version of madras for next fall.)

Some men, too, are tired of plaid. "It's everywhere," says Joe Garcia, a 20-year-old college student from the San Francisco area. "A lot of guys wear it on campus, and girls too"—often in colors he finds "tacky." "I don't think plaid will ever go away, but I wish it did," he says.

Simon Collins, dean of the school of fashion at Parsons the New School for Design, recently tweeted: "Burn all check shirts," using a British term for plaid. It's become too easy for men to throw on a plaid shirt, he explains. "It's lazy, the equivalent of sweat pants." 

Plaid continues to have broad appeal because of its history and its association with work clothing. It also lets men inject color into their wardrobes in a masculine, easily understandable way. 

Tartan plaid usage dates back to 16th-century Scotland, specifically the Highlands area, says Jeffrey Banks, co-author of the 2007 book "Tartan: Romancing the Plaid." Plaid has long been a staple at places like Brooks Brothers and Ralph Lauren, and versions have been widely used for decades, from Burberry's iconic pattern to red-and-black buffalo checks. 

But style observers can't recall a time when it was as popular with as wide a range of men. The current interest began around 2007 with a renaissance in American workwear and heritage style, led by brands like Woolrich Woolen Mills, a line inspired by the Woolrich label, known for its buffalo check. Plaid also appeared on key European runways, including a plaid-heavy fall 2008 show by D&G in Milan, says Michael Fisher, menswear editor at Stylesight, a fashion research firm. "That was one of the first times every single runway look had some representation of plaid," he says. 

By late last year, plaid was hard to avoid in stores. Greg Stella of Rochester, N.Y., did some last-minute shopping for a shirt to wear on New Year's Eve and recalls that "it was very difficult to find a shirt that was not plaid." Still, the 27-year-old, who owns about 10 plaid shirts, bought another one that day.

In an effort to put a new spin on plaid, some designers are pushing plaid-on-plaid looks such as blazers with pants. Jim Moore, creative director of GQ, says, "There are people who can make plaid on plaid look good." But for most men, he says, "I would say don't mix your plaids. I love a plaid shirt with a solid tie or pin-dot tie."

For those who are tired of bright plaids, some retailers and designers are adding shirts in more subtle shades. Terry Hartley II, a 30-year-old marketing and branding consultant from Reston, Va., sat out the trend until recently. "I didn't want to look like a lumberjack walking around D.C.," he says. Then he found some subtle plaid shirts, with "no bold colors, no reds, no yellows, no bright greens," at Lost Boys, a men's store in Washington, D.C.

Designer duo Duckie Brown has long showed bright tartan plaid shirts, pants and blazers in its collections. But the collection to be shown at New York fashion week next month will include items like grey linen wool plaid trousers and dark grey wool tonal plaid pants and blazers— "a fresher take on plaids and tartans," says co-designer Daniel Silver. However, he says, there will still be plaid shirts, "as men can't get enough of them."

 Write to  Ray A. Smith at ray.smith@wsj.com 