Mumbai--Shipping company Mercator Lines Ltd plans to make the most of a sharp rise in demand for coal by spinning off and listing its lucrative coal mining and logistics business. 

The listing date hasn't been set yet, but the spin-off is likely to be completed within a year's time, Mercator Managing Director  Atul Agarwal told Dow Jones Newswires on Monday. 

The company will soon appoint consultants and investment bankers for the proposed share sale. 

Agarwal's comments boosted Mercator's stock, which was trading 4.2% higher at 40 rupees at 0910 GMT, while the Bombay Stock Exchange market was up 0.9%. Mercator earlier hit an intra-day high of 40.50 rupees. 

The company's coal business has become its biggest money spinner, bringing in 4.21 billion rupees during the October-December quarter, slightly more than half of Mercator's total revenue for the period. Demand has surged of late, with several new power plants coming up across the country. 

Companies in India, where the power sector accounts for 70% of the country's coal consumption, are trying to acquire mines abroad as local supplies aren't enough to feed upcoming electricity plants. 

State-run Indian companies bought overseas coal assets worth $22 million during 2009 and 2010, while private Indian companies acquired $1.06 billion worth of coal assets during the period. 

A Mercator unit--Oorja HoldingsPte. Ltd--has two coal mines in Indonesia which together have an estimated reserve of 25 million tons. There is a third mine in Mozambique with an estimates reserve of three billion tons. 

Agarwal said the company plans to acquire at least one more block in Indonesia this year. 

In spite of a recovery in global trade, bulk freight and tanker rates continue to be low, denting revenue for shipping companies. 

Mercator's plan to demerge its coal mining division is in line with moves by its peers in the shipping industry, which have announced plans to hive off their more lucrative non-shipping businesses to increase market valuation as well as offset the volatility of the shipping industry. 

For instance, Essar Shipping Ports & Logistics Ltd said last year that it would separate its shipping, logistics and oilfields business from its high-margin ports business. 

