Rich Seubert climbed into the car sent by the Giants early Monday morning. He settled in as the driver turned toward the Manhattan office of Dr. Russell Warren, the team's physician. Then he talked about how now, with the Giants' doors barred, he needs to find new trainers and a new place to do his rehab work.

Everything was the same and everything was different on the first official workday after the collective bargaining talks between the NFL Players Association and the NFL officially broke down Friday. The union has dissolved and become a trade association, the NFL has locked out its players, and Seubert, the Giants' longest tenured player, was somehow able to find a silver lining in all of it.

With so many of the Giants rehabbing this off-season and so many of them doing it together at the Giants' practice facility, Seubert said just last week he told center Shaun O'Hara, "I'm probably going to hate you by the end of the summer."

"You get sick of being around the same guys, doing the same thing," Seubert said. "Maybe it'll be good for us to all have to find our own places to work out."

As much as the wryly funny, shaggily bearded Seubert will never be a "typical" anything, he is a case study in how an NFL player's life is affected now, at least until the April 6 hearing in federal court on the players' request to lift the lockout.

A left guard who manned center for seven games this past year—and who was subsequently called the team's MVP by general manager Jerry Reese—Seubert wrenched his right knee in the Giants' finale against the Redskins. 

He had microfracture surgery on Jan. 4 to reconstruct his medial collateral ligament, repair his torn patellar tendon and insert cartilage in a hole under his kneecap. Since then, his days have been the same: drop sons Hunter and Isaac off at school at 8:30 a.m., drive to the Giants' facility in East Rutherford and work out with the same trainers who've pushed him through his nine previous surgeries.

"You show up, you get good treatment, and I think that's the one part that stings for a lot of guys," Seubert said. "You've got the best trainers in the world sitting right there and you can't use them."

Seubert said for the last few months, his teammates have researched and talked among themselves about the relative merits of various training facilities and gyms in the area. They all prefer trainers who've worked with professional athletes before, and Warren, the surgeon, said he has full faith that the dozen or so Giants currently under his post-operative care will find that. Receiver and Californian Steve Smith, who also had microfracture surgery, has been doing his rehab off-site the whole time, flying back just for appointments with Warren.

"I don't like the idea that all this has been ground to a halt. II don't think frankly it has a huge effect in that zone," Warren said. "I write up the therapy (routine) anyway and if they have questions, they ask." 

Players are now responsible for their own health care; Seubert's, purchased under the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA), runs $2,000 a month. It will grow to $2,400 the first week in April, when wife Jodi delivers their first daughter.

But players like Seubert, hurt while "on the job," still have their treatment with Warren—and car service to New York City—on the Giants' tab.

"They can't legally say I can't see the doctor who cut my leg up," Seubert said. "This is my life. I care about football, but when football's over I'm not going to care about football, I'm going to care about my leg."

Which, Warren said, is progressing nicely. Seubert can bend it 120 degrees now. He began driving on Valentine's Day. And after shattering the same leg and undergoing five surgeries on it in 2003, Warren said rehabbing during a lockout doesn't ultimately have to be more than a minor inconvenience, especially for him. 

"Richie's unique. He seems to be able to recover from anything that happens to him," he said.

Which includes a lockout, Seubert said. He's always gotten his pay in 17 checks over the course of the season, so he's not yet missed a paycheck. He would ordinarily collect a workout check, which he guessed was about $80, for every day he was in the Giants' facility. And he'd get a workout bonus at the end of the year, depending on how many of those days he logged.

"It's a couple hundred dollars a week to pay the rent and get groceries," he said. "Me, my wife and my boys, we don't spend much. We'll be fine."

In the short term, at least. As for the long term, Seubert said he believes there will be football in the fall.

As for talk that the players will miss their pay and their unity will crack as bank accounts dwindle, Seubert, in characteristic form, scoffed.

"If someone on my team asked me for a loan, I'd tell him to get a job," he said. "We all knew this was coming and on the Giants, we all made plans. It'll all get figured out.''

 Write to  Aditi Kinkhabwala at aditi.kinkhabwala@wsj.com 