 Doctors said Giffords's condition continued to improve. The Arizona congresswoman, recovering from a gunshot wound to the head from Saturday's shooting, was opening her eyes, moving her arms and legs and undergoing physical therapy. Experts said the college Loughner attended responded diligently to incidents involving the alleged shooter, but that the case highlights limits that schools face. 

Thousands gathered for the funeral of Christina Green, the nine-year-old girl killed in the shooting. 

 House Republicans plan to vote next week on repealing health-care overhaul, a test of whether partisan rhetoric will soften after the shooting. 

 Hezbollah-led politicians said they would block Hariri from becoming Lebanon's next premier after forcing the collapse of his government. 

 Clinton blasted Arab states for corruption and political stagnation and warned of the extremist threat, in a shift of tone for the administration.  

 The death toll from severe flooding in Brazil approached 500 people, as further rain threatened to complicate relief and recovery efforts.  

 Brisbane faces a rebuilding effort that could cost over $15 billion from floods that deluged the Australian city. 

 Republican leaders gather Friday to pick a new RNC head, with four candidates seeking to unseat Steele.

 Tunisia's president appealed for calm and pledged not to seek another term as violent unrest continued.

 Russia linked further cuts in nuclear weapons, an Obama administration goal, to a wider multinational arms accord.

 Gates argued in a speech in Tokyo that a strong U.S.-Japan alliance is vital to deterring North Korea. 

 Mortars allegedly fired from Afghanistan hit a house in North Waziristan, Pakistan, killing eight, officials said. 

 Texas GOP Sen. Hutchison said she won't seek re-election, opening the door for a battle over who will fill the seat.

Nigeria's incumbent president, Goodluck Jonathan, won a decisive victory in the nation's ruling-party primary.

A Guyanese man was sentenced to 15 years in prison for his role in a bomb plot at New York's JFK airport.

A Ukrainian ex-minister was given asylum by the Czechs, a sign of concern over Kiev's probes of its opposition.

 An Italian court struck down a measure postponing trials facing Berlusconi. 

Italy's Mount Etna erupted briefly, sending lava down its slopes and spewing out ash.