After more than a decade of increasing representation of women in boardrooms and at the executive level of companies, the rise of women in the workplace at the top-most ranks has begun to plateau.

In 2010, 25.4% of chief executives were women, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, slightly up from 2009 but below 2007's level of 25.6%. Between 2000 and 2007, women's share of the chief executive ranks had increased by 6.8 percentage points. 

On Tuesday, the White House released a report that, among other things, noted that women have met, and in some cases surpassed, men in educational achievement but still lag in pay and are more likely to be in poverty.

The recession might have disproportionately hindered female executives, said  Ilene Lang, CEO of Catalyst Inc., a nonprofit research group that promotes women in business.

Indeed, in times of strife, men are more likely to have role models or mentors who can protect or guide them through company instability, she said. "The recession has not been kind to women," she said.

According to Catalyst, in 2010, women held 14.4% of executive officer positions at Fortune 500 companies. In 2009, they filled 13.5% of positions.

About 15.7% of board seats in the Fortune 500 were held by women in 2010, up from 15.2% in 2009, according to the nonprofit. Since 2005, the percentage of board seats held by women has increased by one percentage point. Prior to the last five years, it had been increasing by half a percentage point per year.

Some women might also be the victim of old stereotypes that women are "caretakers" and not strong leaders, said Ms. Lang.

At consulting firm PricewaterhouseCoopers, the percentage of new partners who are women increased by about 5 percentage points between 2002 and 2010 to 17%. But during the recession, that percentage has stayed flat, said chief diversity officer  Niloufar Molavi.

"It just reflects the need to continue developing the pipeline of women leaders at lower levels," she said.

PwC has allowed more flexible schedules that give people time to tend to family matters, in part to make it easier for women to move up, she said.

The company has also begun a virtual mentoring program that allows women to find senior role models company-wide, even if other women leaders aren't available in their own departments, Ms. Molavi said.

Women might continue to struggle because they're left out of traditional networking activities, like some sports games, that men use to meet people and move up the ladder, said Rutgers University public policy professor  William Rodgers.

"It's not a deliberate exclusion, but it still happens. This makes it difficult to continue moving up," he said.

During the recession, some companies might also have lessened their commitment to diversity initiatives while they've been so concerned about simply surviving, he said.

Consulting firm Accenture sets internal gender diversity targets every year to make sure that it continues to increase the number of women pegged for promotions, said chief human resources officer  Jill Smart.

In its last fiscal year, 16.2% of senior executives at the firm were women, up from 16.1% the year prior, according to the company.

"It's important to continue to make incremental changes, because if you take your eye off the ball, it's really easy to slip backwards," she said.