Drive through one of the region's many gate-free, all-electronic toll booths without an E-ZPass tag and you'll likely get a ticket in the mail—unless you have Iowa or Arizona license plates.

Increasingly, agencies that run key roads and bridges around the region are moving toward toll systems that rely solely on electronics to read a license plate or a tag from a system like E-ZPass. The Metropolitan Transportation Authority plans to test an all-cashless system on the Henry Hudson Bridge in 2012. Drivers who don't have an E-ZPass tag will get an invoice mailed to the address associated with their license plate. 

But to send those invoices, the MTA and other agencies need to contact the state where each license plate was issued to get the name and address of the driver. For vehicles from 48 states, that's not a problem. But the MTA, the New Jersey Turnpike Authority, the New York State Thruway Authority and the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey currently can't obtain information from Iowa and Arizona. That means drivers from those two states can blast through gateless, electronic tolls in the New York region without paying and face little chance of being caught. 

New York is home to some of the nation's busiest toll facilities, including the four major Hudson River crossings and the New Jersey Turnpike. Some, like the Robert F. Kennedy Bridge, have gate arms that won't let a vehicle through until its E-ZPass transponder is read or the driver pays a toll. 

Others, like the New Jersey Turnpike, have lanes without gates that allow drivers with E-ZPass to pay tolls without stopping.

Both Arizona and Iowa—which don't have tolls on their own roads—insist they're not renegades. They say any government agency can work out a deal to receive vehicle owner information. The New Jersey Turnpike is working on a deal with Arizona, a spokesman for the turnpike said. The federal government and individual states have privacy laws barring the disclosure of the identities of license plate owners, creating a patchwork that toll authorities must navigate.

While there are national systems in place to use license plates to track down criminals and people wanted for moving violations, toll collectors don't have automatic access to state license-plate databases.

"A lot of agencies do have difficulty exchanging information," said Neil Gray, the director of government affairs for the International Bridge, Tunnel and Turnpike Association, a group that represents toll facility operators. "It certainly creates an uncertainty factor. It's lost revenue to the agencies."

For the New York-area toll operators, the inability to track down Arizonans and Iowans isn't a big fiscal hit—the Port Authority called it "miniscule".

"Would we like to have the ability to look up plates in every state?" said Judi Glave, an MTA spokeswoman. "I would think so."

 Write to  Andrew Grossman at andrew.grossman@wsj.com 