Scholars say that they've confirmed that places with the happiest citizenry also have the highest suicide rates.

Using data on life satisfaction from the World Values Survey and on suicide from the World Health Organization, researchers found that the unsettling link between happiness and suicide held across 21 developed countries—17 in Europe plus the U.S., Canada, Australia and New Zealand. Neither climate nor religiosity appeared to be crucial factors.

The researchers then looked at the U.S., using information collected by the Centers for Disease Control and other sources. Though somewhat less robust, the connection held here, too: Utah was first in happiness but had the ninth highest suicide rate. New York was 45th in happiness and last in suicides.

Life's blows, the authors suggest, may fall harder when your neighbors wear perpetual grins.

 "Dark Contrasts: The Paradox of High Rates of Suicide in Happy Places," Mary C. Daly, Andrew J. Oswald, Daniel Wilson and Stephen Wu, Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization (forthcoming) 

People associate goodness with the side of their body that's most coordinated—usually the right. But a temporary physical handicap can change those perceptions, a study finds.

Fifty-five right-handers were asked to spend a short period placing dominoes on marks on a table as quickly as they could, using both hands. Half did so with an ungainly glove on their right hand, making their left hand temporarily dominant; the other half wore the glove on their left hand. 

Then participants received a drawing of a head, with boxes to the left and right from its point of view (which matched the participants' POV). The subjects were told the "head" character believed some animals bad and others good, and were asked: Into which box would the character put a good animal? 

Of those whose right hand stayed dominant during the experiment, 77% put the good animal on the right. Among the temporary left-handers, 63% put the good animal on the left. 

 "When Left is 'Right': Motor Fluency Shapes Abstract Concepts," Daniel Casasanto and Evangelia G. Chrysikou, Psychological Science (April) 

White state legislators of both major parties discriminate against their black constituents, a study finds—and minority politicians are more likely to respond to a black citizen's request.

Researchers sent emails requesting information about voter registration to 4,859 state representatives, in 44 states, a month before the 2008 elections. Some of the emails signaled partisan affiliation, others didn't, and they were signed either "DeShawn Jackson" or "Jake Mueller"—DeShawn and Jake being among the "blackest" and "whitest" popular American names, statistically speaking.

The politicians responded to DeShawn 55.3% of the time, to Jake 60.5% of the time. Republican assumptions that black Americans vote Democratic (which they do, overwhelmingly) may have contributed somewhat to that gap. But full analysis of the data revealed that the main driving force was the race of the politicians.

White Democrats responded to Jake's email 61.1% of the time, compared with 54.3% for DeShawn, a 6.8 percentage-point difference. White Republicans favored Jake by 7.6 percentage points. Minority state legislators, meanwhile, favored DeShawn by 16.5 percentage points. 

 "Do Politicians Racially Discriminate against Constituents? A Field Experiment on State Legislators," Daniel M. Butler and David E. Broockman, American Journal of Political Science (forthcoming)  

Unlike most minority groups, gay people have some control over when they reveal their identity. And on that question of timing, a study suggests that later in an interaction is better.

Forty-five people, mostly undergraduates, were told that before meeting a man they would listen to an audio of him answering 20 questions about his background, interests and relationships. Half the time, the relationships question (in which the man mentioned a male partner) came second. The rest of the time that question came 20th. 

Asked how they felt about the prospective meeting (which never occurred), women didn't react differently to the early or late disclosure of homosexuality. But men expressed more negative expectations when the disclosure came early. Men who heard the early disclosure also expressed more negative views about homosexuality in general.

 "Interorientation Interactions and Impressions: Does the Timing of Disclosure of Sexual Orientation Matter?" David M. Buck and E. Ashby Plant, Journal of Experimental Social Psychology (March) 