MANILA—Inflation in the Philippines climbed at a faster-than-forecast pace in February on higher costs of food, fuel and home repairs, sparking more hawkish rhetoric from the central bank and reinforcing a burgeoning market view on the need to raise policy interest rates as early as this month.

The National Statistics Office reported Friday that the consumer price index, the country's main inflation barometer, rose in February by 4.3% from the same month a year earlier—a faster clip than January's year-to-year increase of 3.6%, which was revised up from an initial estimate of 3.5%. February's rate of inflation was the quickest since the 4.3% recorded in May last year. 

The central bank projected February inflation to be in a range of 3% to 4.1%, while economists polled by Dow Jones Newswires forecast a median 3.7% rise. 

Core inflation, which excludes volatile food and energy prices, was at 3.5% in February and 3.3% in January. 

"This supports our view that the scope for keeping rates steady has narrowed," Bangko Sentral Ng Pilipinas Gov. Amando Tetangco said in a statement. He said the latest data will be incorporated in its review of inflation forecasts, but noted that "it is important to remember that the [central bank] looks at expected price movements over a longer policy horizon, and not simply on contemporaneous inflation." 

The central bank has kept its policy overnight interest rates at record lows of 4% for borrowing and 6% for lending since July 2009. At that time, it ended a rate-cutting binge that started in December 2008 and slashed two percentage points off the rates to allow the economy and banks to better cope with fallout from the collapse of investment bank Lehman Brothers. 

Prior to the Lehman collapse, the central bank had raised the overnight rates by a total of one percentage point between June and August 2008 to combat an inflation rate that had risen to double digits.

Deputy Gov. Diwa Guinigundo said Friday that although February's inflation rate topped the central bank's forecast, the average of 3.9% over January-February is still at the lower end of this year's target range of 3% to 5%.

"While the two-month average remains within the target range, greater vigilance and anticipation are required. We shall ensure that monetary policy is appropriate, especially in the light of the continuing volatility in the Middle East and North Africa as well as in global commodity markets," Mr. Guinigundo said. 

Standard Chartered Bank said in a research note to clients that the central bank should start raising rates as inflation pressure mounts. "It would hurt market sentiment if the [central bank] does not respond," it said.

Simon Wong, an economist at Standard Chartered, added that while the bank is keeping its call of rise of a 25 basis points, or hundredths of a percentage point, this month, "now [we] cannot rule out a 50-basis-point hike as we see rising need for the [central bank] to catch up with inflation expectations and avoid being seen as 'behind the curve.'"

Action Economics economist David Cohen said the February data will prompt the central bank to raise its rates by 25 basis points during the next policy meeting on March 24. "Until today, we had thought that it was still a pretty close call between the first hike in March or May," Mr. Cohen said. 

"We think [the overnight borrowing rate] will reach 4.75% by year-end," Mr. Cohen added. 

February inflation was up 1.1% from January, which in turn was up 0.8% from December. 

Year-to-year inflation in February last year stood at 4.2%. 

Philippine stocks largely ignored the latest inflation data and prospects of higher interest rates, with market participants focusing instead on dividends declared by companies and a gain on Wall Street overnight. Meanwhile the peso continues to advance, in step with other regional currencies.

 Write to  Cris Larano at cris.larano@dowjones.com 