MUMBAI–India will take a gradual path to achieving full capital account convertibility by calibrating its steps to domestic and global developments, its central bank governor said Monday. 

"Our position is that capital account convertibility is not a standalone objective, but a means for higher and stable growth," Duvvuri Subbarao said at a special meeting of central bank governors in Tokyo, according to the transcript of his speech posted on the Reserve Bank of India's website. 

The Indian rupee is fully convertible on the current account. However, on the capital account, it is only partially convertible as lawmakers look to shield the economy from sudden outflows of foreign capital in times of crisis that can destabilize the economy. 

The RBI had appointed a committee to set a road map on fuller capital account convertibility. The committee, headed by former RBI Deputy Governor S.S. Tarapore, had suggested a three-phased approach to making the rupee fully convertible. The third phase ends in March. 

Mr. Subbarao said that India is more vulnerable to any sudden stops or reversal of capital inflows than countries with current account surpluses as its foreign exchange reserves mostly comprise borrowed resources. 

The RBI has previously said that India's current account deficit in the current financial year to March 31 is likely to widen to 3.5% of gross domestic product, which is unsustainable. It was at 2.9% in the last financial year. In its monetary policy review last week, the RBI said a faster-than-expected global recovery may impact capital inflows, which so far have been sufficient to finance the current account gap. 

Unlike some other emerging economies, India hasn't implemented capital control measures as they are helping fund its wide current account deficit. However, this isn't a sustainable option and the current account gap must be narrowed, the central bank has said. 

"Among the components of capital flows, we prefer long-term flows to short-term flows and non-debt flows to debt flows. Historically, we have used policy levers on the debt side of the flows to manage volatility," Mr. Subbarao said. 

India currently encourages foreign direct investments in infrastructure and certain other sectors and foreign fund inflows into local stock markets. However, it has set a cap of $20 billion of foreign investments in corporate bonds and $10 billion in government bonds. 

Mr. Subbarao also said that managing capital flows should not be treated as an exclusive problem of emerging market economies. 

"The burden of adjustment has to be shared," he said. 

 Write to  Nupur Acharya at nupur.acharya@dowjones.com 