LONDON –  De La Rue
DLAR


0.59
%




 PLC's chief executive Friday said the world's largest producer of banknotes was still in discussions with Indian authorities over printing irregularities and described the negotiations as constructive. 

CEO  Tim Cobbold told Dow Jones Newswires the negotiations involved various parts of the Indian government, confirming the identity of the customer as the Reserve Bank of India. 

The Indian central bank consistently has declined to comment on the matter. 

  De La Rue
DLAR


0.59
%




 previously hadn't identified the customer affected by its printing scandal, but a potential bidder and media reports had named it as the Reserve Bank of India. 

De La Rue, which is involved in the production of over 150 national currencies, has struggled to overcome production problems that have tarnished its reputation and put its share price under pressure. 

  The Source: De La Rue Confirms Talks With India on Banknotes 

Last summer, it suspended banknote paper production and launched an investigation into quality issues, which found that employees had deliberately falsified certain paper specification test certificates for a limited number of customers. Its then-CEO and several managers resigned in the wake of the problem. 

One principal customer was affected, it had said. 

"While these discussions are ongoing banknote paper supplies for this customer remain suspended," said De La Rue in a trading statement for the period since Sept. 25. 

It added that, to date, the board hadn't seen evidence of an adverse impact of the recent paper production issues on the rest of the business. 

Mr. Cobbold, who was appointed CEO late last year and has been in office less than a month, said "the loss of a large customer is never good for a business," but added that "no customer is lost yet." 

He couldn't say how long the discussion would take, but characterized the talks as "constructive." The company in its statement made no reference to an aborted takeover offer by French rival Oberthur or any new strategies to increase shareholder value. 

Mr. Cobbold had little to say on Oberthur, other than its interest had been unsolicited and that no formal bid had been made. 

De La Rue's shares tumbled 16% Monday when privately owned Oberthur abandoned its effort to forge a friendly deal that valued the U.K. company at 935 pence per share, or £926 million ($1.47 billion). 

In morning trade, De La Rue's shares were down 1.7%, or 12 pence at 687 pence. 

Mr. Cobbold said he would focus on building value, at the top line and the bottom line. He described De La Rue as a high-margin business with "fantastic customer relationships" and "a very strong brand." 

In the trading statement, the board said it remained confident that the group's outlook for the financial year was in line with its previous expectations. 

 Write to  Jonathan Buck at Jonathan.Buck@dowjones.com 