NEW DELHI—The investigation into a more than three-billion-rupee ($67 million) alleged fraud at a Citibank branch has widened with the arrest of an executive of Hero Group, a conglomerate that includes Hero Honda motorcycles.

Police said an employee of a unit of Hero Group, which is based in the Gurgaon suburb of India's capital where the Citibank branch also was located, received commissions for investing the company's funds in the allegedly fraudulent scheme.

Hero Group said in a statement Monday that its main priority is to recover its investments. It is fully cooperating with the authorities investigating the alleged fraud case, the group said. 

The case, which first came to light last week, is an embarrassment for Citibank's parent,  Citigroup Inc.
C


0.67
%




 The U.S. banking group has said it is cooperating with authorities. 

A series of sizable scams have to come to light in India in the past several months, tarnishing the image of the country as a business destination. Indians are still bristling at revelations that the government sold mobile-telephone spectrum in 2008 in an allotment that favored some companies and deprived the nation's coffers of as much as $40 billion in potential revenue. 

Most recently, eight senior officials of state-run banks and financial companies were arrested on charges of taking bribes to facilitate loans to companies in late November. 

The alleged Citibank fraud emerged when Gurgaon police arrested  Shivraj Puri, a Citibank relationship manager, for allegedly luring wealthy clients to invest in schemes that promised higher returns but weren't backed by the bank. The arrest followed a complaint by the U.S. bank after it noticed "suspicious transactions" at the branch.

On Sunday,  Sanjay Gupta, the chief financial officer of Hero Corporate Services Ltd., which is part of Hero Group, was arrested. S.S. Deswal, commissioner of the Gurgaon police, said a local court has allowed the police five days' custody of Mr. Gupta for questioning.

Attempts to reach Mr. Puri and Mr. Gupta were unsuccessful. 

Dalbir Singh, assistant commissioner of the Gurgaon police, said Mr. Gupta allegedly received 200 million rupees in payments to participate in the scheme. 

Police are "trying to investigate how he was operating and where the money that he got from the fraud is," the assistant commissioner said.

Police alleged Mr. Puri produced a fake letter from the Securities and Exchange Board of India to provide credibility to the scheme and reassure investors. Mr. Puri's position with the bank gave the investors the impression the investments were Citibank products.

Investors were allegedly asked to deposit the money in accounts held by Mr. Puri's family members and close associates with the branch, police said. Those account holders, in collusion with Mr. Puri, later either withdrew the money or invested it for their own benefit, police said.

Some of the money was invested in stock markets through brokerages, police said.

Commissioner Deswal said authorities were investigating the possible involvement of other people in the scam. 

The scale of the fraud hasn't been fully ascertained, but investigations have revealed it could involve as much as three billion rupees, Commissioner Deswal said. Of this, about two billion rupees belonged to private companies, including the Hero Group firm where Mr. Gupta worked. 

Hero Group owns about 26% of Hero Honda Motors Ltd., India's biggest motorcycle maker by sales. The group, controlled by the Munjal family, also produces bicycles, auto parts and software services across 20 companies. 

—Santanu Choudhury also contributed to this article.

 Write to  Anant Vijay Kala at anant.kala@dowjones.com 