Warren Christopher negotiated the 1981 release of Americans held hostage in Iran, arranged for the return of the Panama Canal to Panama, and served as President Bill Clinton's first secretary of state.

Mr. Christopher, who died Friday at age 85, was an impassive and courtly figure who was a confidant and troubleshooter for Democratic presidents from Lyndon B. Johnson to Mr. Clinton.

He was also a close associate of candidate Al Gore in the 2000 presidential election, but failed to sway the Supreme Court as general of Mr. Gore's battle over the Florida recount.

In his Senate confirmation hearings for the secretary of state in 1993, not long after the Soviet Union had crumbled leaving the U.S. the sole standing superpower, Mr. Christopher called for "an entirely new foreign policy for a world that's fundamentally changed."

But rather than pursuing a lofty and ambitious program, his four years at Foggy Bottom were consumed confronting a series of regional issues that seemed to foreshadow America's unsettled years to come. Among these was nation building in Haiti; humanitarian intervention followed by chaos in Somalia; and ethnic cleansing in Bosnia, where a much-delayed effort culminated with the Dayton peace accords.

His practical approach perhaps stemmed from his background as a lawyer, steeped in the art of negotiation. It was with deals in Panama and Iran that he had his greatest successes, though his dozens of flights to Israel and Syria yielded little more in the way of lasting peace than those of his purportedly more visionary predecessors.

"My charge had been to serve as the steward, not the proprietor, of extraordinary public trust," Mr. Christopher wrote in a 2001 memoir. 

Born in Scranton, N.D., Mr. Christopher was the son of a local banker. He later said he was deeply affected by accompanying his father to Depression-era foreclosure sales of farms. 

He served in the Navy during World War II and attended Stanford Law School, where he was founding editor of the law review. After graduating in 1949, he worked for Supreme Court Justice William O. Douglas, who advised his ambitious young clerk to "get out into the stream of history and swim as fast as you can." Mr. Christopher joined the Los Angeles law firm of O'Melveny & Myers, where he worked for the remainder of his career when not in government service.

Mr. Christopher became a speechwriter and special counsel for California Gov. Pat Brown, who in 1965 appointed him to a commission investigating the causes of the Watts riots. This brought him an appointment as deputy U.S. attorney general specializing in riots, including the 1968 Chicago riot at the Democratic National Convention. Nearly a quarter-century later, Mr. Christopher spearheaded a commission that investigated the riots following the beating of Rodney King by Los Angeles police. The commission's report sparked widespread reforms and the resignation of Los Angeles Police Chief Daryl Gates.

President Jimmy Carter's secretary of state, Cyrus Vance, selected Mr. Christopher as his deputy, and assigned him at first to the Panama Canal treaty, then to a variety of delicate missions including informing Taiwan that the U.S. was normalizing relations with mainland China.

But it was the hostage negotiations that were Mr. Christopher's most dramatic triumph. 

Mr. Vance resigned in the wake of a failed rescue attempt, and Mr. Christopher was at first bitterly disappointed to be passed over for secretary of state. But instead he flew to Algiers, where he spent months negotiating with tactics that included threatening to storm out, and warning the captors that the incoming president, Ronald Reagan, might prove a less reliable negotiator. 

The hostages were finally freed at the moment of Ronald Reagan's inauguration, and Mr. Christopher met them as they headed home from Algiers. "There were very few people with dry eyes, and I was not one of them," he told a crowd of reporters the next day, as he left the State Department to make way for a new crop of Reagan appointees.

It was an uncharacteristic moment of emotion for the stolid diplomat who was normally so suave in his pinstripe suits that People magazine in 1993 named him to its annual 10-best-dressed list.

But he had at least one other moment of pop-culture adulation. In an episode of "The Simpsons," bartender Moe Szyslak complained about the state of the world in the mid-1990s

"There's not even any wars no more, thank you very much Warren Christopher." 

 Write to  Stephen Miller at stephen.miller@wsj.com 