Some of the hot air has seeped out of  Salesforce.com's
CRM


0.13
%




 highflying stock balloon. And it may continue to deflate if investors focus on the shares' lofty valuation and rising count and the heavy selling of stock by management.

Salesforce.com's stock (CRM) soared 104% from the start of 2010 to December, when it hit a high of $150. Since then, it has pulled back, recently hovering around $132. Despite this, the stock still trades at 240 times the 55 cents a share some analysts expect Salesforce.com to earn in its fiscal year ending January 2012. A liberal price/earnings multiple of 40 on those earnings would lead to a $22 stock price.

The company is in the red-hot area of cloud computing. It rents out -- via the Internet -- software that helps salespeople track leads and customers to enhance productivity.

Some Salesforce.com fans are turning a blind eye to traditional gauges of valuation. Instead of looking at earnings reported under generally accepted accounting principles, they look at profits after stripping out the cost of granting options to employees -- about $100 million annually and growing. That lifts expected fiscal 2012 net to $1.38 a share and lowers the stock's P/E multiple to a less hefty -- but still high -- 96 times.

The use of option-adjusted earnings is eye-catching because of heavy selling by management. Salesforce.com Chief Executive  Marc Benioff unloaded roughly 10,000 shares every day the stock market was open last year -- or $1.4 million daily in December alone. Mr. Benioff's sales stopped at the end of the year. The company declined to comment, saying it is in the quiet period before reporting earnings on Feb. 23.

Mr. Benioff, who still owns 10 million shares, has sold about 17 million shares since the company had an initial public offering seven years ago at $11 a share. The sales have raised roughly $830 million, estimates  Jonathan Moreland, director of research at InsiderInsights.com, a firm that tracks insider stock sales. The company's fully diluted share count has ballooned by more than 40% since it went public.

Proponents of the stock believe Salesforce.com will branch into other types of software and increase sales to large corporations, snatching business from  Oracle
ORCL


-0.01
%




 and  SAP. If successful, they believe the stock could be worth $200 a share.

However, the behemoths shouldn't be counted out. And even if Salesforce.com does execute well over the next few years, its performance is unlikely to be good enough to justify its sky-high share price.

—Jacqueline Doherty is a senior editor of Barron's. For more stories, see barrons.com.