With almost a dozen restaurants opening along 31st Avenue in Astoria in recent years, a new gastronomic sensibility has taken hold in the Queens neighborhood that has long been hailed for its ethnic food scene.

Mostly nestled between the more commercial drags of Steinway Street, 30th Avenue and Broadway, the new establishments join older eateries that have long made Astoria a destination for food connoisseurs in search of Greek, Brazilian, Egyptian and other specialty dishes.

Pachanga Patterson is the latest addition to the restaurant row. Opened just three weeks ago and located a stone's throw from 31st Avenue pioneer Brick Café, Pachanga's menu is influenced by Mexican cuisine. But owner  Giuseppe Falco says the menu actually is inspired by the types of meals whipped up in restaurant kitchens for staff members. 

"In restaurant kitchens, when it comes to staff meals, they're very innovative and will often use what's at hand to create what makes the staff happy," said Mr. Falco.

 "They might make Italian specialties all day but when it's time for the staff to eat, someone will run out and get tortillas and then use what's in an Italian kitchen to create a non-traditional but fantastic meal."

Thirty-First Avenue was an easy draw for the owners of Pachanga, given its tree-lined areas and often more affordable rents than available for spaces on Steinway Street and 30th Avenue. 

In 2009, six Astoria natives joined hands and opened BareBurger, an all-organic burger joint whose menu includes ostrich and elk burgers. The restaurant has since become a mainstay on 31st Avenue and the owners have opened two other locations in Manhattan in the past couple of years.

"There are a lot of kids and families moving in to the neighborhood," said manager  Joe Gualtieri. "We wanted to give them good, clean food and be socially and environmentally conscious without being preachy."

Other eateries opening in the past few years on 31st Avenue include Il Bambino, Bugatti Café, DiWine and Chocolate Spoon Coffee House, a Brazilian bakery. In addition to introducing some novel culinary concepts to the area, the new crop of restaurants often favors organic and locally sourced food.

Some see other important differences as well. "This avenue has got a young entrepreneurial spirit in that we aren't Broadway guys with deep pockets to throw money around," said Il Bambino owner  Darren Lawless, an Irish immigrant who worked as a chef in London and in kitchens in New York City prior to his Astoria venture. "Thirty-First Avenue guys are younger and taking risks."

In 2009,  Ruairi Curtin opened Sweet Afton, a gastro-pub on 34th Street between 30th and 31st avenues, after leaving his Manhattan job as a business consultant. The pub offers a selection of craft beers and it sticks to the "eat local, drink local" ethos.

"There was no place for like-minded people to get together in Astoria even five years ago and I'd end up hanging out in high-traffic areas like the East Village all the time," said Mr. Curtin, who has lived in Astoria since moving from Ireland nearly a decade ago.

"Thirtieth Avenue caters to a more ethnic crowd, but the places opening up on 31st Avenue are catering to a new wave of people," said Mr. Curtin. 

The strip's development isn't limited to the growing gastronomic scene.

Loveday 31, a vintage clothing store, and Candy Plum, a boutique and consignment shop that sells clothing and accessories by independent designers, have also launched in the area.

"I realized there wasn't any alternative shopping in Astoria and thought why not bring it here," said long-time Astoria resident  Ivona Bilicic, owner of Loveday 31, who previously was a buyer for Manhattan's popular vintage shop Screaming Mimi's.

The last few years have seen a steady influx of young residents who are drawn by rents that are lower than those in Manhattan and in parts of Brooklyn. Artists, actors and professionals along with young families have looked to Astoria for its vibrant culinary scene and easy commute into Manhattan.

While still more affordable than some parts of the city, real-estate prices in Astoria have risen sharply in the last decade.

"It's become the 'in' place and has gotten pretty pricey and probably not as cheap, as one would think," said  Paul Halvatzis, owner of Amorelli Realty in Astoria. He says a one-bedroom rental in a new building now goes for between $1,700 to $2,000 a month, adding that "less than 10 years ago, it was half that."

Despite the changing demographic, many remain confident in the neighborhood's ability to absorb what is new without losing the old.

"There is some gentrification but not in the way that it happened in Williamsburg, for example, where it took over completely," said Ms. Bilicic. "We still have strong ethnic pockets and the newer folks remain alongside the ones who have traditionally called it home."