Among longtime New Yorkers, taking stock of the city's continuing physical transformation as old buildings come down and new ones go up is as much a part of life as cursing the weather. But gentrifying or decaying neighborhoods can create formidable obstacles for filmmakers seeking to tell period city-set stories using streets and skylines indelibly altered even in the past half-decade. 

According to the Brooklyn-born writer and director  John Gray, setting his film "White Irish Drinkers" in the mid-'70s Bay Ridge of his youth and shooting it in the same neighborhood 35 years later offered one immediate practical hurdle.

"The satellite dishes," Mr. Gray said recently in his upper West Side apartment. "That was a big problem. You just don't realize how many of those there are. It's just like hundreds. It was incredible." 

Judicious framing and frugal application of computer graphics allowed the 53-year-old Mr. Gray to, at least on film, return the rooftops of Bay Ridge to their pre-digital state. Otherwise, the filmmaker said, "nothing has changed that drastically since I was a teenager there." 

The son of an iron-worker father and a mother employed by the city Department of Welfare, Mr. Gray called Bay Ridge home until his early 20s. The script to "White Irish Drinkers," an alternately sentimental and harrowing coming-of-age saga that opens in the city on March 25, has, he said, been gestating for more than a decade. 

As creator and executive producer of the CBS series "Ghost Whisperer," Mr. Gray was able to save the necessary money to finance the film himself while consolidating production contacts and professional loyalties formed over decades of work in series television and TV movies. "At this point in my career, there are so many people around me that I worked with who are ripe for this kind of thing," he said of the film's $600,000 budget and micro-schedule of 17 days. "It was like, 'Let's go make one for us.' We all came to this with an attitude of, 'Hey let's take those skills that we've learned in TV movies and TV series.' And we had a very strong cast." 

The lion's share of onscreen gravitas in "White Irish Drinkers" is wielded by  Stephen Lang in the role of the brutal working-class patriarch Patrick "Paddy" Leary. "It's a little old-fashioned in a way," Mr. Lang said. "Like a postmodern 'Tree Grows in Brooklyn,' a dysfunctional 'Tree Grows in Brooklyn.' " Likely best-known to film audiences as the implacable Colonel Quaritch in James Cameron's "Avatar" and to city theatergoers for two decades of on- and off-Broadway roles, the Tony-nominated actor said that, at least at voice level, his character in "White Irish Drinkers" was something of a homecoming. "I've played things where the accents are learned," the Queens native said. "But this one I can access very quickly because it really is the speech of my youth. Or my 'yute.' All I have to do is spend 15 minutes with my brother and we're both talking like that."

Reconciling Paddy's humanity and the brutality with which he expresses affection and rage required, Mr. Lang said, "Exercising some actorly discretion and taste. You don't want to let it get over the top." 

But whatever forbearance that one might assume necessary for transitioning from "Avatar" to a film that Mr. Gray said "probably cost less than the craft services budget" of Mr. Cameron's film, was all in a day's work. "That's part of the spirit of the project," Mr. Lang said. "I walked in knowing what to expect." 

So, in a way, did Mr. Gray. The mid-'70s Bay Ridge that is re-created in "White Irish Drinkers" hosted film crews shooting "Saturday Night Fever" and portions of "The French Connection," and Mr. Gray recalled a chance encounter with a movie-set transformation in Park Slope with particular fondness. 

Walking along Prospect Park West en route to class at Bishop Ford High School one morning, the director "noticed that all of a sudden, out of nowhere, they were building a bank. Then the next day there was a barbershop and a pizza place and a bar. I thought, 'This is some weird urban development. What's going on here?' I discovered they were going to shoot 'Dog Day Afternoon' right on that street and I just went berserk!"

The future director's enthusiasm was rewarded by members of the crew of the seminal city-set film. "They used me as an extra. I got to talk to Sidney Lumet and I got to learn so much by just standing there watching. It was like a dream come true," Mr. Gray said.