BANGKOK—Thailand's House of Representatives will likely be dissolved between May 7 and May 10 to pave the way for the general election, Deputy Prime Minister Suthep Thaugsuban said Tuesday, with the vote probably taking place July 1 and 2.

Thai law requires the election to be held between 45 and 60 days after the dissolution.

Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva said this month that he would dissolve the House by the first week of May.

The election campaign in the increasingly divided Southeast Asian nation could prove bitter, though Mr. Abhisit's government is widely expected to be returned to power with the backing of coalition partners. The Oxford-educated Mr. Abhisit, as the head of a military-supported coalition, was made prime minister by parliament in December 2008 after a Thai court, citing vote buying, dissolved a government that backed ousted premier Thaksin Shinawatra.

The removal of Mr. Thaksin in 2006 continues to divide Thailand. The country was consumed by deadly political protests in April and May 2010, when antigovernment "Red Shirt" demonstrators—supporters of Mr. Thaksin—occupied parts of central Bangkok's main shopping district before they were eventually dispersed by the army. The worst political violence in modern Thai history left more than 90 people dead.

During the unrest, Mr. Abhisit agreed to protesters' demands for early elections. But after he named November as a preferred month, his opponents reneged on an earlier promise to end their demonstrations, prompting the prime minister to scrap the plan.

Despite the unrest, Southeast Asia's second-largest economy grew by 7.8% last year thanks to a 28.1% rise in exports, as pockets of the global economy showed signs of picking up and inventory restocking accelerated.

The government has been gradually unveiling policies that appeal to low-income workers, a Thaksin power base. 

Among these are an increase in the minimum wage and civil-servant salaries, and a promise to increase the minimum wage a further 25% over the next two years. It has also started offering low-interest loans to taxi drivers, permanently exempted low-income households from electricity charges and extended social-security-fund coverage for informal laborers. The government has also continued a fuel subsidy.

Election campaigning could start as early as April, given the bitter political fights during the past two years. 