Eva Mendes may as well buy a house in New York. The Miami-born actress makes the six-hour voyage to Manhattan from Los Angeles every few months, despite her dislike of the weather. "I just haven't found it yet—I haven't walked into a place and said, this is home," she said.

Ms. Mendes was in town last week for the Tribeca Film Festival, where her new film, "Last Night," made its American premiere. Like many of her films, the romantic drama about emotional and physical infidelity was shot in New York. The Journal recently caught up with the 37-year-old actress to talk about the movie, which opens in  theaters May 6. 



You're naturally cast in most of your films as the "sexy woman," and in "Last Night" your character tempts a married colleague. Did your past roles play a factor in getting this part?

The thought I had in my head was actually the reverse thought. When I first met [writer-director] Massey [Tadjedin], I said the only way I'm going to do this is if I de-sexify my character. I wanted to really take the sex out of her and not play up certain things that could easily be played up for this kind of role. The hair was not attended to. There was minimal makeup if not any; there were times when I did not have any makeup on at all, which I kind of liked. The attire was work attire, not super serious but certainly not flirtatious, and we consciously went against the sexy pencil skirt or sexy secretary thing because that's such a cliché that we didn't want to get into. As a result I create a real woman—a really layered, flawed woman.



Your movies "Last Night," "Hitch," "The Other Guys" and "We Own the Night" all showcase New York. Are you attracted to films in this city or is it just happenstance?

Yeah, I love working here. It's amazing and it's so funny because I have to tell you—I grapple with the weather here, especially the winters. So the last time I was here was February—I'm here every couple of months or every month—and I was a little, like, begrudgingly getting into the car getting all my layers on. Now I'm back in love with the city. It's incredible and I hate to sound, well—I think this word is so overused—but the energy is amazing. You can't beat it.

Were there any only-in-New-York moments your can report from the shooting of "Last Night"?

Massey had 28 days to shoot this, and we were shooting a lot of night scenes. We had to film on Halloween night here in the city. Poor Massey, she is a rock because it was really difficult, but at the same time how fun because the energy just kept us going once it hit four in the morning and we were already shooting for 10 hours. 

 

What are you looking for in a home in New York?

It's a total vibe and I'm a design snob, so architecture is important. 



Well, you must have some great hotel stories. Have you at least found a hotel to call home?

Yes, I now stay in the same place every time and I love it. I found a place but I don't want to say it though—it's dangerous, there's people out there, you know. But I found a second home here.