PARIS—French voters slammed President Nicolas Sarkozy in the first round of local elections on Sunday, as the ruling UMP party fell well behind the opposition Socialists and close to the extreme-right National Front, which is now seen as a first-rank contender in next year's presidential elections. 

According to the Interior Ministry's first estimates, Mr. Sarkozy's UMP, or Union for a Popular Movement, gathered about 16% of votes, well behind the Socialist Party, with about 25%, and close to the National Front, led by Marine Le Pen, with 14%. Turnout was low, at under 50%. 

The elections are a key test for Mr. Sarkozy, as the final ballot before next year's presidential elections.

Ms. Le Pen, who took over the National Front leadership in January, has smoothed the abrasive image that her father Jean-Marie—who has been convicted of inciting racial hatred and of minimizing the Holocaust—gave the party.

An opinion poll by Harris Interactive last week showed Ms. Le Pen, who has been playing on immigration concerns, would come in first if the first round of presidential elections were held now, ahead of Mr. Sarkozy and potential left-wing candidates. An Ipsos poll this week showed the National Front leader at a similar level to Mr. Sarkozy if presidential elections were to take place this weekend.

"If these first results are confirmed, the [National Front] is in the same league as the UMP: Marine Le Pen's strategy is paying off," said Bruno Cautrès, a researcher at think tank Cevipof at Sciences Po, a Paris university. "It looks like Sarkozy has lost a good chunk of the electorate that voted for him in 2007." 

While Mr. Sarkozy hasn't officially declared whether he intends to run for a second mandate and the Socialist Party hasn't yet picked a candidate, Ms. Le Pen is already on the campaign trail. 

"This is the first step of a grand renewal to which French people aspire," Ms. Le Pen said in an interview on TV station France 2, noting that this was her party's best result yet in local elections.

The French political establishment, both right and left, is worried that Ms. Le Pen could repeat the shock of her father's success when he outpolled then-Prime Minister Lionel Jospin, the Socialist candidate, in the first round of 2002 presidential elections to go head-to-head with Jacques Chirac in the second round. 

Despite Mr. Chirac's eventual victory, Jean-Marie Le Pen's performance left an indelible mark on the French political landscape. It was followed by a merger of leading right-wing parties to form Mr. Sarkozy's UMP. 

Prime Minister François Fillon has hinted for the first time at the possibility that the UMP could be absent from the second round of next year's presidential vote, with Ms. Le Pen running against a Socialist candidate.

Mr. Sarkozy has struggled over the past year to rebuild the popularity that gave him the presidency in 2007. 

A stubbornly high unemployment rate, which was holding at 9.2% in the fourth quarter, and the unpopular reform of France's pension system dented his ratings in 2010. 

His attempts to recover by playing up popular right-wing themes have failed to make up the lost ground, leaving his approval rating hovering around 29%. 

A proposal to take French nationality away from people of foreign origin who commit certain crimes has stalled, and plans to pay gypsies to leave France met with outrage from unions, human-rights organizations and the opposition as well as from other European countries.

This weekend's vote also marks the start of the race for the Socialist Party primary to decide who will be a candidate next year, with Dominique Strauss-Kahn, now the head of the International Monetary Fund, and party leader Martine Aubry seen as most likely to run. 

The final results for Sunday's election of 2,023 local councilors will come after the second-round poll on March 27.

 Write to  Gabriele Parussini at gabriele.parussini@dowjones.com 