Sadhus, the holy men of northern India and Nepal, have long beards, matted hair and rail-thin bodies, frequently brightly painted and garbed in a loincloth—if that. Now a photo exhibit at the Rubin Museum of Art in New York, together with a book by the same photographer, looks at their painted bodies as canvases representing inner visions and higher states of consciousness. 

The exhibit, which opened Friday, is one of the rare occasions when an art museum has displayed body paintings, in this case via the photos of American-born Thomas Kelly, taken over three decades. The photographer, who is based in Kathmandu, Nepal, attached himself to groups of Sadhus and traveled with them. When they asked why he was there, he says, "I'd answer that I'm on a mission to document the history of a people that is unknown to most of us."

Still, there were risks. Many Sadhus angrily wave away photographers, and Mr. Kelly said that spontaneous photography of Sadhus can be dangerous: "You can easily be trampled or attacked." The Sadhus' acceptance of Mr. Kelly, who speaks both Hindi and Nepalese, required slow and careful cultivation. His Spanish-language book, "Sadhus," published in Chile in 2003, will be on sale at the exhibit. 

There are anywhere from eight to 15 million Sadhus, who have abandoned their worldly possessions and follow such Hindu gods as Shiva and Vishnu. Texts almost 5,000 years old refer to these holy men.

The Sadhus bathe every morning, washing off the body art. Then they paint it back on. Followers of Shiva, whose aspects include both destroyer and preserver, use ash from funeral pyres, symbolic of the naked self. Followers of Vishnu, a god of many avatars (who fights evil and protects moral law), use colors, once from natural ground roots but today mostly synthetic powders. Sometimes the Sadhus write on their bodies in devanagari, the Indian alphabet used to write such languages as Sanskrit and Hindi.

Sadhus always paint themselves. "Body art is a form of identity, defining who they are and which deity they are devoted to," says Becky Bloom, who curated the exhibit at the Rubin Museum, which is devoted to the art of the Himalayas. It runs until May 30. 

—Stan Sesser