The financial strains created by crises in Japan and Europe highlight a growing problem: The rich world is getting close to the point where it won't be able to bear the costs of another disaster. 

Japan and Europe face very different crises—one brought on by nature, the other man-made. But from a financial perspective, they're strikingly similar. In both cases, the mounting costs of mitigating disaster are stretching governments' already overburdened finances. In Japan, the advanced world's most-indebted government, the outcome is still uncertain. In Europe, Portugal could soon become the latest country to seek a bailout.

The strains in Tokyo and Lisbon reflect a broader problem: As advanced-nation governments take on increasing responsibility for insulating their citizens, investors, banks and companies from the pain of disasters, they are pushing their financial resources closer to the limit. That, some economists say, could leave them without enough wherewithal to respond the next time a big crisis happens.

"Can we afford another crisis? I think the answer is no," says  Raghuram Rajan, an economist at the University of Chicago who served as chief economist at the International Monetary Fund from 2003 to 2007. "We simply don't have the government capacity in many countries to bail out the system again."

As of 2010, the average central-government debt burden among advanced nations stood at 74% of annual economic output, more than triple the level of 1970, according to economists  Carmen Reinhart of the Peterson Institute for International Economics and  Kenneth Rogoff of Harvard University. That's the highest level since the aftermath of World War II.

The buildup in debt has come amid a major shift in the role that advanced-country governments play during crises. Increasingly, they have stepped in as the insurer of last resort, taking on the cost of everything from rebuilding beachfront communities to guaranteeing the debts of banks and private companies. Ms. Reinhart notes that increases in government debt have been particularly sharp in the wake of financial crises—a phenomenon recently illustrated by the U.S. government, which saw its liabilities jump after it effectively took over mortgage lenders Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

Meanwhile, rich nations' ability to pay is waning. Their mature economies are growing at slower rates than the emerging world, aging populations are leaving them with less potential to earn the money needed to pay rising medical and pension bills, and the kind of taxes that would fund their ambitions face stiff political opposition.

"There's an expectation that government will always be there to bail you out and there's an expectation that tax rates will always be kept low," says Mr. Rogoff. "Those are inconsistent."

It's hard to know exactly how much more debt governments can take on before they get into trouble, but economists at the IMF have taken a shot. In a recent paper, they identified the highest level of debt that 23 advanced-nation governments had managed to handle in the past without defaulting. Then, using IMF forecasts of interest rates and actual debt levels, they calculated how much more debt each country could take on before it reached its limit.

The result: Five countries—Japan, Greece, Italy, Portugal and Iceland—have already reached their limits, meaning they need to implement measures harsher than any past ones to get their debts under control. Others are getting too close for comfort: The U.S., for example, can add debt equal to 51% of GDP before reaching its limit—a gap it could close in about 15 years unless it takes corrective measures.

The IMF economists made their estimates before disaster hit Japan and European leaders agreed on a new bailout fund. By current estimates, the cost of reconstruction could increase Japan's gross general government-debt ratio, which stands at about 226% of annual economic output, by several percentage points. Europe's bailout fund has the potential to add about six percentage points to the euro area's government-debt ratio, which is currently about 84% of GDP—though it would largely be replacing borrowing that financially troubled governments would otherwise be doing in markets.

The potential outcomes aren't comforting. In a worst-case scenario, investor concerns about debt levels could spark a financial crisis that governments would lack the resources to control. 

Alternatively, governments have a number of ways to reduce their debt burdens at the expense of their lenders. Countries that have their own currencies, such as the U.S. and U.K., can devalue their debts through inflation. Governments can also require or persuade banks, pension funds and other institutions to buy relatively low-yielding government debt—a phenomenon already visible in Ireland, which has announced a plan to sell special long-term bonds to its pension funds.

Draconian measures, though, won't work for long unless governments start spending within their means. That could require a far-reaching rethink of what they should do and how they should pay for it. Some economists believe, for example, that limiting the amount of debt people and banks can take on would go a long way toward making sure the most expensive kind of crisis—financial—becomes rarer and less severe.

Ultimately, though, the rich world may have to live with higher taxes, less-generous bailouts, or both. 

 Write to  Mark Whitehouse at mark.whitehouse@wsj.com 