LISBON—Details emerged on Portugal's €78 billion ($115.5 billion) bailout package that will fund the troubled country's deficits and provide capital for its banks, while obliging it to slash government spending and sell state assets.

The package, which was announced late Tuesday, imposes new austerity measures on the debt-burdened country that don't include cuts to the minimum wage or reductions in public-sector jobs, requirements that were unpopular in earlier deals for Ireland and Greece.

The three-year deal with the European Union and the International Monetary Fund is likely to carry an interest rate of between 4.3% and 4.7%—about half of what private markets would have charged Portugal for long-term borrowing—while requiring that the country raise at least €5.5 billion in privatizations, eliminate some tax deductions and slash central government expenditures, said people familiar with the situation.

On the back of the deal , Portugal successfully sold €1.117 billion in three-month Treasury bills Wednesday, albeit at high interest rates. In addition, stocks in Lisbon rose 1.3%, leading European exchanges, while the euro was stronger against the dollar, trading just below $1.49. 

"The size of the package seems to be designed to put a convincing ring-fence around the problems for Portugal," said  Peter Westaway, an economist at Nomura in London.

Portugal is the third country after Ireland and Greece to request a bailout from the EU and the IMF. Many worry that in the absence of a convincing plan to prop up fiscally frail Portugal, financial contagion could spread to Spain, which is much bigger than the three other troubled euro-zone economies combined.

The EU and IMF reached a deal on the three-year financing package Tuesday with the caretaker government of Portuguese Prime Minister José Sócrates, who put the total figure at €78 billion. According to the agreement, €12 billion of the bailout funds will be offered to the country's banks so they can raise their core Tier 1 capital ratios—a key measure of a bank's ability to absorb sudden losses—to 9% this year and to 10% by the end of 2012.

Officials from the larger Portuguese banks, including Banco Espirito Santo SA,  Banco BPI SA
BPI


1.20
%




 and  Banco Comercial Portugues SA, have said they won't need to tap the rescue package.

An official announcement of the bailout deal is expected as soon as Thursday. In return for the aid, the EU and IMF will lean on Portugal to pare its persistent deficits—the state hasn't had a balanced budget in more than 30 years—through spending cuts, elimination of tax deductions and privatizations that will include the national airline TAP Air Portugal and power companies Energias de Portugal SA and Redes Energeticas Nacionais SGPS SA.

Portugal will also be called on to cut €500 million a year in central government spending, while making some overhauls to the country's labor and housing markets, and freezing the minimum wage for the duration of the aid program.

The bailout gives Portugal more time to get its budget deficit, which topped 9% of gross domestic product in 2010, under control. Under the bailout terms, the country will have to reach a budget deficit of 5.9% of GDP this year, 4.5% in 2012 and 3% only in 2013. 

That represents a relaxation of current targets, under which the country had committed to bring its deficit down to 4.6% of GDP this year, 3% next and 2% in 2013.

EU and IMF authorities expect Portugal's economy to contract around 2% this year and next, although it should start recovering in 2013.

The EU and IMF met Wednesday with opposition leaders to enlist their support for the bailout terms. The leaders said they will analyze the package and comment soon after.

Mr. Sócrates resigned in March, after he failed to garner parliamentary support for a fresh round of austerity measures. Elections to form a new government will be held June 5, and European authorities are eager to ensure that whoever wins will be committed to the program.

The leaders of Portugal's two main opposition parties indicated late Wednesday that they would give their blessing to the bailout deal.

The next step, which could be tricky, is full approval by the EU. European finance ministers are set to discuss the package at their mid-May meeting, and disbursement of money from the euro zone's main bailout fund requires unanimous approval.

A wild card is Finland, which is in the process of forming a coalition government after elections last month. The coalition may have to include the euroskeptic True Finns Party, which opposes bailouts.

Finland's expected next prime minister, Jyrki Katainen, said Tuesday he will invite all parties to discuss the country's position on bailing out Portugal and hopes a decision would come by May 13. 

—Emese Bartha in Frankfurt and Jonathan House in Madrid contributed to this article. 