 The U.S. Fed kept its easy-money policies intact as markets reeled from a series of global shocks that could upset a firming U.S. economic recovery, which central bank officials indicated was just starting to take hold.  

 Tokyo stocks dropped 11%, their biggest decline since autumn 2008, as government officials tried to reassure rattled investors amid a broadening nuclear crisis. Shares fell elsewhere in Asia, Europe and the U.S. as investors worried over the economic damage from Japan's quake.  

 Nasdaq OMX moved closer to making a competing bid for the New York Stock Exchange, working to line up financing.  

 The catastrophe in Japan has brought unexpected profits to investors who have long bet the nation eventually will be dragged down by its debt problems.  

 Japan's central bank ramped up efforts to calm markets, offering $244.83 billion in emergency funds in a range of operations including same-day loans.  

 Cargoes of LNG are likely to be diverted from Europe to Japan as the nation struggles with its nuclear crisis, pushing up spot fuel prices in Europe.  

 Chevron plans to expand the company's Gorgon LNG project in Australia, in a move to capitalize on rising Asian demand for clean-burning fuels. 

 ONGC may not get Exxon's 25% stake in the Block 31 exploration block in Angola because of a higher bid from another firm.  

 China was a net seller of U.S. Treasury debt for the third straight month in January. Japan remained a net buyer.  

 H-P's Apotheker said his plans for the firm include a focus on online services and targeting both consumers and businesses.  

 Top investment bankers at Deutsche Bank and UBS earned more than their CEOs in 2010, highlighting how bonuses are still being used to retain rainmakers in the financial sector.  

 EU governments agreed on a broad economic-policy overhaul, but ECB President Trichet said the changes didn't go far enough.  

 The U.S. is preparing to decide whether to tack additional duties on wood flooring from China, in yet another trade spat.  

 Qihoo 360 Technology, a Chinese maker of security software, aims to raise $200 million through an IPO in the U.S.  

 Bahrain declared a three-month state of emergency and handed wide powers to the armed forces, as it moved to quell demonstrations by mainly Shiite protesters a day after the arrival of Saudi troops. Saudi Arabia denied reports that one of its soldiers had been killed.  

 North Korea notified Seoul that it would accept the return of 27 North Koreans who were on a boat that drifted to a South Korean island in early February.  

A mail bomb addressed to a moderate Muslim leader exploded in Indonesia as police tried to defuse it, injuring four people.

Bangladesh's highest court delayed arguments on whether Nobel laureate Muhammad Yunus can retain his job at the microfinance bank he founded.

A Thai court sentenced the operator of an antigovernment website to 13 years in jail on charges of defaming the monarchy and violating the computer crime act.