A few years ago, I overambitiously predicted the death of the "It Bag." In actual fact, a fate far more constructive has befallen what is, in its purest form, the most meaningful and practical of women's fashion items. 

But first, the back story. We all know, thanks to Oscar Wilde, that it is surprising what can fit in a handbag (if it's the right shape and size), but we also know now, thanks to the "It Bag," or IB, about its social messaging, status and price tag. Though I despised the IB with all of its tasteless, meaningless buckles, padlocks, logos, prints and "special editions," it certainly offered the opposite sex an easy solution when it came to gift buying. I can't count the number of husbands or partners of friends who have started a sentence "I want to buy X a nice bag, can you help?" 

While the IB has fallen out of favor, its legacy is that the consumer now knows the value of an expensive bag and is almost instinctively on the lookout for the "next big thing" in the bag world. And that's where the good news begins. All of the attention lavished over the past decade on behalf of luxury-goods companies in the quest to create and sell "the world's most desirable bag" has led to the construction and revamping of some pretty thoughtful, well-put-together classics, with a degree of longevity one would never have attributed to the IB. 

These days most of us know what we want from a handbag, or a pocketbook, as Americans call them. Practicality is mostly high on the list (even with an evening bag or minaudière, one needs to be able to fit in the car keys, the lipstick and a mobile phone); shape and style is, of course, a personal thing, though in my experience, one is either a tote lugger (short straps, big body); a long-strap, medium, squishy-shape lover; or a neat-and-tidy, over-the-shoulder, boxy type. As for color, black and brown obviously win hands down, though this season, there's a plethora of acid vibrancy out there, and a lighter color for summer (taupe or mouse's back) is always a nice idea. Of course, one can switch in and out where bags are concerned; but really, buying a handbag is like buying underwear—if it looks racy, it probably has a sprinter's shelf life and will be spent long before you are.

I have always admired Anya Hindmarch's practical approach to handbag creation. Long before other luxury-goods houses (save Hermès) were thinking things through in terms of what women really wanted, Hindmarch's classic "Carker" was the workhorse for career women, transporting diaries, phones, makeup bags, wet wipes, granola bars and the occasional (in my case) pair of running shoes, all the while looking like a pulled-together, stylish option. Hindmarch's latest classic is the "Maxi," a soft, comfortable troop transporter of a shoulder bag with a weighty zipper, in black, stone, pink and navy (from £695 for the smaller version). In terms of classics, whilst I've never owned a Gucci handbag, I'm tempted by their new version of the "Jackie". With the traditional 1937 diamanté print in hemp and hand-stitched leather and accessorized with bamboo, this roomy shoulder bag (£1,070) has pockets for two phones (very handy, though I'm sure Mrs. KO would have found that somewhat vulgar) and the provenance of an ancient classic. In another 80 or so years, it will still look as good as it does now.

Buying handbags is a challenging customer experience. Unlike clothing or shoes, one cannot easily see the pricing without unzipping or opening the bag, since retailers have cannily understood that tucking the price inside a side pocket requires a level of commitment to, and interaction with, the product that one might not necessarily relish. This is doubly uncomfortable if one is carrying large shopping bags already or has a small child in tow. Full marks then to Louis Vuitton, which displays the pricing on all of its handbags, loud and proud in front of each item at their gleaming Bond Street emporium. Quite right. Why should a customer have to enquire every time a price is needed or go through the rigors of fighting to open stubborn clasps? If I could have any bag in the Louis Vuitton store (and there are lots to choose from), I would take the casually chic "Artsy" in black python for £5,600. The LV-embossed croquet trunk also caught my eye. For £50,000, it would be churlish not to buy that too.

Perhaps you've heard about Mulberry's 66% leap in own-store sales over the Christmas and New Year's period? Surely their Alexa bag (created in homage to the messy-haired British style icon Alexa Chung) can't have done all the heavy lifting. Well, not entirely, though one should never underestimate the value of the right kind of celebrity association. I still have my "vintage" "Luella" bag, named for the company's canny collaboration some years ago with hip Brit designer Luella Bartley. In any case, Emma Hill, the creative director, and Godfrey Davis, the CEO, are driving the bus; though Mulberry does make exceedingly good bags. This season's "Tilly" satchel, with solid buckle clasps (from £812), is very likely to follow in the Alexa's footsteps and become a speedy, but eminently practical, bestseller. Smythson's bag collection is something of which Mrs. Cameron can be justly proud. Their "Nancy" tote (£820) is already perceived by some to be a classic and apparently there's an online waiting list for their new "Cooper" tote (from £715).

The flip side of the sensible bag evolution is that bags have become so important and such style signifiers that these days they are the easiest way to switch up an outfit. YSL's '70s-inspired clutch (£1,195), with heavy silver studding, is a case in point. Whilst your little black dress might be somewhat staid, this bag is anything but. Longchamp's current crop of acid brights make the proverbial sweet store look dull, but the real candy is Kate Moss's range for the label. Her capacious "Gloucester" (£590), in dark racing green, is already a classic with its short handles and big twin buckles, but watch out for the canvas-and-leather satchel (£350) when her new Faraway collection hits stores next week. You wouldn't expect Prada to follow the trend for sensible bags (though Miuccia Prada initially made her fortune from her early techno back packs and continues to turn out simple, desirable pieces). This season, stripes are Prada's thing. If you want to make a statement, then buy the green-and-black striped "Canapa Righe" (£695) and matching hat (£325). Karl Lagerfeld was never afraid of subversion either. His ironic take on the basic, long-handled, denim beach tote, complete with floral leather filigree twin Cs, is cheeky and fun, though you might not think the same about the price tag, £1,965. For around the same price, though arguably not the same amusement value, you could buy Asprey's oversized python tote for £1,835, into which you could certainly pack a lot of beach towels.

There's subversion and then there's subversion. Tomas Maier at Bottega Veneta has laced his classic—the intrecciato-woven "Cabat"—with threads this season. The effect is that of a slightly withered, tatty, Miss Havisham-esque hold-all. As a classic Cabat (£3,385) owner, I appreciate the deconstructive gesture, as only a handbag bore might. But there are plenty out there who wouldn't agree. For £4,170, they might rather have a classic that doesn't appear to be coming apart at the seams. 

 Write to  Tina Gaudoin at Tina.Gaudoin@wsj.com 