 A Renault security agent under investigation for his role in an industrial espionage case had money in a Swiss bank account, his lawyer said, adding that the money was intended to pay an informant.  

New car registrations in Europe increased 1.4% in February to 1.01 million vehicles, a trade association said. 

 China's state-owned SAIC Motor is poised to make a major push into the Western auto market with the launch of an MG sedan this year, aiming to revive the storied British car brand and allow SAIC to develop a network of dealerships across the U.K., possibly with help from longtime partner General Motors.  

Swedish truck maker Volvo named Olof Persson as its new chief executive, starting Sept. 1. Persson, currently the chief executive of Volvo's construction-equipment business, will replace Leif Johansson who is due to retire. 

Rolls-Royce Group said it won a contract to supply Trent 900 engines to power six Airbus A380 aircraft for Asiana Airlines. The South Korean carrier is the first new customer for Trent 900 engines since the failure of one of those engines on an A380 operated by Qantas Airways near Singapore Nov. 4. 

Mitchells & Butlers said Chief Executive Adam Fowle is leaving the company in the latest of a series of management changes at the U.K. pub operator and that non-executive director Jeremy Blood will act as interim CEO.

 The head of Italian oil giant ENI called for Europe to drop sanctions against Libya, saying it was "shooting itself in the foot" and endangering its energy security by punishing the Gadhafi regime. 

Topaz Energy and Marine, the indirectly owned Dubai-based oilfield services unit of Oman's Renaissance Services SAOG plans to raise $500 million in an initial public offering in London. 

Casino operator SJM Holdings, controlled by Macau gambling magnate Stanley Ho, said full-year net profit almost quadrupled to 3.56 billion Hong Kong dollars (US$456.7 million), up from HK$906.7 million in 2009 as gambling revenue in Macau soared. 

Assicurazioni Generali, Europe's largest insurer by life insurance premiums, said full-year net profit rose 30% to €1.7 billion ($2.38 billion) on higher life premiums and the continuing improvement of its operations in Italy, France and Germany. 

Goldman Sachs Group's asset-management arm said it agreed to buy India's Benchmark Asset Management Company, a major provider of exchange-traded funds. 

Powszechny Zaklad Ubezpieczen, Poland's largest insurer, reported a 35% fall in 2010 net profit to 2.44 billion zlotys ($844.2 million), mainly on a downward revaluation of its portfolio of debt securities. 

PepsiCo and Strauss Group, Israel's second-largest food and beverage company, are teaming up to produce dips and spreads for sale outside North America, part of Pepsi's pursuit of growth opportunities in healthier products.

Hearing-aid maker Sonova Holding curbed its profit and sales outlook for the ongoing business year, saying it will be hurt by the impact of a product recall and a product launch delay in the U.S. as well as the strong Swiss franc. 

Political opposition to the 8.4 billion Australian dollar (US$8.3 billion) takeover of ASX by rival Singapore Exchange grew as the leader of one of Australia's main opposition parties expressed reservations about the deal, which needs parliamentary backing. 

French media company Lagardère will postpone the initial public offer of its 20% stake in pay-TV company Canal Plus France, which was set to go ahead in the next two weeks, due to the recent market volatility. 

Media giant Vivendi has the funds available to buy out U.K.-based Vodafone Group's 44% holding in French telecom operator SFR, Chief Executive Jean-Bernard Levy said, although he didn't give any indication that talks on a deal have started. 

Levy also said Vivendi will soon launch Vevo—a music video website joint venture between Vivendi's Universal Music Group, Sony Music Entertainment, and Abu Dhabi Media—in European countries, starting with the U.K., and in the Arabian Gulf. 

Brazilian billionaire Eike Batista has acquired control of Canadian gold-mining company Ventana Gold in a deal valued at $1.5 billion. Ventana is a Vancouver-based mineral-exploration and development company with mineral rights to 4,591 hectares of exploration property in northeastern Colombia.

 Novartis plans to cut around 500 positions at its Horsham site in southern England as part of the Swiss drugs giant's ongoing review of its global operations.  

 Web security software company Websense is exploring a sale with the aid of investment bank Qatalyst Partners, people familiar with the matter said. The company has a market capitalization of $826 million and could fetch around $1 billion in a sale, these people said.  

Google, as part of its goal to allow shoppers to use their mobile devices to pay for goods in retail stores, is working on a potential partnership with electronic-payments company VeriFone Systems, according to a person familiar with the matter. 

Chinese Internet company Tencent Holdings said fourth-quarter net profit rose 46% to 2.20 billion yuan ($334.8 million) from a year earlier because of higher revenue from Internet value-added services and online advertising. 

Motorola Mobility Holdings said it will start selling a Wi-Fi only version of its Xoom tablet in U.S. retail outlets on March 27, at the same price as an equivalent iPad version from Apple. 

LivingSocial, a website offering daily coupons, is in active talks with investors to raise around $500 million to help fuel its expansion and keep up with rival Groupon, according to people familiar with the matter. 

 Dozens of big-name marketers and Internet companies have fallen victim to a scam orchestrated by a series of pornography sites. In a new type of online-advertising fraud, these porn sites are trying to generate revenue by setting up junk pages and faking Web traffic.  

China Mobile, the world's biggest wireless operator by subscribers, said net profit rose 3.9% last year to 119.64 billion yuan ($18.2 billion), as tougher competition and additions of low-income mobile subscribers in rural areas balanced out growth in third-generation wireless business. 

 InterContinental Hotels Group, the world's largest hotel operator by number of rooms, said Chief Executive Andrew Cosslett will step down at the end of June and named Richard Solomons, chief financial officer, as its new CEO.  