I'd like it to be known that when either my daughter or I are certified the winner of Tuesday's third-largest-ever, $355 million lottery drawing, for which we bought four chances Monday afternoon, we're planning to give much of it away. While I often feel as if I'm drowning in college loans, and still can't believe my paycheck after taxes is this small, I realize I'm in better shape than many. At least I have a job. 

If I take the lump-sum payment, which I heard some local TV anchors say was $90 million but is actually about $224 million, there's really no reason why I shouldn't be able to give half of it away and live comfortably off the other half. 

I'd still have to fly commercial and wouldn't have the disposable income to go toe-to-toe at auction against  Ronald Lauder if we both wanted the same Klimt. But I could afford to fix our '97 CR-V once and for all.

As a rule I don't play the lottery. Tuesday's was an exception. I believe the possibility of untold, undeserved riches first appeared on the family's radar Christmas Eve, when my brother-in-law bought us lottery tickets as stocking stuffers. None of us won anything, but simply believing in the possibility was well worth the $1 investment. 

I don't play the numbers for several reasons, arrogance foremost among them. As remote as my chances of striking it rich in my chosen profession (particularly journalism at this moment in human history), penning a best-seller still feels more probable than winning New York's Mega Millions. The odds against that, according to the New York State Lottery's own website, are 176 million to one. To put it in perspective, the odds of getting into Harvard are better, even, than winning the measly $10 sixth prize, which is 844 to one.

Another reason I don't gamble is because I'm a sore loser. I take it personally. I don't recall ever winning anything—and I mean anything—but when, on rare occasion, I play and lose I feel akin to a small child when somebody plays a practical joke on him. Someone else could lose 50 bucks at blackjack and walk away; I'd hate myself for the rest of the day. Gambling feels like playing a practical joke on myself. 

I could probably be a bit more of a risk taker. Years ago I did a piece about Caesar's Palace. I flew to their resorts all over the country—Las Vegas, Lake Tahoe, Atlantic City—and didn't cozy up to a single roulette table or even stick a quarter into a one-armed bandit. It wouldn't have hurt for the sake of the story. Not that my experience would have been synonymous with those of the high rollers I was writing about. They routinely bet thousands on a single roll of the dice, and were happily compensated by management in the form of questionably tasteful luxury suites with Champagne-glass-shaped hot tubs, four-star meals and Rolls-Royces. I don't mean free limo service from the airport; I mean actual gift cars.

The reason, of course, is that the odds are always in the house's favor. Sooner or later, you'll pay it all back. 

I suppose that if I have any philosophy of life, it's to do the hundred infinitesimal things that arise every day that you do have some control over, and to turn those odds in your favor—in essence, to become "the house." Walk to work to avoid getting stuck in a cab; take the time to notice the sky; thank the driver when you get off the bus. Admittedly, they don't provide the dopamine rush of your first IPO or an Oscar, but the hangover if you lose isn't as crushing, either. 

I most feel like sharing these negligible insights with my fellow New Yorkers when I'm standing on line behind them at a newsstand and they're playing their birthdays, their parents' birthdays, their child's birthday, their dog's birthday as lottery numbers. There ought to be some system, sort of like express lanes at supermarkets or priority check-ins at airports, where those of us who want to buy a magazine or a pack of gum don't have to loiter around while they indulge their get-rich-quick fantasies.

Many of us, especially in this beleaguered economy, might be tempted to believe that the odds are stacked against us, whatever our careers. That the opportunity to strike it rich playing the lottery isn't any less reasonable than trying to raise yourself by your bootstraps in the old Horatio Alger tradition. But to spend so much of your hard-earned cash on an outcome over which you have no control? Rare, it seems, is the customer who buys just one ticket.

My hope is that whoever wins the jackpot uses the money well. 

Watching on the news as the winner poses with his or her oversize check is unfortunately what keeps suckers returning week after week. For the rest of us, the vicarious thrill of their happiness should be reward enough. Just so long as you didn't spend more than two bucks on your ticket.

— ralph.gardner@wsj.com 