Brussels this week has been abuzz with ideas about how to make the euro zone's main bailout fund more effective. As the crisis that started in Greece and enveloped Ireland now threatens to overtake Portugal, it's evident that the European Financial Stability Fund has not provided a firebreak between countries that its architects hoped for when it was created in May. 

"The EFSF funding capacity must be reinforced," European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso said Wednesday, adding that "the scope of activities should be widened."

The discussions have taken place mostly behind closed doors, but enough detail has emerged to suggest that many ideas dismissed in the past—some because of German opposition—are now back on the agenda. European officials appear to be moving toward a package that would at once reshape the EFSF and also specify the rules of engagement for the permanent bailout fund that will replace it after mid-2013.

The Doomsday nature of the bailout fund has been noted here before: It's only when the victim is at the point of drowning that a rescue takes place, by which time the next country in line is up to its neck in water. The stipulation that bailouts can only occur as a last resort has rendered them virtually useless in preventing contagion. 

One idea now under discussion is to use the fund to preempt a crisis. It is backed in a number of capitals, including Paris, but critically Berlin has resisted.

The idea would be to use the fund, perhaps in tandem with the precautionary funds available from the International Monetary Fund, as a credit line to stave off a self-fulfilling downward spiral. 

This week the IMF agreed to expand to $72 billion a line of credit for Mexico, the sort of financing available to countries whose policies are seen as strong. The technique might, some officials say, be appropriate for Spain. Ideally, it would never be used.

Such precautionary credit lines can be effective in providing firepower to deter speculative attacks. Yet, some analysts say that Spain and other peripheral countries of the euro zone may be facing a permanent retreat of investors, most of which are elsewhere in the euro zone. If so, a preemptive credit may be less effective.

Linked with this is another proposal: Let the bailout fund buy bonds. This idea is, officials say, eagerly supported by the European Central Bank, the reluctant buyer of last resort in the euro zone's sovereign bond markets. Intervening early could prevent the upward spiral of bond yields which sends the signal to the markets that a country's debt position is unsustainable, and closes off future market finance. However, buying existing debt—as  Stephen Lewis of Monument Securities in London points out—would reduce the money available for future financings.

One other possibility is to lower the interest rates payable on the bailout funds, as discussed in this column last week. High interest rates are meant to make sure a bailout isn't an easy way out for impecunious governments. But high interest rates raise questions about whether countries can really bear the costs of servicing their debts. 

Cutting interest rates for the bailout funds would be relatively easy. It would just require EU leaders to make a political decision. Most of the other proposals, including the next one, would require the leaders to return to their national parliaments to seek agreement and would therefore be tougher politically. 

The other major debate is over enlarging the size of the fund. Using government guarantees totaling €440 billion, it raises money by issuing top-rated bonds. That lowers its funding capacity to just €255 billion, which is supplemented by €60 billion from another EU bailout fund, and a contribution from the IMF of up to half of what the Europeans pitch in. 

That's more than enough to finance Portugal, should it need help. But it may not be able to cover Spain's requirements over the next three years, particularly if the government needs to boost the capital of its banks.

Expanding the fund can be done in several ways. The guarantees of the EFSF could be amended to apply "jointly and severally," a term that would imply every country was in effect guaranteeing all the bonds. This is unpopular in the richer countries starting with Germany, and officials say it's unlikely to get very far.

Alternatively, the fund could issue its bonds with a lower rating, bringing into play guarantees from non-triple-A-rated countries. But the EFSF has been marketing itself as a top-rated credit and that would sit ill with some European officials.

More likely is an agreement to expand the size of the guarantees. To increase the lending capacity to the current headline size of the fund, €440 billion, would require more than €700 billion in guarantees.

One drawback: It could start to create problems for some guarantors. In a research note this week, Stephen Jen of BlueGold Capital Management LLP, a hedge fund manager, wrote: "If the EFSF is enlarged to €700 billion or above, one or more of the currently AAA-rated government debts may be downgraded." A downgrade of any of the five triple-A countries in the euro zone—France, Germany, the Netherlands, Austria or Finland—would in turn compromise the credit ratings of EFSF bonds themselves.

It's a prospect that European officials dismiss as a fantasy. But it does suggest a practical limit to the expansion of the bailout fund.

 Write to  Stephen Fidler at stephen.fidler@wsj.com 