WARSAW—From a cramped TV studio here in the Polish capital, a small team of dissident Belarussian journalists beams newscasts back home, reporting on a severe crackdown against pro-democracy forces being waged by their former Soviet republic's authoritarian leader.

The station, funded by the Polish government, has become an increasingly critical source of independent information for people in Belarus since security forces there beat and arrested hundreds of participants in a massive street protest that followed last month's disputed presidential election. 

For Poland, the TV operation, known as Belsat, is a critical part of its efforts to foster democratic change across the border in neighboring Belarus, where President Alexander Lukashenko has held power for 16 years and kept a tight lid on dissent.

On Monday, European Union foreign ministers are expected to impose travel restrictions on senior Belarussian officials and freeze their bank accounts, diplomats say, in an effort to pressure Mr. Lukashenko to release political prisoners. Among those jailed are three opposition presidential candidates; a fourth candidate was freed from jail Saturday and placed under house arrest. 

Such sanctions "should be a first step," says Artur Michalski, a senior Polish diplomat who oversees Belarus affairs. "We cannot ignore a situation occurring right on our doorstep. What happened in Minsk was a dramatic step backwards."

Poles say their own transition from dictatorship to democracy has made them determined to help Belarus. When Poland struggled to end communism, support from abroad made a big difference, says Mr. Michalski. "We saw that we were not alone. We know how important that is."

Poland has been among the harshest critics of Mr. Lukashenko's moves to crush his opponents after the Dec. 19 election, in which he was declared the winner with nearly 80% of the vote. The results have been challenged by the U.S. and the EU, citing election monitoring by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, which found "bad or very bad" ballot counting in half of the country's precincts.

Warsaw has lobbied other EU states to step up pressure on Mr. Lukashenko and boost support for ordinary Belarussians.

Speaking in parliament in Minsk on Thursday, Mr. Lukashenko said Poland is plotting to overthrow him in an effort to redraw its border with Belarus, which is home to a large number of ethnic Poles.

Poland's Foreign Ministry dismissed his allegations, saying it wouldn't react to "this kind of provocation."

The nearby Czech Republic, as well as Germany, the United Kingdom and the U.S. have also spoken out strongly against Mr. Lukashenko. Czech Foreign Minister Karel Schwarzenberg on Thursday said, "It is not possible to tolerate a pure dictatorship in the 21st century" in Europe.

Belarus's hard line toward opposition politicians has forced EU governments to rethink previous efforts to engage with Mr. Lukashenko's administration. Still, some member states have been wary about imposing severe penalties that they fear could drive Belarus back into the arms of its former political masters in Moscow.

 Polish diplomats are urging not just sanctions, but also aid for Belarussian dissidents and increased support from across the EU for initiatives such as Belsat and other independent media. Poland has organized a conference for potential donors next week in Warsaw to raise funds for "democratization" in Belarus.

For years, Poland has offered scholarships to Belarussian students expelled from university at home because of their political activities. The government also funds groups that provide money to the families of political prisoners and dissidents in trouble.

In Belsat's studio in a Polish Public Television building, an anchorman kicked off the evening news Wednesday with a story about the role of security forces in dispersing the massive street demonstrations in Minsk the night of the elections. He reported on a petition campaign in Minsk demanding the release of political prisoners and on continuing searches by the KGB, the state security agency that still uses its Soviet-era name.

One man who signed the petition told a Belsat reporter: "They didn't arrest the people who should have been arrested."

Back in Belarus, official state television tends to focus on Mr. Lukashenko, with echoes of Soviet propaganda efforts. The Belarussian president is often shown offering guidance at farms and factories. Coverage of other European countries tends to focus on economic dislocation and political turmoil.

Belsat, which started airing in 2007, reaches about one million viewers in Belarus, or roughly 10% of the population, says Alaksei Dzikavitski, the station's editorial director. "We're talking about human rights, about what the government in Belarus is actually doing," says Mr. Dzikavitski. "If you continue to inform people, they will understand that change is possible."Mr. Dzikavitski, who fled Belarus in 2001 and was granted political asylum in Poland, says that Belsat contributors face constant harassment in Belarus. After the Dec. 19 protests, three were arrested and held for 10 days or more. All have since been released, he says.

Belarussians themselves have become more and more willing to speak out when reporters ask their views, he says. "People are tired of being afraid all the time," he says.

Ales Zarembiuk, a Belarussian opposition politician now living in Poland, says that Belsat and other independent media "play a very important role, and the audience is growing....I know people watch and listen and it changes their opinions."

Warsaw is also home to European Radio Belarus, an independent station that broadcasts in Belarussian and receives funding from the EU, the U.S., the Czech Republic and other countries.

On Thursday morning, in ERB's small studio in a Warsaw townhouse, DJ Daria Rumiantsava, 22 years old, lowered the volume on the song playing by American rock band My Chemical Romance. Mara Nalshanskaja, also 22, leaned toward her microphone and read a news bulletin: The leader of a Belarus youth group had been pulled from a train and arrested by the KGB.

ERB's mix of rock music, entertainment news and political reports goes out online, by satellite and over some FM stations that reach into Belarus. Its target audience is younger people, and its reports are also distributed via Twitter, Facebook and YouTube.

Ms. Rumiantsava and Ms. Nalshanskaja are both Belarussians studying journalism in Warsaw on scholarships provided by the Polish government. "People need to know what's going on," says Ms. Nalshanskaja, who says she has been impressed by young Poles' involvement in their country's politics. "The way things happen in Belarus is not the only way."

—Marynia Kruk and Malgorzata Halaba contributed to this article.

 Write to  Gordon Fairclough at gordon.fairclough@wsj.com 