 New York 

In a living-room corner at Ambrose Akinmusire's unassuming apartment in Inwood, near Manhattan's northern tip, a round wooden table, painted white, is littered with hand-scrawled quotations. "I'd rather jump right in and make mistakes than be timid," reads one. Another: "This is my one chance to be me." The former is from Bud Herseth, who was principal trumpet of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra for more than a half-century, the latter from writer Maya Angelou.

That white table, on which Mr. Akinmusire jots down inspiring statements, is where the 28-year-old jazz trumpeter begins each day, playing long tones for two hours. "That part is practice, not creation," he said, sitting before it recently, his compact frame tucked into a desk chair, his warm grin matched by a steely gaze. "It's simply me in the chair, trying to achieve a sound that's just me—to eliminate the trumpet."

 On tour beginning April 14  www.ambroseakinmusire.com 

Mr. Akinmusire's technical prowess commands attention on "When the Heart Emerges Glistening," his powerful new debut CD for Blue Note Records—in the throaty curls that glide upward into glimmering overtones on the ballad "Regret (No More)," for instance, and the daring yet graceful leaps of intervals throughout. Still, in some ways, the trumpet does disappear. The music is fundamentally a group statement, its coherent arc and finely calibrated tension-and-release more compelling than any of its complex elements. Mr. Akinmusire, as knowledgeable as any young player in the lineage of great jazz trumpeters, neither evokes specific heroes nor declares any new jazz-based trumpet directive. 

The absence of a self-­conscious frame is what most impressed trumpeter Terence Blanchard, who, as director of the Thelonious Monk Institute of Jazz, a two-year postgraduate program Mr. Akinmusire attended, became an important mentor. "Ambrose didn't play the trumpet like a trumpet," said Mr. Blanchard. "He didn't play the phrases you learn, wasn't copping any style. He just had this burning desire to express what was inside. He was just trying to play music, flat out."

Mr. Akinmusire (pronounced ah-kin-MOO-sir-ee) began making music on piano at his grandmother's church in the North Oakland, Calif., neighborhood of his youth. By sixth grade, he'd settled on trumpet. "It was a tough place to grow up, but my mother kept me on the right track," he said. So did the old-school jazz musicians still around the Bay Area. One in particular, trumpeter Robert Porter, would take a young Ambrose and his best friend, Jonathan Finlayson (another distinguished trumpeter) to record stores and jam sessions, even have them sit in on gigs. "This wasn't just music," Mr. Akinmusire said. "It was community." Mr. Akinmusire also found a community of musically inclined peers that flowered at Berkeley High School, including his current quintet's drummer, Justin Brown. 

Mr. Akinmusire studied jazz on a scholarship to the Manhattan School of Music, but bristled at the program's aesthetic constraints. While there, he landed in a student ensemble with tenor saxophonist Walter Smith III. Judging by the pair's interlaced phrases on the new CD, the meeting was elemental to Mr. Akinmusire's development. For Mr. Smith, it was revelatory. "Every jazz musician moves to New York wanting to find his own voice," he said. "But nobody knows how to do it. When I heard the looseness and freedom of Ambrose's music, I knew I'd found the right path."

While in college, Mr. Akinmusire connected with another formative influence, alto saxophonist Steve Coleman, who invited him on tour and to record. Mr. Coleman laid down a challenge. "He asked what my concept was," said Mr. Akinmusire. "I thought I'd study the tradition and then one day wake up and have my own concept. He said, 'No—not how it works.'" So Mr. Akinmusire devised a list that he tacked to his wall: His trumpet should sound more like a French horn; his harmony should possess the tensile possibilities of a rubber band. "That list grew and changed for years," he said.

After the two-year Monk Institute postgraduate program, Mr. Akinmusire entered the institute's prestigious annual competition. Within his stirring performances, he played two original pieces. He'd not just competed and won; he'd made a musical statement. The visibility gained from that 2007 victory no doubt emboldened Mr. Akinmusire in his career pursuits. Yet he attributes his confidence more to his band, which includes another longtime associate, bassist Harish Raghavan. "They're fearless," he said, "so I follow them as much as the reverse." (Pianist Sam Harris will replace Gerald Clayton, who plays with distinction on the new CD, when Mr. Akinmusire kicks off a two-month tour with a four-night engagement at Manhattan's Jazz Standard Thursday.) 

Mr. Akinmusire considers his band an ensemble cast inhabiting the storylines of his tunes; before composing "Tear Stained Suicide Manifesto" for the new CD, he wrote a five-page short story. With "My Name is Oscar," he considered a real-life episode—the shooting of a young black man, Oscar Grant III, by a transit officer in his hometown. That track features spare fragments of text, spoken by Mr. Akinmusire, over a drum solo extracted from an unused full-band recording. The creative strategy came in part from pianist Jason Moran, who served as co-­producer for the CD, and who plays on two tracks. 

Mr. Akinmusire first met Mr. Moran, who is seven years his senior, while in college. "Ambrose wanted to understand how an artist progresses and stays true," said Mr. Moran. "My Name is Oscar"—a risky gambit, musically speaking—is, for Mr. Akinmusire, one answer. "This thing happened, and I want people to know about it," he said. "So it's on there."

Mr. Moran recalled that Mr. Akinmusire's initial questions, years ago, were "concerned with who was his crew, what would they have to say?" Without signifying any overt stylistic movement, through means at once personal and collective, and marked by a sense of purpose as much as a sound, that crew is coalescing. "It's the quietest revolution you've ever heard of," said Mr. Blanchard. "But it's a revolution. And Ambrose is right there in its front lines."

 Mr. Blumenfeld writes about jazz for the Journal. 