Sure, there's plenty of whimsical trade-show swag that you could litter your desk with, but why not aim higher than a stress ball? In the long run, you'll be happier with an object (just one; the desk is so easily cluttered) that has a sense of playfulness rather than a sense of humor. 

Here are five. Although they skew more toward pleasure than function, they are, in a way, as essential as a paperclip. Charles Eames put it best: "Who ever said that pleasure wasn't functional?

—Michael Hsu

Still using an ironic mug as your desktop catch-all? Consider this more refined and practical upgrade. Its polished stainless steel cup has a wide rim to accommodate that ever-growing ballpoint pen collection, as well as larger desk tools. The faux-wood "branches" reclaim otherwise squandered desk space for Post-It notes. $93, alessi-shop.com 

Whimsy may have a place in the workplace—but never in finance. This Bauhaus-inspired, Swiss-made (of course) piggy bank is a dignified place to collect your change. Its locking system uses a rare-earth magnet as a key. When it's time to cash out, the walls come apart—essential for spur-of-the-moment trips to the vending machine. $115, ameico.com 

If you're looking to kick up your workspace cute factor, look no further than this pint-sized marsupial. The little joey is made in Argentina from recycled leather. It'll earn its keep in your office by corralling clutter: Use its pouch to stash your cellphone, its mouth to hold business cards and its legs to keep pens from rolling off your desk. $38. momastore.org 

About as tough and rugged as a real rhino, but with a sweeter demeanor, Simus is made from solid beech wood and held together with heavy-duty elastic cord. Pose him in mid-charge or quiet repose, depending on the message you want to send. Plus, he's essential to have on staff if you ever find yourself hosting young visitors. $120, areaware.com 

Forget Tetris. What any office procrastinator really needs is a set of perfectly balanced tops. These are handmade in Austria from a single piece of knot-free wood (you'll pass them on to your kids), and are as beautiful at rest as they are awhirl. Setting them in motion provides a much needed break from the computer. From $21 to 29, puccimanuli.com 