WASHINGTON—The Obama administration, on the defensive amid higher gasoline prices, on Saturday said it will pursue policies that could boost domestic oil production.

President Obama, in his weekly radio address, said his administration would expand drilling opportunities in Alaska's National Petroleum Reserve, speed up continuing evaluation of oil resources in the Atlantic and provide incentives to oil companies to develop energy on the leases they currently own.

"These spikes in gas prices are often temporary, and while there are no quick fixes to the problem, there are a few steps we should take that make good sense," Obama said.

Republicans dismissed the president's measures and continued to criticize his administration over its oil and gas drilling policy, saying it has failed to encourage domestic drilling.

Calling the spate of initiatives "not terribly substantial," Brendan Buck, a spokesman for House Speaker John Boehner (R., Ohio) said "this reversal is striking since his administration has consistently blocked American-made energy."

Senior administration officials said the Interior Department will start to conduct annual lease sales in the Petroleum National Reserve, west of Prudhoe Bay in Alaska. Lease sales had been conducted in this reserve before, but the sales were irregular, officials said. Drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, however, is "off the table," an official told reporters on a phone call Friday.

The administration will also expedite an environmental review of seismic studies that determine how much oil and gas is below the ocean floor in the mid and south Atlantic. If the regions hold promise, they could be added to a lease plan for 2012 to 2017.

To spur oil and gas companies to develop oil and leases they already own, the administration is considering lowering royalty payments for companies that develop within the first three years of their leases, administration officals said. Democrats have introduced legislation that penalizes the companies for not producing on areas they lease.

Also as part of the White House push, the U.S. Interior Department plans to hold lease sales in the western and central Gulf of Mexico that had been postponed in the wake of the Gulf oil spill, senior administration officials said. Several oil companies had assumed these lease sales would be abandoned.

The administration will also extend the length of leases held by companies already operating in the Gulf to account for disruptions following the oil spill, an administration offical said.

Republicans on Capitol Hill have steadily criticized the president in recent weeks as gas prices hover near $4 a gallon. They accused him of doing little to promote new drilling in U.S. waters and blasted him for prohibiting deepwater drilling in the Gulf of Mexico after the Deepwater Horizon oil spill.

The Republican-led House of Representatives recently passed three bills aimed at expanding and speeding up offshore drilling. On Friday the House energy committee discussed legislation that would impose deadlines on the Environmental Protection Agency for reviewing air quality permits related to drilling projects.

Democrats, on the other hand, have been focused on efforts to repeal nearly $2 billion of annual tax breaks given to large oil and gas companies. On Thursday a panel of Senate Democrats grilled top-level oil executives from Shell, Chevron and other major companies and asked them to justify the tax breaks when they were reporting billions in profits.

The president also repealed various tax incentives for the oil and gas industry in his 2012 budget proposal. "The American people shouldn't be subsidizing oil companies at a time when they're making near-record profits," he said in his address.

Senior administration officials denied these measures were meant as a response to Republican criticism. "We are drawing on the best ideas from the Republican and Democratic side of the aisle," an official said.

Republicans view the discussion over oil production as an issue involving job creation, said Rep. Martha Roby (R. Ala.) in the Republican weekly radio address. "The cost of energy is directly related to the cost of hiring workers and running a business," Ms. Roby said.

Ms. Roby also said the federal government needed to cut spending to strengthen the economy and make spending cuts and reforms before raising the debt ceiling.

"Republicans have made clear that there will be no increase in the national debt limit, unless is accompanied by significant spending reforms," she said.

 Write to  Tennille Tracy at tennille.tracy@dowjones.com 