TOKYO—Tokyo Electric Power Co. said Tuesday that external power had been reconnected to all six reactors at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear-power complex, as Japanese authorities made modest gains in containing the crisis at the stricken plant that has become a focus of international concern. 

But an early-evening spike in radiation levels, as well as continued and unexplained emissions of smoke and steam from two of the plant's most troubled reactors, underscored the continued uncertainty of the situation. 

The company also said Tuesday that substances exceeding normal radiation levels set by Japan had been detected in seawater, raising the possibility that contamination from the plant could spread to marine life after already being found in some local produce and food products. 

Tokyo Fire Department's Hyper Rescue Squad Tuesday poured about 180 tons of water on the No. 3 reactor's fuel-storage pool using its Super Pumper water-spraying vehicle. Meanwhile, 150 tons of water was poured from a powerful German-made truck on No. 4 reactor's fuel-storage pool. Officials worry that spent fuel rods stored at the site could heat up and release radioactive material.

But radiation at the plant's main gate briefly jumped to 472.2 microsieverts per hour at about 7:30 pm local time, before falling back to a level more consistent with the rest of the day, at 235.9 per hour. By comparison, a full set of dental X-rays results in radiation of about 400 microsieverts. Officials at Tokyo Electric, known as Tepco, said the jump was likely due to a shift in the direction of the wind. 

Tepco and Japanese nuclear regulatory officials said they didn't know the source of gray smoke that continued to rise Tuesday from the plant's No. 3 reactor or what appeared to be steam coming from reactor No. 2. A Tepco spokesman said the smoke seemed to be ebbing as of Tuesday evening local time, while the steam had become barely visible.

While the significance of the emissions isn't clear, neither has been accompanied by a steady increase in radiation, suggesting the combustion of radioactive material isn't behind either one.

With Tuesday's efforts, all six reactors are now connected to the local power grid. That could help workers use the reactors' cooling systems to keep down the temperature of radioactive material and avoid the release of radioactive waste from the plant.

 The Tepco spokesman said the next challenge was to check whether the systems, including pumps and other equipment at each reactor, will work properly. The time frame was unclear. He said lighting at central control rooms of No. 3 reactor had been restored, while lighting at No. 4 reactor would be back again soon. 

Tepco said cooling systems at the No. 5 and No. 6 reactors were working, offering a boost to recovery efforts. Those reactors were the least damaged by the earthquake and tsunami and haven't been the focus of attention, though they raised concern when spent fuel rods stored at their sites began to heat up last week.

Also Tuesday, the Japan Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency said it had detected higher-than-permitted levels of radioactive materials in seawater near the complex, stirring fears of contamination of marine life. 

The agency said there was no immediate health risk to humans, as the area around the plant had already been evacuated. 

NISA said that sampling in waters about 330 meters south of the plant showed the amount of iodine-131 exceeded the allowable limit by more than 29.8 times, compared with 126.7 times on Monday afternoon. 

The agency said it had alerted the agriculture ministry about possible ramifications for the seafood industry.



 Write to  Hiroyuki Kachi at hiroyuki.kachi@wsj.com 