OXON HILL, Md.—Michael Steele's rocky tenure as chairman of the Republican National Committee came to an end Friday as party leaders elected a Wisconsin political official to lead the GOP's main campaign committee.

Reince Priebus, 38 years old, will lead the RNC through the 2012 elections.

Mr. Priebus is currently chairman of the Republican Party in Wisconsin, where the GOP took a U.S. Senate seat, the governor's office and control of the state legislature from Democrats in November's midterm elections.

Almost unknown outside GOP circles, Mr. Priebus inherits an embattled organization that is more than $20 million in debt. The RNC lost the faith of its big donors during the last election and fell short in its traditional duties of rallying voters and supporting state party groups.

Mr. Priebus promised to restore the party's faith in the RNC and to raise $400 million as Republicans gear up to take on President Barack Obama in 2012.

Mr. Steele, the party's first African-American chairman, was widely criticized for lackluster fund raising and a series of off-tone public statements. He had argued that he deserved re-election in part because of the huge gains Republicans made in the midterm elections.

But the 168 voting members of the RNC never gave him the lead Friday in balloting to select a chairman for the next two years. When he dropped out, Mr. Steele was tied for third place.

"I hope you all appreciate the legacy we leave," he told RNC members in announcing his withdrawal. "Despite the noise—and Lord knows, we've had a lot of noise, haven't we?—despite the difficulties, we won." He ended by saying: "And now I exit, stage right."

The hall of RNC members gave him a standing ovation. 

Committee members held seven rounds of secret-ballot voting before Mr. Priebus emerged with more than the 85 votes needed for victory. He was elected with 97 votes.

He defeated three other candidates in addition to Mr. Steele: Maria Cino, a former official in the George W. Bush administration; Saul Anuzis, a former Michigan GOP chairman; and Ann Wagner, a former ambassador to Luxembourg.

Ms. Cino had been backed by several prominent Republicans, including House Speaker John Boehner and Karl Rove, former senior adviser to Mr. Bush.

Mr. Priebus often invokes Ronald Reagan and describes himself as a fervent Republican since his high-school days. He said Friday that his first date with his wife was to a Lincoln Day Dinner in Kenosha, Wis., headlined by the late Rep. Henry Hyde (R., Ill.), a hero of abortion-rights opponents.

During the race for chairman, Mr. Priebus was criticized for cozying up to Mr. Steele and then turning his back on him. Mr. Priebus was an adviser to Mr. Steele until resigning to challenge the man who had given him a title at the RNC.

During his two years as chairman, Mr. Steele was faulted for a series of verbal gaffes and spending practices that drove away major donors and spent nearly 70 cents for every dollar it raised. A central task for the new chairman is to win back those donors.

Many party brass were clearly relieved at Mr. Steele's departure. "He saw the party was going in another direction, and he exited gracefully. I applaud him for that," said Mike Duncan, who ran the RNC before Mr. Steele took the helm in 2009. 

Mr. Priebus, whose first name rhymes with "pints" and whose last name is pronounced PREE-bus, has not sought attention in the news media and is likely to carry a far lower public profile than did Mr. Steele. He acknowledged in his first remarks to the press that he is hardly a national figure.

"First, my name is Reince Priebus," he said, advising anyone who needed help to look him up on Google.

 Write to  Patrick O'Connor at patrick.o'connor@wsj.com and Neil King Jr. at neil.king@wsj.com 