A top Navy admiral permanently relieved the commander of the USS Enterprise for showing a "profound lack of good judgment" by recording offensive and vulgar videos on a previous tour of duty.

Adm. John C. Harvey Jr., commander of Navy Fleet Forces, said he was immediately and permanently relieving Capt. Owen Honors from command of the Enterprise, a nuclear-powered aircraft carrier. He also said the investigation would continue into how the videos were made and how complaints about them were handled, suggesting others could be disciplined for their involvement.

"His profound lack of good judgment and professionalism while previously serving as executive officer on Enterprise calls into question his character and completely undermines his credibility to continue to serve effectively in command," Adm. Harvey said.

Adm. Harvey announced that Capt. Dee Mewbourne, the former commander of the aircraft carrier USS Dwight Eisenhower, would take immediate command of the Enterprise.

Adm. Harvey said that Capt. Honors' service as commanding officer of the Enterprise had not been called into question. But he said that the videos Capt. Honors recorded in 2006 and 2007 while serving as executive officer of the Enterprise, the second in command of the ship, were inappropriate. 

In the videos, shown on the ship's closed-circuit television system, Capt. Honors used offensive terms for gays, simulated masturbation and introduced a skit showing two women showering together. The videos were made public over the weekend by the Virginian-Pilot newspaper.

Navy officials said the service would investigate the actions of other senior officers who knew about the videos, to determine what actions they took, or failed to take, when the videos were made or shown.

Capt. Honors, whom the Navy didn't make available and who hasn't commented on the matter, has been reassigned to an administrative position at Fleet Forces, based in Norfolk, Va. Being relieved of command is typically an action that will end an officer's military career.

The videos come to light as the military is preparing to allow homosexuals to serve openly. With last month's repeal of the "Don't Ask, Don't Tell" law, the Pentagon intends to soon begin training programs designed to ensure that gays can serve without being harassed.

Pentagon spokesman Col. David Lapan said Tuesday that Capt. Honors's videos should never have been made, no matter what the law was about gays serving openly. "Those kinds of comments were inappropriate before the law was repealed," he said. "The culture across all the services is about treating people with dignity and respect."

The videos have raised questions about whether Navy culture tolerates slurs against gays and denigrating comments about women. Twenty years ago, in 1991, the Navy was ensnared in the Tailhook scandal, after a number of women said they were sexually assaulted at a large gathering of Naval aviators.

Since then, military services have tried to create a more welcoming environment, and have warned officers against using crude language to describe women, gays or racial minorities. Col. Lapan and other military officials said the videos made by Capt. Honors were aberrations and didn't reflect the military's current culture.