WASHINGTON—Auto makers are asking newly empowered House Republicans to help fight a proposal under consideration by the Obama administration to boost fuel-economy standards for new cars and trucks to as high as 62 miles per gallon by 2025.

The Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers, the car industry's main trade group, wrote in a letter to U.S. Reps. Darrell Issa (R., Calif.) and Fred Upton (R., Mich.) that fuel-economy standards are "by far the most expensive regulations auto makers face." The group warned that the 62 mpg proposal—backed by the state of California—would boost the price consumers pay for a car by as much as $6,400, resulting in a possible 25% drop in car sales and the loss of 220,000 automotive jobs.

In 2010, U.S. cars and light trucks averaged 22.5 miles per gallon, according to a projection by the Environmental Protection Agency. 

The group also called on Republicans to scrutinize administration proposals requiring higher ethanol blends in gasoline, video technology to improve rear-view visibility and more-detailed window labeling.

"These rules have the potential to impose significant additional costs on the car buying public, and therefore also bear careful scrutiny," stated the letter by the alliance, whose members include  General Motors Co.
GM


0.28
%




,  Ford Motor Co.
F


1.16
%




 and  Toyota Motor Corp. 

The letter marks a shift in the industry's public stance on fuel-economy regulations. Leaders of several major foreign and domestic auto makers joined President Barack Obama in the White House Rose Garden in May 2009 to support an agreement to boost federal fuel-economy standards to 35.5 miles per gallon by 2016. The event symbolically ended years of industry opposition to any significant boost in the old standard of 27.5 mpg for passenger cars.

Central to that agreement was a commitment by California to shelve plans to seek its own, tougher curbs on automotive greenhouse-gas emissions, a proxy for fuel consumption. That will allow car makers to meet one standard nationwide instead of contending with a patchwork of state standards that the industry said would be costly and limit consumer choices.

The group said the Obama administration's rule to have all new cars get an average of 35.5 miles per gallon by 2016 will cost the industry more than $50 billion. The White House has said it is considering a range of fuel economy standards for 2017 to 2025, with 62 mpg being on the high end, and the alliance said it is working closely with the Environmental Protection Agency and the Transportation Department on the new rules.

In the letter to Mr. Issa, chairman of the House Oversight and Government Reform committee, and Mr. Upton, the House Energy and Commerce committee chairman, the auto alliance expressed concern that California is working on a speedier schedule than federal regulators to set tougher standards for beyond 2016. Mr. Issa has invited industry groups to identify regulations they view as burdensome.

"A rushed effort toward a state rulemaking is not in the spirit of a collaborative effort to develop a single national program" for rules on fuel economy and greenhouse-gas emissions, the auto alliance stated.

James Goldstene, executive officer of the California Air Resources Board, said the board is "surprised and disappointed that the auto industry is signaling its intent to back away from its commitment to build the clean cars the nation needs."

California's clean air standards "drove the industry to produce the clean and efficient vehicles that consumers demand and can now buy," he said.

 Write to  Josh Mitchell at joshua.mitchell@dowjones.com 