The U.S. trade deficit narrowed slightly in November as exports grew faster than imports, although the balance with China—a hot-button political issue—worsened.

America's trade gap declined 0.3% to $38.3 billion, compared with October, the Commerce Department said Thursday, fueled in part by increases in U.S. sales of planes and food overseas. 

The narrower deficit is likely to prompt economists, who have already become more upbeat about U.S. growth, to again boost estimates for the fourth quarter. A narrowing deficit means the U.S. is producing more, both to fill export orders as well as meet domestic demand.

U.S. exports to China hit an all-time high of $9.5 billion in November, an increase of 1.9% from the month before. But the growth in exports doesn't begin to match U.S. imports from China, which rose 0.9% to $35.12 billion. This pushed the overall U.S. deficit with China up 0.5% to $25.63 billion. 

Trade tensions between the two countries have grown in recent months and will likely be a major topic at next week's meeting of U.S. and Chinese leaders in Washington.

U.S. exports and imports both gained modestly in November, with exports increasing 0.8% to $159.6 billion. Imports rose 0.6% to $198 billion in the same time frame. 

A separate report Thursday reflected the job market's fitful recovery: New claims for jobless benefits jumped last week, the Labor Department said, rising by 35,000 to 445,000. The four-week average for jobless claims, designed to smooth out volatility in the data, also increased, by 5,500 to 416,500. 

The Labor Department said that the recent holidays could have led to some distortion in the data, and analysts predicted the labor market would continue to improve this year as the private sector creates more jobs. 

"There's a lot of noise in these numbers," said  Michelle Girard, an RBS Securities Inc. analyst. "The labor market does appear to be strengthening."

Continuing claims for jobless benefits—those drawn by workers for more than a week—dropped by 248,000 to 3.9 million in the week ended Jan. 1. That is partly an effect of jobless Americans exhausting their unemployment benefits. 

Slow economic growth and high unemployment have kept a lid on inflation during the downturn and lackluster recovery. But price pressures have begun to build in the production pipeline. 

The producer price index increased a seasonally adjusted 1.1% in December, the Labor Department said Thursday. It is the sixth consecutive month that producer prices have risen. In the past year, prices increased 4%.

Food and gas prices continued to climb. The December increase in producer prices was largely driven by a 3.7% jump in costs for energy goods. 

Food prices also rose 0.8% in December. Over the past 12 months, food and energy prices increased 3.5% and 11.9%, respectively. 

Price pressures were modest in other goods, though. Excluding food and energy, prices rose just 0.2% last month and were up a slight 1.3% for the year.

 Write to  Sara Murray at sara.murray@wsj.com 