The city's Department of Buildings has clarified a much-maligned safety regulation that residential and commercial property owners have grumbled about for years. 

The rule requires owners of buildings over a certain size to hire full-time site safety inspectors when major facade work is done. But to the surprise of some property owners, the Department of Buildings recently said that inspectors could be employees of the contracting companies performing the actual work. 

Charging as much as $100 an hour, the inspectors can cost a co-op building thousands of dollars in additional fees for a project. 

"It really is onerous," said  Elli Siegal, who lives in a co-op on 70th Street. Her building will soon have major work down to its facade, but has yet to file plans for that work with the Department of Buildings. Shareholders there are preparing to pay as much as $30,000 for a full-time site safety inspector. That's on top of the $250,000 costs for the facade work. 

The inspectors typically work as independent contractors and are hired in addition to construction contractors performing the actual work. Depending on the complexity of the project, inspectors working on a full-time job often find themselves with a lot of downtime and little to do, property owners say.

"It's infuriating to pay someone for what seems to be like nothing" is a common complaint heard from property owners, said  Angela Sung, senior vice president of management services and government affairs for the Real Estate Board of New York.

Officials with the Department of Buildings say the inspector regulations are in place to make sure that the building is safe and to prevent pedestrian injuries.

The regulation was introduced in 1983 in response to a fatal crane accident in 1982. At the time it covered major construction sites for large buildings. In the 1990s, it began to be applied to facade renovation projects as well. 

The department recently clarified the safety-manager rules with officials at the Real Estate Board of New York. Many property owners and contractors for years believed that safety inspectors had to be independent third-parties hired to monitor contractors. The buildings department officials said that inspectors could be employees of the contracting companies performing the actual work. 

The Department of Buildings "requires that site safety managers have active license with the department. They can be employed by the contractor or sub-contracted out. There has been no change regarding that requirement," said  Jennifer Gilbert, a spokeswoman with the Department of Buildings. 

Property owners were pleasantly surprised. "People assume that this would have a tremendous amount of site savings," Ms. Sung said. 

 Write to  Joseph De Avila at joseph.deavila@wsj.com 