The future of Blockbuster Inc. hangs in the balance Thursday, when a federal bankruptcy judge is expected to rule on whether the flagging video chain stays in business or is liquidated.

Powerful voices on each side of the argument will go before the bench to make their cases and try to sway a judge who already has voiced skepticism of the proposed plan to keep the company alive. The hearing begins at 10 a.m. in bankruptcy court in Manhattan. 

Among those objecting to Blockbuster's plans are several movie studios as well as the government's own bankruptcy-court representative. Summit Entertainment, the movie studio behind the "Twilight" saga, and an official creditors committee say liquidation would help stanch continuing losses and secure repayment for their goods. To that end, they are urging U.S. Bankruptcy Judge Burton Lifland to reject a proposed sale of the company for $290 million to senior bondholders. 

Liquidation would mean shutting down the roughly 5,000-store chain, which employs more than 20,000.

The studios and Blockbuster's bondholders were locked in discussions Wednesday that could buy the company more time. Blockbuster is likely to tweak the auction terms that need the judge's approval in a way that could provide more money to studios and give better guarantees about the condition of DVDs they have shipped to the company, according to a person familiar with the matter. 

Blockbuster wants the judge to give a go-ahead to a proposed sale of the company for $290 million to senior bondholders led by New York-based hedge fund Monarch Alternative Capital. The Monarch consortium is acting as a "stalking horse" bidder that would set the floor for other offers. 

Judge Lifland last week signaled the Blockbuster sale process could be in trouble, calling the Monarch-led bid "one of the most aggressive documents that I have seen in my...31 years on the bench." 

He also called the proposed plan a "garbage truck."

The pro-liquidation camp argues that the company's current plan runs afoul of bankruptcy law by steering sale proceeds to certain creditors and for other "critical" expenses, neglecting the studios who believe they have special repayment rights under agreements they made to continue shipping DVDs.

Warner Bros., a unit of  Time Warner Inc.,
TWX


0.28
%




 filed court papers Tuesday demanding immediate repayment for DVDs and other products shipped to the company. Blockbuster owes the studio more than $20 million, according to the court motion.

Blockbuster declined to comment.

Blockbuster bondholders—including the Monarch-led group and billionaire investor  Carl Icahn—said that the company should stay in business, and run an auction to get the most money for creditors. The bondholders said half a dozen other suitors may bid on Blockbuster.

Blockbuster put itself up for sale after poor holiday results cast doubt over its ability to spend several more months reorganizing in bankruptcy court. Between September and January, Blockbuster posted a net loss from continuing operations of $64.8 million.

A person close to Blockbuster said the company is in talks with several other possible bidders in the hopes of getting a better offer than the stalking-horse bid. In recent court documents, Blockbuster listed a litany of potential bidders, including  Amazon.com Inc.,
AMZN


-0.77
%




 Best Buy Co.
BBY


-0.40
%




 and  Coinstar Inc., which operates Redbox DVD vending machines.

None of those companies immediately responded to requests for comment.

Blockbuster also listed several other hedge funds as potential suitors. The company didn't list Mr. Icahn, though the big investor hinted in a Tuesday court filing that he might bid.

Some possible bidders depend on Hollywood studios and would likely treat them better in a sales process, this person said. Blockbuster doesn't want to "pull the plug" on its auction amid efforts to garner better bids, this person said.

Still, Blockbuster's bankruptcy trustee Friday urged the judge to convert the company's Chapter 11 case to a Chapter 7 in which it would liquidate all its assets and repay creditors in the order dictated by federal bankruptcy law.

The trustee said Blockbuster's current deal terms would repay bondholders ahead of studios in an improper way. 

Blockbuster is "administratively insolvent" and pursuing a sale that "runs afoul of the Bankruptcy code," the trustee said, adding that it is "unlikely" Blockbuster can reorganize.

 Corrections & Amplifications 

Blockbuster Inc. suffered a net loss from continuing operations of $64.8 million between late September and January. A previous version of this article incorrectly said Blockbuster suffered the loss between November and January.