Last year,  Stephen Jan rose to his feet and eyed his classmates in Bronx Community College's engine-repair class. Students recited the usual reasons for enrolling: a love of cars, mechanic aspirations, dreams of driving and repairing Corvettes.

Mr. Jan, a 30-year-old software engineer, had a different reason for being there. 

"I'm driving an ambulance between London and Mongolia and my car might break down," he said to stares. 

Mr. Jan was not a medic. He was preparing for the Mongol Rally, a 10,000-mile journey between London and Mongolia where points are awarded for the smallest, oddest vehicles least likely to achieve success—or emergency vehicles that can later be donated.

With the trip, Mr. Jan joined a small but intrepid group of New Yorkers who eschew traditional vacations in favor of loosely organized, multiweek rallies around the world whose key selling point is their potential for fiasco.

These rallies, which send participants riding auto rickshaws across India or navigating a motley assortment of vehicles through the Sahara, attract business-school students seeking to test their crisis-management skills; older executives shaking off a midlife malaise; and people keen on seeing firsthand little-known parts other countries.

Participants at these events usually find their own vehicles, arrange their own visas and plot their own routes. 

And if trouble arises, "you're pretty much on your own," said Mr. Jan, who was introduced to the rally idea by a friend. "We were at a bar and of course after some drinks you're like, 'Oh, we got to do it, we got to do it!'"

His friend ultimately dropped out, but Mr. Jan was hooked. He flew to Berlin to find a car, despite not speaking German. He scraped together a four-person team, and his group, dubbed the Magical Mongolian Mystery Tour, raised more than $7,000 for charity, along with the roughly $1,200 entry fee.

For Mr. Jan and others like him, the chance to escape normal New York life and attempt an overland crossing is too tempting to resist. 

Rally organizers gleefully play up the potential for unpleasant, unexpected catastrophe—catnip for the type of New Yorker who thrives on attempting arduous feats, from monthlong juice fasts to autorickshaw journeys.

"We tell people that it's going to be difficult and they're not going to get any support and they're on their own," said  Andrew Szabo, an ex-New Yorker who went to the City University of New York and went on to found the Budapest-Bamako rally through Africa. "Basically they're buying the right to struggle and suffer in the Sahara."

Many of the rallies, which are run by different companies, encourage or require participants to raise money for charity; often vehicles, such as they are, get donated afterwards. Mr. Szabo estimated that his event raised €800,000 for charity each of the past two years.

Other races are more focused on an experience, such as the Rickshaw Challenge, where participants pilot the three-wheeled vehicles also known as tuk-tuks to drive as far as 1,180 miles across India.

"I wanted to make it, like, a wacky race, so initially we called it the amazing race for the clinically insane," said managing director  Aravind Kumar Bremanandam. The autorickshaws have seven horsepower, "which means that even a lawn mower can outrun it," he said.

Jason Semine signed up for the trip with a group of friends who were celebrating their graduation from the Wharton School. But they didn't intend to simply be tourists.

Among his classmates, "these sort of adventure trips are really popular because they're seen as a way to sort of test your leadership skills," the 29-year-old Manhattan lawyer said. "You can't really model a crisis, you have to be in it."

He and his friends arrived to discover vehicles with no seatbelts or doors. Engines sputtered out, and gears got stuck. 

The flimsy tuk-tuks navigated streets while threading between barreling trucks. One night Mr. Semine and his team came to an unmarked fork in the road, he said. They blindly chose one direction. Later they learned the other path was actually for oncoming traffic.

"There were a few more near-death experiences than I would have liked, but that was kind of part of it, too," he said.

But the problem with adventuring into deepest Sibera is that sometimes you're stuck there. When  James Slizewski, a 29-year-old business analyst at the College of New Jersey realized it was going to take longer than planned to reach Mongolia during his Mongol Rally trip last year, he reluctantly went home early. He had only taken off four weeks from work, but needed closer to six.

His teammates, strangers from Texas he had met on an online message board, dropped him off at a hotel, took all the power converters, and continued on.

"The next thing I know, I'm alone in Siberia," Mr. Slizewsky said. But it was worth it, he said, noting that his team raised about $5,000, including the donation of their car.

"Some people build Habitat for Humanity," he said. "This definitely isn't that."