As the Knicks field their most talented team in at least a decade, it's probably a bad time to trot out reminders of the miserable era from which the Knicks just emerged. But here comes Jared Jeffries.

A 6-foot-11 forward who played from the Knicks from 2006 to 2010, Jeffries is rejoining the team to provide many of the things this newly created Knicks team lacks, namely defense and rebounds. Knicks coach Mike D'Antoni said that it's possible Jeffries could eventually start for the Knicks this season.

He was bought out of his contract with the Houston Rockets last week and his arrival seems to clear up the confusing Knicks' roster situation that has been in flux since the arrival of six new players in the Carmelo Anthony deal.

 Jeffries' signing was one of four moves by the Knicks on Monday and Tuesday. The team waived two players—guard Kelenna Azubuike, who never dressed this season after he couldn't recover from a knee injury, and forward Corey Brewer, who didn't dress as a Knick after being plucked from Minnesota in the Anthony deal. The Knicks also acquired Derrick Brown off waivers from Charlotte. Brown, a 6-foot-8 forward in his second year from Xavier, came highly recommended by former Knick Raymond Felton, a teammate of his in Charlotte.

 D'Antoni said that Jeffries's ability to handle forwards, centers and guards on defense and his familiarity with the Knicks' system made the move an obvious one. The Knicks traded Jeffries in last year's deal that acquired Tracy McGrady from Houston and created salary cap space.

 D'Antoni said he thought Jeffries was playing well when they dealt him to Houston last season. "Hopefully, it will get back to that point,'' he said.

As for Brown, D'Antoni was less specific about his role, saying the team will see what he can contribute.

 Jeffries averaged 1.5 points e and 1.9 rebounds this season after falling out of favor in Houston, playing in only 18 games and averaging just 7.7 minutes per game. As a Knick last season, he averaged 5.5 points and 4.3 rebounds in 52 games. 

Jeffries cleared waivers at 6 p.m. Tuesday, but won't be eligible to play for the Knicks until Wednesday's game against New Orleans at the Garden.

Forward Amar'e Stoudemire said Jeffries' addition will help most on the defensive end. Jeffries has guarded Stoudemire in the past, and Stoudemire said what makes Jeffries great for the Knicks is "the fact that he's able to switch out to other guards and contain them out of the wing" for a Knicks team that relies on flexibility on the defensive end.

 Write to  Kevin Clark at kevin.clark@wsj.com 