VIENNA—The head of the United Nations' nuclear-advisory body said the response to the accident at Japan's Fukushima Daiichi nuclear-power plant has raised questions about the effectiveness of the international nuclear-safety framework. 

He also called for an extensive evaluation to take place once the crisis has been overcome. 

"The current international emergency-response framework needs to be reassessed," Yukiya Amano, director-general of the International Atomic Energy Agency, said Monday at a news conference after an extraordinary meeting of the agency's 35-nation board of governors. 

The IAEA has been criticized for relying exclusively on delayed and imprecise information from the Japanese authorities during the crisis at the Daiichi plant. The nuclear facility, one of the world's 25 largest, was hit first by the earthquake and then by a tsunami that took out the plant's cooling systems, 

"An extensive process of evaluation will be needed after the accident is over. There will be a stock-taking process," Mr. Amano said. He said there is room for improvement in response by the IAEA and Japan but said the agency has done what it can within its statutes. 

"We are doing everything that we can in cooperation with Japan to provide information, but I do understand that the public feels it isn't as extensive as possible, not as fast as possible, and this is also something I would like to see improved," he said

Mr. Amano visited Japan last week, where he met with Japan's prime minister and high-ranking officials from the Daiichi plant's owner and operator,  Tokyo Electric Power Co.
9501


0.14
%




 He said cooperation with Japanese authorities and the exchange of information have improved significantly after his visit but that it still could improve. 

Mr. Amano also stressed that the focus now should be on resolving the crisis in Japan, not on evaluating response and finding fault. He noted that the situation at Daiichi has improved and that he feels assured the crisis will be solved. 

"The accident isn't over. I would like to underline that the situation at the Fukushima Daiichi plant remains very serious, but we have seen signs of improvement," he said. He referred to the restoration of power to the plant's six reactors and of full functionality of the cooling systems at reactor units five and six, which he said "are no longer of immediate concern." 

 Write to  Flemming Emil Hansen at Flemming.Hansen@dowjones.com 