OTTAWA—The Bank of Canada held its benchmark overnight rate steady at 1% for the third successive time, raised growth forecasts slightly and said net exports will likely contribute more to growth.

But the central bank also said the recovery in net exports is being curbed by the strong Canadian dollar and poor productivity, contributing to the widening of the current-account deficit to a 20-year high.

A day after the Canadian government moved to toughen mortgage rules to rein in household debt, the central bank said stretched household balance sheets will probably restrain the pace of consumption growth and household investment. But business investment will likely continue to rebound strongly thanks to stimulative financial conditions and "competitive imperatives."

The rate decision—which was widely expected—"leaves considerable monetary stimulus in place, consistent with achieving the 2% inflation target in an environment of significant excess supply in Canada," the central bank said in its first policy decision statement of the year Tuesday. "Any further reduction in monetary policy stimulus would need to be carefully considered."

The Canadian dollar was slightly weaker after the rate decision was published; the U.S. dollar was quoted at C$0.9879, up from C$0.9869 just before the release.

"The tone of the communique, though slightly more upbeat, reaffirms our view that there is no urgency for the bank to hike before July," TD Securities senior macro strategist  David Tulk said in a report.

Gross domestic product in Canada is expected to grow 2.4% this year and 2.8% in 2012, a bit stronger than the October forecasts of 2.35% and 2.6%, respectively. But core and total consumer price indexes are still expected to reach the 2% target by the end of 2012 when the bank expects the economy to return to full capacity.

It said underlying price pressures affecting inflation remain subdued, reflecting "considerable" slack in the economy. Total CPI is getting a temporary boost from the effects of provincial indirect taxes, but inflation expectations are well-anchored in the 1% to 3% inflation-target range.

Canada's recovery is proceeding "broadly as anticipated, with a period of more modest growth and the beginning of the expected rebalancing of demand," the bank said.

"Net exports are projected to contribute more to growth going forward, supported by stronger U.S. activity and global demand for commodities," it said. "However, the cumulative effects of the persistent strength in the Canadian dollar and Canada's poor relative productivity performance are restraining this recovery in net exports and contributing to a widening of Canada's current account deficit to a 20-year high."

The Canadian dollar has traded higher than the U.S. currency in recent sessions.

The bank noted that commodity prices have increased "significantly" since it issued the October Monetary Policy Report, largely reflecting stronger global growth.

But the path of commodity prices will be influenced by the more restrictive policy measures implemented in some emerging markets to curb their overheating economies, the bank said.

Contribution from government spending is expected to wind down this year as fiscal stimulus ends.

The bank said global economic recovery is proceeding at a "somewhat faster pace" than it had anticipated, but risks remain elevated. It noted that U.S. private domestic demand has picked up and will be reinforced by recently announced monetary and fiscal stimulus.

European growth has also been slightly stronger than expected, but the pace of recovery there will be limited by the euro-zone sovereign debt crisis bank balance sheet issues, the bank said.

The central bank will provide detailed analysis and forecasts Wednesday in its quarterly Monetary Policy Report. Its next rate decision is on March 1. 

 Write to  Nirmala Menon at Nirmala.Menon@dowjones.com 