WASHINGTON—The Obama administration and congressional Republicans on Sunday clashed over federal spending and borrowing, pointing to fights ahead between the White House and newly empowered Republican lawmakers.

White House economic adviser  Austan Goolsbee said on ABC's "This Week" that the administration wants to "juice" the economy, which is gradually improving after a deep recession. While allowing that the U.S. will have to make "tough choices" in the budget, he said that it would be a "mistake" to "skimp on important investments that we need to grow."

But Republicans focused on cutting spending. Rep.  Michele Bachmann (R., Minn.) said on  CBS's
CBS.A


0.45
%




 "Face the Nation" that voters want Congress to "stop spending money that you don't have." 

And on Fox News Sunday, Sen.-elect  Mike Lee (R., Utah) said he was, indeed, ready to tell Americans they'll have to do without some helpful government programs to rein in spending.

Americans "are already doing that in their homes," Mr. Lee said.

Republicans take control of the House of Representatives and have more power in the Senate when the new Congress convenes on Wednesday.

An early test of how far Republicans are willing to go will come when Congress faces a vote on raising the U.S. debt limit. The current U.S. borrowing limit is $14.3 trillion, a mark that is expected to be reached by April or May. Before hitting the ceiling, Congress must vote to increase the nation's borrowing capacity. Otherwise, the U.S. could be forced to default on its debt obligations.

"The impact on the economy would be catastrophic," Mr. Goolsbee warned. "That would be a worse financial and economic crisis than anything we saw in 2008." He added: "We shouldn't even be discussing that -- people would get the wrong idea."

Sen.  Lindsey Graham (R., S.C.) said on NBC's "Meet the Press" that not raising the debt limit could result in a U.S. default that could be "very bad for the U.S. and the world at large."

Still, he said an affirmative vote from him would be conditional. "I will not vote for the debt ceiling increase until I see a plan in place that will deal with our long-term debt obligations," said Mr. Graham, who cited raising the retirement age as one way to tackle the problem. Mr. Graham also suggested that Republicans and Democrats explore bipartisan reforms in Social Security before raising the debt limit. 

Sen.-elect  Pat Toomey (R., Pa.) said the debt limit should be raised in small increments and in a way that is balanced and meaningful to reroute the nation's current "fiscal train wreck." Mr. Toomey, who appeared on "Meet the Press," said Republicans don't want to get rid of entitlements but instead want to reform them. On Social Security, for example, he suggested incentives to "give younger workers the opportunity to accumulate savings."

Others, however, were adamantly opposed. Rep. Bachmann said that "I am not in favor of raising the debt ceiling." Rep.-elect Mike Kelly (R, Pa.), also on "Face the Nation," said that "raising the debt ceiling to me is absolutely irresponsible."



 Write to  Siobhan Hughes at siobhan.hughes@dowjones.com and Melanie Trottman at melanie.trottman@wsj.com 