 5 Gov. Andrew Cuomo delivers his first State of the State address.

 10 City Council will hold a hearing on the city's response to the post-Christmas blizzard.

 11 Gov. Chris Christie gives State of the State address, which is expected to include a glimpse of his budget plans. After a year of budget cutting, Mr. Christie has said this year's budget won't be any less painful. His priorities will determine the amount of subsidies to direct to school districts and towns—and, in turn, property-tax payers—and whether to continue this year's near-elimination of a direct property-tax rebate check. The full budget will be outlined at his budget address in February. The Legislature must pass the budget by the end of June.

 14 New York Fire Department to hold a hearing on plan to charge motorists who get into accidents for roadside service.



 7 "Spider-Man: Turn Off the Dark" is expected to open on Broadway. The troubled $65 million musical has suffered epic setbacks due to financial turmoil, injuries to four of its actors and investigations by federal and state safety inspectors. Now, after four rounds of delays to its premiere, the Julie Taymor-directed production will finally open on the Great White Way, giving critics a chance to judge whether the most expensive show in Broadway history lives up to its hype.

 10-17 Mercedes-Benz Fall Fashion Week takes place at Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts.

 21-22 Lady Gaga plays Madison Square Garden

 22 Jury selection is expected to begin for the trial of the second suspect charged in the home invasion and murder of a woman and her two daughters in Cheshire, Conn., in 2007.  Joshua Komisarjevsky's day in court comes after his alleged accomplice,  Steven Hayes, was convicted and sentenced to death after a long and emotionally wrought trial that garnered national attention for the brutality of the crime.



 31 Yankees home opener vs. Detroit Tiger



 1 Deadline for passage of Gov. Cuomo's first state budget, which must close a deficit of roughly $10 billion.

 8 Mets home opener vs. Washington Nationals

 Also in April, the New York Police Department will hire more than 500 new police officers. If it survives further budget cuts, it's also scheduled to hire 1,000 more in July. There are about 35,000 officers now on the job. The hires in 2011 would fill vacancies caused by retirements and attrition. 

 22 The Metropolitan Opera raises the curtain on "Die Walkure," the second installment in its new production of Wagner's four-part "Ring" cycle. Directed by  Robert Lepage, the opera stars  Bryn Terfel and  Deborah Voigt. The third opera, "Siegfried," opens in the fall.



 2 Costume Institute Benefit Gala. François-Henri Pinault and Salma Hayek will be honorary chairs, and Colin Firth, Stella McCartney and Anna Wintour will be co-chairs. 

 4-July 31 "Alexander McQueen: Savage Beauty" exhibition at Costume Institute at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. 

 16 Opening Night Gala for American Ballet Theatre

 20-22 Mets at Yankees

 24 Groundbreaking for the Whitney Museum of American Art's new downtown home. A development 25 years in the making, the museum's planned  Renzo Piano-designed building in the Meatpacking District, adjacent to the High Line, will allow it to expand out of its  Marcel Breuer-designed home at 75th Street and Madison Avenue, where space constraints mean it can display only about 10% of its permanent collection at any one time.



 1-3 Yankees at Mets

 12 The 2011 Tony Awards, presented by the American Theatre Wing and the Broadway League, will take place at the Beacon Theatre.  CBS
CBS.A


0.45
%




 will broadcast the awards ceremony.



 1 Plan to charge motorists up to $490 for the New York Fire Department to respond to accidents and car fires is set to take effect. The so-called Crash Tax, which was cooked up to close a severe budget gap in the FDNY, has garnered criticism from New Yorkers and some members of the City Council who have vowed to ban the proposal. Mayor Michael Bloomberg supports it. 

 6-Aug. 14Royal Shakespeare Company is building a full-scale replica of its Courtyard Theater inside the Park Avenue Amory. During the six week residency, the company will perform five Shakespeare plays.

 20 U2 plays New Meadowlands. 

 25-28 Barclays PGA, Edison N.J.

 29-Sept. 11 U.S. Open Tennis Tournament



If the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, Gov. Cuomo and the state Legislature can't come up with a way to fill the $9.9 billion gap in the MTA's $26.3 billion capital plan, the agency won't be able to keep awarding contracts for crucial system repairs and big projects like the Second Avenue Subway.



 8 Fashion's Night Out

 8-15 Mercedes-Benz Spring 2012 Fashion Week

 11 The city will mark the tenth anniversary of the terrorist attack of Sept. 11, 2001. State officials have vowed that the National September 11 Memorial will be ready by that date and will consist of the nation's largest manmade waterfalls that will fall into two sunken pools in place of the footprints of the Twin Towers. The names of the 2,980 victims of the attacks will be inscribed in the memorial.



 6 New York City Marathon

 Also in November, the New York Historical Society will re-open after undergoing renovation to its facade and galleries.



 31 A multibillion-dollar increase in the income-tax rate on New York's wealthier residents expires at the end of the year. Gov. Cuomo and state lawmakers must decide whether to allow the increase to expire as scheduled or extend it further.