'In formulating any philosophy," the amateur philosopher Woody Allen once observed, "the first consideration must always be: What can we know? That is, what can we be sure we know, or sure that we know we knew it, if indeed it is at all knowable. Or have we simply forgotten it and are too embarrassed to say anything?" 

Philosophers have always been the butt of jokes, as the intellectual historian James Miller reminds us in "Examined Lives," his earnest, wistful collection of biographical sketches of a dozen pre-eminent "lovers of wisdom," from Socrates to Nietzsche. Since ancient times, members of this peculiar guild have been famed for their impracticality and otherworldliness. According to legend, the first philosopher, Thales of Miletus (in the sixth century B.C.), was so intent on observing the stars that, while walking one night, he fell into a ditch. An old woman taunted him: "How can you expect to know all about the heavens, Thales, when you cannot even see what is just before your feet." Some two millennia later, my own father could be heard to mutter similar things while I spent the better part of my 20s reading old philosophy books that bore no obvious relation to earning a living. 

But Mr. Miller's aim is not to rehearse the many ways in which philosophy has provided its own comic fodder. He sets aside the epistemological obsessions that, since the Enlightenment, have led philosophers to question the very possibility of knowing anything with certainty. As Mr. Miller emphasizes, the philosopher was not always a university type, a professor writing obscure books filled with technical jargon. Philosophy began, in its Greek original, as a way of life—a demanding personal regimen. Philosophers were gurus, and their deepest insights were available only to disciples who possessed the character to resist common pleasures. 

This tradition has to do, above all, with the long shadow cast by Socrates—or at least by the presentation of Socrates in the bewitching dialogues of his great student, Plato. In these endlessly rich dramatized discussions, we encounter Socrates as a self-described gadfly, questioning all comers in the marketplace about the best way to live. In the most famous of the dialogues, the "Apology," which concerns his trial and death sentence in Athens for "corrupting the young," Socrates emerges as a figure of near mythic integrity. As Mr. Miller writes: "He is prepared to die rather than renounce his beliefs. Serene in his willingness to sacrifice himself, he will give up living in order to prove his unswerving commitment to his transcendental project, his unending search for wisdom." 

 By James Miller  Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 422 pages, $28

Struggling with this formidable legacy took many forms over the next several centuries, and Mr. Miller is troubled by the inconsistencies he finds. Diogenes the Cynic was a strict ascetic who disdained convention, but he reveled in public indecencies that cannot be described here. Aristotle conducted research of encyclopedic scope, virtually inventing empirical science, but his achievements were tainted by his long-standing complicity with Macedonian power and conquest. As for Augustine, a prolific genius of the church, he grew ever more wary of the role that reason might play in the good life, opting finally for the certainty of religious dogma.

In Mr. Miller's (admittedly idiosyncratic) selection, the modern era in philosophy begins with the humane skepticism of Montaigne in the 16th century and culminates in the megalomania of Nietzsche, who styled himself a prophet and tried to blaze a path back to ancient grandeur. For these moderns, the challenge was to find a way for reason to co-exist with the confounding flux of life, what Mr. Miller calls "the protean and transient character of inner experience." Introspection and self-interrogation became the hallmarks of philosophical integrity.

This inward turn is all the more reason, as Mr. Miller sees it, to examine the intimate details of the lives that these philosophers actually lived. We learn, for instance, that Rousseau, for all his moralistic pronouncements about the proper childhood education, had his own newborn children sent to a foundling home; that Kant, the stern advocate of disembodied reason, was something of a hypochondriac; and that Nietzsche, as he developed into the ferocious oracle of the "will to power," lived in an apartment flooded with sunlight and beautifully decorated with cut flowers and lace coverlets.

Most of the biographical details in Mr. Miller's deeply researched survey are not nearly so juicy, of course. They simply remind us that even the greatest of minds come packaged in all-too-human bodies—and that the heirs of Socrates (like Socrates himself, no doubt) had their vices and vanities. For Mr. Miller, these discoveries are disappointing. As he writes in his epilogue: "I confess that some of my old assumptions about the value of the examined life have been shaken, in part because recounting these particular philosophical lives has provoked a variety of unexpected reactions—not just awe and admiration, but also pity, chagrin, and, in a few instances, amused disbelief."

But perhaps Mr. Miller expects too much. He describes himself, with endearing candor, as the product of a Lutheran upbringing that stressed introspection and sincerity and as a former 1960s activist who values "authenticity." This is not a pedigree that predisposes him to accept the necessary limits of the philosophical life. A more detached, ironic temperament might have served him better. Woody Allen is not a bad starting point.

 Mr. Rosen is the editor of The Journal's Review section, which appears every Saturday.  