WASHINGTON—The House passed a bill Wednesday designed to block any government connection to abortion, underscoring Republican attempts to balance the party's focus on jobs and the deficit with signals that its leaders care about social issues.

The vote was 251 to 175, with 16 Democrats joining all Republicans in voting yes. Senate leaders say they have no plans to take up the legislation.

The bill would permanently enact the Hyde Amendment, which forbids government funding for abortion and is currently passed on a yearly basis.

It would also rescind tax credits for small businesses that provide employee health coverage, if those policies include abortion. In addition, individuals who spend enough of their income on health care to qualify for a tax deduction would lose that tax benefit if they buy coverage that includes abortion.

Supporters said they wanted to ensure that taxpayers don't fund a procedure opposed by millions. "People work hard all year to send in their tax dollars on April 15th," said Rep. Vicky Hartzler (R., Mo.). "They shouldn't have them spent on things they find morally objectionable."

Opponents said the bill would dramatically expand the definition of government funding, by including private spending that receives tax breaks. 

Democrats also criticized Republicans for focusing on social issues rather than jobs. "Gas prices are approaching $5 a gallon, millions of Americans are looking for work, and we're busy turning the tax code into a moral club?" said Rep. Jackie Speier (D., Calif.).

The Smith legislation had strong support from GOP leaders. House Speaker John Boehner (R., Ohio) appeared at a press conference in January announcing it, and he and other Republican leaders spoke on its behalf on the House floor Wednesday. Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D., Calif.) spoke against it.

The bill's designation as "H.R. 3" signified that GOP leaders saw it as one of the most important bills in the current Congress.

Passage of the legislation suggested that, even at a time of economic struggle, Republican leaders want to convey to social conservatives their ongoing support.

Several other recent events have showcased the continuing strength of social conservatives inside the GOP. As Congress debated a 2011 spending law, Republicans pushed to block federal funding for Planned Parenthood Federation of America, which provides abortions among other services. The measure was ultimately omitted.

Indiana Gov. Mitch Daniels, a possible GOP presidential contender, announced last week he would sign a bill denying state funding to Planned Parenthood. Mr. Daniels' move was closely watched, because he had declared earlier that Republicans should declare a "truce" on social issues in order to focus on the economy. 

After the Obama administration said it would no longer support the Defense of Marriage Act, which defines marriage as between a man and a woman, Mr. Boehner announced that the House would defend the law in court.

While Senate leaders say they will not move the House bill, abortion opponents say they intended to keep pressing ahead, possibly by offering the measure as an amendment to other Senate legislation. Such an amendment would most likely need 60 votes to pass, which it's unlikely to attract.

The House bill, sponsored by Rep. Chris Smith (R., N.J.), would require anyone whose premiums are subsidized under the new health law to get a separate policy to cover abortion. Under the law now, those individuals can buy a general policy that covers abortion, though they have to pay for the abortion coverage with a separate check.

 Write to  Naftali Bendavid at naftali.bendavid@wsj.com 