BASEL, Switzerland— Central banks across the world are ready to do whatever it takes to avert sustained inflation, European Central Bank President  Jean-Claude Trichet said. 

There is a "solid unity of purpose among central bankers to continue to anchor solidly inflation expectations," Mr. Trichet said Monday, adding "this doesn't mean that we take the same decisions." 

Mr. Trichet was responding to a question on whether some central banks, particularly the U.S. Federal Reserve, risk keeping interest rates too low for too long. He was speaking in his capacity as the chairman of the Global Economy Meeting. 

An agreement on that issue is crucial, or people will lose confidence in central banks, which will hurt economic growth, Mr. Trichet said at a news conference following regular meetings of central bankers from across the globe at the Bank for International Settlements in Basel. 

"In our view, global growth is confirmed... at a relatively robust pace, driven by emerging countries, which are dynamic, and by the confirmation of the recovery in advanced economies," he said. 

In contrast to the ECB, which signaled that euro-zone rates could go up as early as April, the U.S. Federal Reserve hasn't indicated a shift in its loose policy. 

The ECB chief said central bankers meeting in Basel on Sunday and Monday were more concerned about rising inflationary pressures than they were at the start of the year. 

"Of course, the additional tensions observed on oil and energy are giving additional importance to the message we delivered in January," he said. "What is clear is that, in emerging economies, you see strong signs of inflationary threats."

Oil and energy prices have risen to new highs since the BIS January meeting, as political turmoil has gripped the Middle East, raising fears of disruption to crude-oil supplies from the region. 

Oil prices reached a new 2½-year high Monday amid intensifying unrest in Libya, with the price of crude for April delivery edging up $2.06 to $106.48 a barrel in electronic trading on Globex.

Mr. Trichet wouldn't comment on whether the surge in food and other commodity prices was caused by anything other than supply and demand, namely by investors seeking higher returns in commodities in an environment of record-low interest rates globally. 

But he expressed confidence that food inflation could be tackled in the longer term if incentives were in place to increase food and agricultural supplies. He also identified rising demand as a key factor behind the surge in soft-commodity prices. 

"If the appropriate incentives [are in place], it is possible to elevate the level of supply as far as food commodities are concerned," especially in Africa, Mr. Trichet said. This would, over time, help bring supply in line with global demand, he added. 

Mr. Trichet also urged governments not to let up on curbing global imbalances in order to sustain noninflationary growth world-wide. 

"We should not lose momentum and continue to work actively to reduce them in a medium-term perspective," he said. 

This means countries with large current-account deficits should boost exports, while countries with surpluses, such as China, should stimulate internal demand, he added. 

Speaking at a central-banking conference in Paris last week, Bank of Italy Governor Mario Draghi and Bundesbank President Axel Weber both said global imbalances were "here to stay." 

 Write to  Nina Koeppen at nina.koeppen@dowjones.com and Nathalie Boschat at nathalie.boschat@dowjones.com 