  Click to view more city guides.  

 ASIA 

 Bangkok | Hong Kong | Mumbai |  Seoul | Shanghai | Sydney 

 EUROPE 

 Amsterdam | Antwerp | Barcelona | Berlin | London | Madrid | Milan | Paris | Stockholm 

 MIDDLE EAST/AFRICA 

 Beirut | Cape Town | Istanbul | Tel Aviv 

 NORTH AMERICA 

 Atlanta | Boston | Chicago | Dallas | Los Angeles | Louisville | Miami | Nashville | New Orleans |  New York | Oahu | Palm Beach | Philadelphia | Pittsburgh | Portland, Ore. | San Francisco | San Juan | Savannah | Seattle | Toronto | Vancouver | Washington 

 SOUTH AMERICA 

 Bogotá | Buenos Aires | Mexico City | Montevideo | Rio de Janeiro | Sao Paulo 



 FROM NOVEMBER through early March, Stockholm is in lockdown. Temperatures drop and daylight can last a scant six hours. Parks and green spaces—comprising 40% of the city—are empty. How Bergmanesque.

Come April, the ice thaws, the bath of the northern light begins to shift toward those lore-inspiring 16-hour days and the energy in the city of islands and crystalline waters—bound by Lake Mälaren and the Baltic Sea—becomes electric. Not a bad time to visit, and drink the Kool-Aid of the collective euphoria.

Perhaps such a cruel winter is the price to be paid for living in a place of such blinding beauty, where many historic landmarks remain intact, since the circa-1250 port has largely avoided the wrecking ball of war. Inhabitants pride themselves on upholding Stockholm's cultivated appearance, from its medieval, Baroque and neoclassical churches and palaces to its pastel-hued 19th-century edifices andmodern Scandinavian bones. 

The twists and turns of the cobblestoned streets in the Old Town, the island where the royal palace stands, might lead to a sweeping view of the Baltic or a sleek new gallery or graffiti-sprayed indie-rock bar. None of it seems out of place in a neighborhood where much of the old now holds the new.

No area is more abuzz these days than Södermalm (commonly called Söder), Stockholm's once-decrepit south district. The streets are now alive with fashion boutiques, art spaces, restored architectural treasures and glam boutique hotels like the Rival (opened in 2003 by ABBA's Benny Andersson). Scruffier outposts—such as the alternative club Hornstull Strand and the live music spot Debaser Medis—play well with the zone's well-heeled "craft" cocktail bars including theater spillover Södra Bar & Kitchen and the industrial-chic Gondolen.

Stockholm's culinary scene has been invigorated, too. While cured salmon, pickled herring, blood pudding and meatballs in cream remain staples, the greenmarket movement and taste for reinvention have hit venues from Restaurant Riche and Frantzén/Lindeberg to chef hangout Rolfs Kök and rollicking B.A.R.

Temperatures in April creep up to the 50s and the city blooms. When summer comes, cramming parks, café patios and party yachts, it's all less evocative of the winter-shrouded "The Seventh Seal" than a transcendent moment right out of "Wild Strawberries."

—Sara Reistad-Long



 Founder and creative director of Stockholm-based fashion line Acne; furniture designer; magazine publisher 

 Swedish Cuisine // Mathias Dahlgren. The restaurant is in the same building as the Grand Hôtel, where all the royal guests recently stayed for the Crown Princess' wedding. The local-produce food is extraordinary—entrees like pickled herring with beet foam—yet the atmosphere is unpretentious, warm. Södra Blasieholmshamnen 6, mathiasdahlgren.com  

 Cozy Brasserie // Bergamott. This is a friendly, intimate and very relaxed French-Swedish bistro. I used to live next door. It has a chalkboard menu with lots of fresh fish. All the girls are crazy about the waiters there. Hantverkargatan 35, restaurangbergamott.se  

 Art Bar // KB (Konstnärsbaren). Where you go to have drinks and end up chatting with a couple of old eccentrics. It's been the hangout for creative types since the '30s, and an old group of artists still gathers over red wine on the top floor. Smålandsgatan 7, konstnarsbaren.se  

 House of Style // Jacksons. A store and gallery specializing in indigenous 20th-century design, it has chairs, sofas, ceramics and textiles—a trip through Nordic design history. Sibyllegatan 53, jacksons.se  

 Antique Outpost // Olle Nyman's Studios. The old home of Swedish artist Olle Nyman appears untouched since his death in 1999. His antiques collection is amazing. One of the rooms is a welcoming café. The studios open back up in May. Strandpromenaden 61, Saltsjö-Duvnäs, koloni.se  



 Sweden-born president and founder of cosmetics company FACE Stockholm; eyewear and hotel amenities designer 

 Meet Market // Nytorget Urban Deli. Located in the old bohemian part of the city. At night you'll find the cool bloggers, artists and fashionistas at this bar and café off the market. The architecture is raw—concrete floors—modern and very Nordic.  Nytorget 4, urbandeli.org  

 Picture Perfection // Fotografiska. This is a brand-new museum with exciting exhibitions and knowledgeable curators. It's located in a beautiful old waterfront tile building. Do a drink in the dramatic second-floor bar. Stadsgårdshamnen 22, fotografiska.eu  

 Asian Opulence // Berns Asiatiska. The ceilings are gilded, and the crystal chandeliers are huge in this circa-1863 Moulin Rouge restaurant. August Strindberg drew inspiration for his novel "The Red Room" here, where rich met poor in a theatrical and electric environment. Berzelii Park 9, berns.se  

 Fashion Fancy // Hope. An award-winning fashion brand that's raw, elegant and simple. It's this year's must-have. Much of the collection was inspired by Ingmar Bergman movies like "Fanny and Alexander" and "Persona." Norrlandsgatan 12, hope-sthlm.com  

 Kids' Stuff: Tuss. The clothes are minimalist in color and design, and have a timeless Scandinavian feel. Perfect if you want your child to look as smart as you do. Artillerigatan 29, tuss.se  



 Furniture designer and co-owner of architecture firm sandellsandberg; designer of the Moderna Museet's restaurant in Stockholm 

 Morning Stroll // Djurgården. Take the loop from bridge to bridge on this island park, and you'll pass all the politicians, businessmen and trophy wives from the affluent neighborhoods surrounding it. It's Stockholm's Central Park or Bois de Boulogne.  djurgarden.net  

 Decadent Breakfast // Saturnus. Cozy up with the paper and a steaming cup of private import coffee. Their cinnamon rolls are amazing, twice as big as anywhere else. Eriksbergsgatan 6, cafesaturnus.se  

 Ideal Evening // Teatergrillen and Restaurant Riche. Ask the host on a Thursday night for the Ingmar Bergman table at Teatergrillen restaurant. Afterward, go for a nightcap and deejay music at Riche's club, in the same building. Nybrogatan 3, teatergrillen.se; Birger Jarlsgatan 4, riche.se  

 Traditional Tastes // Östermalms Saluhall. Friday afternoons I go to this to covered food market, featuring all the Swedish specialties. Have a glass of wine while walking around, and order the fried pickled herring at Melanders. Östermalmstorg, ostermalmshallen.se  

 Modern Furniture // Asplund. This is a can't-miss place for contemporary Swedish pieces. If the owner is in a good mood, he'll offer you a perfectly made espresso. Sibyllegatan 31, asplund.org  



 Swedish-raised chef and owner of New York's Red Rooster; author of "Aquavit and the New Scandinavian Cuisine" 

 Fresh Finds // Hötorgshallen. You'll see the diversity of "new" Sweden. It's where you find the best merguez sausage, Italian salamis, exotic berries, game meats and fresh shrimp salad. It's my favorite greenmarket. Hötorgshallen, hotorgshallen.se  

 Hipster Hangout // Grill. Melker Andersson's casual restaurant has the best Swedish cocktails, and you'll find many of the city's artists hanging out there. They have a Swedish version of the caipirinha, which uses vodka instead of cachaça. Drottninggatan 89, grill.se  

 After-Hours Eats // P.A. & Co. This is a classic late-night brasserie—go after 10 p.m.—where you can have great Swedish food. You'll see people playing backgammon, and also taste some of our classics, like Beef Rydberg, tenderloin in red wine sauce. Riddargatan 8, paco.se  

 Live Music // Marie Laveau and Hornstull Strand. Both have great shows and are located in Söder. It's a great walking scene where you'll meet young designers and artists. Hornsgatan 66, marielaveau.se; Hornstulls Strand 4, hornstullstrand.se  

 Sunset Scene // Old Town (Gamla Stan). The streets are so narrow you can barely ride a bike. Cross the bridge and head to the back pocket (called Bakfickan) of Operakällaren, where you'll have some great meatballs. Karl XII Torg 3, www.operakallaren.se  