With new rules governing how third parties sell digital content on  Apple Inc.
AAPL


0.96
%




's App Store likely to kick in over the next couple of months, developers are scrambling to deal with the fallout.

Some app developers are still trying to understand the new rules—which essentially tighten Apple's control over sales of digital content in its App Store—and decide whether to comply with the company's demands or seek an alternative situation. Meanwhile, several large media companies, including Condé Nast and Hearst Corp., have had private negotiations with Apple to reach their own deals.

All of the maneuvering stems from new App Store guidelines that Apple unveiled in February. At the time, Apple said companies that sell digital content such as books, movies, music and magazine subscriptions over its iPhone, iPad and other devices must make that content available for sale via an app, rather than provide a link within the app to an outside website. Apple would then take a 30% cut on any sale.

Though they can't put a link within the app, companies can still sell content through their own websites, in which case Apple wouldn't share revenues. But any content they sell on the App Store would have to be the same price or lower.

Apple's new terms have raised regulatory scrutiny. The Federal Trade Commission has made some preliminary inquiries into the issue, though it is too early to tell whether it would develop into a formal investigation, according to a person familiar with the matter.

Apple declined to comment for this article.

The scrambling by developers shows how high the stakes have gotten as more people buy smartphones and, by extension, apps. Investment bank Sterne Agee estimates Apple's App Store generates as much as $2 billion a year in sales. In the most recently reported quarter ended March 26, Apple doubled iPhone sales to nearly 18.7 million units, which was more than during the holiday season.

The enforcement date over Apple's new rules remain an open question. While some developers received notice in February that Apple would require them to take payments through the App Store rather than through their own billing system by March 31, others have subsequently been told to be in compliance by June 30.

Music subscription service Rhapsody was told there was no enforcement date yet and that it could continue to sign up users through a link to its site until further notice, a person familiar with the matter said.

In the last week, Hearst and Condé Nast agreed to sell iPad magazine subscriptions. Hearst said it was "pleased" with its agreement but declined to offer details.

Meanwhile, Condé Nast negotiated the ability to bundle print and digital subscriptions; it previously had been unclear whether Apple would allow such bundles and how the pricing would work though some developers were told that they could grant print subscribers free access to their iPad app. For most Condé Nast magazines, the print-digital bundle will be the same price as the iPad edition in the App Store. 

  Eddy Cue, Apple's vice president of Internet services, said Apple "always contemplated" the idea of print-digital bundles and was comfortable with the deal considering Condé Nast wasn't attempting to charge more for the iPad edition.

Meanwhile, some new apps—including a  Sony Corp. e-book app—which were rejected in February because they weren't in compliance with Apple's newly laid out rules, still aren't on the App Store. A Sony spokeswoman declined to comment on the current status of its app.

Educational services company Follett Corp. said it won't try again to get its Café Scribe digital textbook app—which Apple rejected in February for not being in compliance with its new rules—into the App Store. "The margins in the textbook business are low," said  Gary Shapiro, Follett's senior vice president of intellectual properties, adding that giving Apple a 30% cut of textbooks that cost $53 on average would force it to operate at a loss.

Mr. Shapiro said its solution for Apple device users for now is to offer his company's textbook content through a Web browser, rather than an app. Follett has also built an app for mobile devices that runs on  Google Inc.'s Android operating system. 

He worries, however that the new rules will have a much deeper impact, making already-skeptical publishers even less willing to offer their content because of the lower revenue opportunity. "People are just staying on the sidelines," he said.

Some developers decided to comply immediately with Apple's new rules. Yudu, the U.K. developer of digital editions for publishers, launched a service last week that will let its publisher customers sell digital subscriptions on their own websites, in addition to selling them through the App Store for the same price.

Yudu Chief Executive  Richard Stephenson said purchasing subscriptions through the App Store will likely be more attractive to consumers than buying them through the other websites because it will be easier. "You've got to treat the App Store like Walmart," he said. "If you want to put [a product] into Walmart, Walmart sets the rules." 

Other developers are hoping Apple will relax some of its new rules. People in the digital book publishing business, which already suffers from thin profit margins, said they are hopeful that Apple will be willing to reach a compromise that would allow them to offer ebook apps without Apple taking a 30% cut of every book they sell. But they will be negotiating from a position of weakness since not being on the App Store isn't an option for most. 

One small digital-book seller said the Apple policy makes their business unsustainable. IFlowReader, which sells books within its e-reading apps, said this week that it will close on May 31 because it would lose money on each book sale if Apple took 30% of its revenue. "We bet everything on Apple and iOS and then Apple killed us by changing the rules in the middle of the game," the company said in a statement on its website.

The company's chief executive, Dennis Morin, said Apple was unresponsive to his e-mails.

—Russell Adams  and Thomas Catan  contributed to this article.