MELBOURNE, Australia – There goes the Rafa Slam.

Entering this year's Australian Open Rafael Nadal had the rarest of opportunities: to be the first man in more than 40 years to hold all four major tennis titles. But his quest was halted Wednesday in a quarterfinal encounter with fellow Spaniard David Ferrer.

Before the tournament Mr. Nadal, who had won his first U.S. Open last summer, had deemed his chance to win all four Grand Slam tournaments in a row a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity. After Wednesday's loss he has to start from scratch.

Mr. Ferrer beat Mr. Nadal, who hadn't lost a set in the tournament, in straight sets: 6-4, 6-2, 6-3. A leg injury early on prevented Mr. Nadal from competing to the best of his ability.

"I think I am a very, very lucky sportsman about what happened in my career," said a sober Mr. Nadal in his post-match press conference. "And I have to accept the fantastic moments that I had during a lot of years with the same calm than when I have problems."

Most concerns about Mr. Nadal have stemmed from a string of injuries that have hampered his career in the past. A right knee injury forced him to retire from his quarterfinal match at last year's Australian Open as he tried to defend his 2009 title.

So when Mr. Nadal requested a medical timeout to treat an apparent injury to his left thigh just three games into his match, a cloud of uncertainty fell over Rod Laver Arena as tournament director Craig Tiley anxiously looked on.

Mr. Nadal eventually returned but gave a worried look to his camp that led fans to fear a repeat of last year's scenario less than half an hour into the night session. Initially his movements seemed impaired, and Mr. Ferrer, a dogged baseliner, quickly jumped to a 4-1 lead in the first set.

Mr. Nadal gradually adjusted to his predicament and got back into the match through grit and a few powerful forehands. But his footwork remained spotty, and after saving two set points thanks to a couple of volleys he conceded the first set 6-4.

Early into the second set an interruption for an Australia Day fireworks display allowed Mr. Nadal to converse with his uncle and coach Toni. He kept fighting from there, clenching his fist after winning important points. He did not receive additional medical help, but he kept stretching his left leg during breaks.

The resurgence was short-lived. Though he regained some mobility, Mr. Nadal was thoroughly outplayed by a focused Mr. Ferrer, who went on to bag the second and third sets quickly.

Mr. Nadal declined to elaborate on the extent of his injury afterward because he said he didn't want to take anything away from the victory of Mr. Ferrer, who is a Davis Cup teammate and a friend. He admitted that the match was "almost over" after he sustained the injury but said that at no point he considered retiring.

"It seems like I always have problems when I lose, and I don't want to have this image, no?" Mr. Nadal said. 

Mr. Nadal had often dominated his countryman, including in the last seven of their 14 previous encounters. But Mr. Ferrer, who is ranked seventh in the world, is playing some of the best tennis of his career. He won his tune-up event in Auckland the week before the Open and has yet to lose a match in 2011.

Now the 28-year-old Mr. Ferrer has a major dose of momentum as he reaches the second Grand Slam semifinal of his career. (He reached the same stage at the 2007 U.S. Open.) He next faces Scot Andy Murray, who defeated Ukraine's Alexandr Dolgopolov in four sets earlier Wednesday. The winner of that match will face either defending champion Roger Federer or Novak Djokovic in Sunday's final.

"I'm very happy with my game. I'm very confident," Mr. Ferrer said after the match. "So I want to enjoy this moment, no, (but it) is not easy."

Mr. Nadal had breezed through his first four matches but had expressed worry about his form. After a third-round victory during which he was sweating more than usual he said he was feeling tired, a possible remnant of an illness he suffered in Doha earlier this month. But Mr. Nadal insisted that his preparation for the tournament had been adequate and that he felt "fantastic" in the days before Wednesday's match.

The loss is sure to again raise questions over whether his physically demanding style of play is a threat to his career over the long term. But Mr. Nadal, just 24 years old, has done well to recover from devastating losses in the past. Following his retirement here last year he went on to record the best season of his career.

Mr. Nadal said it was too early to know in which tournament he will compete next.

In the meantime Rod Laver, who won all four Grand Slams in a row in 1962 and 1969, and Don Budge, who did the same in 1938, remain the only two members of the most exclusive club in tennis.