The City was on tenterhooks. Diaries had been cleared. Armies of bankers, lawyers and accountants assembled to provide instant analysis and rebuttal. The publication of the Independent Commission for Banking's interim report was widely expected to be one of the landmark days in the City calendar—perhaps even one of the most important days in its modern history. Excitement was running so high that the ICB's computer systems crashed in the global rush to download the report as it was published at 7 a.m. on Monday. The sense of anticlimax was to set the tone for the rest of the day.

Anyone expecting a traditional White Paper setting out clear proposals for consultation was disappointed. The report was billed as an "options" paper, with chairman Sir John Vickers making clear that virtually all options were still on the table. Even the report's big idea—that banks should ring-fence their U.K. retail operations—was left so wide open that analysts trying to identify likely winners and losers drew a blank. Most concluded that with no end in sight to the regulatory uncertainty, the U.K. bank sector should continue to trade at a discount to its European peers.

Even so, it's possible to draw a few tentative conclusions. Lloyds is the most obvious loser: the ICB's recommendation it shed substantially more market share than currently required by the European Union to improve the competitiveness of the U.K. market came as a surprise—not least to Lloyds, which had received no inkling such a proposal was in the offing. Although how much Lloyds will lose remains uncertain since the ICB declined to say how much market share it believes Lloyds needs to shed. Analysts have interpreted the ICB's comments as meaning anything up to double the 600 branches already slated for sale, but any loss would be offset partially by the proceeds of the sale. 

Much less clear is who stands to lose most from the ring-fencing proposal. The ($range of potential outcomes is huge, depending on where the ICB decides to draw the line. On this, the ICB bizarrely gives no clue as to its thinking. It's not even clear what purpose its ring-fence is designed to serve: Is it to protect retail deposits, with the banks required only to put a matching quantity of qualifying assets into the ring-fenced subsidiary? Or is the aim to ring-fence certain services, with banks required to put a much larger quantity of assets into the subsidiary, which would then be allowed to fund itself from a variety of sources, including securitizations, covered bonds and other forms of wholesale funding?

There is a world of difference between the two. On the ICB's analysis, the first solution would involve ring-fencing 15% of assets held by U.K. banks, the second 45%. For  Barclays
BCS


0.38
%




 and Royal Bank of Scotland, the narrowest possible definition of U.K. retail would be the best outcome. Barclays has £100 billion ($162 billion) of U.K. retail deposits on a balance sheet of £1.5 trillion, so stripping these out would make little difference to the funding profile of the rest of the bank. But increase the pool of ring-fenced assets to £400 billion and costs for the rest of the bank may soar.

For  Lloyds Banking Group and Santander UK, the reverse is likely to be true: the wider the ring-fence, the better the outcome: indeed, if the pool of qualifying assets is drawn wide enough to include foreign exchange, interest-rate swaps and other standard corporate banking services, these banks would barely need to change their business structures at all. Ironically, one of the bigger losers under either structure could be HSBC, which already operates a subsidiarized balance sheet held up as a model of conservatism, since it has a large surplus of U.K. deposits and also has a sizable investment banking operation on its U.K. balance sheet. 

Where will the ICB draw the line? The report gives no hint—  indeed, it barely mentions the crucial question of funding at all. But the ICB's unpublished analysis shows that the costs to the U.K. banking system would be smaller if the boundary was drawn wider, according to someone familiar with its work. Given the ICB's remit requires it to take account of the impact of its proposals on the U.K. fiscal position that would suggest Lloyds, Santander and HSBC are the ones likely to come out on top. There is no doubt this is what the Treasury would like to see, given the risks any large-scale disruption to the banks might pose to the increasingly fragile U.K. economic recovery.

But if it's hard to spot the winners and losers among the banks, one winner is easier to identify. There is palpable relief at the Treasury that the ICB has backed away from more radical proposals to break up the banks. Chancellor George Osborne took a risk when he handed responsibility for such a vital political decision to the ICB. Although he had carefully drawn up the terms of reference to minimize the risks, that was no guarantee that some mavericks on the ICB wouldn't push these radical ideas, regardless of the short-term impact on the economy. However the outcome was about as good as the Treasury could reasonably have hoped: the ring-fencing proposal received broad acceptance from both parties of government, while leaving scope during the consultation period for the proposals to be watered down as the details are thrashed out.

Meanwhile, the biggest loser is Mervyn King. The governor of the Bank of England's outspoken campaign for far more radical reforms has been comprehensively defeated. Although Mr. King was always careful to caveat his pronouncements, no one in the City was in any doubt he favored either radical restructuring of the banks or at the very least substantially higher capital ratios than the ICB has recommended. His public interventions looked like attempts to pressurize the ICB and risked dragging the BOE into treacherous political territory. But Mr. King has sensibly taken a vow of silence and will not be offering further views on the structure of U.K. banking. With less than two years to go before his retirement, he is a diminished force. By the time the ICB delivers its final report, the City's attention will increasingly be focused on the identity of his successor. One thing is certain: Mr. Osborne will demand that potential candidates display a far more constructive relationship with the banks. 

 Write to  Simon Nixon at simon.nixon@wsj.com 