CHICAGO—The Illinois State Supreme Court agreed on Tuesday to decide whether Rahm Emanuel is qualified to run for mayor of Chicago a day after he was kicked off the ballot by a lower court. 

Earlier Tuesday, the high court ordered city election officials to stop printing ballots without his name after 300,000 had already been produced.

The topsy-turvy day came after months during which Mr. Emanuel, the former White House chief of staff, had dominated the mayoral race in polling and raised millions of dollars more than all the other candidates combined.

"I get the feeling I'm in Disney World," said Ann M. Lousin, an expert in Illinois constitutional law and a professor at The John Marshall Law School in Chicago. "This is about is about as crazy as it gets."

Challengers have been trying to knock Mr. Emanuel off the ballot since he declared his candidacy in early November. They argue that Mr. Emanuel failed to fulfill a residency requirement because he moved to Washington in 2009 to be President Barack Obama's chief of staff and didn't return to Chicago until October 2010. 

See some key dates in Rahm Emanuel's campaign for mayor of Chicago.

A state municipal code says a mayoral candidate must be a resident of the city he wants to lead for one year before election. 

In December, the Chicago Board of Election Commissioners accepted Mr. Emanuel's argument that because he paid Chicago property taxes, cast his vote in his home town and always intended to return here, he hadn't forfeited his residency. That decision was upheld this month by a Cook County Circuit judge.

But on Monday, by a vote of 2 to 1, an appellate court overturned that decision, ruling that Mr. Emanuel hadn't lived in the city for a full year before the election. It said his stint in Washington serving Mr. Obama didn't qualify as an exemption from that rule. 

The decision destroyed the air of inevitability that had surrounded Mr. Emanuel's campaign.

According to a Chicago Tribune poll taken last week, Mr. Emanuel enjoys the support of 44% of the city's voters. In second place, with 21%, is former U.S. Sen. Carol Moseley Braun, while Gery Chico, a former chief of staff of Mayor Richard Daley, holds third place with 16%. Mr. Emanuel has raised more than $10 million, four times as much as his nearest rival.

At 7 a.m. Tuesday, printing presses were spitting out Chicago mayoral ballots without Mr. Emanuel's name on them, though he continued campaigning as usual. At 10:30 a.m., he was in a produce warehouse on the city's South Side, accepting the endorsement of a local Teamsters union. He vowed to keep fighting.

"I'm confident in the argument we're making about the fact that I never lost my residency," Mr. Emanuel said.

At noon, the Supreme Courted breathed new life into his campaign when it ordered that printing presses stop producing ballots that omitted his name.

By 2 p.m.—with the 300,000 ballots already made—Mr. Emanuel's name was put back on.

Paul Green, a political scientist at Roosevelt University in Chicago, said if Mr. Emanuel was reinstated on the ballot the publicity would help him. "Miracle of miracles, this has made a tough, hard-nosed politician look sympathetic," he said. "He's gotten more publicity than any candidate in history running for mayor."

A telephone poll of 2,308 likely voters conducted by the Chicago Retail Merchants Association on Monday showed that the appellate-court ruling had boosted Mr. Emanuel's popularity. Nearly 72% of likely voters said he should be allowed to stay on the ballot. If he does stay, 52% said they would vote for him—enough to avoid a runoff. 

The Supreme Court didn't indicate when it would rule. It declined to hear new oral arguments or accept new evidence, suggesting a decision would come sooner rather than later, legal experts said.

It is unlikely Mr. Emanuel's case would be heard by the U.S. Supreme Court, experts added. State supreme courts typically have the final word when no federal question is involved.

 Write to  Lauren Etter at lauren.etter@wsj.com and Douglas Belkin at doug.belkin@wsj.com 