The discovery of Osama bin Laden's hideout inside Pakistan is raising awkward questions about how much the U.S. can rely on a country it courts as an important ally in pursuing its war against al Qaeda.

But America's involvement in Indonesia and the Philippines shows despite its problems in Pakistan, Washington can and does cultivate successful partnerships on other crucial fronts in its campaign against Islamist terror groups. The key difference in Southeast Asia, security officials say: These countries welcomed U.S. help in tackling significant homegrown terrorist threats that jeopardized their own security. 

"The U.S. and Indonesia are now getting closer and closer," Indonesia's Defense Minister Purnomo Yusgiantoro said Wednesday in a forum with reporters. "We agree on how to cope with terrorism."

The U.S., along with Australia, Britain and other countries, played a key role in helping combat the terrorist threat in the world's most populous Muslim nation. Since a wave of bombings began in 2002, Indonesian security forces have arrested some 600 terrorists, of which around 500 have been brought to trial. 

Indonesia counterterrorism chief Anysaad Mbai said in an interview that foreign nations have assisted with everything from identifying fingerprints to providing surveillance technology to scouring bomb sites for clues about who planted the devices. "They taught us how to collect stuff in the bomb crater so we can identify the bomb and figure which group made it," he said.

The U.S. role in the Philippines was more explicit. It sent military advisers there to help local troops to curtail the spread of al Qaeda's local offshoot, the Abu Sayyaf group.

Al Qaeda's roots in Southeast Asia run deep and its example continues to exert an influence on militants in the region, security analysts say. Hundreds of Indonesians, Filipinos and Malaysians joined bin Laden and other volunteers in Afghanistan in the 1980s to fight against the Soviet Union. Some embraced bin Laden's jihadist philosophy and established terrorist cells that killed hundreds of people and emerged as dangerous threats to the security of Indonesia and the Philippines, in particular.

The U.S.'s engagement with Southeast Asia, whether by nurturing special investigation squads in Indonesia or through direct military assistance in the anarchic islands of the southern Philippines, has helped contain the threat from radical interpretations of Islam in the region. "There's no doubt that antiterrorism effort has helped, although there certainly is a continuing threat," says Rohan Gunaratna, head of the International Center for Political Violence and Terrorism Research in Singapore—a view that is widely shared around the region.

Indonesia and the Philippines' success in curbing some of the terrorist threats contrasts with the apparent problems in Pakistan. U.S. officials say they believe Pakistan's security services maintain close links to terrorist groups that can further the country's interests in neighboring Afghanistan or attack archrival India. 

The difference in Southeast Asia, security analysts say, is that leaders there sought out U.S. help when they realized the extent of their homegrown terrorist problems and the hazard they posed.

The predominantly Christian Philippines was the first to seek assistance. The rugged archipelago is among the countries worst affected by the global reach of al Qaeda. The architect of the 9/11 attacks, Khalid Sheikh Mohammed lived in Manila in the 1990s where he planned assassination plots against Pope John Paul II and former U.S. President Bill Clinton in addition to sketching out the blueprints for the subsequent 2001 attacks on the U.S., Philippine and U.S. intelligence officials say—a claim that Mr. Mohammed corroborated after his capture and detention at Guantanamo Bay. Bin Laden's brother-in-law also helped establish and finance the Abu Sayyaf along with Filipino veterans of the Afghan wars against the Soviet Union.

In 2001, with Abu Sayyaf trying to enlist other, larger Muslim secessionist groups operating in the south of the country, the Philippine government asked for U.S. assistance. American troops began training Philippine forces and built schools, roads and water supply systems to help wean local residents off handouts from the guerrillas. 

American commanders required U.S. troops to carry copies of the Philippines' constitution to drum home the fact that they were operating in another democracy to help stamp out a common problem, and reinforce the rules that they couldn't engage in combat themselves.Gradually, the strategy worked. After launching a series of ambitious plots in the mid-2000s, including the firebombing of a ferry in Manila Bay that killed 116 people, Abu Sayyaf today is largely confined to its home island of Jolo and is a shadow of what it used to be. Philippine officials estimate the rebels' numbers have dropped from over 3,000 fighters at its peak to just a few hundred today. 

Indonesia, with its large Muslim population, presented a different challenge. 

In the immediate aftermath of the 9/11 attacks on New York and Washington, U.S. officials warned Indonesia about aspiring terrorists planning to strike at Western targets. They were largely rebuffed. 

Then the 2002 Bali bombings ripped back the curtain on the growing Islamist movement in the country. The deaths of 202 people in a pair of blasts at popular nightclubs triggered a groundswell of international pressure on Indonesian authorities to act quickly. They did. With assistance from the U.S., Australia and other countries, Indonesia put in place a new terrorist investigation police squad known as Detachment 88 and modernized its legal code to permit emails and video clips to be submitted as evidence. It also acquired software from the U.S. that enabled investigators to closely monitor terrorist activity in terrorist chat rooms and helped investigators trace telephone calls.

Security analysts say the country's increasingly transparent legal procedures are paying significant dividends by portraying terrorists as plain criminals. 

"The U.S. helped build up Indonesia's capacity to combat terrorism by intelligent training," says Noor Huda Ismail, director of the Jakarta-based Institute for International Peace-Building and an authority on security affairs. "It was a success in capturing the perpetrators and in sending them to court and then jail."

The terrorist threat remains, though. Some commentators, such as Julkipli Wadi, Islamic studies professor at the University of the Philippines argue that if the U.S. military remains in the Philippines after Abu Sayyaf threat recedes, it could provoke fresh insurgencies. 

Other analysts say Indonesia, especially, needs to work harder to rehabilitate its terrorist suspects instead of allowing them to radicalize other people. 

"Prison is a good place for ex-terrorists to spread their ideology to other inmates," says Mr. Ismail.

Mr. Mbai, the antiterrorism chief, says Indonesia is now pushing new measures to prevent convicted militants from radicalizing other Indonesians. The government is also trying to prevent the radicalization of students in schools and universities which he says are producing many combatants in a new wave of terrorists.

"This isn't a simple job," Mr. Mbai says. "It requires a long-term shift" in thinking.

—Yayu Yuniar  contributed to this article.