Here is a roundup of news from Indian newspapers, news wires and Web sites on Wednesday, March 16, 2011. The Wall Street Journal has not verified these stories and does not vouch for their accuracy.

  Sharad Shah Hikes Stake In Tata Coffee

Tata Coffee said one of its shareholders,  Sharad Kantilal Shah, and his associates have increased their stake to 12.90% in the company by buying shares from the open market. (Source: Economic Times)

  Reiter Sells Shares In  Lakshmi Machine 

Long-term Swiss partner Reiter has sold a large chunk of its stake in the Coimbatore-based textile machinery major Lakshmi Machine Works by offloading a bulk of its stake under the share buy-back scheme floated by the latter. (Source: Economic Times)

Kingfisher Plans $300 Mln GDR Issue

Kingfisher Airlines will go ahead with its plans to raise $300 million through Global Depository Receipt issue, likely to come at end of the next month if the Libya crisis eases out a bit, said two people with the direct knowledge of the matter. (Source: Economic Times)

Air India Charters To Issue Bonds

Air India has decided to float a bond issue of 20 billion rupees ($442.86 million) through Air India Charters, a profitable subsidiary which runs the low-cost arm Air India Express. (Source: Economic Times)

Govt Set To Liberalise FDI Policy

The government is likely to liberalise the foreign direct investment norms for entry of foreign companies that have existing joint ventures or technical collaborations in India. The new policy, to be implemented from April 1, may drop the requirement of no-objection certificate that foreign firms need to set up a separate entity. (Source: Business Standard)

Apax May Join Bidding For Henkel India Brands

Apax Partners, the London-based private-equity firm with $10 billion assets under management, is expected to throw its weight behind one of the bidders interested in buying some brands of Henkel India – primarily in the laundry and personal-care segments. (Source: Business Standard) 

  ITC
0372


-2.25
%




 Picks Up All Shares In  EIH
EIH


0.00
%




 Offer

Cigarette and consumer goods maker ITC Ltd bought all the shares allotted to it in the rights offer by EIH Ltd, the company that runs hotels under the Oberoi and Trident brands, undeterred by its promoters' stake sale to Reliance Industries Ltd (RIL) last year to fend off a potential takeover bid. (Source: Mint)

No Approval For Hinduja Bank Buy

Belgian company KBC has cancelled a proposed €1.35 billion ($1.9 billion) sale of its private banking arm to Indian group Hinduja after it failed to get regulatory approval. (Source: Mint)

 Write to  the Online Journal's editors at newseditors@wsj.com 