The English Premier League has long been derided as predictable, but as Manchester United prepares to play host to Chelsea on Sunday, the championship is heading for one of the tightest finishes in years. 

But let's be honest: This isn't exactly a clash of the titans.

If there's one thing that stands out about this Premier League season, it's how historically bad the leading combatants have been. Even if United wins its remaining three games, its final tally of 82 points would be the lowest total by the title winner in a decade and 13 points fewer than the record set by Chelsea in the 2004-05 campaign. 

Whatever the outcome at Old Trafford on Sunday, the team that lifts the Premier League trophy this year will be arguably the least impressive champion this century.

"It hasn't been a classic season by any means," said Tony Barker, a member of a Chelsea supporters' group. 

"I think any of the past five or six champions would have walked away with the league this year."

And yet, with three matches remaining, there's an argument to be made that this is the most exciting season English football has seen in years. 

Just three points separates United in top spot from second-place Chelsea, and there's a good chance the title could be decided by goal-differential for the first time in Premier League history. Even Arsenal could be back in the hunt come Sunday, potentially three points behind with two games to play, despite repeatedly self-destructing down the stretch.

"It's going down to the wire, that's for sure," said Tony Cottee, a former West Ham United player and a now a football analyst.

Evidence of a decline among English football's ruling class has been clear for some time. In the five seasons prior to the 2009-10 campaign, the Premier League provided 12 of the 20 Champions League semifinalists, six finalists and two winners. Since then, only one team—Manchester United, which will contest this year's final—has advanced past the quarterfinals.

But rarely has there been a year when all England's top clubs have shown themselves to be so flawed all at the same time. United are short on creativity, Chelsea suffered an epic midseason slump, Arsenal remains flaky and Manchester City has struggled to gel. Even Liverpool, which occupies fifth place, spent the first half of the season flirting with relegation.

All of which has turned conventional thinking about Premier League title races on its head. Usually, the team that wins the league does so in one of two ways: by being significantly more organized than its opponents and grinding out 1-0 wins; or by being significantly better than its opponents and putting the weakest teams to the sword. 

This season, that's not the case. Manchester United sits at the top of the standings, but has completed only four 1-0 victories in 35 league games and has held its opponents scoreless in just 43% of those matchups—its lowest figure since the 2003-04 season. At the same time, United has won by three goals on just five occasions this season, fewer than any of the past nine Premier League champions 

"Maybe the individuals have not shone as brightly for United this season," said Mark Hughes, a former Manchester United striker and now head coach of Fulham. "There's not those key elements to the team where people will jump out of their seats."

In the past four seasons, the Premier League champion has averaged roughly 11 away wins. This season, Arsenal leads the way with eight wins on its travels, while United has won just five of its 18 games on the road—the same number as Blackpool and Newcastle United.

This remarkable slump at the top of the standings surely has something to do with last summer's World Cup. The Premier League's best players, who mostly play for the biggest teams, returned tired or ran out of steam early: Wayne Rooney and Fernando Torres disappointed in South Africa and that form lingered into the season; Frank Lampard and Cesc Fabregas have been in and out of the treatment room with significant injuries.

Other stars were struck down with less expected ailments: Didier Drogba missed eight weeks after contracting malaria, while United midfielder Darren Fletcher returned to action against Schalke Wednesday after missing two months with a stomach virus that caused him to lose more than 12 kilograms.

The absence of key players after a period of restrained recruitment means English football's top clubs have lacked something they have come to rely on in previous seasons: an excess of high-quality players capable of providing a winning moment of quality in the tightest games.

"There was no superstar," says Gianfranco Zola, the former Chelsea forward. Indeed, the paucity of outstanding performers is reflected in the fact that Dimitar Berbatov remains at the top of the goalscoring charts, despite spending most of the past three months on the substitutes' bench.

If this year's title contenders have lacked the glamour of their predecessors, United can at least point to its remarkable perseverance. Self-belief has long been a characteristic of Sir Alex Ferguson's teams, but this year's lineup has been particularly resilient: Sixteen of its 73 points have been secured by goals in the final 15 minutes of games, more than any other team in the Premier League. 

Still, the suspicion remains that United's biggest strength is everyone else's weakness. United would be almost certain of clinching a record 19th English championship with a win Sunday, but many of the team's followers expect the race to go down to the final day of the season on May 22.

"The fat lady's been clearing her throat for weeks, but we keep blowing our chances," said Martin Rodgers, a 55-year-old Manchester United fan and a season-ticket holder. 

"It would be nice to have it sewn up this weekend so we can concentrate on [the Champions League final against] Barcelona, but with all the twists and turns we've had this year, I doubt it."