TOKYO—Facing shifting dynamics in the videogame market,  Sony Corp. unveiled a new portable game machine to rival Nintendo Co.'s 3DS handheld and opened up its game software library to phones and tablet computers running  Google Inc.'s Android software.

Dedicated gaming devices are now in competition with increasingly powerful smartphones like  Apple Inc.
AAPL


0.72
%




's iPhone running simple-to-play titles, but Sony sees its forthcoming game machine, code-named "Next Generation Portable," as a major technological leap over existing mobile handsets and videogame machines.

In front of more than 1,000 videogame industry officials and reporters, Sony showed for the first time the device's five-inch "organic light-emitting diode" touch-screen display, rear touch panel and 3G network connectivity. Sony said the machine, currently known by the acronym "NGP," will be available later this year, in time for the holidays.

"We believe this to be the ultimate portable entertainment device,"  Kaz Hirai, the head of Sony's PlayStation business, said at the news conference.

Sony's new game machine aims to fulfill Chief Executive  Howard Stringer's vision of electronic devices that tap into the company's online network offering movies, music and videogames. The NGP will also test Sony's product development prowess after several years focused on cost-cutting.

Its handheld rival, Nintendo, is also about to introduce a new handheld device next month. The Nintendo 3DS allows users to play 3-D videogames without special glasses, the first major game machine to offer that capability. Nintendo will release the 3DS first in Japan on Feb. 26 and then in March for the U.S. and Europe.

The 3DS will sell for 25,000 yen ($304) in Japan and $250 in the U.S. at launch. Sony hasn't disclosed the price of its handheld.

Packing a significant amount of hardware muscle, the NGP will be expensive to produce, which poses a pricing dilemma for Sony: It can sell the machine at a loss, hoping to make up for it with software sales—a practice commonplace in the videogame industry—or place a hefty price tag on it, hurting initial demand.

"There is also a question of how they will work with carriers on how to pay for the 3G network connectivity," said  Hirokazu Hamamura, president of Enterbrain, a Japanese publisher of books and magazines about videogames.

Sony faced a similar predicament with the launch of its PlayStation 3. The powerful game machine generated heavy interest, but it suffered a slow start because the console was priced way above  Microsoft Corp.'s
MSFT


0.25
%




 Xbox 360 and Nintendo Wii. It cut prices aggressively to boost demand, but Sony then incurred heavy losses at its videogame arm.

Once hailed by a Sony executive as the "Walkman for the 21st Century," the PlayStation Portable has failed to live up to the company's own pre-launch hype. It has sold a respectable 67 million units since its late-2004 debut, but Sony's game machine has been overshadowed by Nintendo's DS handheld which has sold twice as many units as the PSP in a similar time frame.

In a nod to the growing threat from smartphones, Sony said it will for the first time ever make PlayStation software titles playable on non-Sony devices. Sony unveiled the PlayStation Suite, which will be available to phones and tablets running on Google's Android software platform.

"Easy-to-play games are becoming big business and this is recognition of that change in the market," Mr. Hirai said in a briefing with reporters after his presentation.

Later this year, some non-Sony phones and tablets will have access to games once available for the original PlayStation as long as they meet certain specifications laid out by Sony.

Users will buy games a la carte from the PlayStation Suite, but Sony said it may consider moving to a subscription model. Sony is limiting the PlayStation Suite to Android-based phones and tablets for now, but Mr. Hirai didn't rule out the possibility of moving the application to Apple's App Store.

Separately on Thursday, Nintendo posted a 74% decline in net profit for the nine months through December due to declining Wii and DS sales and appraisal losses on its foreign cash reserves from the yen's strength. 

—Yoree Koh and Juro Osawa contributed to this article.

 Write to  Daisuke Wakabayashi at Daisuke.Wakabayashi@wsj.com 