France's upset loss to Italy last Saturday didn't fundamentally change the 2011 Six Nations Championship. England, unbeaten this season, continues to trudge towards a grand slam that has been on the cards since the opening weekend.

But here's what it did accomplish: France's epic failure in Rome, in which it surrendered a 12-point lead in the final half-hour and fell to its first ever loss to Italy, was the clearest sign that—six months before the Rugby World Cup in New Zealand—the French team is in the midst of a shocking collapse.

Just 12 months after celebrating its third grand slam in nine years, France plays host to Wales in its final Six Nations game on Saturday faced with the alarming prospect of a third straight defeat, a losing record in the competition and its lowest finish in this tournament for a decade.

"They are broken men," said Alexis Palisson, the Brive fullback.

France has long had a reputation as rugby's most enigmatic team. Impossible to predict and always capable of self-destruction, the French can scare the hell out of foes and fans alike, often in the course of a single match: In the 1999 World Cup semifinals, France trailed New Zealand 24-10 before tearing off 33 unanswered points in a remarkable comeback win.

"You never know which French team is going to get off the bus," said Serge Betsen, a former France player and a rugby analyst.

But even by the maddeningly inconsistent standards of French rugby, the scale of the team's slump is extraordinary. Since winning last season's Six Nations, France has gone into a tailspin, suffering 40-point shreddings in South Africa and Argentina last summer, followed by an autumn series that culminated in the heaviest home defeat in 105 years of French rugby, a 59-16 loss to Australia in Paris.

Although France won its first two matches of this year's Six Nations, it lost a bruising encounter to England before last weekend's humiliating reversal in Italy and has scored just seven tries in four games, its worst return in 30 years. 

"It's gotten a bit much," said Serge Blanco, vice-president of the French Rugby Federation. "After [the loss to] Australia in November, now it's Italy."

From champs to chumps, it has been some fall. But what's most remarkable about this decline is that it comes at a time when France has emerged as the dominant force in professional rugby. 

The Top 14, the country's leading professional league, is the destination for the world's best players, who have turned the competition into a showcase for a flashy, fast-paced physical brand of rugby.

With booming attendances and the biggest television contract of any domestic rugby league, French teams are the toast of Europe. Between them, Top 14 clubs make up four of the eight quarterfinalists in this season's Heineken Cup—a record—and five of the surviving eight teams in the Challenge Cup. Nobody else has more than two.

Even at international level, France's struggles are reversing modern trends. It took France 44 years to claim a share of the Five Nations title and another five to win one outright, but since then it has been the most successful country, winning nine grand slams, five in the professional era and an additional two titles (without winning all its games) since the tournament expanded to include Italy in 2000.

This season's slide surely has something to do with untimely injuries and the quirks of European rugby's calendar. Unlike the southern hemisphere's Tri Nations tournament, which operates a home-and-away schedule, the Six Nations is a series of one-off games. Some countries play three road games and just two home games, which explains why success is often achieved on a biennial basis—the French tend to prosper in even years, having walked off with the tournament in 1998, 2002, 2004, 2006 and 2010.

But some say the biggest problem is the unique structure of the professional game in France, where club rugby is now prioritized over international success and everything from the length of the Top 14 season to divisions between the sport's governing bodies have undermined France's Six Nations campaign. 

In other words, the national team is being clubbed to death.

"It is a matter of the balance between clubs and the national team," said former France captain Franck Mesnel. "We should be favoring the national team, but we are not." 

This state of affairs that can be traced to the start of the game's modern era, when rugby became professional in 1995, and the French Rugby Federation relinquished its role as governing body of the club game by electing to focus solely on administering the amateur sport.

The upshot was the formation of the Ligue National de Rugby, an independent body set up by the clubs to govern the professional game. Now, 15 years later, French rugby's financial muscle is used to promote the interests of the Top 14 clubs—even at the expense of the national team.

"Our championship is very important," said Blanco, who played 93 games for France. "It is the main priority."

While virtually all other major rugby nations have made their national team the primary focus, the French Rugby Federation does not have the appropriate elite players system. As a result, while Australia's players train together for around five months a year, the French coaches get their players for just a week before the Six Nations.

"In that amount of time, it's difficult to get everyone on the same wavelength," said Emile Ntamack, the France assistant coach.

In addition, the Top 14 season is the longest and most draining in world rugby, with 26 regular-season games—four more than England's Premiership and 63% higher than the Magners League, which comprises the leading teams from Ireland, Wales, Scotland and Italy.

Some French players appeared in 45 games last season, including Top 14, Heineken Cup and international matches, before Tests in South Africa and Argentina. 

"It is simply not possible to play this much and still play well when it matters," said Mesnel, who played for France in the 1987 World Cup final. "It is simply not realistic and we badly need a new plan." 

Some people have a simpler theory for the Rome debacle, in which France surrendered an 18-6 lead in the final 30 minutes by conceding a try and three late penalties. 

"We played like useless prats," said Imanol Harinordoquy, the French No.8. "We lacked professionalism and we deserved to lose."

 Write to  Jonathan Clegg at jonathan.clegg@wsj.com 