Baseball's longest-standing game within the game began on July 15, 1996, when Derek Jeter approached the batter's box at Fenway Park to lead off the first inning against the Boston Red Sox and girded himself for a new experience. 

A rookie shortstop with the Yankees, Jeter had heard about Tim Wakefield. But as he took the pitcher's first offering for a ball, Jeter realized that actually seeing his stuff in person was something different altogether.

"There aren't too many guys in the minor leagues who throw knuckleballs," Jeter said. 

Jeter surprised himself by ripping the next pitch for a double, and it was a significant moment during an otherwise unexceptional mid-summer contest, even if nobody realized it at the time.

 Ever since, Jeter and Wakefield, the cover-model superstar and the blue-collar knuckleballer, have collected seven World Series rings between them and formed an unlikely tie that binds these two rival franchises together. No active hitter-pitcher duo in Major League Baseball has faced each other more often in the regular season. 

Jeter has 115 career plate appearances against Wakefield heading into this weekend's series at Yankee Stadium, a competition that spans 16 seasons and narrowly outdistances Wakefield's decade-plus duel with former Yankees first baseman Jason Giambi. Giambi, who now plays for the Colorado Rockies, has faced Wakefield 112 times.

Jeter has done better than most against Wakefield, hitting for a .287 average with three home runs and 10 RBIs—although Jeter has not fared nearly as well against him in the postseason, collecting just two hits in 11 at-bats.

Their familiarity is the product of something rare: two players staying with the same teams, and within the same division, for so long. And if both have begun to wage losing battles against the corrosive effects of time, then there also is mutual respect.

"He's always been someone I've admired," Jeter said. "The way he handles himself, the way he competes, his longevity. He does his job, and does it well."

Wakefield, 44, is a meticulous man who completes a USA Today crossword puzzle in the clubhouse every afternoon, and he seems acutely aware of his place in the game. At spring training, he said he had "numbers that I want to accomplish, milestones I want to surpass."

 He acknowledged that these were factors that motivated him to return for another season, perhaps his last. He noted how he was just seven wins short of 200 for his career—and seven wins short he remains.

Wakefield has labored through the early part of his 17th season with Boston, his spot in the bullpen looking more precarious by the inning. He has compiled a 5.40 earned-run average with no wins and one loss in 11 appearances. In his prime, he was an innings-eating starter who baffled hitters with pitches that dipped and darted like wind-blown grocery bags. But his knuckleball has sometimes lacked its hallmark volatility, and his efforts have been spotty.

"It's been a grind," he said in a recent interview. "You try to reminisce and look back at your career, but I'm also in survival mode. And that's the way my entire career has been—survival mode. You can't relax until you take this uniform off for good."

Jeter, with his new $51-million contract, might not be able to relate to the concept of "survival mode." But at age 36, his revamped swing has been a bit of a disappointment and his pursuit of his 3,000th hit has turned into something of a slog. He was hitting .271 with just two home runs and 10 RBIs before Thursday's game against the Kansas City Royals.

Odds are that Jeter will dig in against Wakefield at some point this weekend, and it promises—as always—to be a taxing exercise. Wakefield is unusual, Jeter said, because all a hitter can do is try to gauge the speed of the pitch. The rest is guesswork.

"You can go into a game and have no chance against him if the knuckleball is moving that day," Jeter said. "Maybe you can get lucky a couple of times, find some holes. But it's not like you enjoy facing him. I enjoy seeing him, but I don't enjoy facing him."

Like Jeter, Giambi said he typically feels as though he gains a tactical advantage the more often he faces a pitcher—or at least gets a better sense of their tendencies and patterns. Based on what he has seen before, he might anticipate a changeup with a 1-1 count or an inside fastball at 2-1. But there is no such rhythm to his at-bats against Wakefield, and it shows: Giambi has a .163 average against him.

"It's actually one of the purest forms of the game that there is," Giambi said, "because there's really no plan. It's basically: see the ball, hit the ball." 

Despite his struggles against him, Giambi still describes facing Wakefield as "fun" and "awesome," and Jeter was just as effusive in his own, more muted way. "I've definitely enjoyed it," he said. 

Kevin Cash, who caught for Wakefield for much of the 2008 season, said he often noticed how Jeter and Wakefield would exchange "a look or a smile" during certain at-bats. "You could tell there was a lot admiration there," Cash said.

Wakefield said one of the highlights of his career was his selection to participate in the 2009 All-Star Game. It was the first time he and Jeter actually had a chance to share a conversation, and Jeter gently chided him for being "the old guy" on the American League team.

Wakefield said it was one of those "cool moments" that he will remember, the lone occasion when they were teammates instead of adversaries.