LONDON—The euro zone's private sector grew at the fastest pace in six months in January, as a surge in Germany and solid growth in France more than offset weaker performers, a survey by financial-information firm Markit showed. 

Official data released Monday also showed Germany helping to drive a pickup in euro-zone factory orders in November, further evidence that the industrial sector expanded at a solid rate as 2010 ended. 

"The euro zone has started 2011 on a solid footing, with a record rise in new orders in Germany helping to sustain economic growth at a quarterly pace of approximately 0.7% in January," said  Chris Williamson, chief economist at Markit. 

Markit said the divergence between Germany and the rest of the single-currency area has widened further. Employment also continued to fall outside Germany and France, raising the prospect of an uneven recovery and complicating the outlook for the European Central Bank's monetary policy. 

A two-speed euro zone is expected to remain a focus for financial markets this year as Germany and France outpace the economies of Ireland, Spain, Greece and Portugal, where governments are carrying out tough austerity measures to cut their bloated budget deficits. 

Markit said the preliminary reading of its euro-zone Composite Output Index, a gauge of activity based on about 85% of results of a survey of manufacturing and services firms, rose to 56.3 in January from 55.5 in December. A reading above 50 indicates an expansion in activity. 

"While we do expect some softening in the coming months as fiscal consolidation kicks in, we see risks increasingly skewed towards stronger-than-expected [gross domestic product] in [the first half of] 2011," said  Marco Valli, chief euro-zone economist at UniCredit Research. 

Euro-zone economic growth slowed to a quarterly rate of 0.3% between July and September from 1% in the second quarter. Growth remained dependent on exports and stock building while consumer spending barely increased and investment spending fell. 

Markit's Services Business Activity Index increased to a two-month high of 55.2 in January from 54.2 in December, but the manufacturing Purchasing Managers Index slipped to a two-month low, but still robust, 56.9 from 57.1. 

Growth was led by Germany, which expanded at the second-fastest rate in the survey's 13-year history. Output growth also accelerated to a four-month high in France, driven by an unexpectedly strong surge in the services sector. 

"All in all, the fact that the ongoing and broadening recovery in core countries—Germany in particular—continues to offset the weakness in the periphery is very encouraging," said  Martin van Vliet, an economist at ING. 

But outside the two biggest economies of the euro zone, output growth was close to stagnation, with the rate of increase only slightly above December's 13-month low, Markit said. 

"The ECB is very aware that higher interest rates are the last thing that Ireland, Greece, Portugal, Spain and Italy need," said  Howard Archer, chief European and U.K. economist at IHS Global Insight.

The survey showed weak demand is keeping a lid on inflation in January. Input prices rose at the strongest rate since August 2008, but output prices rose at a reduced pace, suggesting companies' margins are being squeezed further. 

Growth in new business hit a record high in Germany and slowed only slightly in France in January, but outside those two countries new orders fell marginally for the fourth time in five months. Robust payroll growth in Germany also contrasted with the near stagnation of the labor market in France and further job losses elsewhere. 

"Overall euro-zone private sector employment grew at a reduced rate as a result, suggesting that the region's rate of unemployment will have remained close to double-digits at the start of the year," Mr. Williamson said. 

Separately, U.K. data due this week are expected to show GDP growth slowed on a quarterly basis during the final quarter of 2010 as severe winter weather hurt the economy, a survey by Dow Jones Newswires showed Friday. 

The European Union's Eurostat agency said Monday that industrial orders were 2.1% higher in November than October and were up 19.9% from November 2009. Those figures were slightly weaker than the market consensus estimate, but topped October's 1.4% rise from September and 14.8% year-to-year gain. 

In a reflection of the weak labor market, factory orders for durable and nondurable consumer goods fell, while orders for intermediate and capital goods increased. Intermediate goods, such as steel, are used to make other goods, while capital goods include tools and equipment. 

The figures also showed that while orders surged 5.3% on a monthly basis in Germany in November, they fell in Italy and the Netherlands. 

"The recovery is not yet broad-based, either on a geographical or product distribution, which could be a source of fragility over the medium-term," said  Dominique Barbet, a senior economist at BNP Paribas. 

 Write to  Nicholas Winning at nick.winning@dowjones.com 