If one needed further proof that F. Scott Fitzgerald's quote about there being no second acts in American life was finally dead, consider Marc Maron. The New Jersey-born comedian helped pioneer what is now known as the New York alternative-comedy scene, beginning in the mid 1990s at the now shuttered Luna Lounge with the Monday-night stand-up revue "Eating It." While many of his peers moved swiftly up the comedy food chain, Mr. Maron moved out to Los Angeles, where his career stalled. 

Once there, though, he found that his garage, of all places, provided an escape from personal turmoil and professional stasis—for it was there that he began to produce his interview podcast, "WTF." The program has since become a bona fide hit via iTunes, where it regularly appears in the service's top 10 most downloaded podcasts. This week, Mr. Maron, 47, returns East for a live Thursday-night taping of "WTF" at the Bell House in Gowanus. He spoke with the Journal recently while on tour in Bloomington, Indiana. 



How did you stumble onto this podcasting success? 

When I started doing this, it was at a very difficult point in my life. I had nothing. I was unbookable. I had no agent. It was awful. So this thing just came out of necessity and the excitement just to try something with absolutely nothing to lose. It sort of evolved and became popular. Not only are people digging it, but there's nobody above me. I'm not taking any orders, I'm not carrying anyone's water, I'm not doing anything for anybody but myself and how I want to do it. 



Did you view the podcast format as a viable way to stage a comeback?

I've never really been a business-minded person, but my voice and my mind kind of fits this medium. I'm doing exactly what I want to do and I'm actually growing as a person because I'm talking to my peers and having conversations with other human beings at least twice a week for and hour. It's actually helping me process life and learn things and grow emotionally. And people listen to it! 



So how does the garage material transfer to the stage?

The garage conversations are just that—long-form, one-on-one conversations about whatever. The live shows are a panel of funny and interesting people being funny and interesting, I hope, for a crowd. The only thing that's really the same is my complete inability to prepare. It's very exciting not knowing where something's going, and I like that about both the shows. 



Now that you've been out west for awhile, how does New York look to you?

The Lower East Side is just unrecognizable to me, but I'm on the fence as to whether it's good or bad. I'm sure that if I had been living there the entire time, I would have a lot of horrible things to say about it. But there is a pace and a glory to New York that at least for me is not there anymore, by virtue of where I am in my life and what I've gone through and what I've become. 



Do you feel the city's alt-comedy scene has improved or regressed since you've been gone?

I think in the entire industry, it's a different landscape performance-wise, so whatever we had then is gone, that's for sure. A year ago I could not sell 40 tickets in [New York]. But now, because out of desperation and passion I've been in my garage talking on a microphone to my peers, I'm now going back to two sold-out shows in Brooklyn. I may not necessarily ever be a big star or even financially independent, but for one reason or another this is my window to work. I always felt kind of alienated from the hipsters of Brooklyn. I'm glad they count me as one of their own, I guess. 