Bangalore -- Realty fund HDFC Property Ventures Ltd is selling its investment in a technology export zone in Bangalore back to the developer, making its fifth exit in recent months.

The sale will earn the fund a return of 4.90 billion rupees on the 2.1 billion rupees it invested in Manyata Business Park, an information technology special economic zone in north Bangalore, less than five years ago, said an executive of HDFC Property, who was briefed on the matter, but declined to be named.

The zone, home to firms such as  IBM Corp.
IBM


0.05
%




, is a joint venture between HDFC Property and Embassy Property Developments Ltd, a Bangalore realty firm that specializes in office space.

HDFC Property's exit from the venture will be complete by mid-April, the fund executive said.

"It was an excellent investment for us," the executive said, adding that at the time of delivery, 7.5 million square feet of the 12.5 million square feet space was leased. 

"However, the liquidity situation is tight in real estate and there may be a slowdown in exits for a temporary period," he said.

Embassy Property didn't respond.

HDFC Property, the realty fund of India's largest mortgage lender Housing Development Finance Corp. Ltd, had put up for sale six office properties in which it had invested about four years ago, as it prepared to return money to investors, Mint reported in January.

HDFC's domestic fund manages about 10 billion rupees of assets.

The fund's previous exit was from Embassy Golf Links, an office property in Bangalore. The sale to a clutch of wealthy individuals earned it returns of 2.2 billion rupees on an investment of 510 million rupees, the fund executive said.

Analysts said HDFC Property's recent exits were triggered by the quality and rental yield of its assets across markets.

Office properties are attractive to buyers as they generate substantial rental income, said Ambar Maheshwari, head of investment advisory at DTZ International Property Advisors Pvt. Ltd.

"We will continue to see a combination of buybacks and secondary sales, where funds exit by selling their stake to another fund," he said.

Bangalore, India's technology hub, is seeing an increase in demand for space in dedicated export zones as many blue-chip technology companies seek to expand their offices to keep up with a growing economy.

Ready-to-move-in space is limited in these zones, but a significant supply addition is expected in Bangalore by mid-2012, BNP Paribas Real Estate Research, India, says in its latest report.