The U.K. plans to loosen criteria that allow entrepreneurs and the very rich to settle as the government attempts to stem immigration without shutting the doors to foreign money and talent, with U.K. Immigration Minister Damian Green planning Wednesday to unveil plans for two new routes into the U.K., according to a person familiar with the matter. 

The move is an effort to cherry-pick those foreigners the U.K. deems most likely to boost growth and investment, even as other avenues to enter the country are being closed off amid concern among some Britons that the speed of immigration has been too fast in the past decade.

Currently, those deemed "investors" must have at least £1 million ($1.6 million) to invest in shares and government bonds, entitling them to gain permanent residence after five years. Mr. Green plans to announce two new criteria for investors: a £5 million route that will entitle individuals to gain permanent residence after three years; and a £10 million route, gaining residence after two years, the person said.

The second route being expanded is aimed at entrepreneurs in an effort to make the U.K. more attractive for start-up businesses. Previously, a foreign entrepreneur needed a minimum of £200,000 to invest in a business, allowing him or her to set up a business with a three-year visa. 

In the future, there also will be a route for entrepreneurs who have obtained £50,000 of funding through various specific routes—such as a private-equity firms regulated by the U.K. or investment bodies affiliated with the government. In addition, a second person will be able to qualify for a visa based on that same pot of funding, in recognition that entrepreneurs often come in pairs. 

Representatives for the U.K. Home Office declined to comment. 

While so far both categories have been accessed by possibly as few as hundreds of people across both categories, the government wants to open up the routes to additional investors and entrepreneurs. But it is doing so just as the Conservative-led coalition that won power last May is bringing in an annual immigration cap of 20,700 visas for non-European Union workers.

Under the last government, Britain saw a decade of high immigration which the Conservative Party promised to cut when it came to power. Like other European countries, the British public has become increasingly edgy over large-scale immigration. 

To help it cut back on annual levels that have typically been in the hundreds of thousands, the government has made it harder for all but the very skilled professions to be allowed in. On Monday the government said professions from pipe welders to skilled meat trimmers will be removed from a so-called shortage-occupation list intended to ease entry.

The U.K. is also looking at ways to reduce the number of foreign students who enter the country, a controversial move in a country whose universities' estimate that non-EU students generate more than £5 billion to the economy. Options include reducing the number of universities that are allowed to accept foreign students and not allowing foreign students to study for any course below degree level.

The government, though, faces a tough task in trying to reduce the level of immigration below its own target. The number of employment-related entry clearance visas issued in 2010 was 166,660, an increase of 3% from a year earlier. A host of British and foreign companies have also already complained that the U.K.'s new rules have made it harder for them to bring in their own foreign born workers, saying this makes the U.K. a less attractive place to do business.