 New York 

 Lincoln Center Theater  Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater  150 E. 65th St. ($75-$85)  212-239-6200/800-432-7250  Closes June 12



The most important new musical since "The Light in the Piazza" has come to New York. "A Minister's Wife," in which Austin Pendleton, Joshua Schmidt and Jan Levy Tranen took a classic play by George Bernard Shaw and made it better, opened two years ago at Chicago's Writers' Theatre, one of America's half-dozen top regional companies. Now this exquisite musical version of "Candida" has transferred to the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater, Lincoln Center Theater's smaller downstairs house, in a production staged with immaculate grace by Michael Halberstam, who conceived the show and directed its original Chicago production. To say that you mustn't miss it is to grossly understate the case.

Comparisons with "My Fair Lady," the other Shaw musical, are interesting but irrelevant: "My Fair Lady" is a Broadway operetta, while "A Minister's Wife" balances on a knife-edge between post-Sondheim musical comedy and full-fledged opera. A one-act show performed on a single set by five singing actors and accompanied by four virtuoso instrumentalists, it takes one of Shaw's talkiest plays, a study of what in 1894 would have been called a "modern" marriage, and transfuses it with the hot blood of pure lyricism.

Would Shaw have approved? I rather doubt it. Consider his central characters: James Morell (Marc Kudisch) is a universally adored socialist clergyman, his wife Candida (Kate Fry) a paragon of maternal warmth. Theirs is less a romance than a meeting of minds—it's clear that the temperature in the Morells' bedroom is on the tepid side—and so the arrival of Marchbanks (Bobby Steggert), a young poet who falls hard for Candida, causes chaos at the parsonage. Like most of Shaw's plays, this one has an autobiographical subtext: He, too, was a socialist preacher, albeit a secular one, and by most accounts he preferred talking about love to making it. Hence the oddly sterile tone of "Candida," which is as emotionally stunted as it is mentally stimulating.

Hence, too, the heightened emotional impact of "A Minister's Wife," which brings "Candida" to pulsing life by adding Mr. Schmidt's astringent yet tuneful music and Ms. Tranen's gentle lyrics to Shaw's crisp, brittle words. Mr. Pendleton's essential contribution to the proceedings has been to compress the three acts of "Candida" into a single act that says everything it needs to say in 95 tightly written minutes.

Ms. Fry and Liz Baltes, who plays James's lovesick secretary, appeared in the original Chicago cast of "A Minister's Wife." In the New York production they're joined by Messrs. Kudisch and Steggert and Drew Gehling, who is cast as James's curate. All five players are completely at ease with the long monologues that Mr. Pendleton has drawn more or less directly from Shaw's play, and they handle Mr. Schmidt's tricky score with sweet assurance. While I wished from time to time that "A Minister's Wife" had been cast with opera singers—just as I occasionally wished that certain of the dialogue scenes had been set as operatic recitative—I can't imagine any other cast striking a better balance between song and speech.

Mr. Halberstam has done a superlatively fine job of transferring "A Minister's Wife" to the larger three-quarter-round stage of the Newhouse Theater without losing any of the hushed intimacy of his original Writers' Theatre production. (The new set, by Allen Moyer, is an ever-so-English explosion of clerical clutter.) Here as in Chicago, his direction is so impeccable that you scarcely notice it: Everybody onstage does just what you'd expect them to do in real life, and the spoken and sung scenes are dovetailed so neatly that the transitions are all but imperceptible.

This has been a frightful year for new musicals, which makes the arrival of "A Minister's Wife" all the more satisfying. Needless to say, it's not for everyone, and especially not for those who judge a musical solely by its decibel level and sequin tonnage. If you belong in that category, stuff your wallet full of cash and head for Times Square. If, on the other hand, you believe that a musical can be as smart, poignant and provocative as a first-rate play, then "A Minister's Wife" will thrill you to the marrow. 

 BAM Harvey Theater  651 Fulton St., Brooklyn, N.Y.  718-636-4100  Closes June 5 (Sold out)

YOU CAN'T GET into the Donmar Warehouse's production of "King Lear," whose entire run at Brooklyn's BAM Harvey Theater is sold out. Don't sweat it, though: This "Lear," directed by Michael Grandage, is very good but by no means great, and Derek Jacobi's performance of the towering title role is interesting, which is a polite way of saying odd. Mr. Jacobi's take on the mad monarch is essentially comic, a now-flamboyant, now-whiny medley of hoots and squeaks such as might be emitted by a gifted character actor trying to play a role that's two sizes too large for him. The production itself is direct to the point of baldness, a well-acted exercise in 21st-century theatrical conservatism played in slickly nondescript costumes on an open-stage set that appears to have been designed by a camouflage painter. The second half is better than the first, but neither half is worth paying scalpers' rates to see.

—Mr. Teachout, the Journal's drama critic, blogs about theater and the other arts at www.terryteachout.com. Write to him at tteachout@wsj.com. 