WASHINGTON—House lawmakers approved a procedural rule Friday as part of a Republican attempt to repeal last year's sweeping health-care law, setting the stage for a final vote on the measure next week. 

The vote was 236-182 in favor of approving the rule, which is a House requirement setting the parameters of debate on underlying legislation. Usually, the rule is approved the same day as a final vote on legislation, but in this case, the vote on the bill won't occur until next week. 

Republicans' attempt to repeal the health-care law is largely a political gesture that is almost certain not to be taken up by the Senate, which continues to be controlled by the Democrats. 

The law is seen by Democrats as one of their signature domestic-policy achievements during the first two years of the Obama administration, but it is opposed by almost every Republican. 

Many of its provisions have yet to be implemented by federal agencies, including a requirement on adults to have some form of health insurance or face a possible fine. That provision, known as the individual mandate, takes effect in 2014. 

Democrats have argued that, as more of the law's many initiatives are enacted, the wider measure will increase in popularity around the country as Americans begin to benefit. 

Republicans have argued that repealing the health-care law will save the American taxpayer billions of dollars. But this assertion has been disputed by the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office, which has said that rolling back the law would cost the taxpayer $145 billion from 2012 to 2019. The party's leaders have questioned the effectiveness of the CBO. 

Republicans have said they intend to follow the repeal effort up with more specific attempts to overhaul the health-care law. These could include attempts to withhold funding for programs created by the law, preventing them from being implemented. 

Senate Democrats have largely refused to reopen the health-care debate. They have said they will seek to replace one of the measures put in place to partially pay for the costs of the law—an unpopular Internal Revenue Service reporting requirement on small businesses. 

The so-called 1099 program requires that company owners report to the IRS virtually every business transaction in. Small-business owners have argued it is onerous, and its costs to them far outweigh any benefit in terms of increased taxes recouped by the federal government. 

 Write to  Corey Boles at corey.boles@dowjones.com 