The theme of President Barack Obama's State of the Union Address Tuesday night was "winning the future." It also could have been labeled, "winning the center."

The speech was designed to show that Mr. Obama, just two months after suffering deep bruises in the midterm election, has a grasp of what a previous president called the vision thing. With its talk of investing in education, basic research and new technologies, the address marked a conscious effort to end the phase of his presidency focused on getting the country out of its economic mess, and to move on to a search for what is beyond the mess.

Yet the vision he sketched out isn't likely to win over skeptics on the right. They think his talk of cutting spending in some areas is more than trumped by his desire to spend more in other areas. And they already doubt his new pledges to ratchet back regulation.

Nor will the Obama vision be entirely pleasing to his friends on the left, who will be puzzled by his sudden interest in cutting the corporate tax rate and disturbed by the spending cuts they know are coming. "I'm sure there will be plenty of unhappiness about that," a senior Obama aide said just before the speech.

Instead, it is a vision designed to be clear and attractive to the broad center of the country—the place where Mr. Obama and his party suffered the most grievous losses over the past two years. Indeed, the State of the Union was the best illustration yet of how the post-election Barack Obama has repositioned himself.

To those independent voters who abandoned him in November, and to those disillusioned admirers who had begun to doubt that he actually represented the post-partisan leader advertised in 2008, Mr. Obama sketched out a kind of grand political bargain to move the government and the nation in the direction he wants.

He gave ground to the right and to the business community by offering to reduce a corporate tax rate that he said is holding down American competitiveness. He offered new ways to address conservatives' concerns about medical-malpractice lawsuits. And he offered a shout-out to those who think he has spent recklessly by extending his previous call for a three-year freeze on discretionary domestic spending to five years.

In return, though, he said he would seek funds to realize his vision of a future where the federal government is active rather than passive in the task of shaping America's economy through education, research and infrastructure spending. The image he summoned to describe this view—the challenge posed by the Soviet Union's Sputnik space launch half a century ago—was meant to recall a time when the government, in a role embraced by a broad swath of Americans, unabashedly led the country in meeting a challenge that seemed almost existential at the time.

"Half a century ago, when the Soviets beat us into space with the launch of a satellite called Sputnik, we had no idea how we'd beat them to the moon," Mr. Obama said. "The science wasn't there yet. NASA didn't even exist."

But by "investing in better research and education," the U.S. beat the Soviets to the moon. "This," Mr. Obama declared, "is our generation's Sputnik moment."

Pick the words that you think best complete the president's sentences.

Review the main topics and words used in President Obama's address this year and compare with 2009 and 2010. 

Take out the words "Soviet Union" and substitute "China," and replace the description of a race to the moon with a race to protect American economic pre-eminence, and you get the picture Mr. Obama was seeking to convey. 

Above all, the president sought to draw a parallel today to the way in which that race to the moon was won: through a partnership between government and private business, one that was well funded thanks to broad support in the center of the taxpaying public. Implicit in the image is the assertion that Republicans won't undertake a similar mission to win the economic race today.

Is that a vision the American center can be inspired to embrace today, as it did amid the Cold War? That's the Obama calculation. "What is palpable out there is a desire for a sense about the future," one senior Obama adviser says. 

At the same time, the differences between now and the Sputnik era are significant as well. The government had ample resources then, and sags under deficits now. Trust in government was high then, but has plummeted since. 

Perhaps more important, for many Americans the economic future takes a back seat to lingering fears of the economic present. Many of them are likely to judge the president, as well as his Republican counterparts, above all on how many jobs they can create here and now.

 Write to  Gerald F. Seib at jerry.seib@wsj.com 