The Young Professionals Committee of the Greater New York City affiliate of  Susan G. Komen for the Cure gathered 250 friends to raise awareness for breast cancer by "Painting Wall Street Pink" on Thursday.

The night before, Mother Nature had painted it more than 19 inches white, which resulted in early-morning murmurings that organizers might cancel the event. But  Sandy Kozlowski, YPC founder and executive committee chair, wasn't deterred. "Green light for pink. That was my e-mail to the group," the corporate attorney said. 

Her dauntless attitude was partly the result of surviving a near fatal ordeal in Bali six months earlier. According to Ms. Kozlowski, while staying at The Oberoi Hotel, a glass door pane collapsed on her right leg, severing arteries and nerves. Complications ensued, and she spent three months at a hospital in Singapore. "It made me even more committed to Komen," she said, "to making sure we can all live every day to its fullest."

The evening's festivities had two parts in two locations. The first took place on the trading floor of the New York Stock Exchange, where guests enjoyed cocktails and hors d'oeuvres, and had their photos taken on the bell platform. With over a hundred video and computer screens, as well as information streaming along ticker tapes, it wasn't an easy room to pinkify, but this was, in fact, part of the Komen strategy, according to founder  Nancy Brinker, to "deliver conventional messages in unconventional ways in unexpected environments."

Two hours later, the group hoofed it down the block to Cipriani Wall Street for more cocktails, hors d'oeuvres, and a pasta buffet dinner. You might assume a breast cancer awareness event to be strictly for ladies, but in fact there were more men than women.  Steve Simmons, a broker and the executive committee's treasurer, said he recruited a lot of men to the event with the lure of meeting women. "I don't mind being a pimp to cure a disease," he joked.

When toasting the crowd,  Eric Brinker, the 35-year-old son of Nancy and nephew to the late Susan Komen, introduced himself as having had the "distinct privilege of being raised around more pink than any other man in the world." 

When asked if discussing breasts was awkward for him, he said, "It's not now because we've … broken down the stigma. But I remember blushing when I was a kid telling people what my mom did." 

He mentioned that in the early days of the Komen foundation, his home was headquarters, and among the paraphernalia around was a breast mold upon which one could practice inspecting for lumps. "I was popular because of that," he said.

—Lizzie Simon