Over the past few weeks, as wins and smiles and late-night talk-show appearances have become more frequent for the Knicks, they have developed quite a bit of confidence and even a little swagger.

In the midst of all that, there was little hint of a crash and almost no evidence that they might be headed back to the mediocrity that plagued them in the beginning of the season, when they started 3-8. 

But with their third straight loss on Monday afternoon, a 129-121 drubbing at the hands of the Phoenix Suns, they showed the cracks that were thought to be ancient history. And after the loss, Knicks coach Mike D'Antoni offered his biggest criticism yet of his 22-18 team.

"We think we are really good and we are not," Mr. D'Antoni said. "We are a team that played hard to get where were got and now we are playing soft to get back to maybe where we should be." 

Against a team that was clearly not at its best, Suns shooting guard Vince Carter lit up the Knicks, scoring 29 points and grabbing 12 rebounds. Forward Grant Hill added 25, and point guard Steve Nash had 15 points with 11 assists.

The Knicks' Amar'e Stoudemire scored the quietest 41 points possible in the defeat. Forward Wilson Chandler added 23 and Raymond Felton had 13 assists but just seven points. 

Mr. D'Antoni said after the game that his team isn't the Boston Celtics or Miami Heat or any other NBA powerhouse, though few needed reminding on Monday afternoon. 

"We didn't quite play with enthusiasm. We didn't bring the energy we needed. We didn't play smart defensively," Mr. Stoudemire said. 

This was another recent low point for the Knicks, who suffered a 93-83 loss on Friday night to the Sacramento Kings, who were tied for the NBA's lowest win total with eight.

The Knicks previously lost three straight from Dec. 12 through Dec. 17, though two of the losses came against the Heat and Celtics.

"I think we have to understand that we haven't done anything yet as far as winning. We have won a few games," Mr. Stoudemire said, later adding "four games over .500 is unacceptable. We had a chance to take advantage of our situation and we didn't. Now we have a tough road trip ahead of us."

The Knicks play the Houston Rockets, San Antonio Spurs and Oklahoma City Thunder in the next week.

The game was back-and-forth for most of the afternoon. The Knicks actually looked in control when Mr. Felton, after scoring just four points through three quarters, hit a go-ahead 3-pointer with nine minutes remaining to give the Knicks the lead at 101-100. 

Mr. Carter airballed a 3-pointer on the next possession. But the Knicks couldn't clamp down defensively, and the Suns began to pull away when Mr. Nash hit a 3-pointer to make the score 109-106 with 4:30 remaining.

Mr. Carter scored five straight points from there, and Channing Fyre's wide-open 3-pointer with 2:39 remaining made it 119-110 and sealed the game. 

Ten days ago, the Knicks crushed these same Suns 121-96 and turned former Sun Mr. Stoudemire's homecoming into a laugher. Mr. Felton even got a triple-double while the rest of the team's starters rested on the bench during the blowout. There weren't such luxuries in the rematch.

The Knicks struggled from the field, making just 11 of their 31 3-point attempts. The Suns, meanwhile, hit 11 of 21 3-pointers and outrebounded the Knicks 48 to 38.

 The Knicks, already lacking in height while at full-strength, were without reserve center Ronny Turiaf, who was out with a hip contusion. 

Against the smaller Knicks front line, Suns center Robin Lopez scored 12 points and Marcin Gortat seven rebounds in a reserve role.

Mr. Stoudemire picked up a technical foul, his 12th of the season, when he threw a shoulder into Mr. Frye five minutes into the game. Bill Walker and Mr. Frye also picked up double-technicals during a minor confrontation in the first quarter. 

Mr. Stoudemire leads the league in technical fouls, which is troublesome because 16 technical fouls result in an automatic one-game suspension.

 Mr. Stoudemire said after the game he doesn't know what to do because the emotional, physical style of play that oftentimes results in technicals is "his game." 

"I think he is fine," Mr. D'Antoni said. "I have been around Amar'e a long time. He can control it and hopefully he will."

Danilo Gallinari scored 17 points in 30 minutes in his first game back after a sprained left knee kept him out for six games. Mr. D'Antoni said he thought Mr. Gallinari played OK but did not look sharp, especially with shooting, where he made one of his three 3-point attempts. 

 Write to  Kevin Clark at kevin.clark@wsj.com 