WASHINGTON—Republican leaders gather Friday to pick a new party chief amid hopes that fresh leadership might revitalize the GOP's flagship organization, the Republican National Committee, heading into the 2012 election.

But evidence abounds that the RNC's varied woes run deeper than the troubled stewardship of its current chairman,  Michael Steele.

The organization fell short last year in many of the traditional ways it tries to boost GOP candidates, such as deploying its huge database to find Republican voters and unleashing its usual army of volunteers. It spent a minimal amount on television advertisements, and far less than in 2006, the prior midterm election, on aid to state parties and coordinated campaigns with candidates.

In a pivotal moment last spring, the RNC turned to a new conservative group, American Crossroads, for help in updating and expanding the RNC's voter database, a move former RNC officials say would have been unthinkable just years ago. Early discussions are now under way to have the RNC possibly cede control of the list altogether by turning database management over to an outside consortium.

Voter-turnout efforts have traditionally been a core strength of the RNC. But the organization rattled many within the party last fall when it curtailed its voter-mobilization effort, saying it was not the best use of money. An RNC internal assessment found after the election that a more vigorous mobilization effort could have made Republican candidates competitive in 21 additional House races. As it was, the Republicans picked up 63 seats in the House.

The five contenders for chairman of the Republican National Committee are: 

 Michael Steele, 52: Current RNC chairman and former Maryland lieutenant governor. Sharp criticism of his two-year leadership of the RNC, particularly his lackluster fund raising, could upset his re-election plans. 

 Reince Priebus, 38: Chairman of the Wisconsin Republican Party. The GOP's string of victories in Wisconsin in November, along with support from many committee insiders, have positioned him as the front-runner to topple Mr. Steele. 

 Saul Anuzis, 51: Former Michigan GOP chairman. Portrays himself as the tech-savviest of the contenders. He lost to Mr. Steele in the 2009 contest for RNC chairman but could do well on Friday. 

 Ann Wagner, 48: Former Missouri Republican official, RNC co-chairman and ambassador to Luxembourg. Promises to rev up fund raising and has been the sharpest in criticizing Mr. Steele's leadership. 

 Maria Cino, 53: Former Bush administration official who also worked as a top strategist within the RNC. Several top Republicans support her, including former George W. Bush strategist Karl Rove and House Speaker John Boehner, but she is seen as a long-shot.

"The real question is, can the RNC get back to where it needs to be in time for the 2012 campaign? It's going to be extremely difficult," said Rick Hohlt, a longtime Republican Party insider and fund-raiser.

The four candidates looking to unseat Mr. Steele in Friday's RNC election promise to rev up fund raising and reinstate the RNC as the party's premier operational hub. Mr. Steele defends his two-year tenure by pointing to the party's string of victories in November. Mr. Steele's defenders also say that he raised nearly $200 million in a challenging fund-raising environment.

Mr. Steele and those vying to take his place—Wisconsin party Chairman Reince Priebus, former Michigan party Chairman Saul Anuzis, Missouri GOP operative Ann Wagner, and former RNC official Maria Cino—have opportunities to revive the organization. The RNC could regain its footing if it tapped into the huge amounts of money that other Republican organizations, such as the Republican Governors Association, raised in the 2010 election.

Overall, GOP candidates and parties raised more than $1 billion for the election. The RNC's share was $200 million.

Moreover, Republicans have a strong chance of retaking the Senate in 2012, after winning the House last November, and see a chance to win the White House. Those prospects could stir intense interest among Republican donors and business groups, coming on top of the major gains in the midterm elections.

Still, both political parties face challenges. Both have taken a beating from the 2002 McCain-Feingold campaign-finance law, which severely limits the ability of the RNC and Democratic National Committee to raise large sums of money from individuals, labor unions and corporations.

The law was intended to curb the influence of big money in politics, but it ended up driving rich contributors on both the left and right toward a crop of new independent political entities, many of which don't have to disclose their donors.

Republicans created several groups, including American Crossroads, just as the RNC was faltering in its own fund-raising efforts. Older outside GOP groups such as Americans for Prosperity also took on a more central campaign role as donors filled their coffers as never before.

"What we have is a diminished RNC that is probably not going to be able to do what it has done for so many past elections," said Mike Duncan, a past RNC chairman who is now active with American Crossroads. "For better or worse, that means that outside groups are going to be all the more important."

The RNC's ledger swung from a $15 million surplus when Mr. Steele took over in early 2009 to a $23 million deficit now. The RNC collected just 10% as much from large donors under Mr. Steele as it did during the previous midterm election.

By contrast, with President Barack Obama in the White House and Democrats in control of Congress, the DNC had a successful fund-raising year. For the first time since President Bill Clinton was in the White House, the DNC raised more money than the RNC. 

The DNC raised $221 million for the 2010 election. That's nearly twice as much as the $130 million that the DNC raised for the last midterm election, according to the FEC.

With the election taking place Friday, RNC officials declined to comment on the record about Mr. Steele. 

Last fall, RNC spokesman Doug Heye said it was "expensive to raise money when you don't have the House and Senate and the White House."