NEW DELHI—Bharti Airtel Ltd. posted a 31% drop in fiscal fourth-quarter net profit on Thursday, as new African operations cramped margins at the Indian telecommunications company. Higher interest costs also hurt Bharti's results.

Investors punished Bharti's stock, sending the shares down as much as 4.7% in reaction to the company's fifth consecutive earnings decline. The share losses eased as investors took note of Bharti's stabilizing local operations and its prospects for improved performance at the African business. The stock closed down 3.3% at 357.60 rupees ($8.06) on the Bombay Stock Exchange, while the benchmark Sensex index fell 1.4%.

India's largest mobile-phone operator by subscribers said its net profit fell to 14.01 billion rupees ($315.8 million) in the January-March quarter from 20.44 billion rupees a year earlier. Profit rose 7.5% from the fiscal third quarter ended in December. 

Consolidated revenue rose 51% to 162.66 billion rupees from 107.49 billion rupees, helped by subscriber additions and contributions from the African unit. On a sequential basis, revenue rose 3.2%. 

The average of estimates in a poll of 11 analysts called for a net profit of 16.62 billion rupees on revenue of 163.49 billion rupees.

"Margins are relatively intact and the domestic operations have performed well. On the Africa front, the revenue was below our estimates," said  Sangeeta Tripathi, an analyst at Mumbai-based brokerage Sharekhan. 

Bharti's unprofitable African unit narrowed its loss to 878 million rupees from 2.16 billion rupees in the October-December quarter, while revenue rose to 41.82 billion rupees from 40.53 billion rupees. 

Costs for the African business remain high, but the company expects those expenses to decline over the next four to six quarters, said  Manoj Kohli, Bharti's chief executive of international business and head of African operations. 

Bharti said its net-profit figure isn't comparable as the year-earlier data didn't include results from the African operations, which the company acquired from Kuwait's Mobile Telecommunications Co.—also known as Zain—in June 2010. 

Bharti, about 32%-owned by Singapore Telecommunications Ltd., has operations in India, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and several African nations. It has 220.9 million subscribers, including 167.7 million in India and South Asia. 

The company's interest costs surged to 6.83 billion rupees in the January-March quarter, compared with interest income of 356 million rupees a year earlier, because of the debt that Bharti took to fund the $9 billion African acquisition. It also borrowed funds to pay $3.3 billion to the Indian government last year for bandwidth to offer third-generation mobile and wireless broadband services. Net debt totaled $13.43 billion as of March 31, compared with $530 million a year earlier. 

Bharti's consolidated earnings margin before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization contracted to 33.5% from 38% a year earlier, but expanded from 31.6% in the previous three months when the company incurred a one-time brand-building expense. 

The company's margins were mainly hurt by a 67% year-to-year jump in total costs. Bharti, which rebranded Zain's African operations under its Airtel brand, said sales and marketing expenses more than doubled from a year earlier to 18.26 billion rupees.

Average revenue per user from wireless operations—a key gauge of profitability—fell 2% in India from the third quarter, to 194 rupees. Average minutes of use per user was flat sequentially, at 449. ARPU from wireless operations in Africa fell 3% from the third quarter to $7.20.

—Kenan Machado in Mumbai contributed to this article.

 Write to  Romit Guha at romit.guha@dowjones.com and R. Jai Krishna at krishna.jai@dowjones.com 