This has not been a good month to be a dissident in China. As the authorities continue to sweep up lawyers, activists and netizens across the country, it is increasingly obvious that an intense crackdown on dissent is underway. But compared to earlier suppression campaigns, this one is more terrifying because of its blatant lawlessness.

Dozens of people have been caught up in the crackdown, many facing the possibility of long prison sentences after having been charged with serious state security offenses such as subversion. But they are the lucky ones, for at least they have access to China's legal process, as flawed as it is. Others, like lawyers Tang Jitian, Jiang Tianyong, Teng Biao, Liu Shihui, Tang Jingling and Li Tiantian are not so fortunate. They simply disappeared after being taken into custody just over a month ago.

Signs of tightening control have been visible for several years. Arrests and prosecutions for state security offenses skyrocketed in 2008 and remain high. But the authorities are now employing a range of new, illegal methods to silence their critics. 

Plainclothes police put activists and their family members under restrictive forms of house arrest, depriving them of their rights without any hint of due process. The police prevent suspects from contacting their lawyers and keep them in custody beyond the prescribed time limits. Interrogators practice torture with impunity. 

But most terrifying of all is the way in which enforced disappearance appears to have become almost routine.

When agents of the state make individuals disappear, it is an act of intimidation designed to instill fear not only in those who have been taken away but also in those who might be next. Without the protection of the law, those who have been disappeared can be subjected to torture without accountability. 

For instance, rights lawyer Gao Zhisheng was feared dead after he disappeared for over a year. When he suddenly re-emerged last April after strong international pressure, he described brutal acts of torture and hinted at other treatment of which he could not speak. Then he disappeared again and, once more, his fate remains uncertain.

Now reports are filtering out from people close to Tang Jitian that he was subjected to similar treatment. Liu Shihui was savagely beaten before being taken into custody. Are Teng Biao and Jiang Tianyong being tortured, too? Without any credible assurance that they can be protected by the law, we have reason to assume the worst.

Last month, one dissident exposed how illegal house arrest works. Chen Guangcheng, a blind legal activist, has been held captive in his own home, along with his wife and child, since being released last September from the prison where he had been held for four years and three months on trumped-up charges. In a video smuggled out of his Shandong village and posted on the Internet, Mr. Chen and his wife revealed how they were watched over day and night by thugs at the behest of local government officials. Friends, reporters and diplomats who have tried to visit have been chased off and assaulted. After release of the video, Mr. Chen and his wife reportedly were beaten.

When asked to comment on individual cases, government spokesmen assure us that each case is being "handled in accordance with the law." This should conjure up notions of due process, fairness and justice, but the sense of law we get from China these days is much less reassuring.

Ministry of Foreign Affairs spokeswoman Jiang Yu recently warned foreign journalists in Beijing that "the law is not a shield" for them to hide behind. "There are people," she continued, "whose only desire is to see the world in chaos and create trouble in China. As far as people with such motives are concerned, I don't think any law can protect them."

A brave editorial in the influential Southern Weekend responded that "the law should be a shield for all." It was quickly removed from the paper's website. When it comes to those who challenge the existing political order in China, the law in China is often more a weapon than a shield, one deployed with great ruthlessness by authorities intent on preserving "stability above all else."

Rule of law is an ideal that the Chinese government itself repeatedly professes, both to its own citizens and to the international community. But when its security forces resort to harassment, arrest, enforced disappearance and even torture to deal with perceived threats to stability and voices expressing legitimate criticism, it erodes confidence in the sincerity of the government's commitment.

Lawyers are being targeted precisely because of their efforts to hold the Chinese government accountable for those commitments. What's happening in China right now looks less like rule of law than a sort of "law of the jungle" in which power is exercised unchecked. As China descends into lawlessness, this jungle could become a very fierce place indeed. 

 Mr. Rosenzweig is a senior researcher at the Duihua Foundation, a human rights organization. 