HOUSTON — U.S. Rep. Gabrielle Giffords entered the next phase in her long recovery Friday when she was transferred from an Arizona hospital to a Texas rehabilitation center, nearly two weeks after being shot in the head at a constituent event.

Accompanied by her husband, astronaut Mark Kelly, and her trauma surgeon, Ms. Giffords was transported by ambulance from Tucson's University Medical Center to nearby Davis-Monthan Air Force Base, then flown to Houston's William P. Hobby airport and moved by helicopter to Memorial Hermann Hospital.

Here, she will spend several days rehabilitating in the intensive care unit before occupying a spartan room in The Institute for Rehabilitation and Research, a nationally recognized 119-bed facility that has broad expertise in treating survivors of traumatic brain and spinal cord injuries.

Randall Friese, an Arizona surgeon who accompanied Ms. Giffords on her trip, said she became visibly moved inside the ambulance when she heard applause from well-wishers who had lined the roads in Tucson.

"When I saw her reaction today to the cheering that was going on, it was clear to me that she knew what was going on," Mr. Friese said, adding, "She smiled and she began to tear a little bit, and I think she began to understand the support the city has for her."

TIRR has treated many notable patients over the years including Kevin Everett, a former tight end for the Buffalo Bills who suffered a career-ending neck injury during a 2007 game, and Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott, who became wheelchair bound after an oak tree fell on him while he was jogging in 1984.

Capitol Police scoured the building Thursday prior to Ms. Giffords' arrival and will maintain a special security detail in the wing where the congresswoman will be staying.

Founded in 1959 by a pediatrician to treat patients with polio, TIRR expanded over time to focus on severe brain and spinal cord injuries and is one of 16 federally designated "model system" research institutions where the latest scientific techniques are put to use. 

The center employs teams of physicians, psychologists, nurses, nutritionists and therapists who assess the physical and emotional state of seriously injured patients and help them make a full recovery, or achieve what Carl Josehart, the facility's chief executive, calls their "new normal."

"She is clearly moving her lips, we have already seen that," said one of the Texas physicians who will treat her, neurosurgeon Dong Kim. He interpreted the movements as a sign Ms. Giffords is trying to form words.

Most patients stay at TIRR roughly four weeks, but some have remained as long as six months before entering an outpatient phase of rehabilitation, which typically lasts for months, sometimes years. The facility has five gymnasiums where therapists work with victims on slowly restoring motion to their limbs and standing up by themselves — for example, by using a harness to hold up a patient as they try to walk on a treadmill. Ms. Giffords was able to stand and look out her hospital window on Wednesday, continuing what doctors have described as a remarkable recovery after being shot Jan. 8. The alleged shooter, Jared Lee Loughner, is set to be arraigned in a Phoenix courtroom on Monday.

 I hope that Ms. Giffords recovers completely. I don't know how realistic that is but I still wish it for her and for us. We all need a smile. 

—Paula Dowling

The rehabilitation sessions are often grueling for recovering patients, who can become frustrated while struggling to do simple tasks they once took for granted.

"Physical rehabilitation is very demanding," said Mark Sherer, the center's director of neuropsychology, "especially for a patient that has suffered traumatic brain injury." 

But the road to recovery can be made smoother by a family's love, Mr. Sherer added, and at TIRR, Ms. Giffords will be in close contact with her husband and other loved ones. 

She will be leaving behind her Arizona caretakers, however, including her nurse, Tracy Culbert, who accompanied her on the trip Friday and with whom she had forged a close bond.

Ms. Culbert said the congresswoman gestured to the ring on the nurse's finger, and playfully placed it on her own finger after the nurse had taken it off.

"Her personality is coming out," Ms. Culbert said, adding that she would miss her time with Ms. Giffords. "She is a very strong woman."

Ms. Giffords was shot in the head at close range Jan. 8 in a mass shooting at a Tucso-area supermarket that left six dead and injured 13, including the 40-year-old congresswoman.

A federal grand jury indicted the 22-year-old accused gunman for attempted assassination of Ms. Giffords, and attempted murder of two of her aides. Mr. Loughner is scheduled to appear in federal court in Phoenix Monday.

