 China announced details of a long-awaited property tax in two of its largest urban centers, but the move intended to crack down on speculation and curb rising prices that are fueling public anger was relatively mild and analysts said it would have only a limited impact on investment.  

 Goldman Sachs Group's J. Michael Evans will be named the head of emerging-markets business world-wide, a new position that expands his responsibilities beyond his role as chairman of Goldman's operations in Asia.  

 Sony unveiled a new portable 3G game machine to rival Nintendo's 3DS hand-held and will sell PlayStation games for Android smartphones and tablets.  

 Nintendo's profit tumbled 74% in the nine months ended December on slumping sales of its Wii and DS game machines.  

 Lenovo will invest $175 million in a joint venture with NEC that gives the Chinese company control of Japan's biggest personal-computer maker.  

 Nokia posted a 21% drop in profit as the cellphone giant lost ground in smartphones, and its new CEO suggested strategic changes lie ahead.  

 BlackBerry maker RIM reiterated that it isn't possible to give Indian security agencies access to its corporate smartphone email service.  

 U.S. stocks wobbled amid mixed economic and corporate reports. In Asia, big gains for resources and auto stocks boosted China's main stock index despite sharp falls in property shares.  

 The dollar strengthened against the yen on the heels of a downgrade to Japan's sovereign-credit rating, while the euro surrendered a two-month high it hit against the dollar.  

 China will renew its push to cut its steel industry's capacity after its largest mills made only limited progress toward consolidation last year. 

 The U.S. budget deficit will reach nearly $1.5 trillion in fiscal 2011, the budget office said.  

 TNK-BP's Russian shareholders are seeking to halt the share swap and exploration deal between BP and Rosneft.  

 Nobel Peace Prize laureate and pro-democracy advocate Mohamed ElBaradei returned to Egypt, a moment that promised to provide a jolt to antigovernment protests that extended for a third day in Cairo and other cities across the country. 

A car bomb struck a funeral tent in a mainly Shiite area of Baghdad, killing at least 48 people and triggering skirmishes between Iraqi troops and demonstrators angry about security failures.

A U.S. consular official shot dead two armed men as they tried to rob him in a street in the central Pakistani city of Lahore, triggering a public protest.

A purported al Qaeda leader in Pakistan said the terror network is losing territory and fighters amid a U.S. drone strike campaign, according to an audio message monitored by a U.S. group that tracks militant propaganda.

Another snowstorm hit the U.S. East Coast, stranding thousands of road, rail and air travelers. Some 300,000 were without power in Washington.

 Australian Prime Minister Gillard proposed a $1.79 billion tax to help fund reconstruction in flood-devastated Queensland.  

An Indonesian volcano, Mount Bromo, spewed towering clouds of ash, forcing some airlines to cancel flights to the island of Bali.