Nearly 10 years after Osama bin Laden led a devastating attack on their city, New Yorkers greeted news of his death Monday with loud cheers and quiet reflection. Some laid flowers, others went to church. Some went out of their way to visit the place where the buildings he destroyed once stood. Others sought to explain what it meant to their young children.

Most went on with their days as they would any other. A raucous celebration that lasted into the early hours of Monday near the World Trade Center site gave way to the beginning of another work week. Construction went on as normal there. Crews kept scrambling to prepare a memorial that's set to open in seven months, on the 10th anniversary of the attacks.

But bin Laden's death remained in the thoughts and conversations of nearly everyone in and around New York City. 

A 10-year-old girl who lives on Vesey Street and never knew the Twin Towers talked about it with her mother as they watched celebrations late Sunday. Mayor  Michael Bloomberg stood with a crush of officials where the towers once stood and said "let the spirits that are all around us know some peace and justice." And the thousands who lost friends and family tried to put meaning on a cataclysmic event—the elusive man who had left holes in their lives was finally dead.

***

  Jimmy Simopoulos sat inside St. Paul's Chapel across the street from the World Trade Center site Monday, rubbing his face and praying. The 45-year-old East Village resident had with him two American flags and a poster that read "Osama Dead. America Keeps Promise. 9/11 Avenged!"

He got there about noon, drawn to the church because it was a place of "refuge" and "safety" following the attacks. Others had the same idea. Tears streamed down the face of one woman, with blond hair and a turquoise blue shirt as she walked out of the church. Dozens of people sat on benches along the outside of the church in quiet reflection. 

Mr. Simopoulos was on his way to work on Chambers Street on Sept. 11, 2001. He said he heard and saw the planes crash into the twin towers and came back to Ground Zero in the days following to volunteer and distribute supplies to relief workers. He said that he lost several friends in the attacks and was depressed for several months afterward

Mr. Simopoulos said he was praying for the people who lost their lives and their families, but also celebrating bin Laden's death. "I think the world would be a better place without him," he said. 

—Emily Steel

***

While the crowds had dispersed after a rowdy night at the World Trade Center site, the people still came Monday morning, some looking to keep celebrating.

  Sam Hendrickson and his friends were driving around Cornell University's campus in Ithaca, cheering and playing patriotic music Sunday night after hearing the news of Mr. bin Laden's death. Then they decided to drive to New York. They loaded up on Red Bull energy drinks and food from McDonald's for the four-hour ride. 

"When I first got here, it was a little emotional," said Mr. Hendrickson, a 19-year-old who was in elementary school when the towers fell. "The aftermath, how everything changed has been 50% of my life—it's pretty historic."

The group planned to take a short nap at the Upper West Side home of one student's parents before driving back upstate for finals. 

"I'm not going to remember this class I took," Mr. Hendrickson said. "I'm going to remember being part of this important historical event."

—Alison Fox

***

The memorial to the attack victims in Middletown, N.J., is tucked away inside a grove of trees, just behind the town's train station that used to be part of the daily routine for some of the 37 residents killed on Sept. 11, 2001.

A red-brick path winds toward a pond. The path is lined with stone wedges, each etched with a short epitaph and a likeness of the person killed.

On Monday, American flags stuck out of the ground alongside many of the grave-like memorials. Someone had left an Easter arrangement and stuffed animals for  Kathleen A. Hunt Casey. Fresh pink, white and red flowers sat in a glass vase by Dick Stadelberger's memorial stone. And a Christmas wreath still leaned against the monument to  Justin John Molisani Jr.

Throughout the day, family members, friends and people who felt a connection with the dead trickled in.

Gus Brandstetter had driven by probably thousands of times, but never stopped until Monday.

"I'm not sure why," he said. "Not that I didn't want to, I just felt a little spooky about it. But today seemed like a good day, a good day to do that. I just wanted to pay my respects, give them all a fist bump so they could close this chapter."

—Lisa Fleisher

***

In her high school classroom on Long Island on Monday,  Talat Hamdani listened as students expressed joy at the news of bin Laden's death. She had a different feeling: relief. 

Ms. Hamdani's son, a Pakistani-American police cadet, was killed on Sept. 11, 2001, at the World Trade Center after going to the site to help victims.

"I wasn't happy, but it was some relief that after this 10-year manhunt he was finally brought to justice," she said.

Like many Muslims, Ms. Hamdani bristled at the notion that Muslims had to answer for the actions of terrorists. "It was an injustice," she said. "Osama bin Laden had taken away my faith. Now that he's been brought to justice, it will hopefully redeem the Islamic faith in the eyes of the world."

—Tamer El-Ghobashy

***

Public School 234 sits three blocks north of where the World Trade Center once stood. Ten years ago, its students were displaced for months after the attacks. Many families who lived in the neighborhood had to find temporary housing.

On Monday, parents there grappled with what to tell their young children.  LaVon Kellner, who was working in Lower Manhattan on the day of the attacks, brought her 10-year-old daughter Chloe, a P.S. 234 student, to the site late Sunday night to show her the celebrations.

"I woke her up and told her that the man who ordered the planes to hit the buildings was killed," Ms. Kellner said with tears in her eyes as she leaned over her daughter, hugging her. She and her daughter live a block from Ground Zero, on Vesey Street. 

  Susan Singh, who recently moved to TriBeCa, decided to keep the news from her younger children. She has yet to tell them about what happened to the buildings that used to tower over their neighborhood.

"I always think back to how it must have been," Ms. Singh said Monday after picking up her 3-year-old and 5-year-old up from the school. "I haven't even told my kids what happened. I don't know when I'm going to be able to explain it to them. I don't want them to be afraid."

—Erica Orden and Alison Fox

***

Bin Laden's death was on the minds of older students elsewhere in the city.

"Every student was talking about it" when they came into class, said  Evan Piekara, who teaches sixth- and seventh-grade English and social studies at Intermediate School 162 in the South Bronx. He said the class had focused on the Middle East at the beginning of the school year.

"They were really excited that something they had been talking about in class became much more relevant to them," he said.

Mr. Piekara was already thinking of ways to continue the conversation with his students. An upcoming unit on debating may be centered on the details of bin Laden's death. At the end of class, his last period of the day, his students didn't want to leave.

"I had to literally shoo them away," Mr. Piekara said.

—Barbara Martinez

***

  John Duffy, chief executive of Wall Street firm Keefe, Bruyette & Woods, was finishing up dinner in Chicago with colleagues late Sunday night when they heard the news. 

"The waiter came over to our table and asked if it was OK if he turned on the television,'' said Mr. Duffy. "There was a rumor that Osama bin Laden had been killed or captured. We said 'absolutely.' "

KBW lost about half its New York staff in the attacks on the World Trade Center, including the firm's co-CEO  Joseph Berry and Mr. Duffy's 23-year-old son Christopher, who was an assistant trader.

All through Sunday night, Mr. Duffy fielded calls and emails from his four children as he sat glued to the hotel television. Family emotions were already raw—they had been preparing for his daughter's wedding on Saturday.

"My reaction is pretty complex,'' Mr. Duffy said. "There is certainly relief that this guy was taken out. And although this is a little difficult to say, I am glad he was killed by a U.S. operation and he didn't die from a liver problem or something like that. Maybe it sounds a little barbaric and my priest friends might not agree. But I am actually happy the way it happened. He got what was coming to him."

Over the 10 years since the attacks, Mr. Duffy said he couldn't accept that bin Laden remained at large.

"It wasn't every day that I thought about it, but when I'd turn on the television and see some story about Afghanistan or some clip about bin Laden, I'd inevitably say 'why can't they find him?''' Mr. Duffy said. "There is a feeling of gratitude from the 3,000 family members who lost somebody."

—Michael Corkery

***

On Monday afternoon, several police officers were chatting outside the 13th Precinct and adjacent Emergency Service Unit squad in Gramercy Park when  Simon Levenson stopped to tuck a bouquet of flowers in the memorial for the three officers in that precinct who died responding to the World Trade Center attacks. 

Mr. Levenson, an oil painter who lives across the street, said he's never attended the annual Sept. 11 memorial service on the block. But after Sunday's news about bin Laden, he felt compelled to pay his respects. "Yesterday felt like finally a good day," Mr. Levenson said. "It wasn't happy. It wasn't sick. It was somewhere in the middle. I guess it was closure." 

As Mr. Levenson passed, the officers stopped their conversation to wave and thank him. One of the officers, Det.  Keith Connelly of the Emergency Service Unit, said a group of his fellow officers visited the World Trade Center site on Sunday night to take part in the celebration, and a few more followed them on Monday. 

"Everyone's elated this has finally come to an end," said Mr. Connelly. "We're just happy that justice was served. We're raising our flag proudly today." 

—Russell Adams

 Write to  Andrew Grossman at andrew.grossman@wsj.com 