PARIS—John Galliano, the Christian Dior star designer who was fired Tuesday, "unreservedly" apologized Wednesday for his alleged anti-Semitic comments.

The emotional mea culpa marked the troubled designer's first effort to salvage his reputation. Yet he also painted himself as a victim of discrimination, and said he was assaulted and that he would fight back.

"Anti-Semitism and racism have no part in our society. I unreservedly apologize for my behavior in causing any offense," the British designer said in a statement. 

He said he would immediately seek help for his "failures." People close to Dior said the 50-year-old designer has been suffering from alcohol addiction and that it impacted his ability to work.

Dior is part of the luxury-goods empire of  Bernard Arnault, chief of LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton. Mr. Galliano was handpicked by Mr. Arnault in 1996 to become the creative chief of Dior. A successor hasn't yet been named.

Mr. Galliano's apology is his first comment since he allegedly made anti-Semitic comments during a bar brawl last week and in a separate incident caught on video and circulated on the Internet this week. The Paris prosecutor's office said it will send Mr. Galliano to trial for the comments. Under French law, making anti-Semitic remarks is illegal and punishable with up to six months in prison. 

Mr. Galliano is expected to appear in court between April and June. The decision follows several hours of hearings Monday as part of the police investigation. 

However, Mr. Galliano also said he was a victim in the bar brawl. He said he would contest the anti-Semitic and racist accusations stemming from last week's dispute at La Perle, a trendy bar in Paris. 

"I completely deny the claims made against me," he said in the statement. 

Mr. Galliano alleges he suffered verbal harassment and an assault with a chair when another bar patron took "violent exception to my look and my clothing." 

Mr. Galliano confirmed that he has filed a defamation claim. "I have fought my entire life against prejudice, intolerance and discrimination, having been subjected to it myself," he said in his statement issued Wednesday. "In all my work my inspiration has been to unite people of every race, creed, religion and sexuality by celebrating their cultural and ethnic diversity through fashion.. That remains my guiding light."

The French fashion house dismissed Mr. Galliano Tuesday after the video, which appeared to show Mr. Galliano slurring insults such as "I love Hitler" to people sitting next to him at a bar in Paris. He was already suspended following last week's bar brawl, pending a police investigation, which is ongoing.

Though his words have already cost him his job with Dior, he also designs his eponymous label, which belongs to the French fashion house. 

Dior hasn't clarified Mr. Galliano's status with his own brand. Both labels—Dior and John Galliano—plan to go ahead with their catwalk shows during Paris Fashion Week in the coming days.

The design team at Dior has been scrambling to put the finishing touches on the show, which wasn't done before the ax came down on Mr. Galliano Tuesday. 

The show is scheduled for Friday.

—Max Colchester contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Christina Passariello at christina.passariello@wsj.com 