One set of siblings consisted of a medical student with a literary bent and her oddball brother. The other set included two rich sisters, whose father had been a Confederate sympathizer. They met up in Baltimore and then made their mark in Paris, where they acted as patrons to the likes of Pablo Picasso and Henri Matisse—and helped change the history of art.

Next month, separate exhibitions on both U.S. coasts will recall the lives of these great collectors: Leo and Gertrude Stein and the Cone sisters, Claribel and Etta. 

On Friday New York's Jewish Museum will open "Collecting Matisse and Modern Masters: The Cone Sisters of Baltimore." The roughly 80 artworks and other objects include masterpieces from the Baltimore Museum of Art's Cone Collection by Paul Gauguin, Picasso and Paul Cézanne. A rich sampling of Matisse includes his majestic 1935 "Large Reclining Nude."

Then, on May 21, the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art will open "The Steins Collect: Matisse, Picasso and the Parisian Avant-Garde." 

The Cone Collection, bequeathed to the Baltimore museum upon Etta's death in 1949, is nearly intact. By contrast, Leo and Gertrude's collection was divided after the two had a falling-out in the early 1910s. Each began selling or trading away works. Art scholars have sought for a decade to track down every work of art they once owned, as well as important holdings of Matisse and others assembled by the Steins' older brother Michael and his wife, Sally. The curators have managed to assemble 155 works for the show.

The Steins and Cones, children of German-Jewish immigrants, led intertwined lives. Some critics say that the famous Stein salon in Paris, where many of the inaugural works of European modernism filled the walls, had its origins in the Cones' cultural Baltimore evenings. Eventually, Michael and Sally started a rival Paris salon, which came to promote Matisse as much as Gertrude promoted Picasso, and Michael helped the Cones put their giant Matisse collection together.

Some paintings could be in both shows. Matisse's innovative 1907 work "Blue Nude," on view in San Francisco, was first bought by Leo and Gertrude, then acquired by the Cone sisters some two decades later. Katy Rothkopf, the Baltimore curator who oversees the Cone Collection, says that the Matisse painting, acquired by the Steins not long after it was finished, had a strong impact on Picasso. The Spaniard was so shocked by the work, she says, that it provoked him to create "Les Demoiselles d'Avignon," his great precursor to Cubism, that same year.

Picasso biographer John Richardson argues that Leo Stein sparked Gertrude's passion for Picasso and their circle's interest in Matisse. But within a decade of discovering the painters, Mr. Richardson says, Leo "reacted violently against modern painting, sold virtually everything he had and became a curmudgeon."

The New York show runs through Sept. 25 and will travel to the Vancouver Art Gallery. After the San Francisco show closes on Sept. 6, it will move to Paris's Grand Palais and later to New York's Metropolitan Museum of Art.