SINGAPORE—House prices, wages and other economic issues are expected to dominate Singapore's general election on Saturday. But the expansion of influence by some religious groups, especially Christians, is also triggering debate in the booming Asian financial hub, with possible complications for the country's leadership in the years ahead. 

The founder of modern Singapore, former Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew, made secularism a key plank of the young city-state's social order after it became independent in 1965, and there is no official religion in the country. Mr. Lee, who now serves as "minister mentor" in Singapore's cabinet, believed it was necessary to prevent any of the young nation's main religious groups—including Buddhists, Muslims, Taoists, Hindus and Christians—from asserting dominance, so that Singapore could stay focused on economic growth and racial harmony.

The strategy worked. While other Asian countries, including Malaysia and Indonesia, at times got sidetracked with religious and ethnic divisions in the following years, Singapore powered ahead. In the space of a generation, it became one of the world's richest nations. 

In that time, the country's population has swelled with foreign immigrants and some groups have expanded their influence. Many residents say the city-state's ability to accommodate the growth of religious groups peacefully presents a template for the rest of the world. 

Singapore's opposition candidates are looking stronger than ever in the general election being held Saturday. Take a look at the key players, including Nicole Seah, below, one of the youngest candidates on the ballot.

Saturday's general election is expected to be the most fiercely contested in the country since its independence in 1965. Opposition parties collectively are challenging 82 out of 87 parliamentary seats. Review the major parties.

But maintaining religious harmony has gotten tougher as some groups, especially Christians, have increased their share of the population and taken a more visible role in day-to-day life, expanding churches and weighing in more regularly on local political issues, such as whether to more aggressively regulate the city-state's booming casinos or stand against liberalizing the country's rules against homosexuality.

Christians as a proportion of the population grew to 18% in the last census in 2010, from about 15% a decade earlier and 7% around the time of independence. Local congregations, particularly the city's Pentecostal churches, have expanded dramatically and spent hundreds of millions of dollars on new meeting spaces.

Christians are also heavily represented in the halls of power, with about 40% of Singapore parliamentarians in the term now ending identifying themselves as Christians. In Saturday's polls, roughly half of the incumbent People's Action Party's new candidates vying for seats identify themselves as Christians, according to local media accounts. Comparisons to past years' parliamentary breakdown by faith weren't immediately available and several lawmakers don't make their affiliation public. 

Singapore has seen no violence or outright charges of one group advancing itself at others' expense. But the demographic and electoral trends have raised a red flag with some government officials, who fear it could lead to social divisions and political discord common in more-religious countries, including the U.S., where debates on topics such as abortion have preoccupied policy makers.

If religious groups further expand, they could start to play a bigger role in policy, analysts say. Well-organized religious groups could also create new sources of political power in a city-state that has historically been dominated by a single political organization—Mr. Lee's PAP, which is expected to retain power after Saturday's vote.

"This government hates to have power centers develop that are outside its control, and to have the pulpit as a power center is something that is most unwelcome," says Alex Au, a prominent gay-rights activist and blogger in Singapore.

Government leaders have said they are more concerned about maintaining social order and harmony. Prime Minister Lee Hsieng Loong, the son of Lee Kuan Yew, said in August 2009 that Singapore's pluralistic society can't afford the sorts of culture wars that dominate American public life, adding, "Christians cannot expect this to be a Christian society, Muslims cannot expect this to be a Muslim society, ditto with the Buddhists, the Hindus and the other groups."

The elder Mr. Lee, now 87 years old, has likewise flagged concerns over the future of social cohesion, especially in a series of interviews published this year in the book, "Lee Kuan Yew: Hard Truths to Keep Singapore Going."

Mr. Lee indicated he wasn't terribly worried about "law-abiding" Christians, but warned "if we get a cabinet full of Christians, we may have an intolerant cabinet, we'll not allow that."

He also added concerns about Muslims, who make up 15% of the population. "I would say today, we can integrate all religions and races except Islam," Mr. Lee, who describes himself as nonreligious, said in the interviews. "Muslims socially do not cause any trouble, but they are distinct and separate."

The comments were especially upsetting to Muslims, with one local Islamic group, the Association of Muslim Professionals, describing the comments as "potentially divisive." Mr. Lee softened his rhetoric, saying he stood corrected on his comments and that Malay Muslims have made efforts to integrate.

Religious groups have run afoul of the government in Singapore before. Jehovah's Witnesses was made an unlawful sect in 1972 because of its moral objections to military service, which is compulsory for most males in Singapore.

In 1987, several activists and clergy connected with the Catholic Church were arrested over an alleged Marxist coup plot. The government subsequently instituted religious harmony laws in the early 1990s that made it illegal to incite religious hatred or use religious activities for political purposes.

More recently, large churches have clashed with the government over their expansion plans.

City Harvest Church, a fast-growing nondenominational congregation that is Singapore's largest with 32,000 members, last year spent S$310 million (about $250 million) to buy a stake in Suntec Convention Center, a major real-estate property located in the city's prime downtown area. The goal was to use some of the space for religious meetings and it was widely assumed the group would also gain a share of income from other tenants. Other congregations, such as New Creation Church, have made similar investments.

The government sought to curb such enterprise by restricting the religious use of commercial property to two days a week and banning religious promotional displays in the properties' public areas. It said in a statement it was trying to ensure "the predominant use and character of commercial developments are not eroded, and that such places remain as secular spaces that can be enjoyed by people from all segments of society." City Harvest and New Creation declined to comment.

"We credit the government for maintaining its neutrality in relating to the various religions," said a spokesman for the National Council of Churches of Singapore, an umbrella group representing most mainstream Christian denominations. He added the group encourages member churches to engage with other faiths and maintains friendly contact with leaders of other faith groups.

"The churches have attempted to stamp a Christian identity on the properties they have invested in," Daniel Goh Pei Siong, an associate professor at the National University of Singapore, says. "This has resulted in a public backlash with people asking why these Christians are buying up property and making these spaces exclusively Christian." 

Other fault lines include gambling, which has been opposed by some Christian groups, and homosexuality.

Gay-rights groups have said they believe Singapore is drifting toward a more lenient view of homosexuality, a point the elder Mr. Lee has also made in "Hard Truths." But Christian groups have pushed back.

In 2009, a group of Christians with ties to a local Pentecostal Anglican church gained control of the board of Singapore's main women's rights advocacy organization and sought to "correct" its liberal stance on issues such as homosexuality. They were later voted out of the group.

In the current election season, questions about sexual diversity re-entered the political sphere with a minister from the ruling PAP taking issue with a video showing a Singapore Democratic Party opposition candidate discussing ways to advance the gay-rights cause. The PAP minister, Vivian Balakrishnan, raised questions about whether the party "will now pursue this cause in the political arena."

—Patrick Bartaand Chun Han Wong contributed to this article.