Weak demand for steel in Japan, the world's third-largest consumer, is further depressing spot prices for iron ore and some steel products throughout the world following last week's earthquake.

Spot iron-ore prices continued to fall in Asia by about 3.4% to around $147 a metric ton in the past week. As recently as February, spot iron-ore prices were hovering around $170 a metric ton. 

The price of hot-rolled steel, which is widely used and considered a benchmark product, has fallen about 3.5% to about $735 a metric ton in China since earlier this month. However, prices of hot-rolled steel in the U.S. continue to rise. 

Generally, steel prices in the U.S. tend to lag behind the price trends in Asia. Also, the U.S. market is benefiting from recovering auto and manufacturing sectors.

Japan's pause in iron-ore buying and steelmaking since the disaster is putting more iron ore and steel supply into the world markets. 

"Japan is second-biggest buyer of iron ore in the world," said  Charles Bradford, an analyst with Bradford Research. He said some shipments of iron ore that were on the way to Japan have been turned away since Friday's earthquake and tsunami. 

"Most ports are in Tokyo Bay or south, nowhere near tsunami regions, but whatever iron ore coming in may be redirected to China," Mr. Bradford said.

Additional iron ore flowing into China, already the world's biggest purchaser of the raw material, would give steelmakers there more leverage to pit iron-ore sellers against one another to lower the spot price.

Since China, as the largest consumer, essentially sets the price for spot iron-ore prices around the rest of the world, steelmakers in Asia, South America and Europe are likely to benefit from cheaper and more plentiful supply.

Japan also is a major producer of steel, making about 8% of the world's production. At this point it is unclear how much steel is being made since the earthquake. 

At least four blast furnaces were closed by the earthquake, including Nippon Steel Corp.'s Kimitsu Works, Nippon's Kamaishi Steelworks, a JFE Steel Corp. plant in the Chiba prefecture and Sumitomo Metals Industries Ltd.'s Kashima Steel Works. Kamaishi and Kashima remain offline. 

Most of the country's steel mills are located inland, away from the eastern coast hit by the tsunami. Still, production could be affected by rolling power outages, particularly at power-intensive, electric-arc furnaces, which melt scrap steel to make new product. 

The disruption in Japanese steel production isn't expected to tighten supply to the point where steel prices are expected to rise, because there is enough excess steelmaking capacity in Japan and other countries. 

"Severe port damage and ongoing power shortages may result in further steel production losses," according to a research note by  Alex Tonks, commodity strategist for Merrill Lynch, a subsidiary of Bank of America. "Yet excess capacity within Japan and more significantly China and South Korea will provide an offset. Any reduction in Japan's demand for raw materials used in steelmaking is likely to be offset by increased demand from China, Korea and Taiwan in our view."

Hot-rolled-steel prices in China already had been falling before the earthquake, partly because of excess steel supply and falling iron-ore prices. 

Mr. Bradford, the analyst, said a potential bigger concern in the coming months is rising spot prices for scrap steel. Japan is the world's second-largest exporter of scrap steel, behind the U.S. Scrap steel is melted in electric-arc furnaces to make steel.

Although the devastation in Japan has created much debris, including scrap steel, it has to be processed and bundled first. Mr. Bradford also said Japan's scrap steel may be rejected by other countries over concerns that the scrap may be radioactive. 

"Japan is second biggest exporter of scrap, melting contaminated scrap is a concern," he said.

In other commodity news:

 OIL: Crude futures settled above $100 a barrel for the first time since Monday as Japan claimed modest progress in controlling the crisis at a damaged nuclear plant and as Western countries appeared closer to intervening in Libya. Light, sweet crude for April delivery rose $3.44, or 3.5%, to $101.42 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange. Brent crude for May delivery on the ICE Futures exchange rose $4.30, or 3.9%, to settle at $114.90 a barrel. 

 Write to  Robert Guy Matthews at robertguy.matthews@wsj.com 