Knoedler & Co.  19 E. 70th St.,  (212) 794-0550  Through March 11 

MoMA's "Abstract Expressionist New York" has sparked numerous ancillary shows. This season, New York galleries have mounted focused exhibitions of Lee Krasner, Willem de Kooning, Joan Mitchell, and Hans Hofmann and his students. 

Helen Frankenthaler (b. 1928), employing gestural brushstrokes, bold color shapes and shimmering washes, is considered to be a bridge between Abstract Expressionism and Color Field painting. But she is represented by only one canvas in MoMA's retrospective. Never fitting neatly into a single movement, she occupies a region unto herself. Knoedler, with this career-spanning, three-floor survey comprising paintings, woodcuts and a hand-painted bronze folding screen, has decided to change all that—to reconsider her career and, oddly, to give a devoutly Western painter Asian flair. 

I consider Ms. Frankenthaler's art luminous yet occasionally merely decorative; ultimately too minimal and unstructured for my tastes. But this exhibition has beauty, momentum. 

The large reddish field of "Tattoo" (1983) burns as hazy pressure (think "French"—moments of Mark Rothko, Pierre Bonnard, Titian).

Coming on the eve of New York's Asia Week, it is a fine show if you ignore its premise and dubious catalog essay, written by the Chinese-American art critic and poet John Yau. Mr. Yau, citing the Asian-themed titles of Ms. Frankenthaler's works, surmises—with little or no substantiation—that she is steeped in "Asian art and philosophy" and has had "a long engagement with Asian art." This is news, if not revisionist fantasy, to anyone who knows the artist and her European Modernist-influenced works, whose ambiguous titles were generally arrived at through free-association.

Anyone is entitled to an opinion about what works of art mean, but that opinion needs to meet a minimum standard of intellectual rigor, particularly when it is being advanced by the gallery representing the creator of those works.

Grey Art Gallery, NYU  100 Washington Square E.,  (212) 998-6780  Through March 26 

Esteban Vicente (1903-2001), the only first-generation American Abstract Expressionist born in Spain, is not in "Abstract Expressionist New York," which is why this traveling survey of roughly 80 works, the first pairing of his collages with his small, freestanding sculptures, is not only timely but necessary.

Trained as a sculptor, Mr. Vicente divided his time and moved fluidly between making collages and paintings; so, although this show is not fully representative, it is a fairly accurate portrait. 

Inspired initially by Surrealist, Dadaist and Cubist collage, Mr. Vicente's collages (composed of cut and torn hand-painted paper) are as much drawing as painting.

Improvisation, not concrete structure, is the rule here. Yet there are gems among these rough-cut works. "Number 7" (1950), in which lines spiral through Cubist architecture, is well-constructed yet free-spirited. The collages "Untitled" (1956), in which a turquoise rectangle buoys those of black, white and cream; and "D-1957," in which yellows offset warm gray-violets, twinkle gently, clearly. 

Larger collages, from the 1980s, more colorfully vibrant and subtle, suggest Bonnard-like shimmers. 

But the 20 small painted and plaster-covered abstract wooden sculptures—Constructivist-inspired "toys" evoking figures, animals, trees and crude molecular models (one struts cockily like a rooster)—steal the show.

Tibor de Nagy Gallery  724 Fifth Ave.  (212) 262-5050  Through March 5 

In 1948, John Meyers and Tibor de Nagy, stirred by their love of puppets and the commercial success of Howdy Doody, started the Tibor Nagy Marionette Company. Among the collaborators and puppet makers were Jackson Pollock, Mr. de Kooning, Franz Kline and Virgil Thomson. The company didn't last, but it did entrench Messrs. Meyers and de Nagy among New York School artists and poets, who inspired them, in 1950, to open the Tibor de Nagy Gallery.

This fascinating show, teeming with pictures, poems, graphic design and memorabilia—often word-paintings jointly made by writers and artists—highlights some of the gallery's best and brightest moments of the past 60 years.

A video of Frank O'Hara reading poetry, and two film farces by Rudy Burckhardt—exploring psychotherapeutic transference and money-lust, respectively—add an auditory backdrop to this show, in which artists Nell Blaine, Joe Brainard, Alfred Leslie, Ms. Mitchell, 

Fairfield Porter, Larry Rivers and Trevor Winkfield, and writers John Ashbery, Mr. O'Hara, Ron Padgett and James Schuyler, pay tribute to one another. 

Informative and visually stimulating, "Painters & Poets," unlike many vanity projects, celebrates not the work of a gallery, but that of its writers and artists.

—Mr. Esplund writes about art for the Journal.