LONDON—British Prime Minister David Cameron said Libyan air defenses had been "largely neutralized," allowing enforcement of the no-fly zone over the country. 

Mr. Cameron told the British Parliament that U.K. Typhoon fighters were set to begin their part in enforcing the no-fly zone from a base in southern Italy, a 25-minute flight from Libya. 

British navy Capt. Karl Evans told journalists that, with coalition ships heading into the area, the Libyan navy had been stopped from firing from sea at positions on shore. 

The prime minister told Parliament that Spain contributed four air-defense fighters and tanker aircraft, Canada provided six fighter jets, Norway and Denmark offered 10 fighters combined for the operation. Greece and Spain opened their bases to coalition forces, he said. 

Mr. Cameron appeared to rule out targeting Col. Moammar Gadhafi. That contradicted a comment by U.K. Defense Minister Liam Fox that the Libyan leader was a "legitimate target." 

"I think Libya needs to get rid of Gadhafi," Mr. Cameron said. "But we are responsible for trying to enforce the [United Nations] Security Council resolution. The Libyans will choose their own future," he said. Last week's U.N. resolution authorizing the use of force to protect Libyan civilians didn't call for the removal of Col. Gadhafi, Mr. Cameron said. 

Gen. David Richards, the head of Britain's armed forces, said it was "absolutely not" the plan of the coalition to target Col. Gadhafi. 

The British government has interpreted the U.N. resolution, however, as permitting an attack on the Libyan leader, according to a person familiar with the matter. As a result, the U.K. was keeping open the possibility of targeting Col. Gadhafi, providing that would be consistent with the U.N. resolution's aim of protecting civilians, the person said. 

Mr. Cameron said the U.K. isn't looking to take over the command of the operation from the U.S., as some British newspapers have speculated. He said he wants the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to take over operations, whether under a British, U.S. or French commander. The command could end a hybrid of NATO and various nations acting in conjunction, however, similar to how the International Security Assistance Force acts in Afghanistan, a person familiar with the matter said. 

Mr. Cameron also again declined to rule out the use of British ground forces in the operation, saying the U.N. resolution only blocks the use of ground troops in an occupying force.

Mr. Cameron's comments came during parliamentary debate over U.K. participation in the no-fly zone. All three major parties have said they back British participation.