With only four years in equity research, winning Taiwan analyst Danny Ho attributes his relatively quick rise as a tracker of petrochemical stocks to his previous experience: consulting at a government-sponsored think tank on the textiles industry and at a Singapore-based synthetic-fiber research agency.

"Stock picking isn't just about numbers and modelling, you must be very familiar with the industry and the forces behind the whole macro environment," said Mr. Ho, of Yuanta Investment Consulting.

Mr. Ho, 46, recalled that after the global financial crisis and a hiatus in petrochemical-product buying due to the credit crunch, most analysts expected a release of pent-up demand.

"Many Western-trained analysts believed the demand cycle of petrochemicals would repeat after the financial crisis," he said. "But they missed a very crucial point—the market driver is the emerging markets, not the developed markets, which means the model they relied on wasn't applicable."



Mr. Ho's top pick in 2010 was  China Petrochemical Development Corp., which supplies materials for resin, engineering plastics and synthetic fibers. Mr. Ho put a buy call on the stock near the end of 2009 and kept it in place throughout 2010—a year in which it returned 133%. Other notable picks included Oriental Union Chemical, which posted a 53% return in 2010, and Formosa Plastic, which returned 51%. (Mr. Ho made his buy call in January, so capturing a 49% gain.)

"For emerging markets like China and India, their primary aim of producing is to feed domestic demand, not fighting off competitors and gaining market share," Mr. Ho said. "Without this understanding, one would easily make wrong predictions in capacity utilization and operating margins."

Mr. Ho expects tight nylon supplies and strong demand in China over the next two years—pushing prices higher. His pick to take advantage of the trend: Zig Sheng, which manufactures and distributes textiles and stored up a large inventory of a key feedstock used to create nylon when prices were lower. Other picks for 2011 include textile firms Tainan Spinnin, Lealea and Lan Fa Textile, as Mr. Ho expects cotton prices to remain high through 2012 and demand for polyester to prove resilient. 

— Aries Poon 