Human beings apply their creativity to almost every material imaginable, including living plants. The results may be nothing more than a few pots on a city fire escape. Or they can be the 1,000-plus acres that Pierre S. du Pont turned into the incomparable Longwood Gardens outside Philadelphia. However simple or ­elaborate, a garden is both an expression of the human spirit and a place to restore the soul; "paradise" derives from the ancient Persian word for garden. 

As Wade Graham makes clear in "American Eden," gardens are also a mirror of the culture that produces them. As America evolved from a few colonists ­precariously perched between an ocean and a vast ­wilderness to a continent-spanning behemoth of 300 ­million people, the country's gardens changed too. Mr. Graham, a garden designer with a doctorate in U.S. ­history, is well-suited to ­following the path of American gardening over the years. His chronicle begins almost as soon as America starts and involves native plants as well as those brought from England—many of which (dandelions, for instance) quickly escaped and changed the landscape of the New World.

By the early 18th century, as the wealth of the colonies increased, more elaborate gardens evolved. The public gardens in Williamsburg, Va., for instance, were built largely at the orders of the colony's British governor, Alexander Spotswood, who employed courtyards, terraces and clipped hedges to "define geometric spaces," Mr. ­Graham says. Spotswood was following the taste for Renaissance design that still dominated the English garden. He ­intended the gardens to beautify the town and its new capitol building, but the Williamsburg gardens were also a display of Virginia's wealth and sophistication, a way of announcing: "We're not the backwoods anymore." In fact, the backwoods of log cabins and Indian raids were only a few miles away. 

Mr. Graham calls Thomas Jefferson's Monticello the home of the country's "founding garden," and not ­without reason. Jefferson's influence in gardening was, Mr. Graham argues, as pervasive as his influence in ­public architecture and politics. The Monticello garden "became the model for what an American garden ought to be: a relaxed composition of trees, lawn, shrubs and flowers, informal but self-assured, large but not palatial."

Fortunately for garden historians, Jefferson was a compulsive record keeper, and his "Garden Book" is a cornucopia of facts about what he planted, what worked, what failed and when plants bloomed. But ­Jefferson's garden was, for all its relaxed composition, an aristocrat's private domain. As the U.S. grew ­explosively in the 19th century, the urban public's access to greenery and fresh air declined. In 1776, one could have walked from New York's business district to the countryside in 20 minutes. By 1850 it would have taken hours. The solution: Bring the countryside to town.

 By Wade Graham  (Harper, 459 pages, $35)

Adding a bit of country to city settings occurred in many places, but New York's Central Park, designed by Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux, is ­unsurpassed. Central Park may seem to afford an ­intoxicating sense of the natural world for captive city-dwellers, but its appearance is almost totally artificial. Beginning in the late 1850s, Olmsted and Vaux leveled hills to fill in swamps, dug out lakes and installed ­artificial brooks to give New Yorkers the illusion of a natural landscape, much as ­Lancelot "Capability" Brown had done for aristocratic clients a century earlier in ­Britain. Central Park, in other words, was a rich man's pleasure garden for the public, in keeping with reforms and public improvements of the ­Victorian age.

As the U.S. expanded westward, Americans imported English tastes again by following the imperatives of the Arts and Crafts movement, with its emphasis on ­simplicity and naturalism. The result was, for instance, the gardens in Grosse Pointe, Mich., where prominent designer Ellen Biddle Shipman executed 44 commissions, Mr. Graham says, and "embraced the Arts & Crafts ­garden's synthesis of formal and informal, structured to wild." California, with climates and sensibilities—in the verdant north and the desert south—so different from the East Coast's, showed the Arts and Crafts influence but also produced its own garden culture of bountiful flowers, palm trees and orange orchards.

As inner cities decayed in the mid- and late 20th ­century, their parks decayed too. But recent decades have seen a revival in many urban parks, often undertaken by private organizations rather than public bureaucracies, and even the claiming of new parkland from blighted space. A prime example: the marvelous High Line in downtown Manhattan, where an abandoned elevated rail line was an eyesore until its conversion to a slender strip of flowers and grasses with spectacular views of the cityscape.

Mr. Graham recounts his tale with considerable verve and a vast erudition in the history of gardening and the arts generally. He is a little less sure-footed with other ­aspects of American history. We're told, for instance, that the settlers in Virginia were more wealth-oriented than their more religious New England contemporaries. But while the Puritans might have been intent on building a shining city on a hill, they also regarded economic success as a sign of God's grace and pursued wealth every bit as energetically. Puritans often put at the head of their ­ledgers: "In the name of God and profit." Mr. Graham also has factory farming developing in the mid-19th century and emptying out the rural population. But while the ­percentage of Americans engaged in agriculture has been declining almost since the country was born, rural ­America was expanding through much of the 19th century and did not begin its decline until well into the 20th.

But these miscues amount to little more than an ­occasional weed in the pleasing green expanse of "American Eden." Among much else, Mr. Graham shows us that the history of how our nation grew can be found in what it has grown.

 Mr. Gordon is the author of "An Empire of Wealth: The Epic History of American Economic Power." 