  Research In Motion Ltd. posted a 32% jump in quarterly profit, but the BlackBerry maker warned of lower earnings and revenue in the current period. Shares fell about 11% in Friday afternoon trading.

The Waterloo, Ontario, company also said it plans to allow Android applications to run on its PlayBook tablet computer, due out next month. The move will greatly expand the number of apps available on the PlayBook. But it is a concession by RIM, as it has struggled to compete against  Apple Inc.
AAPL


0.90
%




 and a slew of devices running  Google Inc.'s Android software.

The number of third-party apps available on the Apple and Android platforms is in the hundreds of thousands, dwarfing the approximately 20,000 apps available on RIM's BlackBerry App World store.

RIM said it shipped 14.9 million BlackBerrys in the quarter ended Feb. 26, near the top of its guidance of 14.5 million to 15 million units, but below the 16.2 million iPhones Apple sold in its December quarter.

RIM has set the North American launch of the PlayBook for April 19. Executives said Thursday the tablet's rollout wouldn't be affected by the quake in Japan.

The PlayBook launch comes as RIM struggles to compete in the U.S. and increasingly relies on sales in emerging markets for its growth, where cheaper models make up more of sales.

The competition is coming in both the consumer and corporate markets, the latter of which RIM has traditionally dominated.

In the February ended quarter, RIM earned $934 million, or $1.78 a share, compared with $710 million, or $1.27 a share a year ago. Revenue was $5.56 billion, up from $4.08 billion a year ago.

For the current quarter, which ends in May, RIM forecast earnings of $1.47 to $1.55 a share on revenue of $5.2 billion to $5.6 billion. The outlook is below the Thomson Reuters mean estimates for the quarter of earnings of $1.65 a share on revenue of $5.64 billion. 

RIM said the guidance reflects a shift toward cheaper handsets and an increased level of investments for research and marketing, especially for its tablet. The range is also wider than usual "to reflect the risk of potential disruption in RIM's supply chain as a result of the recent earthquake in Japan," it said. 

RIM, which typically forecasts earnings and revenue for only one quarter, took the rare step of providing full-year earnings guidance, forecasting fiscal 2012 earnings in excess of $7.50 a share.

On a conference call, RIM co-Chief Executive  Jim Balsillie said RIM has a powerful product roadmap starting in the company's fiscal second quarter. This, coupled with the PlayBook launch, will drive strong sales volumes and help RIM achieve its earnings target, he said.

Shares of RIM fell $7.28 to $56.81 in Friday afternoon trading, after ending the 4 p.m. Nasdaq session Thursday at $64.08, up $1.97. 

 Write to  Stuart Weinberg at stuart.weinberg@dowjones.com 