MADRID—Spain's National Court said Friday it has issued an international order to extradite  John Demjanjuk, an alleged former concentration camp guard and former U.S. citizen who is currently on trial in Germany for crimes against humanity. 

Spain wants the 90-year old retired Ohio auto worker to stand trial on separate charges, focusing on his alleged service in the Flossenbuerg camp, in Germany, where 150 Spanish citizens were interned and 60 were killed during World War II. This would be the first trial in Spain—where a number of prominent Nazis lived during the Francoist era—of a former figure of the Nazi regime. 

The National Court is a tribunal with national jurisdiction that handles politically high-profile cases linked to terrorism and white-collar and organized crime, as well as cases of crimes against humanity even if they don't involve Spanish citizens. Over the years, its judges have handled numerous high-profile global cases, including some against the governments of China and Israel and allegations of U.S. torture at Guantánamo Bay. 

Mr. Demjanjuk, who was born in Ukraine and moved to the U.S. in 1952, is on trial in Germany since late 2009, on charges that he was a member of the notorious Waffen-SS serving in the Sobibor death camp in occupied Poland. He is charged with 28,060 counts of accessory to murder, but denies ever having been a guard, saying he only served as a soldier with the German army. Previously he had served in the Soviet Union's Red Army, until his capture by German forces in 1942.

Mr. Demjanjuk gained global relevance in the late 1980s, when he was stripped of his U.S. citizenship and extradited to Israel, where he was sentenced to death on charges that he was "Ivan the Terrible," a notorious guard at the death camps. However, an Israeli court eventually acquitted him, calling it a case of mistaken identity, and sent him back to the U.S. He was later extradited to Germany on separate charges.

German authorities now must decide whether they will allow Mr. Demjanjuk's extradition to Spain at the conclusion of the current trial. 

Spain was non-belligerent but friendly to Nazi Germany during most of World War II. However, Spanish dictator  Francisco Franco let tens of thousands of Jewish refugees escape Nazi-occupied Europe across Spanish borders—even though Franco later allowed Waffen-SS members like Belgium's  Leon Degrelle and Austria's  Otto Skorzeny to live in Spain after the war. 



 Write to  David Roman at david.roman@dowjones.com 