MELBOURNE, Australia—U.S. optical-fiber maker  Corning Inc.
GLW


0.00
%




 won the first major contract for the $35.6 billion national Internet broadband-network project that the government hopes will improve broadband speed across Australia. 

Australian government-owned NBN Co. awarded three equipment contracts for network infrastructure over the next five years with the largest—valued at as much as 1.2 billion Australian dollars (US$1.19 billion)—going to Corning.

Italy's  Prysmian
PRY


0.50
%




 SPA and Melbourne-based Warren & Brown Technologies won smaller orders valued at up to A$300 million and A$110 million, respectively. 

Australia's largest infrastructure project is planned to reach more than 13 million homes and businesses within 10 years, and will boost technology companies like  Apple Inc.
APPL


19.38
%




 and Samsung Electronics Co. Ltd., whose gadgets are hobbled by poor Internet connectivity outside the country's cities. 

"This is a very significant day for NBN Co.," said  Mike Quigley, NBN's chief executive Monday. "Part of our purchasing strategy is to make a substantial upfront purchase commitment to encourage suppliers to invest in their Australian supply chain ramp-up as we head to volume rollout." 

Corning will invest about A$25 million at its Melbourne facility while Prysmian plans to spend an extra A$13 million on plant and equipment in Sydney. The initial contracts will create 400 new manufacturing jobs in Australia. 

"Corning is fully committed to the NBN rollout," said  Rainer Dittrich, managing director of Corning Cable Systems in Australia. 

NBN Co. is negotiating many deals in relation to the network, the main one being with Australia's largest telecommunications company  Telstra Corp. to access its infrastructure. The company has already awarded contracts to Nokia Siemens Networks valued at up to A$400 million over 10 years and an initial deal with  Alcatel-Lucent
ALU


-0.25
%




 valued at A$70 million. 

Mr. Quigley said despite flooding around Australia, he doesn't expect much impact on the rollout timetable for the project, which was faced sharp criticisms from Australia's opposition parties who question the price tag of the network. 

The opposition has repeatedly called for a cost-benefit analysis of the project, which the government has rejected. 

Opposition communications and broadband spokesman  Malcolm Turbull says a cost benefit analysis "would look at the various means of achieving the agreed end of universal and affordable broadband and then identify those that were most cost effective and efficient."