The federal judge who was shot dead Saturday at a political event in Tucson, Arizona was there to thank U.S. Congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords for backing his effort to get more judicial support for the swelling numbers of immigration cases in his district, according to two U.S. federal judges.

In an interview, Michael Hawkins, U.S. Circuit Court Judge of the Ninth Circuit in San Francisco, said Judge Roll had recently asked Ms. Giffords to sign a letter to Alex Kozinski, the chief judge of the Ninth Circuit, to help convince the court to declare his federal judicial district a judicial emergency due to the high number of immigration and border control cases that were being heard in that district. Judge Kozinski, in an interview, confirmed that he received the letter.

A judicial emergency would allow judges to delay a trial because there were not enough bodies to hear the case. Rep. Giffords, an Arizona Democrat, signed the letter, along with the Rep. Ed Pastor, according to a copy of the letter viewed by the Wall Street Journal.

Judge Roll called Ms. Giffords within the last couple of days to thank her for signing the letter; she mentioned she was doing a constituent event in the area where he lived so he decided to attend the event to thank her, according to Judge Hawkins.

Judge Roll and Ms. Giffords were shot Saturday along with 16 others, outside a Safeway in Tucson. The shooting left six dead, including Judge Roll, local law enforcement officials said. Local hospital officials said that Ms. Giffords had survived a gunshot wound to the head after emergency surgery and was likely to recover.

The letter signed by Rep. Giffords and Rep. Pastor, outlined the challenge Judge Roll faced in handling a growing caseload. "The District of Arizona is simply overworked and understaffed...Much of the District's caseload is a direct result of the crisis at the U.S.-Mexico border. Judicial resources in the District of Arizona are simply unable to keep pace with this escalating crisis at the border."

Judge Kozinski said he moved a meeting from a weekday to a Sunday later this month so that Judge Roll - too busy with cases during the week -- could present the case.

"It's a horrible tragedy. He was one of the most active hardest working judges in our district court," Judge Kozinski said. "He was a very active chief judge, always trying to get more resources for his underserved district."The conservative Judge Roll, who was appointed by the first George Bush to the court, had worked for Judge Hawkins as a prosecutor when Judge Hawkins was a U.S. Attorney in Arizona.

 Write to  Alexandra Berzon at alexandra.berzon@wsj.com 