Will 2011 be the year that Angela Merkel finds her euro-mojo? 

The German Chancellor has certainly started the year in a manner that suggests that she has had enough of people calling her weak and "konzeptlos" when it comes to leading Europe out of its debt crisis. 

Her televised address to the nation at New Year may have lacked the passion of her speech to the Bundestag in December ahead of an EU summit, but it gave no comfort either to nostalgic enthusiasts of the deutsche mark, or to the unreconstructed Euro-skeptics of London. It's worth repeating the key parts in full: "We have to strengthen the euro, and it is not only a question of money. The euro is more than just a currency. It is our good fortune that we Europeans are united. A united Europe is the guarantor for our peace and our freedom. The euro is the basis of our economic well-being. Germany needs Europe and our common currency, for our own good, and for coping with global challenges." 

The echoes of  Helmut Kohl are unmistakable and deliberate: the euro is a symbolic and political project; economics and politics are inseparable; and, most of all, Germany cannot contemplate a future based on anything other than partnership within Europe, and God be praised for that. 

It is the rhetoric that characterized the post-war generation, and still does characterize what remains of it. It is conspicuous that the only senior figure in the coalition to talk convincingly in Europe in those terms is 68-year-old Finance Minister  Wolfgang Schäuble, a Kohl protege. His counterparts at last year's Ecofin meetings may have bridled at how rigidly he defended the German line, but they can be thankful that they had to deal with a man who remembers how much Germany needs Europe. They should breathe no sighs of relief if he is forced to retire this year because of ill health. 

The crisis that is now in its fourth year is, in fact, the first of many since the World War II when Europe has had to deal in earnest with a generation of German politicians with no memories of the helplessness and devastation of the post-war period. Ms. Merkel's own formative years were spent in the heady days of national reunification, and some of her ministers barely remember Nena's 99 Red Balloons, let alone the Marshall Plan or Willy Brandt's gesture of penance at the Warsaw Ghetto memorial. 

Among younger Germans, and particularly among younger German journalists, it seems it has become fashionable to think that the economic relations between Germany and the rest of Europe, and Germany and the rest of the world, have changed so much that the original rationale for monetary union no longer adds up. 

Demand for German products from emerging markets such as China and India, so the argument goes, is so well entrenched that the country can, effectively, do without the deadweight that is Greece and the rest of the euro zone's periphery. We have put our house in order, and if Greece and Spain can't do the same, then tough luck. 

There is no lack of figures to back the argument up: over the first three quarters of last year, exports to China were up 45.7% from a year earlier, while those to the euro zone were only up 13.5%. Exports to France, long considered the most important German export market of all, were up a paltry 11.3%, while those to Turkey were up 35.5%. Even Russia, the only one of the big emerging market economies to have a serious recession and problems returning to growth, took 26% more German goods in the first nine months of last year than in the same period in 2009. 

But it's a commonly German preoccupation to focus on visible trade flows. A look at the financial interconnectedness between Germany and the rest of Europe makes clear that any notion of being able to act independently of Europe is illusory. 

German banks had $548 billion—or €446 billion at prevailing exchange rates—at risk in the five problem countries of the euro zone as of June, according to the Bank for International Settlements. They had €392 billion of capital and reserves, according to the Deutsche Bundesbank. Thus, it doesn't matter whether Germany tries to withdraw from monetary union, or have fiscal sinners expelled from it: the credit losses and writedowns caused by the ensuing currency moves would effectively bankrupt the German banking system, even before manufacturers start shifting jobs to cheaper locations as capital that had been stored in the euro gets reallocated to the new  D-Mark. The economy as Germany knows it today would not survive, but it would still fare better than the country's political reputation, which would be shattered by the dismantling of the EU's most ambitious project. 

For a country that prizes stability above all else in economic matters, further debate should be superfluous. 

The trouble for Ms. Merkel is—if you know all this to be true, how do you stop your counterparts from gaming you? Just as importantly, how do you do that while persuading panicky financial markets to keep their heads? 

 Write to  Geoffrey Smith at geoffrey.smith@dowjones.com 