HONG KONG -- Most major Asian markets advanced Monday as news of Al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden's death in a U.S. attack boosted sentiment, lifting Japanese and South Korean stocks sharply higher and pulling Australian shares off five-week lows.

"This doesn't mean terrorism will come to an end, but it's a positive trading incentive since the manhunt has been going on for more than a decade," said Kazuhiro Takahashi, general manager at Daiwa Securities in Tokyo. He added that buying on this news will likely be short term as attention shifts back to the state of the U.S. economy.

Japan's Nikkei Stock Average climbed 1.6% to 10,004.20, reclaiming the 10,000-point level for the first time since March 14, while South Korea's Kospi added 1.7%. Australia's S&P/ASX 200, which was down more than 1% at one point, erased those losses to finish little changed.

Markets in China, Hong Kong, Singapore, Malaysia, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam were shut for a public holiday.

Trade was thin in Japan with many investors away for the Golden Week holidays. Tokyo markets will be shut from Tuesday and will reopen Friday.

The day's performance came after U.S. President Barack Obama announced that U.S. forces had killed bin Laden in a firefight in Pakistan. The news added to gains in the U.S. dollar and the U.S. index futures, in addition to spurring Asian stocks.



Dow Jones Industrial Average futures were recently up 90 points in screen trade.

In Japan, the yen weakened on news of bin Laden's death, spurring shares of exporters. Canon Inc. and Sony Corp. each climbed 2.5%, while Advantest Corp. and Komatsu Ltd. added 3% each.

Panasonic Corp. climbed 2.8% after announcing cost-cutting plans.

Mizuho Financial Group Inc. rose 3.1% after unveiling the exchange ratios for turning group companies into wholly owned subsidiaries; Mizuho Securities Co. lost 5.9%.

Australian shares hit a five-week low during the session as the Australian dollar rallied to a 29-year high. But the market recovered on news of bin Laden's death.

"The short-term reaction looks positive, but it's hard to know how the markets will ultimately react (to bin Laden's death)," said IG Markets institutional dealer Chris Weston.

Financial stocks and major miners supported the recovery, with Macquarie Group Ltd. rising 3.2% and National Australia Bank Ltd. rising 0.7%, while BHP Billiton Ltd. and Rio Tinto Ltd. added 0.7% and 0.6%, respectively.

Ranking among decliners, Woodside Petroleum Ltd. slipped 1%, pressured by weakness in crude-oil prices.

"The Aussie dollar is obviously a concern for the Australian share market at these levels," said MarketsPlus's head of sales trading, Scott Johnson. "We are waiting for potentially good results from the banks this week, but there's a little bit of apprehension in the broader market."

The bin Laden news raised hopes that geopolitical risks in the Middle East could be reduced, and that sent Nymex June crude-oil futures down $1.44 to $112.49 a barrel on Globex.

In Seoul, construction plays were helped by a government plan unveiled Sunday to restructure financially stricken local builders. Hyundai Engineering & Construction Co. rose 1.1% and Daewoo Engineering & Construction Co. climbed 2.2%.

Hopes that the won's strength would encourage more South Koreans to undertake air travel lifted shares of Korean Air Lines Co. and Asiana Airlines Inc. 6.6% and 11.5%, respectively.

The Sensex declined 0.7% in Mumbai afternoon trading, meanwhile, amid worries that the Reserve Bank of India would raise interest rates again after its meeting Tuesday to control high prices. Shares of State Bank of India tumbled 3.8% and Icici Bank Ltd. dropped 1.2%, while Maruti Suzuki Ltd. gave up 2%.

Elsewhere, Indonesian stocks rose 0.5% by late afternoon. Earlier in the day, New Zealand's NZX 50 and Philippine shares finished 0.5% and 0.2% higher, respectively.

The U.S. dollar was buoyed against major currencies in Asia on Monday following the news of bin Laden's death, although trade was thin. The U.S. dollar index, which measures the greenback against a basket of six global currencies, rose 0.11, or 0.2%, to 73.15.

The dollar was at 짜81.43, against 짜81.20 in late New York trade Friday. The Australian dollar, which climbed as high as $1.1011 earlier in the day, had more recently pulled back to $1.0947.

The Korean currency jumped as high as 1,062.90 won to a U.S. dollar, bolstered by news of a larger-than-expected trade surplus of $5.82 billion in April. It was recently at 1,064.28 won.

Meanwhile, the euro recovered from the day's lows against major rivals, with traders watching the European Central Bank's policy meeting Thursday, and U.S. April jobs data due Friday for clues to market direction over the next week.

The common currency, which hit a low of $1.4762 and 120.03 yen earlier in the day, was more recently at $1.4813 versus $1.4810 in late New York trade Friday, and at 짜120.63 against 짜120.28.

Trade in precious metals was choppy as spot silver suffered one of its most severe intraday drops early Monday; the metal plunged from the day's high of $48.15 a troy ounce to $42.21, before recovering. It was more recently at $44.76.

Spot gold prices, meanwhile, dipped to a low of $1,539.50 a troy ounce in volatile trade Monday amid a broad-based commodities sell-off and the bin Laden news. More recently, it was at $1,552.10, down $13.60 from its New York settlement Friday.

 Write to  Colin Ng at colin.ng@dowjones.com 