 China and Brazil announced commercial agreements, including an order worth up to $1.5 billion for Brazilian aircraft from Chinese companies, during a summit by the two countries in Beijing which comes at a time when Brazil has become increasingly frustrated with Chinese trade practices.  

 U.S. stocks slumped after falling oil prices dragged energy stocks sharply lower, adding to disappointment over Alcoa's lackluster sales and a grim reassessment of Japan's crippled nuclear-power plant.  

 Asian shares fell, undermined by Japan's declaration that its nuclear crisis is on the level of the Chernobyl disaster and by the IMF's prediction that global economic growth is likely to slow this year as risks emerge.  

Top Federal Reserve officials signaled that the U.S. was unlikely to follow the ECB in raising interest rates anytime soon. 6 

 The U.S. trade gap narrowed in February but still suggests a drag on the economy.  

 Growth in global oil demand may be slowing, the IEA said, while Saudi Arabia reversed a late-February production increase because of tepid demand.  

 Intel is starting a joint research center with Tencent Holdings of China to develop technologies for tablet-style computers in the Chinese market.  

 Final bids submitted for Shanghai Motel came in below the $1 billion expected, possibly derailing the sale. Shanghai Motel operates the Motel 168 brand in China.  

 Nokia unveiled two new smartphones in an attempt to stem its drop in market share as the struggling handset giant transitions to using Microsoft software. 20  

 Cisco will curtail some of its consumer operations, including shutting its Flip video business, admitting that its campaign to build a consumer brand has largely failed.  

 South Korea's central bank left interest rates unchanged at 3%, as expected, but hinted afterward that it will likely resume tightening in the coming months.  

 SB LiMotive will invest $500 million by 2013 to add one or two more car-battery production lines in Korea. The joint venture between Samsung SDI and Robert Bosch may also expand its production facilities beyond Asia.  

 The dollar pared its losses after hitting its lowest levels in more than a year against a basket of major currencies, as short-term positioning momentarily overrode concerns about the U.S. fiscal and monetary-policy outlook.  

 Japanese officials are increasing their focus on protecting the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear complex from earthquakes and tsunamis, after problems following strong aftershocks showed officials are unprepared for another major incident.  

Moammar Gadhafi's forces fired rockets along the eastern front line and shelled the besieged city of Misrata, as France said NATO should be doing more to take out the regime's heavy weaponry targeting civilians.

Former Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak was hospitalized at a Red Sea resort on the day he was set to be summoned for questioning by prosecutors over corruption allegations and abuse of power.

Yemenis demonstrated across the country against a mediation proposal by neighboring Gulf nations because it offers the president immunity from prosecution.

A U.N. report declared that the Palestinian Authority is ready to operate as a sovereign government in a range of areas but cautions that state-building gains will be limited without progress on peace negotiations.

Militiamen and soldiers loyal to Ivory Coast's defeated president Laurent Gbagbo have started surrendering their weapons.

 Indonesia chose South Korea's state-run aircraft maker as the preferred supplier for a set of fighter jets that will be used to train military pilots.  

The toll in the Belarus subway bombing rose to 12 dead and more than 200 wounded, and authorities said several people have been detained in what they are calling a terrorist attack. The opposition voiced fears that the government would use the attack to launch an increased crackdown on dissent.

Cambodia has stopped plans to develop a titanium mine in a protected forest, winning praise from environmentalists in a country better known for rampant deforestation.