WASHINGTON—Chinese President Hu Jintao, on the third day of his state visit, pressed his message that deeper cooperation is good for the U.S. and China, while U.S. lawmakers sought to pin him down on points of contention.

Neither was fully successful.

During a speech at a lunch organized by the U.S.-China Business Council, among the most sympathetic venues to Beijing in Washington, Mr. Hu said China seeks investment by foreign firms to boost economic development. He urged the two nations "forge a framework of broader and stronger economic cooperation" and cited such "new areas" for collaboration as aviation, space, infrastructure and clean energy.

Work in those fields would make business ties "even stronger," he said. China has long sought U.S. approval for the export of U.S. high-technology goods and services that are blocked because they could have military uses.

Mr. Hu sketched what he said was a five-point plan for improving relations over the next decade, which amounted to greater cooperation between the sides and a commitment not to let individual disputes derail overall improvements. He pledged that China would "never seek hegemony or pursue an expansionist policy" in foreign affairs.

The only discordant note he struck involved Tibet and Taiwan, which he said "concern China's sovereignty and territorial integrity" and represent China's "core interest." Those longstanding Chinese claims aren't contested by the U.S.



Perhaps more tellingly, Mr. Hu didn't name the disputed South China Sea area alongside Tibet and Taiwan. The U.S. and China have sparred over that area. Rather, he said U.S. and Chinese cooperation were important for advancing the Asia-Pacific region.

While the business audience was largely appreciative—he received two standing ovations— several attendees said they had heard similar words before and one said he could have recited most of the speech by memory.

Rob Nichols, head of the Financial Services Forum, a trade group of large financial firms, said he wanted to make sure Mr. Hu's vow of continued openness to investment included financial companies. Former U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor that the lack of specifics wasn't surprising. "No president will walk into a business audience and start negotiating." 

Earlier in the day, China's critics in Congress had two shots at Mr. Hu during separate meetings in the House and Senate. Lawmakers pressed him on a variety of issues, including trade policy, human rights and forced abortion resulting from the country's one-child policy. None said they made much progress and several lawmakers said they were frustrated that the sessions didn't allow for give and take, because of the time needed for translation and because Mr. Hu gave lengthy and nonspecific answers.

 If our politicians keep blaming China like this instead of correcting our own problems, we surely will go down the toilet faster. 

—Ken Phillips

Mr. Hu met with House members for about an hour, but only House Speaker John Boehner (R., Ohio) and House Minority Leaders Nancy Pelosi (D., Calif.) asked questions. Rep. Pelosi, a longtime critic of China, asked Mr. Hu about the Tibetan freedom movement and Liu Xiaobo, the jailed dissident who wasn't allowed to travel to Oslo to pick up his Novel Peace Prize, lawmakers said.

On the Senate side, lawmakers huddled with Mr. Hu in the office of Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid and included Senate Foreign Relations Committee Chairman John Kerry (D., Mass.) and the top Republican on the panel Sen. Richard Lugar (R., Ind.), as well as Sen. John McCain (R., Ariz.). 

Notably absent was Democratic Sen. Charles Schumer of New York, a frequent China critic who earlier this week predicted Congress in the coming months would pass legislation targeting China's currency policy. Rep. Sander Levin of Michigan, the top Democrat on the influential House Ways and Means Committee, plans to introduce a currency bill next week that replicates a measure passed with wide bipartisan support by the House in September.

Administration officials don't feel the legislation, if passed into law, would prompt China to retaliate. But Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner has tried to convince China that Congressional anger is real and that China needs to make changes to head off retaliation.

—Michael R. Crittenden contributed to this article.

 Write to  Michael R. Crittenden at michael.crittenden@dowjones.com 