 Two of the world's biggest jet makers, Bombardier and Empresa Brasileira de Aeronautica, announced agreements aimed at helping them take advantage of an expected rapid rise in demand for aircraft in China.  

 Toyota will resume production of three hybrid models in its home market Monday. The Japanese auto maker expects new parts to arrive next week and will use components that it currently has to begin production.  

 Hong Kong's market for IPOs showed no sign of slowing, as a Shanghai-listed construction-machinery maker laid plans to raise as much as $3 billion and a unit of a Chinese state-owned group raised $658 million.  

 U.S. stocks gained as investors largely looked past the deepening political crisis in Portugal to focus on encouraging earnings from tech companies and U.S. jobs data. In Asia, Japanese shares slipped, while most other markets rose.  

 The Philippine central bank raised overnight rates, at record lows since July 2009, by 0.25 percentage point in an effort to address mounting price pressures.  

 More countries are stopping the import of food products from Japanese prefectures hit by the nuclear crisis, but the impact is expected to be negligible.  

 China may not be able to meet rising food demand from domestic resources, a senior agriculture official said, indicating room for growth in imports.  

 Sands China is in talks with InterContinental Hotels to manage two hotel towers at its expansion project in Macau after a deal with Shangri-La Asia failed.  

 Bank of China, the first of China's major lenders to report earnings, said profit rose 29% to $15.9 billion last year.  

 Credit Suisse CEO Brady Dougan's overall pay fell by a third in 2010, and he didn't receive a cash bonus, after the bank's net profit dropped 24%.  

 Vietnam's inflation rate accelerated and its trade deficit widened in March, showing that imbalances continue to plague the nation's economy.  

 New Zealand narrowly avoided a recession in the fourth quarter, and many economists are guardedly optimistic about prospects in the second half of this year.  

 Qantas raised ticket prices on domestic routes and trips to New Zealand for a second time this year, due to higher oil prices.  

 China's Baidu said it plans to start using new copyright-recognition technology on its online document platform to prevent sharing of pirated content.  

 Li & Fung posted a 27% rise in net profit and said it hopes to more than double its core operating profit by 2013.  

 Military assessments suggested strikes on Gadhafi's ground forces have failed to loosen their siege of the key western city of Misrata, as coalition forces pounded targets of the Libyan regime on the Mediterranean coast and deep inland.  

 Yemeni President Saleh and the country's top general are hashing out a political settlement in which both men would resign from their positions in favor of a civilian-led transitional government, according to three people familiar with the situation.  

 Thousands called for liberty in the Syrian city of Daraa, defying a government crackdown as they took to the streets in funeral marches for protesters killed by police gunfire, an activist said.  

A suicide bomber rammed a car loaded with explosives into a police station in northwestern Pakistan, killing five and injuring more than two dozen people.

A 6.8-magnitude earthquake struck northeastern Myanmar, killing one woman and shaking buildings as far away as Bangkok. 

 North and South Korean scientists are set to meet near their nations' border to discuss volcanic activity at Mt. Baektu, in a rare sign of cooperation that came amid military drills in the South.  

A Japanese court sentenced to death the man convicted for a stabbing rampage in Tokyo last year that left seven people dead.

 New U.S. rules allow investigators to hold domestic-terror suspects longer than others without giving them a Miranda warning.  