Bassist William Parker was simply thinking out loud when he floated the concept of a band devoted to Curtis Mayfield's music. He had just performed at the Banlieues Bleues Festival, near Paris, in 2000. "We were talking about R&B and soul music in the dressing room," he said recently at his East Village apartment, "and I mentioned the idea, the way you do sometimes. I didn't think I'd actually do it."

But Xavier Lemettre, who produces the festival, invited Mr. Parker back for a month-long residency dedicated to the project. The following year, Mr. Parker returned with mostly longtime associates, including drummer Hamid Drake, trumpeter Lewis Barnes and pianist Dave Burrell. He had some tightly conceived but loose-limbed arrangements, and an idea about contrasting singer Leena Conquest's stirring renditions of Mr. Mayfield's lyrics with sharp-edged spoken-word commentary from poet Amiri Baraka. Mr. Parker drew the festival's community in, too, including a 90-member children's choir. It was a success and the start of something larger. 

The band Mr. Parker will bring to (Le) Poisson Rouge on Friday has developed Mr. Mayfield's familiar hits into something Mr. Parker said "works differently each time we do it." His two-CD set "I Plan to Stay a Believer: The Inside Songs of Curtis Mayfield" (AUM Fidelity), among last year's standout releases, chronicles the project thus far, with tracks recorded at performances that span six cities, three countries and eight years. 

The thought of Mr. Parker, 59, playing someone else's music, let alone familiar hits, may surprise his followers: He has been a central figure in New York's avant-garde for the past three decades, and a core presence at the annual Vision Festival, America's essential free-improvisation gathering, for all of its 15 years. In 2010 alone, Mr. Parker's inventive, insistent bass playing anchored not just his Mayfield album but also "Uncle Joe's Spirit House," his freewheeling organ-quartet recording; "Onecept," tenor saxophonist David S. Ware's powerhouse trio release; and a reissue of early 1980s sessions by the quartet Commitment. As a composer, Mr. Parker balances form and freedom to startling effect.

Still, this latest project makes perfect sense. Mr. Mayfield, the singer and guitarist who grew up in Chicago's Cabrini-Green housing project and died in 1999 at 57, lent newfound spiritual uplift to R&B and soul through such 1960s classics as "People Get Ready" and "It's All Right," songs he recorded with the Impressions. His 1970s solo hits—songs like "Freddie's Dead"—offered stark social statements within funk's nascent sound. Mr. Parker has signaled similar inclinations through album titles—1996's "Compassion Seizes Bed-Stuy," for instance—and in less obvious ways. "However abstract, his music usually contains a clarion call for change or awareness or just strength," said Ms. Conquest.

Mr. Parker first heard Mr. Mayfield's songs while growing up in the South Bronx's Melrose housing project. "It was transformative," he said of the music. "It took you from where you were to another place. And musically, it was a step different—its cadence and the way it took shape was, for me, very close to the way jazz gets put together." 

The subtitle of Mr. Parker's recording reflects his belief that within every song lies "an inside song which lives in the shadows, in between the sounds and silences and behind the words, pulsating, waiting to be reborn." 

Mr. Drake, whose work with Mr. Parker is among modern music's rhythmic thrills, hears just that happening. "When we dug into 'People Get Ready,' something clicked," he said. "And then something else very special happened when we went 'inside.' It became almost an orchestral statement."

That sense, palpable at the 2008 Vision Festival, is pretty well captured on the album: A Brooklyn-based choir and punchy horn arrangement give way to Mr. Baraka barking out verse, as hands clap and saxophones squeal. Halfway through, Mr. Burrell shifts his piano cadence, and the choir becomes just another element among shifting blocks of rhythm and melody. Mr. Parker's version of "I'm So Proud," recorded in Amherst, Mass., in 2002, begins with doo-wop piano accompaniment, throwback trumpet and Ms. Conquest singing straight. But soon Mr. Parker, on doson'ngoni, a six-stringed West African harp, alters the form, and an accompanying 10-member chorus chants in the circular patterns of Central African pygmies. When "Freddie's Dead" turns into collective improvisation, it sounds like a natural extension of both Mr. Parker's musical path and the desperation packed within Mr. Mayfield's song.

"It was never the goal to do a cover," said Mr. Parker. "We can't play Curtis Mayfield any better than Curtis Mayfield did. So we do something else, carry his message by making it our own."

—Mr. Blumenfeld writes about jazz for the Journal. 