SHANGHAI—Shanghai's mayor on Friday said the city will impose a controversial tax on property, a move by China's richest city that may be rolled out nationally as authorities scout for new ways to cool housing prices.

Mayor Han Zheng told a rare press conference that Shanghai's ambition as a global center for finance, trade and shipping depends on controlling "distorted" home prices, which he said threaten to drive away talent as people fear being "slaves of their house." The tax is a "future-oriented" policy, the 56-year-old mayor said, adding "If we cannot solve the housing issue, there will be no future for the city of Shanghai."

Unaffordable real-estate is one of the most important factors illustrating the gap between China's growing middle class and its massive population of have-nots, which the ruling Communist Party describes openly as a potential risk to its power.

The country has one the most expensive real-estate markets anywhere relative to the income of its citizens. Global Property Guide, a Manila-based consultancy, says a square meter of property stands at 164 times China's per capita income, compared with 33 times in high-priced Japan.

Nowhere is there more soul searching about real-estate values than in Shanghai, where the debate over whether Chinese society in general has developed as quickly as its real-estate market was revived recently when authorities stood powerless to snuff out a high-rise fire in November and at least 58 people died. 

In addressing reporters for almost three hours Friday, Shanghai's mayor addressed income disparities repeatedly, promising to keep vegetable prices under control, help employees get raises and introduce a 10%-plus increase in the largely symbolic minimum monthly wage of 1,120 yuan in April. Any company that can't afford to pay its employees that much, the mayor charged, has a "broken business model."

There has been no official confirmation of how Shanghai's tax, and a similar one planned in the southwestern metropolis Chongqing, will actually be structured. Local media have generally reported the governments are expected tobase the assessment on formulas that take into account size, occupancy and other factors about property, with a charge that is likely under 1% of a property's value. It is not expected to apply retroactively, but only to new transactions. 

Mr. Han said the tax will be applied hand-in-hand with other measures, including the building of 80,000 affordable units and government-subsidized rental property.

The tax has numerous critics. Buyers and sellers already pay a transaction tax on real-estate deals, as well as other one-time taxes. Also, in China, the government technically owns all land so apartment or house ownership actually is more like a long-term lease, which some say shouldn't be taxed.

Analysts cast doubt on how effective the tax is likely to be, saying powerful factors underpin China's housing prices, including a lack of investment alternatives in a nation where incomes continue to rise quickly.

New CLSA Asia Pacific Markets research cited an 80% ownership rate in urban China already, and noted that its surveys show 70% of consumers expect prices to go on rising. Likewise, Standard Chartered economists, also in new research, said Internet searches of the characters "mai fang," or "buy a home," have been rising since the third quarter of last year, suggesting demand in the short term. And Capital Economics Ltd. analysts said in a recent report "there are plenty of examples outside China of bubbles in property markets which have longstanding property taxes," specifically the U.S. and U.K. 

Plans for the tax are also emerging as Chinese cities sit on enormous, but largely hidden, deficits. In Shanghai, which last year funded a lavish World's Fair, the Shanghai Expo 2010, but hasn't broken down the costs and is now developing a  Walt Disney Co.
DIS


0.30
%




 theme park, Mr. Han pledged to make more government accounts public over the coming year. He said the city also hopes to lead China in implementing a value-added tax on the services industry. 

In speaking about plans for Shanghai's financial-market development, Mr. Han strongly suggested that at least one major city-owned conglomerate will be listed on the local stock market soon. He sounded less certain of when regulators in Beijing will allow foreign companies to issue shares on Shanghai's exchange, though noting, "In my opinion it's definitely the right time."

 Write to  James T. Areddy at james.areddy@wsj.com 