NEW DELHI—Essar Group Friday stepped up its war of words with  Vodafone PLC, accusing the U.K. company of trying to keep the value of Essar's holding in their India telecom joint venture "artificially depressed."



Essar said that its decision to merge two of its units—the issue at the center of the growing storm—is aimed at finding out the value of its total 33% stake in Vodafone-Essar Ltd.

Vodafone owns about 67% of Vodafone-Essar, which was formed in 2007, while Essar Group company Essar Telecommunications Holdings Pvt. Ltd. has 11% and Essar Communications Holdings Ltd. 22%.

Essar wants to merge Essar Telecommunications into listed India Securities Ltd., but Vodafone objects to the deal, saying that it is concerned that the value of India Securities after the merger could be misinterpreted as a fair market value of unlisted Vodafone-Essar.

"Vodafone does not wish a company in which it holds a majority interest to become the subject of a false market," the company said on Tuesday.

But Essar Friday said the proposed merger "is fully compliant with all applicable Indian laws."

It added that it wanted to list Vodafone-Essar in 2010 but Vodafone didn't allow it to go through, and that "no market value could be established."

It called Vodafone's objections to the merger "motivated and factually incorrect."

A Vodafone spokesman, in an initial reaction, wanted to know "exactly what is factually incorrect," but he didn't comment on the other accusations.

Vodafone-Essar is the third-largest mobile phone company by users in one of the world's fastest-growing markets: India has more than 700 million subscribers and is adding more than 15 million a month.

Vodafone unit Vodafone International Holdings B.V. Thursday approached markets regulator the Securities and Exchange Board of India, asking it to investigate the proposed merger, what it claims is inadequate disclosure and violations of insider trading of India Securities shares.

Essar denies any wrongdoing.

The U.K. company has a pact with Essar that gives the Indian diversified conglomerate a put option for its stake, which it can sell to Vodafone for $5 billion between the third and fourth years of the deal's completion, namely until May 2011.

The alternative is that Essar could sell shares worth between $1 billion and $5 billion in the company to Vodafone at a market-determined price.

"If Essar opted for the partial sale to Vodafone, in addition to the market-related payment, Vodafone would also have to pay Essar an additional $725 million sum under an agreement signed between the two groups in July last year," Essar said.

 Write to  R. Jai Krishna at krishna.jai@dowjones.com 