Let's get the proper bouquets out of the way. Steve Lavin's done an exceptional coaching job at St. John's. In his debut season in New York, he's steered the Red Storm into the NCAA tournament for the first time since 2002—and brought new energy to a dormant program. There have been exuberant Madison Square Garden victories over Notre Dame, Connecticut, Duke and Pittsburgh. For a recovering, basketball-starved city, St. John's has been a delight, even more so than the fitful Knicks (though the Knicks will be 49 percent better in 2011-12, according to their recent ticket price hike.)

But let's talk about the crazy Steve Lavin shoes! Sixth-seeded St. John's faces a tough test Thursday against 11 seed Gonzaga—especially with senior D.J. Kennedy sidelined with a knee injury—but blah, blah, blah, Jim Nantz, Jay Bilas and so on. It's all a distraction from the bold coaching fashion move of the season. 

Now don't pretend we're all supposed to be above these superficial things. This is New York City. If you didn't occasionally obsess over superficial things, you wouldn't live here. You'd live in Vermont.

Since January, Lavin has been rocking a pair of bright white Nike Air Force 1s with a suit and no tie. Originally, the sneakers were worn by coach and his staff as a sign of solidarity and awareness during a Coaches vs. Cancer weekend (Coach K did it, too). It was an admirable gesture, and a worthy cause.

But after the Red Storm rolled off a few big victories, the white shoes stuck around. It's not quite Louie Carnesecca's technicolor sweater, but it's a conspicuous sight at Red Storm games—the well-groomed coach roaming the sideline in a handsome suit and retina-blinding kicks.



And it is an...intriguing sartorial choice. It's not Andre-Leon-Talley-screaming-with-his-hands-over-his-eyes wrong. It's not Rick Pitino decked out like Colonel Sanders. It's not Bob Huggins dressed for an 18-hour Greyhound ride. 

But Lavin's trying to pull off something tricky here. As a men's fashion maneuver, Sneakers & a Suit has a high degree of difficulty—"a risky move that can pay off big," says the editor-in-chief of Men's Health, David Zinczenko. 

Executed properly, Sneakers & a Suit can give the wearer a youthful, mildly rebellious look. Done poorly, you look like a guy who forgot his Rockports on the Metro North. Or thrice-divorced motivational speaker prowling through a Hamptons cocktail party.

Lavin's sneaker-suit combination is enthusiastic, but not yet perfect. 

"There's a way to wear sneakers with a suit, but this ain't it," says GQ senior editor Will Welch. "The hems of his pant legs are flopping around, and they don't sit right on Air Force 1s, which are low-top basketball shoes and a hip-hop staple, but not really meant to be worn with an otherwise conservative suit."

If Lavin insists on sneakers, Zinczenko recommends that Lavin try a simpler shoe, like a John Varvatos Converse All-Star. If the coach sticks with the Air Force 1—Nike is a St. John's sponsor—GQ's Welch suggests that Lavin narrow the cut of his suit, with slimmer, tapered pants, for less billowing around the ankles. 

"And if he's going to wear slimmer pants, he'll need a shorter, hipper jacket, too," Welch says. 

See? Fashion is a complicated endeavor—maybe even more so than stopping Gonzaga. 

Of course, all that matters to Lavin is that St. John's keeps on winning. If he gets to the Final Four, the thriving coach can go barefoot. Or even wear man sandals. 

 Write to  Jason Gay at jason.gay@wsj.com 