TOKYO—Iwaki, on the coast of northeastern Japan, is just outside the danger zone Japan's government has set around the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear-power complex, but the city isn't taking any chances.

After Tuesday's revelation that radiation levels had spiked around the troubled complex, Iwaki began telling its 340,000 citizens to stay home, close windows and doors and keep out of the rain, which was forecast for Wednesday. 

"We're talking about radioactive substances after all," said Iwaki public-relations officer Takahiro Kuboki. Considering how winds and rain can spread radiation over longer distances, "even areas that are outside the 18-mile radius may get affected."

Japanese authorities were evacuating people within a 12-mile radius and telling those within an 18-mile radius of the complex to stay inside. Iwaki dispatched sound trucks to all its neighborhoods to spread the message to stay indoors. 

The Japanese Japanese government has been making a contingency plan, sending specialist doctors and engineers to hospitals in Fukushima Prefecture and mulling radiation-sickness remedies, such as potassium iodide and transplants of umbilical-cord blood.

"We're not taking the situation lightly," said Noriyuki Shikata, deputy cabinet secretary for public relations. "We're studying what should be done if the situation becomes more serious, but we think the probability of it getting that bad is low."

U.S. Air Force aircraft were also flying missions in support of the relief effort. Roger Drinnon, a spokesman for Air Mobility Command, said transport aircraft had delivered 107.5 tons of cargo, including 64 tons of search-and-rescue equipment from the U.S. and 43.5 tons of generators and other equipment from a U.S. base in South Korea. Air Mobility Command refueling planes have loaded 29,900 gallons of fuel on U.S. military aircraft flying relief missions over the Pacific. 

The U.S. Agency for International Development, the lead U.S. government agency for coordinating humanitarian relief efforts, has deployed a 157-strong disaster assistance response team that includes 144 civilian search and rescue personnel from Fairfax County, Va., and Los Angeles County, Calif., said spokeswoman Gina Jackson.

 The threat of radiation could add misery to hundreds of thousands of quake victims by possibly forcing relief organizations to withdraw their operations.

"The Japanese Red Cross Society is committed to rescue any victims, including those of nuclear radiation," JRCS spokesman Mutsuhiko Owaki said. "But we cannot send rescue workers to places where there is a clear risk of radiation exposure." he added, suggesting the group will have to limit its operations to areas where such risks are low.

In response to an appeal for help from the JRCS, a five-person team has arrived in Japan from the International Red Cross to evaluate Japan's aid needs. The team's assessment on the radiation risks could influence the decision by other countries to send rescue teams to Japan.

Meanwhile, Mr. Kuboki of Iwaki said his phone has been ringing off the hook with questions about how to keep safe from radiation. He suggested they cover their mouths with damp handkerchiefs. 

Many told Mr. Kuboki they wanted the city to order an evacuation so they could leave.

"It's an extremely difficult situation," he said. "You watch the press conferences and you feel there's something they're not telling you."

Mr. Kuboki was worried about the city's water supply, which was running low after the earthquake and tsunami damaged many of its pumps. Across the country other cities scrambled to figure out how to prepare for a serious nuclear leak.

Tokyo and other regions of northern and eastern Japan reported levels of radiation higher than normal but well below anything considered dangerous. Still, the developments spread anxiety throughout eastern Japan—even in Tokyo, 150 miles from the Fukushima complex. Around 100 people stood in line by one railway ticket counter at Tokyo Station on Tuesday, many seeking to go southwest, away from the troubled reactors.

"My wife is pregnant, so today we decided to go to Nagoya," said Shintaro Tanaka, a worker in his 30s. Mr. Tanaka said he was hoping the crisis would end soon because he had only one day of paid leave, but that he was prepared to stay away as long as necessary. "We're worried," he said.

Tokyo said that at one point it measured a radiation level of 0.809 microsievert per hour, about 23 times as high as on a normal day but a fraction of the roughly 400 to 600 microsieverts a human body receives from one X-ray. In the afternoon local time, it fell to 0.0682 microsevert an hour.Yokosuka, south of Tokyo, saw 0.212 microsievert per hour. Kitaibaraki city, about 37 miles northeast of Tokyo and closer to the Fukushima nuclear power plant, reported radiation of 5.575 microsievert per hour, about 100 times as high as normal.

The transportation ministry implemented a no-fly zone in an 18-mile radius around the Fukushima Daiichi plant. 

"The planes that fly through that air could well be bathed by that too," said Takashi Kawase, special assistant to the director in the flight-standard division.

The measures come after  Tokyo Electric Power Co.
9501


0.14
%




 on Tuesday announced there had been an explosion and a fire at two more reactors at its Fukushima Daiichi nuclear complex, which already had seen explosions at two other reactors as cooling-system failures led to overheating reactor cores. 

The company also said radiation levels near one reactor at one point hit 400 millisieverts per hour, a level that can "clearly have an impact on the human body," said chief government spokesman Yukio Edano.

In Iwaki, at the hotel Tabito Ofukuro no Yado, receptionist Yoshiko Sato, 58, said they had decided to close after Iwaki gave the order to stay indoors. "I'll be OK with the status quo if it stays this way, but I'm really worried about how things are developing," Ms. Sato said. "Some of us want to leave, but we're short of gasoline and we can't really go anywhere."

—Nathan Hodge and Hiroyuki Kachi, Kana Inagaki and Ryosuke Hanada contributed to this article.