HONG KONG—Accused murderer Nancy Kissel concluded her five-day testimony in a Hong Kong court Tuesday after episodes that included in-court outbursts, breakdowns and sometimes incoherent answers regarding the 2003 death of her husband. 

The episodes could have some bearing on her defense that her mental state contributed to the events of the night she bludgeoned Merrill Lynch investment banker Robert Kissel to death with a lead statuette after serving him a sedative-laced milkshake. 

The 46-year-old mother of three, who was convicted of murder nearly six years ago, is facing trial again after a Hong Kong appeals court ordered a retrial, citing procedural errors. Ms. Kissel has pleaded guilty to manslaughter, a lesser charge, on the basis of provocation and diminished responsibility—legal defenses that partially excuse actions based on the accused's state of mind at the time of the killing.

Ms. Kissel and her attorneys argue that the killing followed years of physical and sexual abuse by Mr. Kissel. Prosecution witnesses have painted a picture of Mr. Kissel as a kind and loving family man. 

The case became a sensation because of the peek it offered into the lives of the Hong Kong's expatriate elite.

With many of the facts in the case revealed during the previous trial, the American expatriate's appearance on the stand could be pivotal. In five days of testimony, Ms. Kissel repeatedly burst into tears and interrupted the prosecution's questioning with outbursts in which she appeared to hallucinate about seeing her husband. 

On Tuesday, the final day of Ms. Kissel's testimony, Judge Andrew Macrae ordered a 30-minute break when the defendant broke down during questioning, screaming, "I can't remember." She said, "I keep seeing him." 



A similar incident prompted an early adjournment on Friday, when she screamed that she could see him on the floor, saying "he's going to hurt my children." Some jurors appeared disconcerted during that outburst, while others seemed unfazed.

Friday's breakdown came as lead prosecutor David Perry tried to poke holes in her narrative, saying that until she was accused of murder in 2003 she never told anyone about her previous suicide attempts or about Mr. Kissel forcing her to submit to anal sex.

A psychiatrist and psychologists will testify that Ms. Kissel was suffering from mental illness that runs in her family and that she exhibited behavior similar to post-traumatic stress disorder, lead defense lawyer Edward Fitzgerald said in his opening statement.

When asked Tuesday about the milkshake she served her husband, Ms. Kissel testified that her children had helped her make it and that everyone, including herself and the children, drank some of it. 

Pressed on why she would add drugs, she said: "I can't think for the life of me why I would put drugs in the milkshake with my children there. That unsettles me."

Mr. Perry responded: "What about the fact you killed your husband, does that unsettle you?"

Ms. Kissel then broke down again, repeating "I take responsibility...I take responsibility for causing my husband's death."

On the night of the killing, Ms. Kissel testified, her husband was wielding a baseball bat as he confronted her about wanting a divorce. "He told me it was a done deal," Ms. Kissel said, adding that he claimed she was unfit to care for the couple's three children. 

She said the fight turned violent and he started trying to force himself on her. Struggling on the floor, she tried to pull away but he grabbed her by the ankles. Then she grabbed the statuette and swung it behind her, hitting his forehead. When he kept coming after her, she said, "I just kept swinging. I just wanted him to stop...he was never going to stop."

She testified that she had put sleeping pills in his Scotch prior to the incident in an effort to calm him down and avoid the forced sex she said he demanded often. Mr. Kissel's autopsy found trace amounts of various sedatives, including Rohypnol, commonly known as a date-rape drug.

Mr. Kissel's body remained in the master bedroom of the couple's apartment for three days before she wrapped it up in a carpet and hired movers to store the bundle in a rented storage space near their apartment—actions that are agreed-upon facts in the case but that Ms. Kissel claims not to remember. The prosecution called her reaction to what she'd done "a cleanup and disposal operation," while the defense has described her actions as those of a frenzied, unstable woman.

Under cross-examination Tuesday, Ms. Kissel answered consecutive questions with "I don't know" and "I don't recall." Mr. Perry accused her of remembering more than she let on.

"Things in my mind don't make sense anymore. I can't figure it out," she said after final questions from Mr. Fitzgerald.

The story of the killing and subsequent court proceedings, dubbed "the milkshake murder" in the media, spawned at least two books and a 2008 TV movie. 

