Mayor  Michael Bloomberg announced sweeping changes in the city's housing-maintenance policy, aiming to identify and fix multi-family buildings with distressed living conditions before they become uninhabitable. 

The city plans to target 500 such buildings within the next 12 months. It has set aside a $250 million loan fund to help fix up buildings over the next five years that participate in a city rehabilitation program.

Under the city's new policy, the Department of Housing Preservation and Development will form a team of investigators to inspect deteriorating buildings and to analyze data such as outstanding tax debt and neighborhood foreclosures.

"If the 1970s teaches us anything, it is that even one abandoned or derelict building can undermine the safety of everyone on the block," the mayor said Thursday. 

The City Council also plans to propose legislation that will allow the city to sell liens placed on properties with maintenance violations to private collectors. The city can currently sell tax liens—but not maintenance-violation liens—to private collectors, and 80% of property owners pay off those liens, said  Rafael E. Cestero, commissioner of the Department of Housing Preservation and Development.

Currently, the city for the most part finds dilapidated buildings through individual complaints. "Too often tenants don't make complaints till things have gone too far," said City Council Speaker  Christine Quinn. "We know from the Milbank buildings we simply can't wait."

The Milbank buildings, made up of about 10 poorly maintained buildings in the Bronx that have racked up 4,372 maintenance violations to date, were one of the main reasons why the city decided to act more aggressively toward negligent property owners. The properties were owned by Los Angels-based Milbank Real Estate. 

In 2008, the owners defaulted on the loan and the Milbank portfolio went to a court-appointed receiver. 

LNR Property, the custodian of Milbank's $35 million mortgage, is trying to sell it for nearly $35 million. But the city has been pushing the company to accept lower offers. City officials said that buyers wouldn't be able to afford to pay that asking price and also properly maintain the dilapidated buildings. 

LNR didn't respond to requests seeking comment.

 Write to  Joseph De Avila at joseph.deavila@wsj.com 