Setting the right price for a product or service is critical for a small business. But many entrepreneurs don't succeed the first time – or the second or third, in some cases.

The problem is that there is no one formula that yields the best price point, experts say. 

On the most basic level, the price should cover the overhead of the business and provide some profit. That can be tricky to calculate, especially at start-ups, says  Patricia Sigmon, author of "Six Steps to Creating Profit" and president of  David Advisory Group in New York, a consulting firm for small and mid-sized businesses. 

Typically, entrepreneurs come up with a price based simply on the cost to produce the product, she says. They often overlook a slew of behind-the-scenes operational expenses such as "licenses, taxes, workman's compensation or the telephone bill," she says.

Many owners also forget to factor in intangibles that customers should pay for, such as good customer service or the convenience the product or service provides. (Please scroll through the photo gallery below to read entrepreneurs' pricing pitfalls.)

"One objective in pricing is capturing the value of the product or service," says  Julie Meehan, senior manager at Deloitte Consulting in Atlanta and co-author of the book, "Pricing and Profitability Management," which will be released this summer. Business owners often underestimate the true value of what they're selling and wind up setting a price that's too low.

It's a mistake that can be difficult to fix because customers quickly get accustomed to low prices, Ms. Meehan adds. "Price is one of the biggest images of your product or service in the market," she says. 

Some owners face the opposite problem – they set their prices too high and can't lure customers to pay. Especially in the current economy, with penny-pinching customers unwilling to open wallets, entrepreneurs must consider how much the market will bear, says Ms. Sigmon. It's easy for customers to " Google for another price and if you have no added value [to your more-expensive product], you will lose," she says.

To adjust, owners may have to reduce the price and compensate by cutting costs or changing business operations. 

Pinpointing the sweet spot takes time and due diligence, experts and entrepreneurs say. Competitors can provide insight, but setting prices based on what they ask for may trigger a price-cutting war. 

One way to determine market value is by asking customers, through surveys or interviews, about what they are willing to pay, suggests Ms. Meehan. "Then, monitor how the prices are in the market, and how the competitors respond, and make adjustments accordingly," she says. 

 See the gallery below for seven pricing mistakes small-business owners recently made and fixed. (Requires Adobe Flash.)  

 Write to  Emily Maltby at emily.maltby@wsj.com 