Tennis has a third leading man. Unfortunately for Great Britain, his name is not Andy Murray.

Mr. Murray fell flat for a second consecutive Australian Open final, losing in straight sets to Novak Djokovic, 6-4, 6-2, 6-3. He has now played three Grand Slam finals and has yet to win a set, a mark of futility that no man has matched since the Open era began in 1968.

The defeat means that Britain, which hasn't produced a man fit for a Grand Slam singles title in 75 years, must wait some more. But the bigger news out of Melbourne is the emergence—or more precisely, the reemergence—of Mr. Djokovic. After a long and often thrilling spell of dominance by Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal, tennis now has another supremely confident champion who could be a threat to win any tournament he enters, on any surface.

In Melbourne, Mr. Djokovic was dazzling. He lost one set the entire tournament and dispatched Mr. Federer in straight sets in the semifinals. He won with defense, with passing shots, with a few timely volleys and with grit. Most of all, he won with his quickness: The 23-year-old Serb's lateral movement rivals that of any current player, and perhaps any in the history of the game.

Indeed, Mr. Djokovic is the latest master—after Mr. Nadal—of a new style of tennis, one in which defense becomes offense. Put Mr. Djokovic in a precarious position and he is at his most dangerous. He regularly slides on hard courts and hits winners from near splits. His limbs stretch as easily and as quickly as a rubber band, and return to their proper places just as fast. He often makes the 27 feet between a tennis court's singles lines look like a mere gap.

Mr. Djokovic took control of the final late in the first set when he retrieved several apparent winners and won a 39-stroke rally that gave him a set point. Before long, he had rattled off five straight games to open the second set and left Mr. Murray looking thoroughly overmatched.

"I think he would have beaten every other player on the tour if he played like that tonight," Mr. Murray said.

When Mr. Djokovic won his first Australian Open title, in 2008, much was said about the dawning of a new era in tennis. Dijana Djokovic, his mother, even quipped that the king—meaning Mr. Federer—"was dead."

The talk proved to be empty. Messrs. Federer and Nadal won 10 of the next 11 major titles and Mr. Djokovic didn't win one. Though he never dropped below No. 4 in the world rankings and at one point moved up to No. 2, Mr. Djokovic seemed a long shot at the majors. His skills deteriorated, too, most notably his once-effective serve. For a long stretch he served more double faults than aces, unheard of among elite players.

Mr. Djokovic's resurgence began during last year's U.S. Open, where he saved two match points against Mr. Federer in the semifinals (he later lost to Mr. Nadal in the final). At the end of the season, he played flawlessly in leading Serbia to its first-ever Davis Cup title. 

Despite his good form, though, Mr. Djokovic was deemed a distant-third favorite upon arriving Melbourne, behind Messrs. Nadal and Federer. Mr. Nadal was seeking to become the first man since Rod Laver to win four consecutive Grand Slam titles; Mr. Federer, the defending champion, had compiled a 26-2 record since the U.S. Open and had pummeled Mr. Djokovic at the season-ending championships in London.

And then the unthinkable happened: Mr. Nadal, slowed by a leg injury, lost in straight sets to fellow Spaniard David Ferrer in the quarterfinals. When confronted by Mr. Federer in the semifinals, Mr. Djokovic coolly controlled the match from start to finish.

Mr. Djokovic made no bold pronouncements after his victory on Sunday evening—he said Messrs. Nadal and Federer remained the two best players in the world—but he clearly feels much more comfortable in their presence.

"I feel I'm a better player now than I was three years ago, because I think that physically I'm stronger, I'm faster," he said. "Mentally, I'm more motivated on the court. I know how to react in certain moments, and I know how to play on a big stage."

It's in this last regard where Mr. Murray is most in need of improvement. If one had to choose a word to describe his play in the last two Australian Open finals, "sluggish" would be a fine choice; "hesitant" would be another. In the semifinals of this tournament, after Mr. Murray lost the first set to the indefatigable Mr. Ferrer, he calmly adjusted his tactics and went on the attack. He frustrated Mr. Ferrer with superb volleys and sharp angles. At last, it seemed, Mr. Murray had learned to put his seemingly endless variety of lobs, slices, drives and drop shots to proper use.

This loss seemed to confirm the opposite. In the throes of a Grand Slam final, the sport's most excruciating test, Mr. Murray played tentatively. It was as if he had no plan. At the start of the match, these two men assembled many long and skillful rallies, and seemed on equal footing. Once Mr. Djokovic began to hit closer to the lines and attack Mr. Murray's shaky serve, Mr. Murray had no response. It wasn't until the third set when he began taking more chances—and like last year, it was already too late.

Mr. Murray cried during last year's trophy ceremony. This year, he said, it was easier to accept defeat, largely because he is happier off the court compared to 12 months ago. 

And what of that streak, the 75 years—and 280 Grand Slam tournaments—that have passed since Fred Perry won the last major title by a British man, at the 1936 U.S. Open? Mr. Murray was circumspect.

"I want to try and win one, of course," he said. "But if it doesn't happen, it doesn't happen."

Mr. Murray is not the first man to lose his first three major finals: Other members of the club include Ivan Lendl (he lost his first four and the first two sets of his fifth, before going on to win eight majors); Andre Agassi (eight titles, including one at each Slam); and Goran Ivanisevic (one title, at Wimbledon). And Mr. Djokovic's victory, in a sense, should give Mr. Murray hope. Even in the Federer-Nadal era, one's fortunes can change quickly for the better.

 Corrections & Amplifications  The tennis world's Open era, which marks when the Grand Slam tournaments began to allow professionals to compete with amateurs in their events, began in 1968. A previous version of this article incorrectly said the Open Era began in 1969.