Former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney has quietly launched a 15-city push to secure financial commitments from big-money "bundlers," hoping to reveal a fund-raising network that would establish him as the prohibitive frontrunner for the Republican nomination for president.

Mr. Romney and top aides will meet Thursday in New York with nearly 100 donors—many from Wall Street— at the Harvard Club. Attendees are being asked to raise between $25,000 and $50,000 for Mr. Romney within 90 days, in an effort to post large fund-raising totals quickly, one person familiar with events said.

On Tuesday, Mr. Romney met with fund-raisers in downtown Washington, where he also gave his view of the early nominating caucuses and primaries.

Mr. Romney said he needed to do well in the New Hampshire and Florida primaries and Nevada's caucuses, while emerging from those early states with enough money to convince undecided voters that he would have the financial firepower to get to the finish line.

He said he expected to win in Nevada, as he did in 2008, and that he saw Florida's primary as pivotal, with only two candidates likely to emerge from that state able to compete in the later primaries. Less clear was his thinking on the nation's first nominating contest—the Iowa caucuses—where socially conservative voters dominate and where Mr. Romney placed a distant second in 2008.

Finance meetings are also scheduled for March 30 in Los Angeles, as well as in Detroit, Dallas, Houston and Atlanta, people familiar with plans said. Romney fund-raisers are set to converge on Las Vegas on May 16 for a final push ahead of the first financial filing deadline. The Las Vegas meeting will include a marathon phone-a-thon to reach donors, according to one fund-raiser involved in the plan.

"When the day is done and we're in the thick of a presidential race, money will not be an obstacle for Gov. Romney," said Lewis Eisenberg, a prominent hedge fund manager who will attend Thursday's event.

"By early summer, the world will know what we've done," another prominent fundraiser said.

Mr. Romney is widely considered the early frontrunner on the strength of name recognition and his losing bid for the 2008 Republican nomination. But that status is fragile, in part due to a Massachusetts health care law he signed that is widely seen as a precursor to the federal law and is disliked by many Republican primary voters.

Mr. Romney has made few public appearances in the early nominating states, while potential rivals, such as Mississippi Gov. Haley Barbour, former Minnesota Gov. Tim Pawlenty and former House Speaker Newt Gingrich, have been on the stump frequently. But out of view, Mr. Romney and his team have been erecting a campaign apparatus that supporters say will be far larger than those of other candidates.

More than 90 people are expected to attend the New York meeting Thursday, Among those expected: Mr. Eisenberg; New York Jets owner Woody Johnson, Manhattan real estate developer and Miami Dolphins owner Stephen M. Ross, and Emil Henry, a former top Treasury official in the George W. Bush administration. 

The list shows Mr. Romney making inroads in courting fund-raisers who worked for Sen. John McCain (R., Ariz.), the 2008 Republican nominee. McCain's two national finance chairmen—Mr. Eisenberg and Washington lobbyist Wayne Berman—are now with Mr. Romney. Mr. Johnson, led the fund-raising effort for the Republican National Convention in 2008, was also with Mr. McCain that year.

Among Mr. Romney's potential rivals, Mr. Barbour is thought to be able to raise substantial donations. In the last election cycle, he helped raise $117 million for the Republican Governors Association while serving as its chairman. Mr. Romney raised more than $60 million for his 2008 presidential campaign, according to campaign finance records, and in addition spent nearly $45 million of his own money.

Earlier this month, officials of Mr. Obama's fledgling re-election campaign told about 450 donors to raise $350,000 each before the end of the year, a total of more than $157 million that, if reached, would start the president off on what many expect to be a billion-dollar re-election effort.

At the Washington meeting, Mr. Romney spoke about the Massachusetts health care law, a sign that he still believes his campaign must address the issue. The former governor told donors that the plan he signed in Massachusetts was the best for the state at the time, but that no one plan should be imposed on the nation.

A Romney fund-raiser said the former governor also would argue that the Massachusetts law was necessary to stave off the imminent bankruptcy of the state's Medicaid program. The law's requirement that most in the state buy insurance coverage had been hatched by the conservative Heritage Foundation and was used by Mr. Romney to thwart state Democrats from winning a government-run insurance option, he will argue.

 Write to  Jonathan Weisman at jonathan.weisman@wsj.com 