Wear comfortable shoes. The Armory Show, New York's biggest contemporary art fair, up through Sunday, offers thousands of artworks. Last year, at least 60,000 people attempted the gallery booth crawl. This year, organizers expect as high a turnout, given the returning health of the contemporary-art market.

The crowd during Wednesday's VIP preview included evesryone from "Gossip Girl" actress Kelly Rutherford to collectors Susan and Michael Hort to Museum of Modern Art director Glenn Lowry. Artists Tracey Emin and Chakaia Booker also stopped by, the latter impossible to miss in her signature (and formidably tall) turban. 

So far, sales have been brisk for works in the $3,000 to $20,000 range, but pieces priced over $500,000 have taken longer to draw serious offers. Works sold so far include Matt Collishaw's 13-piece series of Old Master-style still life photographs depicting fast-food morsels like onion rings and cheeseburgers, which Blain/Southern Gallery priced at around $10,000 apiece. "They're pretty much all gone," a gallery representative said, two hours after the fair opened.

Video art and playful sculptures—which seemed scarce during the conservative recession years—have also turned up in multiple gallery booths this year. Galerie Ron Mandos has asked $45,000 for Daniel Arsham's "Sculpture," a ghostly peekaboo installation in which a standing mannequin's head and torso is shrouded beneath a white, undulating sheet of plaster "canvas" billowing out from a nearby wall. Over at XL Gallery, passersby lined up to don 3-D glasses so they could see Bluesoup Group's untitled 3-D video of an undulating land mass. It's priced to sell for $10,000, glasses included. 

Here are three more fair highlights:

 Iván Navarro: This Chilean artist fenced off Paul Kasmin Gallery's 24-foot-by-36-foot booth space with his white-neon "Armory Fence," a 5-foot-tall row of glowing filigree that comes off cheery—but is electrically charged. It's being offered in 7-foot-long, $40,000 sections, and the gallery says reserved by potential buyers, one a collector and the other an institution. Mr. Navarro said he wanted to create a booth people could see but couldn't enter. 

 George Widener: In January, the Schirn Kunsthalle in Frankfurt, Germany, devoted an elaborate exhibit to this self-taught North Carolinian and his colorful doomsday drawings, but he's not yet well known in his home country. Dealer Roger Ricco says American contemporary collectors who admire Outsider artists such as Henry Darger and Martin Ramirez are beginning to discover Mr. Widener. The artist's 2011 work, "Megalopolis 789," which evokes both a Roman naval battle and a calendar, sold at the fair for $50,000.

 Alexander Gorlizki: If there were a prize for Best Booth Wallpaper, it would undoubtedly go to this British transplant to New York, who papered the walls of Greenberg Van Doren gallery's outpost with images of jewel-toned splatters and Léger-like pipes. Mr. Gorlizki also teamed up with master miniature painters in Jaipur, India, to create his latest series of otherworldly drawings, including "A Time to Refrain," which—despite its title—sold to an American collector for $6,000.

 Write to  Kelly Crow at kelly.crow@wsj.com 