TOKYO—Tokyo stocks fell sharply Friday, as broad market weakness on the back of higher-than-expected China inflation data was exacerbated by a massive late afternoon earthquake strongly felt throughout the Tokyo area. 

The Tokyo Stock Exchange reported that its systems weren't affected by the severe tremor that occurred in the last 30 minutes of trading. Centered in northeastern Japan, the quake was originally estimated at a magnitude of 7.9 on the Richter scale, was but later revised up to 8.9—and at a magnitude of at least 5.0 in Tokyo. 

The Nikkei Stock Average ended down 179.95 points, or 1.7%, to 10,254.43 following the prior day's 1.5% selloff—the lowest closing level for the index since Jan. 31. 

The Topix index of all the Tokyo Stock Exchange First Section issues also tumbled 15.33 points, or 1.7%, to 915.51, with all 33 Topix subindexes ending deeply in negative territory. 

Trading volume jumped as the quake spurred last-minute selling, topping 3.15 billion shares, easily the most robust seen this year. June Nikkei 225 futures closed down 200 points, or 1.9%, at 10,170 on the Osaka Securities Exchange. 

Powerful aftershocks were being felt well after the most severe shaking had subsided, with many tsunami warnings issued for the length of Japan's eastern seaboard. 

No loss of life nor significant collateral damage was immediately reported in the central Tokyo area, although high-rise buildings could be seen visibly swaying as the ground continued to shake. 

At least a portion of the train service in and around the Tokyo metropolitan was halted for safety reasons. Landline phone service was also intermittent in some areas. 

Calls to the Tokyo Stock Exchange couldn't be immediately routed. 

Stocks were weaker from the open, hit by more Middle East unrest, and Moody's unexpected downgrade of Spain's sovereign debt, which significantly depressed risk appetite and hurt equities on Thursday. 

China's consumer price index data, released just after the morning TSE close, provided yet another sell-catalyst. Although the inflation outcome topped expectations, it did not necessarily reflect unmanageable economic conditions, according to Hideyuki Ishiguro, supervisor of investment strategy at Okana Securities. He predicted bargain-hunting in the afternoon session, but tepid buying was dashed by the quake. 