DETROIT—Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder says his administration wants no part of the noisy labor fights flaring in three neighboring states. Instead, he is leaning hard on his state's struggling cities and school districts to do their own belt-tightening.

With his recent budget and proposed legislation, the newly elected Republican is pressing municipal leaders to be more aggressive in cutting jobs, benefits and services, and more efficient with their spending. Cities that don't comply stand to lose either millions of dollars of state funding or control of their finances.

In Allen Park, a Detroit suburb where property values are down $100 million since last year and revenue is off $1.1 million, officials are heeding the message. This month, in a bid to exact concessions from employees and close a $663,000 deficit, the city laid off its entire fire department.

Elsewhere, officials are bracing for disaster. "This could be the final straw in us not being able to balance our budget," said William Cooper, city manager of Hamtramck, an enclave in Detroit that is seeking a $2.5 million state loan to avoid bankruptcy. "The only serious question is how many other communities will move into serious financial problems."

Mr. Snyder, a tax lawyer who founded a Michigan venture-capital company after leaving his job as president of computer maker Gateway Inc., said his plan represents the kind of tough love municipalities need. "A lot of jurisdictions were sort of headed towards a cliff," he said in an interview. His proposals are designed to force them to adopt "best practices" and lessen their reliance on state aid.

Michigan has its own $1.8 billion deficit. But that is small by national standards, amounting to just 4.2% of the budget. The larger concern, Mr. Snyder argues, is the crisis brewing at the local level, where sinking property values and business failures have slashed property-tax revenue, while pension and health costs have surged. Michigan's treasurer said a handful of communities may fail to meet payrolls this month.

To address that, Mr. Snyder is sharpening two tools at his disposal. One is the state's revenue-sharing fund, a pot of sales-tax money distributed to cities according to need. That cash has been critical for cities such as Detroit, which received $176 million this fiscal year—the annual cost of its fire department—and tiny towns such as Hartford in the southwest, which received $110,000, a tenth of its budget.

  (See Corrections & Amplifications item below.)  

Mr. Snyder proposed to cut the revenue-sharing pool by one-third to $200 million, and make aid contingent upon local belt-tightening—including concessions on wages and benefits—and service consolidation. Exact benchmarks will be outlined later this month. Under his plan, cities that once received funds automatically will have to earn them.

"Those local governments that have to formulate their budgets now have to plan for the worst," said Eric Lupher, an analyst at Citizens Research Council of Michigan, a nonpartisan think tank. "As we can see in Allen Park, it is not pretty."

The other tool is a 1990 law that allows the state to appoint financial managers to take over municipalities at risk of insolvency. A bill now nearing passage in Lansing would strengthen those takeover powers, allowing the state to intervene sooner and void union contracts. The state recently sponsored training for 60 new financial managers.

Democratic lawmakers have blasted that measure and the suggested changes to revenue-sharing as a state power grab. But with Republicans in control of both houses in the state Legislature, the Democrats have little power to stop it. The House last month passed the emergency financial-manager bill, which the Senate is expected to pass soon.

Michigan AFL-CIO President Mark Gaffney called the bill an assault on local unions. Other critics of the governor complain that the loss of revenue-sharing will force many desperate communities into insolvency, while the governor proposes to cut business taxes by $1 billion.

The plan "is going to compound the injuries to all cities," said Todd Flood, attorney for Allen Park, which receives about $400,000 from the state.

In Hartford, City Manager Yemi Akinwale said he has already negotiated the cheapest health-care plan available and is sharing fire and library services with the surrounding township. "For a small town with an eroding tax base, to be in a position to lose $110,000, the best term for that is devastation," he said.

Lawmakers in Lansing are forging ahead. "All signs have pointed for many years to this day of reckoning," said Republican state Sen. John Proos, who represents Hartford. "I suspect that some municipalities will find themselves in grave financial shape."

 Write to  Kate Linebaugh at kate.linebaugh@wsj.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications:  Grand Rapids, Mich.'s budget including enterprise funds was $371 million for 2011. A graphic accompanying this article incorrectly says it was $111.9 million, using the amount of the city's general fund.