This column doesn't usually recommend particular goods or services, but I have just the person if your Picasso needs freshening up. He's  Simon Parkes, an art restorer whose studio—though, based on the volume of work and 10-member staff, touching up everything from 18th-century portraits of British dowagers to an  Andy Warhol soup can, it might be more appropriate to call the operation a small art-conservation factory—is situated on East 74th Street, not far from Sotheby's, one of Mr. Parkes's best customers.

I can't speak for his restoration talents from personal experience, since I'm happy to report that all my Picassos, as well as my Modiglianis, Manets and Michelangelos, are holding up just fine. But I like to think I have some sense of the talents Mr. Parkes, 56, brings to bear from his second career—as a successful landscape painter.

His choice of subject matter is shrewd—the places where the understated wealthy like to vacation—Maine, Martha's Vineyard, the Bahamas. And his taste is impeccable, focusing on elements in the landscape that people who have visited those same spots may have well have made their own. In any case, he has an unerring way of bringing the viewer into private communion with them: white light and shadows on a Cranberry Island sand dune; a deserted beach path in the British Virgin Islands; a modest farmhouse at evening in Wainscott.

That focused discernment is also evident in the results of the 1,500 to 2,000 works of art that pass through his doors every year. "It should feel very fresh and modern," Mr. Parkes said as he stood before a  Marsden Hartley still life Tuesday afternoon. "Very immediate and unfussed with. I'm going to get the guy to change the frame and rethink some of the retouching in the background.

" George Washington at Princeton is a very popular subject by Peale," he went on, of a staid 1780 portrait of the father of our country by  James Peale that was nearby. "It had a bad lining, bad retouches. But the face is almost perfect. It's a good, honest picture."

Mr. Parkes picked up a Warhol  Campbell Soup
CPB


-0.71
%




 can—not one of the iconic paintings, but a solid, cast-aluminum facsimile of a can from 1964, the red-and-white label silk-screened on, and Warhol's signature scribbled on the underside. 

"It's not actually a label," the restorer noted. "We're going to leave it looking old but retouch some of the little losses to make it look slightly less scruffy—fair to the piece and to Andy. I don't think he'd say, 'I love it beat up.' I don't think that's his thing."

The son of a British mathematics teacher, Mr. Parkes dropped out of high school at 17 and moved to London from his native Berkshire, where he apprenticed for several years with an art restorer by appointment to her Majesty the Queen. He moved to the U.S. in 1978 and set up his own studio a couple of years later. He and his wife Jane have two sons and divide their time between Manhattan and East Hampton.

With the advent of new and better adhesives and varnishes, the mantra in art restoration these days is "reversible." Less is more: peeling away the heavy, yellowing varnishes of antiquity to restore the immediacy of the paintings underneath. 

Mr. Parkes said he believes his ultimate client isn't Sotheby's, Christie's or any of the dozens of private dealers and owners he works with; it's posterity—a responsibility probably better understood by a painter who sees his own work in the 19th-century landscape tradition of Corot. 

"The vigilance in this business is to be true to the painting," he explained. "Not to the auction house, or dealer, or owner. What's right for the picture—not for the mood" of the times. 

He no longer does much of the actual restoration work himself. "I've had my moment, the ship has sailed," he said frankly, as he looked over an easel on which  Karen Schifano, one of his restorers, was working on a beautiful but beat up  George Luks portrait of a young woman, supposedly  Gertrude Vanderbilt. "It takes a particular kind of energy. You have to be left alone, in a bubble. Put on your headphones. Ideally, you could put in six or seven hours a day."

Mr. Parkes spends as much time these days meeting with art dealers and auction house experts—examining paintings, suggesting restoration strategies, writing reports—as he does guiding his troops. "I have a good phone manner," noted the restorer, whose personality caroms between wry and parched. "I don't speak in unintelligible language. There's nothing wrong with being English in this business."

The recession, he confessed, has forced him to recalibrate his business plan, though volume has remained steady. "The number of no-charge opinions I provide has gone up," he said. "I hardly ever charge for written reports these days. I make lots of visits as a courtesy. We're not trying to get rich on any one picture. A picture of your granny is going to cost approximately the same as a 1916 Picasso. I'm not going to pretend it takes any longer to do a Picasso."

— ralph.gardner@wsj.com 