President Barack Obama demanded Friday that Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi immediately halt all attacks against civilians and withdraw his forces from several cities, vowing military action if he fails to comply with a United Nations resolution that authorized the use of "all necessary measures" to protect civilians in Libya.

The demands came as reports of fighting on the coastal highway 30 miles from the rebel capital of Benghazi and bombardments of the city of Misrata in the west ran counter to Libyan Foreign Minister Moussa Koussa's earlier announcement of a cease-fire against those trying to overthrow the Gadhafi regime.

Mr. Obama sketched out a limited American military role, saying the U.S. would help set the stage "for the international community to act together," and that there wouldn't be any American troops on the ground. He said use of force would be focused on protecting civilians; he said nothing of trying to force Col. Gadhafi from power, and an official later said regime change wouldn't be the goal of military action.

Libyan authorities in the capital Tripoli refrained Saturday from commenting on events in Benghazi but one official read to reporters two letters that he said were dispatched by Col. Gadhafi to President Obama and other world leaders.

In the first letter to President Obama, the Libyan leader sounded a conciliatory tone while also warning that his regime was not fighting rebels or political opposition groups but members of al-Qaeda in North Africa. 

Col. Gadhafi said the U.N. resolutions were "invalid" because they amounted to interfering in the internal affairs of a sovereign nation and said that he has never fired "one bullet" against his own people. 

"I have all the Libyan people with me and I am prepared to die and they are prepared to die for me, men women and even children," the letter said.

Although there has been close cooperation in the past between Washington and Tripoli in fighting extremist militants in North Africa, the Libyan regime has presented no credible and concrete evidence so far that would prove that al-Qaeda members were involved in the current popular uprising turned armed insurrection. 

As the international community bears down on Libya, U.S. allies Yemen and Bahrain moved forcefully against demonstrators, despite Washington's efforts to coax those regimes to show restraint. Government supporters in Yemen fired on protesters Friday, killing dozens, while Bahrain, which attacked protesters this week after Saudi security forces arrived to defend the regime, tore down a 300-foot monument that has been the hub of demonstrations.

In Libya, rebel leaders in Benghazi said they would continue to fight to oust Mr. Gadhafi and pressed the international community to act as soon as possible on the U.N. resolution.

Track events day by day.

"What are they waiting for?" wondered Salwa Bugaigis, a spokeswoman for the transitional rebel government in Benghazi. "Since 7 a.m., Gadhafi has been trying to exterminate Misurata."

On Friday night in Tripoli, Deputy Foreign Minister Khalid Kaim said the cease-fire announcement was "credible, real and valid," and denied reports of attacks on Misrata, or any civilian deaths since the start of the present crisis.

The contradictory Libyan actions suggested Col. Gadhafi might be trying to have it both ways—using a cease-fire and diplomacy to forestall any attack, while continuing to squeeze rebels on the ground.

The American statement and the actions in Libya left the course of the conflict uncertain, a day after the U.N. Security Council put it on a dramatically different footing with its broad resolution authorizing international military action. Despite initial speculation that the resolution might open the way for immediate Western military action, there instead was diplomatic jockeying and uncertainty about whether rebels would get direct military support from the developing coalition.

A meeting was set for Saturday in Paris among international leaders to continue planning how to enforce the resolution. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton planned to attend along with leaders from the European Union, the African Union, the Arab League, and the head of the U.N.



Mr. Obama said the Pentagon was coordinating military planning for a no-fly zone, which would keep the Libyan regime from using planes against rebels, while countries including Britain, France, and Italy ramped up preparations to start to enforce it.

If the U.S. and its allies move to establish a no-fly zone, they would likely start by using cruise missiles or high-flying attack aircraft—perhaps American ones—to destroy at least some of Libya's air defenses, composed mainly of Russian-built SA-6 surface-to-air missile sites, and radar installations.

Once Col. Gadhafi's air defenses are taken out, British and French planes would likely take the lead in enforcing the no-fly zone and in preventing Col. Gadhafi's army from advancing further into eastern Libya. The U.S. is expected to provide support for those flights, but a senior defense official said Mr. Obama hasn't ruled out using U.S. combat aircraft for enforcement.

The head of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization also said it was "completing planning in order to be ready to take appropriate action." Qatar said it would be the first Arab country to take part in the military operation, meeting a prominent American call for Arabs to be involved in any international action against one of their own leaders.

President Obama said the U.S., Britain, France, and Arab states agreed the cease-fire must be implemented immediately. "That means all attacks against civilians must stop," he said.

Initially, the Libyan government appeared to accept the U.N. resolution, which had language broad enough to authorize establishment of a no-fly zone as well as additional military measures. 

As a member of the U.N., Libya "is bound to accept the Security Council resolution and has decided an immediate cease-fire and the cessation of all military operations," according to a statement Mr. Koussa read in Tripoli. He added that the government was willing to enter into "dialogue" with all parties.

The government's statement—coming from a hard-line regime insider—marked a sharp shift from its recent rhetoric, in which it vowed to crush internal and external enemies. 

But it was far from clear that the cease-fire would take effect, as both sides of the conflict appeared determined to fight on Friday and confirmation of battlefield developments was difficult. Libya has invited foreign observers to Libya, but reporters and international aid organizations have limited access to most areas of the country.

Residents in Misrata said the city was totally isolated, with water cut off and hospitals running out of medical supplies. Government helicopters hover overhead, they said, and rebels reported clashes with tanks.

For embattled residents of eastern Libya and rebel leaders who have been pushed back to the east over the past week, passage of the U.N. resolution offered a ray of hope. 

On the streets of Benghazi, the mood of despair that reigned Thursday shifted dramatically to jubilation. Thousands of Benghazi citizens, waving Libya's pre-Gadhafi flag and singing revolutionary songs, thronged Friday night to the square outside the rebel headquarters.

"Yesterday there was heavy fear in the city, and now we're all celebrating," said 42-year-old laborer Mustafa Ammar Mohammed, as he took his two sons to the square.

"If the Security Council had not acted, many of the people you see around would be dead now," he added.

But rebel fighters were scrambling "We've heard that Gadhafi is coming, and we have to take everything seriously," said rebel spokesman Hisham Gheriani as fighters deployed around the revolutionaries' headquarters in the Benghazi courthouse on the Mediterranean corniche.

Uncertainty persists about the next steps, however. "We are ready" for military intervention, French foreign minister Alain Juppé said Friday. But he also indicated that Saturday's summit would determine the course of military action.

British officials detailed the military assistance they could provide, which would include Typhoon and Tornado fighter jets, refueling tankers, and surveillance aircraft. Italy offered the use of seven air bases. Spain offered to participate in the mission, as did Qatar, though it declined to specify what role it would play.

There remained some confusion about the intervention's ultimate goal, even within the Obama administration. Mrs. Clinton on Friday suggested that Col. Gadhafi's ouster was the ultimate goal of the U.N. resolution; President Obama said the goal was the protection of civilians in Libya.

Mrs. Clinton said Friday that "the overwhelming vote by the Security Council, I think, reflects a broad understanding that, number one, stop the violence, and number two, we do believe that a final result of any negotiations would have to be the decision by Col. Gadhafi to leave." Mr. Obama spoke only of using the military to protect civilians.

Later, other officials said regime change isn't the purpose of military preparations. "We still think that Gadhafi has lost his legitimacy and must go, but this military mission is not about regime change. I would not conflate the two," an administration official said. 

—Adam Entous, Stephen Fidler and Alistair MacDonald contributed to this article.