NEW DELHI— General Motors Co.
GM


-0.06
%




 Thursday unveiled the first engine developed by its Indian unit, as the Detroit auto maker takes a significant step to expand its presence in this emerging automobile market. 

The 1.2-liter gasoline engine will initially be offered in the Chevrolet Beat small car from Feb. 1 and later extended to other models as well, company executives said. 

Introducing locally developed engines will help GM utilize the lower-cost and skilled manpower in the south Asian country to produce new cars that are priced competitively to take on rivals such as  Suzuki Motor Corp.
7269


-0.02
%




, Hyundai Motor Co. and  Ford Motor Co.
F


-0.51
%




 

"India is a key market for General Motors," said  Tim Lee, GM's president for international operations. 

"We are focusing on leveraging our unmatched global resources, as well as our growing local capabilities to develop vehicles and powertrains in India, for India," Mr. Lee said. 

The new so-called Smartech gasoline engine will be produced at GM's engine plant at Talegaon, in the western state of Maharashtra. The auto maker also has a technical center and a design studio in India's technology hub of Bangalore, where it has 2,000 employees. 

GM has invested more than $230 million on the new factory in Maharashtra that opened last November. The company previously said that the unit will have an initial capacity of 160,000 engines a year.

GM has a car manufacturing plant at Halol in the western state of Gujarat and another at Talegaon. 

General Motors India Pvt. Ltd. makes and sells eight car models locally under its Chevrolet brand, namely the Spark, Beat and Aveo U-VA hatchbacks, the Optra, Cruze and Aveo sedans, the Captiva sport-utility vehicle and multi-purpose vehicle Tavera. 

"India and the rest of emerging markets, are very important to us. The business model after the IPO [initial public offering] is to focus on and leverage on these growth markets," Mr. Lee said. 

Separately,  Karl Slym, president and managing director of GM India, said the company will introduce six new vehicles in the next two years. Four of the new models will be passenger vehicles and the other two will be commercial vehicles. 

Also, Mr. Slym said GM plans to start selling its first light truck with partner  SAIC Motor Corp.
600104


1.94
%




 by the end of December. 

GM formed an equal joint venture with SAIC in December 2009, which will make cars from their Shanghai General Motors Corp. joint venture and mini commercial vehicles from their SAIC GM Wuling Automobile Co. joint venture. 

Mr. Slym said a diesel engine model of the Beat small car will be introduced in a few weeks. 

"We have a portfolio planned for the next 5 years which focuses on the growth market of India," he said, adding that the auto maker aims to sell 300,000 vehicles in India in 2013. 

Sales of GM cars in the country rose to 110,804 vehicles in 2010 from 69,579 in 2009. The 2010 sales figure is the highest since the company began operations in 1996. 

 Write to  Nikhil Gulati at nikhil.gulati@dowjones.com and Santanu Choudhury at santanu.choudhury@dowjones.com 