The Obama administration's health-care overhaul won a reprieve Thursday from a Florida federal judge who had ruled it unconstitutional, while the House voted to repeal a piece of the law that irked small businesses.

U.S. District Court Judge Roger Vinson in Florida granted a stay to his January ruling, agreeing with the Obama administration that it would be "extremely disruptive" to block implementation of the law while appellate courts weigh its constitutionality.

However, Judge Vinson used the occasion to criticize the Obama administration. The judge said his Jan. 31 ruling was "plain and unambiguous" in its intent to bar the administration from moving forward with the law.

If the administration didn't think it could comply, it should have immediately filed a motion for a stay rather than choosing to "effectively ignore the order" for two and a half weeks "and only then file a belated motion to clarify," Judge Vinson said.

In his January decision, the judge ruled unconstitutional the law's requirement that individuals carry health coverage or pay a penalty. He found that the insurance mandate was so central to the law that the entire measure must be voided.

The Justice Department has said it didn't read the January decision as requiring the administration to halt implementation of the law. The judge said Thursday that interpretation was incorrect.

Judge Vinson ordered the government to file an appeal to his ruling within seven days if it wants to keep the stay in place.

The Justice Department welcomed the stay, saying it would allow consumer protections and tax credits to small businesses to go forward. 

David Rivkin, a lawyer for the 26 states challenging the law, said the decision "gets us exactly what we always wanted, which is an expeditious appellate process."

Meanwhile, the House voted 314-112 to repeal an unpopular tax-reporting requirement, in what would be the first substantial change to the law.

The Senate has approved the repeal in a different form, meaning it's likely to take some time before the change becomes final.

The provision requires owners of smaller businesses to report more business transactions to the Internal Revenue Service, with the goal of curtailing tax evasion and raising some $18 billion over a decade. Business groups called the requirement too onerous. 

The House repeal measure seeks to cover the lost revenue by clawing back subsidies for health insurance if beneficiaries see their income grow beyond a certain threshold. The Senate measure instructed the White House budget office to find the savings in unspent federal money.

 Write to  Brent Kendall at brent.kendall@dowjones.com 