NEW DELHI - India's environment ministry Monday said South Korean steel maker Posco's much-delayed $12 billion plant can go ahead with certain conditions, sending a signal that environmental concerns won't derail mega-industrial projects needed to keep the country's economic growth on track. 

The clearance comes five years after Posco announced it would set up a 12 million tons a year steel plant in the mineral-rich eastern province of Orissa, in what could become the country's single-largest foreign investment to date. 

The approval offers some hope to investors, especially those in India's steel sector, where projects valued at more than $80 billion have been delayed because of problems with land acquisition and the lack of environmental clearances. 

Dozens of major initiatives - including projects proposed by ArcelorMittal and Tata Steel Ltd. - have been delayed for years by the regulatory process or opposition from local residents against the acquisition of their land. The Indian government has had little success in negotiating compromises, resulting in the stalling of infrastructure and industrial projects vital to India's growth. 

Companies investing in India had for long considered environmental clearance a given, albeit marked by a lengthy bureaucratic process. In the last two years, however, Environment Minister Jairam Ramesh has made such clearances much tougher to obtain. Last year, he rejected London-based miner Vedanata Resources PLC's bid to mine Niyamgiri Hills for bauxite, signalling a more rigorous approach to applying the country's environmental and tribal rights laws. 

However, he has shown some flexibility recently, allowing projects such as one of India's largest residential project in western India, to go ahead with a string of conditions attached. 

In Posco's case too, the good news has come with one significant rider. Mr. Ramesh has held back the use of more than 2,000 acres of land, almost half the total project area, pending assurances from the provincial government that tribal people don't live there or need to be compensated for loss of home and livelihoods. 

Mr. Ramesh said the environmental clearance will have 28 conditions related to controlling pollution at the site, maintaining a 25% green area around the project and spending 2% of annual net profit from the plant on social welfare in the areas surrounding the site. 

He added that the approval for the project was restricted to the first phase of building a four million tons a year plant with a 400 megawatt power plant and a captive port to haul raw materials and finished goods. As the company scales up the plant to 12 million tons a year, every subsequent stage would need a new set of clearances. 

Posco spokesman  Chung Jae-woong declined to comment on the clearance with conditions attached. "We will announce our official stance soon," he said. 

—  Saurabh Chaturvedi in New Delhi and  Kyong-Ae Choi in Seoul contributed to this article.

 Write to  Prasenjit Bhattacharya at prasenjit.bhattacharya@dowjones.com 