There's apparently no honor among alleged thieves.

In a lower Manhattan courtroom, prosecutors have played a series of secretly taped telephone conversations, made by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, in the insider-trading trial of Galleon Group founder  Raj Rajaratnam. 

The tapes focus on hedge-fund managers and others passing along allegedly hot market tips. But in a Wall Street version of WikiLeaks, the tapes also have revealed what some of capitalism's chieftains have been saying about their colleagues and associates behind their backs. It isn't pretty.

A hedge-fund trader calls his buddy "a little dirty" and speaks of trying to "pump information out of my friend." Two associates mock a third for wanting to join a "billionaire circle." A former  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
GS


0.30
%




 director calls his fellow board members an "opportunistic group."



Then they all keep doing business together.

"In today's world with WikiLeaks and the Internet, just assume nothing is private—even the phone, said  Barbara Pachter, a New Jersey-based etiquette specialist who urges people to avoid bad-mouthing others. 

  Anil Kumar, a former McKinsey & Co. consultant and a star government witness, grinned briefly on the witness stand as prosecutors played a tape in which Mr. Rajaratnam, his old business-schoolmate, and another associate, then-Goldman director  Rajat Gupta, talked about him. 

During the July 29, 2008, call, Messrs. Rajaratnam and Gupta deride Mr. Kumar's aptitude for doing investment deals. "I'm getting a feeling that he's trying to, just...be a mini-Rajat, right?" Mr. Rajaratnam says on the tape. "Without bringing anything new to the party, right?"

"Yeah, yeah," says Mr. Gupta, who previously oversaw Mr. Kumar as managing director at McKinsey.

Mr. Kumar, 52, has pleaded guilty to conspiracy and securities fraud. McKinsey has said Mr. Kumar had violated the firm's "culture, values and policies."

Mr. Rajaratnam, 53, faces 14 counts of securities fraud and conspiracy; he declined to comment through his spokesman.

Mr. Kumar had testified that Mr. Rajaratnam had given him more than $2 million through offshore accounts for inside information on McKinsey clients.

"Honestly, Rajat, I'm giving him a million dollars a year for doing literally nothing," Mr. Rajaratnam tells Mr. Gupta on the July 2008 call.

"I think you're being very generous," Mr. Gupta replies. "But he should sometimes say thank you for that, you know?"

In the same conversation, Mr. Gupta called fellow Goldman directors "an opportunistic group," saying that though they believed commercial banking was a low-return business, they might buy Wachovia Corp. if it were "a good deal." 



Goldman, which didn't buy Wachovia, declined to comment. 

At other times, Mr. Rajaratnam turns around and talks about Mr. Gupta. In a May 28, 2008, call, Mr. Rajaratnam gossiped with Mr. Kumar about how Mr. Gupta had overextended himself with corporate board positions and other responsibilities.

"You know that his family suffers," Mr. Rajaratnam says on the tape. "I asked him, 'So are you outsourcing your wedding or how are you doing it?'" Mr. Gupta's daughter was married a few months later, according to online photos of the event. 

In an Aug. 15, 2008, call, Mr. Kumar speculates that Mr. Gupta is being "greedy" by pursuing a possible job at a private-equity firm run by wealthy investor Henry Kravis, so he can be "in that circle."

"That's a billionaire circle, right?" asks Mr. Rajaratnam. "Goldman is like the hundreds-of-millionaires circle." Mr. Rajaratnam then suggests Mr. Gupta wants to make $100 million "without doing a lot of work."

Messrs. Rajaratnam and Kumar also speculate about Mr. Gupta's "personal family crisis," and discuss his wife's unhappiness with his travel schedule and gossip about another couple's marriage as they make plans to meet for dinner at Manhattan's posh Nobu restaurant.

Through his lawyer, Mr. Gupta—who has denied civil insider-trading allegations filed this month by regulators—declined to comment.

  Danielle Chiesi—a former beauty queen and hedge-fund manager who has pleaded guilty to conspiracy to commit securities fraud in the case—also was heard on tape talking about a tipster with whom she allegedly had an intimate relationship. 

In an Aug. 15, 2008, tape, Ms. Chiesi spoke with Mr. Rajaratnam about information about  Advanced Micro Devices Inc.
AMD


-2.93
%




 she received from  Hector Ruiz, former AMD chief executive, and  Robert Moffat, a former senior executive at  International Business Machines.
IBM


0.01
%




 Mr. Ruiz hasn't been accused of wrongdoing.

Lawyers for Mr. Moffat, who pleaded guilty last year to conspiracy to commit securities fraud and securities fraud, said in court documents filed last year that he gave Ms. Chiesi information because they had an "intimate" relationship and he wanted to impress her. He declined to comment through his lawyers. 

Criminal complaints and developing disclosures in the Galleon insider trading case allege a far-reaching and complex scheme. Review the known and alleged relationships.

In the August 2008 tape, Ms. Chiesi told Mr. Rajaratnam she would soon see Mr. Ruiz, the day after Mr. Moffat was coming to her parents' lake house with his wife and daughter. 

"Moffat's married?" asks Mr. Rajaratnam. "He looks like, you know, he's a single guy. You know, sort of he's got the swagger." 

"Really? I think he's more like a geeky type," Ms. Chiesi responds. 

Mr. Rajaratnam tells Ms. Chiesi not to leak anything to her "little boyfriends," to which she replies: "I don't have any friends." 

Mr. Kumar testified this week that Mr. Rajaratnam had warned him that Ms. Chiesi also was "intimate" with Mr. Ruiz, Mr. Kumar's client, and was spreading information that she received from him all over Wall Street.

Mr. Ruiz's spokesman has said their relationship wasn't intimate, and declined further comment. A lawyer for Ms. Chiesi declined to comment.

Meanwhile, Mr. Rajaratnam also spoke on Aug. 15, 2008, with his brother Rengan, who said in a call that he tried to "pump information out of my friend," another McKinsey partner who since has died.

  Rengan Rajaratnam told his brother that the former McKinsey partner was "a little dirty," and alleged that he freely offered him information on AMD.

"He's like, 'buy it, buy as much as you can as soon as you can,'" Rengan said and laughs on the call. "He finally spilled his beans."

Rengan Rajaratnam couldn't be reached for comment. 

In another call an hour later, the two brothers have a laugh, according to the transcripts. "Scumbag," Rengan says, referring to the former McKinsey partner. "Everybody is a scumbag."

 Write to  Michael Rothfeld at michael.rothfeld@wsj.com and Susan Pulliam at susan.pulliam@wsj.com 