Jared Loughner's alleged shooting rampage has left those who know him numb with shock and disbelief.

But friends and acquaintances say signs of unbalance flashed furiously in the past few years of his troubled life, and they appear to have gone largely unheeded.

High-school friends describe his progressive slide into unusual behavior—inexplicable writings, strange theories of cognition and consciousness, a propensity to go suddenly mute.

A college instructor was convinced his classroom outbursts were far more than just adolescent antics but found college authorities largely unresponsive to his concerns. 

His compatriots in an online website for computer gamers—some who'd known him virtually for years— grew concerned last year about his controversial postings on the game sites, several of the game players said over email Sunday. In April, Mr. Loughner was removed from an alliance of players in the game "Earth:Empires."

Pima County Sheriff Clarence Dupnik said Saturday that Mr. Loughner appeared to have psychiatric issues. It remains unclear whether he had been treated for mental illness. Mr. Loughner, now in federal custody, can't be reached for comment. 

Mr. Loughner spent his adolescence just north of Tucson, in a community where a flat carpet of strip malls and low subdivisions dissolves at its fringes into dirt roads and rolling, saguaro-spiked desert.

High-school friends give varying accounts of his home life; one, Alex Montanaro, describes a warm family who encouraged Mr. Loughner's interest in music; another, Zach Osler, says Mr. Loughner told him he was unhappy being at home.

Mr. Loughner's parents have been unreachable since the shooting.

Old friends say that Mr. Loughner began high school a normal kid who excelled at the saxophone. But around his junior year, things deteriorated. His grades were lousy, friends say, and he fell into using drugs.

Mr. Osler says Mr. Loughner was absorbed into his group of friends but was never at the center of it. While indulging in the perennial teenage pastime of hanging out, Mr. Loughner would suddenly embark on odd discourses—"he didn't make sense," Mr. Osler said—and then just as suddenly clam up. "A lot of the time he was mute," Mr. Osler said.

Mr. Loughner drifted further apart from the older friends still around. About two years ago, Mr. Osler said, Mr. Loughner sent him a text message saying he no longer wanted to be friends. Mr. Osler said he had heard Mr. Loughner had cut his ties with others as well.

"He told off everyone," Mr. Osler said. 

He didn't return for his senior year, and instead began sporadically taking classes as Pima County Community College.

In an elementary algebra class at the college taught by math instructor Ben McGahee in the summer of 2010, Mr. Loughner was an immediate nuisance and often nonsensical, Mr. McGahee said. On the first day of class he blurted out, "How can you deny math instead of accepting it?"

"The other students were concerned after class," Mr. McGahee said. "They said he was red in the face, shaking."

On his first test Mr. Loughner wrote "Mayhem Fest!!!" in large letters, Mr. McGahee said.

Mr. McGahee said he appealed to counselors and a dean to have Mr. Loughner removed from his class on several occasions.

"I was pretty concerned about what he was capable of doing," Mr. McGahee said. "They said there's nothing we can do, he hasn't brought a weapon, he hasn't taken any action."

Mr. McGahee said that for the first week of class, a campus police officer was stationed outside the room, which Mr. McGahee understood was because Mr. Loughner was known to be troubled.

But school spokesman Paul Schwalbach said a campus officer was never assigned to Mr. Loughner.

"He was a disruptive and an odd, strange sort of character in the class," Mr. Schwalbach said. "He wasn't dangerous."

Mr. Loughner finally left Mr. McGahee's class during the third week following a heated confrontation that involved the campus officer, a dean and a counselor, according to Mc.Gahee and Mr. Schwalbach.

Mr. Schwalbach said the outbursts in classrooms and libraries didn't indicate to school officials a mental health problem or other concerns that would draw in local authorities outside of the school.

In September, after five run-ins with campus police for disruptive behavior and the discovery of rantings on YouTube, Mr. Loughner was issued a suspension letter, delivered by police officers to Mr. Loughner's home. After he had already withdrawn from the school, the college sent him a letter informing him he would have to take a mental health exam if he were to return.

 Write to  Alexandra Berzon at alexandra.berzon@wsj.com and Charles Forelle at charles.forelle@wsj.com 