Laden with learning, psychological lore and genius-level analysts in pursuit of psychopaths, "Criminal Minds" gave off signs of a likely hit as soon as it reached the screen in 2005. And a hit it became, of course, and remains. The CBS drama about a team of FBI experts who theorize their way into the minds of serial killers, and which arrived with scripts bejeweled with quotes from Emerson, Faulkner, Nietzsche and such, has undergone major changes since its early days but continues to earn top ratings. All that would explain why CBS undertook a spinoff of the show, this one called "Criminal Minds: Suspect Behavior"—a title that carries little suggestion of the difference between the original and the spinoff, but one that also suggests the producers weren't quite sure of the difference either. 

Wednesdays, 10-11 p.m. EST, on CBS

Every episode does begin with an explanation that within the FBI's Behavioral Analysis Unit are rapid-response teams known as "red cells." And that these "nontraditional teams operate outside the bureaucracy" and report solely to the director of the FBI. Being nontraditional and operating outside of the bureaucracy is, we hardly need reminding, the highest of accolades in TV storytelling of this kind—the signal we're about to meet impressive characters. As it turns out, we need regular reminding because—this was particularly the case in the first episode—the elite red cell in question consists of a glum cast of characters barely distinguishable from one another, with the exception of the team leader, Sam Cooper, who is played by a downright depressive Forest Whitaker. 

True, their caseload isn't a kind that lends itself to lively spirits. The premiere episode concerned the abduction of two little girls—one black and one white, to confuse matters—by a serial murderer of little girls, afflicted, the FBI sleuths figured out, by madness brought on by unrequited love for his own young daughter. It's the sort of twisted extreme of psychopathic motive in which "Suspect Behavior" specializes—and it can be said that when it comes to the portrait of suffering victims, like that of the pitiable children here, and the race to get to the apparent next victim before the killer strikes again, the spinoff maintains much of the strength of the original. The formula works: a chase that comes to a satisfying end in the face of seemingly impossible odds, as the team members find that needle in the haystack with the help of computer whiz extraordinaire Penelope Garcia (Kirsten Vangsness), who can download a suspect's life history, early-childhood schooling and taste in breakfast food in a flash—a role she also plays in the original.

Less successful in the spinoff is what comes in between—the texture and character parts, the scripts heavy with pronouncements of the obvious and with horror plots whose strained premises are so elaborate they undercut the impact of all the gore and terror. One episode concerned a deranged nurse who goes about killing people, and, occasionally, removing body parts, to win attention for her warnings about lethal hospital infections that she herself has caused—and you don't want to know any more. Other than the fact that the perpetrator had cut one victim's eyes out—and in broad daylight. This is "high-risk behavior," one member of the crack, nontraditional FBI team deduces. "Offender behavior this extreme does not exist in a vacuum," team leader Cooper himself concludes. Inspector Clouseau could not have done better.

A vacuum is exactly what comes to mind as the episodes and the actors in them struggle under the burden of torpor-inducing dialogue. This matters in a drama in which the show of mind is everything. Still the new series will likely find a large audience consisting of fans of the old. It's why—to add to the obvious—spinoffs are made.

CBS's new midseason series "Mad Love" has high spirits to spare—the sort, admittedly, bordering on the frenzied, which is the only kind that writers of young-couples TV comedies know. But that's far from all it has—though the series about four New Yorkers has a familiar lightheaded air, and an evident willful obliviousness to the possibilities of story and character development that suggests its creators don't quite have their hearts in the notion that this enterprise could work. 

Mondays, 8:30-9 p.m. EST, on CBS

What this comedy has is the charm of its brash comic energy. That it's an energy located mostly in a single character, and not the main one either—officially, anyway—makes little difference. He's Larry, the standard portly second-fiddle figure played by Tyler Labine, a nonstop engine of virile bluster who commands every scene, and he's in nearly all of them. And in nearly all of them he's at bitter odds with the other secondary character, Connie (Judy Greer).

None of this is to say that the official main characters aren't appealing. They're Larry's old friend Ben (Jason Biggs), a handsome lawyer and perfect model of refinement, and his adored new girlfriend, Kate (Sarah Chalke), a couple who met and fell hopelessly in love at the Empire State Building. It's best not to think about that. The important thing is that complications ensue in better-than-average sitcom style—that is, with sharp lines delivered with faultless comic timing by all hands. 