Looking for an excuse to get out of jury duty?

Try this one: Tell the judge you have tickets to one of Oprah Winfrey's last tapings of her eponymous top-rated talk show that's going off the air after 25 years.

It worked for a Chicago-area woman who was let off a 12-person jury for the corruption retrial of impeached Illinois Gov. Rod Blagojevich.

U.S. District Judge James Zagel considered rescheduling the trial around the so-called Oprah Juror's four May 10 tickets, but conceded even "that seems a little over the top."

The story underscores a societal reality: People will go to great lengths to shirk jury duty.

Most excuses are less creative: doctor's order, child-care issues, work that can't be missed, a planned once-in-a-lifetime vacation. But though judges aren't insensitive to personal issues, they don't always buy them.

"The knee-jerk reaction of everyone is, 'This is an inconvenience to me,'" says Circuit Court Judge Kenneth Popejoy, who presides in DuPage County, Ill. "Jury duty is an inconvenience. And we all have life reasons not to go. But if everyone who had an excuse got off, who would we be left with?"

Nuisance or not, serving on a jury is, by law, a civic responsibility you must fulfill. Jurors are chosen at random through state databases of names, such as voter registration and driver's licenses.

Potential jurors fill out questionnaires and then face further scrutiny by judges and attorneys before selection to the jury in a process called voir dire.

You could face civil or even criminal penalties if you skip a notice to appear at jury duty or get caught lying to get out of it.

"Most people know that jury service is, in fact, a privilege and that a jury notice is a legal notice," says David Bookstaver, spokesman for the Unified Court System of New York. "If you ignore it, there are real consequences."

Among them: arrest, jail time and/or hefty fines.

There's an old joke: Would you trust your fate to 12 people who couldn't figure out how to get out of jury duty?

Don't tell it to a judge. They don't like to hear excuses -- lame, humorous or otherwise. "We live in a society where we are judged by our peers in a court of law," Judge Popejoy says. "Someday it might be time for you to be judged by your peers. Do you want 12 good people like you?"

That usually softens up potential jurors, but there are still those who don't want to serve, particularly if the trial is a high-profile one that could take days, weeks or even months.

Few people want to readily commit themselves to a courtroom for long periods of time. At an average of about $40 a day, the remuneration isn't much of a magnet either.

Though most judges and attorneys will tell you otherwise, it's not terribly hard to get off jury duty.

Exemptions are typically limited to hardship cases tied to work or child-care situations, for example, or those for cause.

If it's a rape case, for example, and your sister was raped five years ago, you might not be able to be fair to the accused, which would be considered cause.

But even if you don't have those types of excuses, you're not welcome on a jury if you're overly opinionated or biased. "If it's the truth, say you can't be fair and impartial," says Marshall Isaacs, a New York-based litigator. "They can't keep you then. It's really that easy.

"The bottom line is if you really want to get off jury duty, you can," he says.

Maybe, but judges encourage those called to serve. "To a person, I've never had anyone at the end of the situation say they were disappointed," says Judge Popejoy. "Once they actually do it, people really enjoy jury duty. You really feel that you are doing something for the good of society."

Here are some dos and don'ts to follow if you are summoned:

Never lie. You're talking to judges in a court of law.

Be nice. Judges and attorneys, like most people, don't want to have to deal with nasty people.

Be wary. Many lawyers have perfected their own systems for picking out liars and scrutinizing potential jurors. Often, defense attorneys will hire jury consultants who have advanced degrees in criminology or psychology to vet candidates. They can tell when you're lying.

If you can't be fair and impartial, let them know. "If you put up enough of a fuss, you'll get off," says Mr. Isaacs.

Postpone it. Most courts will give you two to three opportunities to defer serving.

Teach or enroll in school. High-school, college and graduate-school teachers and students are often released because they will miss classes. Some states will exempt you if you're taking online courses. You'll need proof of enrollment.

Have a chronic illness. Again, you need proof but courts understand that those with chronic or debilitating illnesses are not likely to withstand the pressures of jury duty.

Know someone. It really doesn't matter who -- the judge, an attorney, the defendant. It's a given friends can't possibly be fair and impartial about their friends.

 Write to  Jennifer Waters at jennifer.waters@dowjones.com 

—Read more at marketwatch.com.