The euro zone's fiscal crisis has one positive aspect—it has spurred an unprecedented amount of public debate in its 17 member nations, reflecting a level of popular engagement that has been almost entirely absent since the single currency was launched in 1999.

This is proving a major source of confusion for investors, who had grown accustomed to the careful control of the euro-zone message exercised by Berlin, Brussels, Frankfurt and Paris over the past decade. 

But if the euro zone is to survive, it will require the support of a populace that has until now been largely indifferent to its existence. And that can only be secured by talking openly about its faults as well as its merits, of which there are many. 

As the crisis enters its second year, the views of Finnish party leaders, Slovak coalition partners, academics, "wise men" and lawmakers, however distant from power, may all matter. Public discourse in the euro zone used to consist of nothing more than a comforting drone, conducted in language that was designed to obscure and suppress any suggestion of conflict. It is now a cacophony, and many are feeling a little bewildered. 

As the core has lost authority, and its reassurances that everything is under control and going according to plan are disproved daily, the range of possible outcomes has widened enormously. Europeans used to look rather smugly at the U.S., where it seemed nobody was in control, everything was in dispute and the rhetoric unnecessarily robust. But it turns out that's just the way things are when what is under discussion really matters, and has consequences that are important to people.

Having for the most part sleep-walked into the euro, many members of the currency area are now wondering exactly what it is they've gotten themselves into. In 2003, the U.K. conducted a very thorough investigation of whether the euro was a currency it could use. It failed some, although not all, of Gordon Brown's five tests. 

None of the current members of the currency area examined the issue with anything like that level of rigor. All they had to do was meet or attempt to meet some fairly crude numerical targets, and most people were happy with that. 

Indeed, euro-zone policy makers affected to be gently amused at the passions aroused in the U.K. by the issue of whether to use one medium of exchange or another. It was not, they suggested, a matter of great or profound significance. But if you are going to surrender a fairly important part of your sovereignty, the least that should be expected is a decent row, and some sharp language. 

Inside the currency area, there was some grumbling when euro notes and coins were introduced, and prices that had been marked in the legacy currencies were converted to a common standard. Almost everyone felt that in making the conversion, retailers took the higher rather than the lower value where there was an alternative. But that was hardly an objection to the euro in principle.

It has taken a crisis of previously unimaginable scale and scope, but the euro zone's public space is no longer marked by quiescence and excessive politeness. 

In recent days, the leader of Finland's third-largest political party has claimed the euro zone is suffering from a form of "gangrene" that calls for radical surgery; an Irish economist has claimed the ECB is interested primarily in "placating the editors of German tabloids;" a member of the junior partner in Germany's governing coalition has proposed that new mechanisms be put in place that would allow countries to leave the currency area; and one of Germany's "wise men" has said the currency area may not survive the next 12 months in its current form.

None of these comments represents a vote of confidence in the euro zone or its institutions. But they are in their various ways intended to be constructive, in the sense of changing things for the better. Most of the debate on the euro zone's future assumes it is a thing of value, if slightly or severely dysfunctional in its actual operation. 

This is not all good news. It is now much more difficult to follow the debate, more difficult to distinguish the serious proposal from the wild fancy, more difficult to be sure about which voices matter and to which a deaf ear can be turned. It is much harder to make informed judgments about how it will address its mounting debt crisis. 

"Statements from various officials continue to be confusing and unhelpful," the Institute of International Finance said in a note on the euro zone's debt problems. 

Perhaps if the currency area had attracted as much passion when it was in its infancy, it wouldn't be in quite the mess it is today. People who live in the 17 countries that use the euro have woken up to the fact that it isn't a colorless, bloodless, faceless abstraction, and that it is an extremely ambitious if currently flawed attempt to create a multi-national economic space that is without precedent, and may never be attempted again.

 Write to  Paul Hannon at paul.hannon@dowjones.com 