Over time, denim has risen from the very bottom of the fashion food chain to the tippity top. Witness the spring collections of Dries Van Noten and Valentino, two designers who rarely send the material down the runway, but made the utilitarian cotton a sophisticated centerpiece. Just as the working-class woven reaches the upper echelons of design, and in turn the willowy frames of high society, a revealing new exhibition reminds us of the fabric's humble beginnings. 





When one ponders the history of the fabric, certain images may come to mind. Levi Strauss & Co.'s original pair of dungarees, first sold to miners in 1873 during the California gold rush; Jane Birkin in impossibly low-rise bell bottoms roaming the streets of Paris with Serge Gainsbourg; Brooke Shields ensuring nothing got between her and her Calvins. Seventeenth-century barbers, beggar boys and seamstresses? Probably not. "When you think of the history of jeans, you think of the Marlboro man. You think of cowboys and America," said Alan Salz, the owner of art gallery Didier Aaron in New York. The gallery is playing host to a much-buzzed-about exhibition this month, which debuted in Paris's Galerie Canesso during fashion week last fall, entitled "The Master of the Blue Jeans." The show consists of seven oil paintings previously pegged to other artists of the period and now believed to be from the hand of just one. This unidentified artist specialized in depictions of Italian peasants wearing jackets, aprons and dresses made from what was then called "genes," fustian cotton named after its assumed city of origin in Genoa, Italy. (French weavers in Nîmes are also credited with creating a cloth referred to as "de Nîmes," hence the word "denim.") "What this exhibition helps illustrate—because very few garments from this era survived as people wore their clothes until they practically disintegrated—is that denim had been alive and well long before it came to America in the 18th century," added Mr. Salz. In addition to the scarcity of denim from this era being in textile museums, none of the mystery painter's contemporaries, including Diego Velázquez and Georges de La Tour (who also painted Italy's poor), depicted the cotton fabric in their works, which makes these portraits particularly intriguing. The Master of the Blue Jeans also stands out for the treatment of his subjects, giving them an air of nobility typically reserved for the upper class. 

There is a freshness to the enigmatic artist's paintings, which show denim in a light—and era—we've never seen it in before. The same can be said of including that of Stella McCartney, who created several all-indigo looks. Her collection includes an architectural shift dress that plays up the material's stiff qualities, and a denim polo dress layered with indigo silk trousers. "Denim is already ingrained in a woman's wardrobe, so I wanted to make it richer by playing with silk indigos, denim knitwear and denim silks combined with actual denim pieces," said Ms. McCartney. "Incorporating them all into one story, so one can't tell what is actual denim, modernizes it and makes it not just a casual item."

 At Valentino, the fabric is given a ladylike quality, in the form of a sweet A-line dress with tuxedo ruffles in a deep shiny indigo, while Dries Van Noten stitched white and light blue denim onto the sleeves of a boat neck shirt and cut rich billowing wide-leg trousers in a navy cloth. New York-based designer Derek Lam made royal blue denim the centerpiece of his California-inspired spring collection, with a V-neck tunic layered under a chambray trench, among other pieces. Phoebe Philo took the material in its most cerebral direction, pairing a full-length denim skirt with a boxy t-shirt for Céline—certainly not what the Master of Blue Jeans would have expected all those years ago. "You wouldn't have found a princess of Genoa wearing denim," said Mr. Salz, who explained the fabric was reserved for the drapery and bed linens of 17th-century aristocrats. "But now every princess does."

 Write to  Alexa Brazilian at Alexa.Brazilian@wsj.com 