The circumstances of international military action in Libya have done little to bolster hopes long fostered in this city of Europe presenting a united, well coordinated front on foreign policy. This is all the more significant as the U.S. is inviting Europe to take the lead in dealing with the North African state. 

Britain and France lobbied strongly for military action to bolster the rebellion against Col. Moammar Gadhafi, eventually overcoming resistance in Washington, particularly in the Pentagon. Now the Obama administration is urging Europe to take the prime responsibility for the military operations and diplomacy. 

Unlike for the U.S., Libya has strong strategic significance for Europe, not least in its capacity to generate a flood of migrants to its shores. Nonetheless, European governments have struggled, to say the least, to find a common position.

In one of the most important foreign-policy questions since the launch of the Iraq war in 2003, the three major European powers on the United Nations Security Council couldn't agree on a single position on authorizing military action. Britain and France pushed strongly for last week's resolution; Germany abstained.

Fast forward a week. In meetings of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, France has been holding out against the alliance being at the center of a unified command structure to direct the operations; the other 27 allies think it is essential. Diplomats say military advice is that a unified command and control is necessary for the safety of allied troops, to prevent in particular attacks on friendly forces. 

France says the current coordination among national militaries is working just fine. Officials from elsewhere say they can't remember a multinational military operation without a unified command. In fact, the last multinational operation involving Western armed forces that didn't have a unified command structure was in Lebanon in 1983. 

That didn't end well and culminated in the withdrawal of U.S. and French troops after they suffered heavy losses from suicide bombers. 

In Bosnia in the 1990s, NATO allies even found a way to incorporate Russia into a multinational operation under a unified command, with its forces reporting to a U.S. commander (with his U.S., rather than his NATO, hat on.)

Robert Hunter, a former U.S. ambassador to NATO now with the Rand Corporation in Washington, says he thinks the coalition may be able to find ways to work around a unified command. But the division among the allies "plays into Gadhafi's hands and makes it look like we're at sixes and sevens."

There's no little bitterness about France's stance. One senior Italian official told colleagues this week that France has taken a "neo-imperialist approach" over Libya, suggesting it didn't want the alliance involved because it was seeking to go beyond the terms of the U.N. resolution and oust Col. Gadhafi. (A French diplomat said in response that "It is not imperialist to make sure a U.N. resolution is respected.")

France, however, isn't the only one that its allies see as complicating matters. At the other end of the NATO debate is Turkey, not a member of the European Union but a NATO ally since 1952. 

Paris has argued that Turkey's position would tie the hands of a military operation if it were to be put into NATO's hands. Diplomats say Ankara has dropped its objections to a no-fly zone—but said enforcing one should be a NATO-only operation, apparently excluding non-NATO participation in a coalition. 

It also has made plain that it doesn't support ground attacks, which has stopped NATO planning for that. That puts the alliance at an impasse. U.S. Admiral James Stavridis, NATO's top military officer, was in Turkey on Thursday to try to work things out and meetings continued at NATO headquarters in Brussels to find a way around it.

Perhaps more serious in the longer term is that there appears to be little clarity among European governments on what the ultimate objective is of an air campaign that diplomats say was born in confusion as French jets struck military targets in Libya hours before its coalition partners got involved. 

The U.N. Security Council resolution 1973 authorized a no-fly zone and "all necessary measures" to protect civilians short of occupation. The history of air-only military actions is that they rarely, if ever, defeat an adversary without "boots on the ground," or at least the realistic threat thereof. The risk is that Col. Gadhafi holds out in Tripoli and the west, while other parts of the country stay under control of the opposition. No one side can inflict a decisive blow on the other. Meanwhile, foreign jets patrol over the country for years. 

What hopes for European unity under these circumstances? Maybe, as Charles Dickens's Mr. Micawber would have said, something will turn up before we have to find out.

 Write to  Stephen Fidler at stephen.fidler@wsj.com 