SINGAPORE—U.S. private equity group Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. will acquire a 10% stake in Vietnam's Masan Consumer Corp. for $159 million, in what will be the largest ever private equity transaction in Vietnam. 

The investment by KKR values the Vietnamese maker of consumer goods such as fish sauce and soy sauce at US$1.6 billion, said Ho Chi Minh-listed conglomerate Masan Group, which owns an 86.8% stake in Masan Consumer. 

Under the deal, which will be KKR's fourth investment in Southeast Asia and its first in Vietnam, Masan Consumer will issue 14 million ordinary shares to KKR while the parent firm will cut its stake to 78%. 

  Ming Lu, a senior operating executive of KKR, said "this investment demonstrates our strong conviction in the business prospects of Masan Consumer, as well as in Vietnam as a whole." 

KKR's first foray into Vietnam comes after a spate of high-profile private equity deals in the country over the past couple of years, as firms broaden their search for assets among Asia's high-growth markets. Despite declines in the Ho Chi Minh Stock Exchange—the index is down 6% in the past month—foreign investors continue to pour in. 

According to government data, disbursed foreign direct investment into Vietnam was US$2.54 billion during the first three months of the year, up 1.6% on the same period last year. For the full year, the government expects disbursed foreign direct investment to range between $11 billion and $11.5 billion, against $11 billion in 2010. 

In January this year, U.S. private equity group Mount Kellett Capital Management LP bought a 20% stake in Masan Resources, which operates a tungsten mining project, for $100 million.

In October 2009, the U.S.-based firm TPG Group and Danish firm BankInvest Group bought a minority stake in Masan Group Corp. for a total of US$50 million.

Masan Group Chief Executive Officer  Madhur Maini said in the statement that this transaction will help the company in its strategy of transforming itself from a food to a consumer staples business.

"We welcome KKR as a partner to assist us in achieving this objective. In addition, we view the next two years as transformational for the group and continue to build a war chest for strategic M&A," Mr. Maini said. 

Masan Consumer is one of Vietnam's leading diversified consumer companies. It currently manufactures and distributes a range of food products, including fish sauce, soy sauce, chili sauce, instant noodles and edible oils. 

The company said its revenue for the year ended Dec. 31, 2010 was $272 million with net profit of $60 million. 

—Nguyen Pham Muoi in Hanoi contributed to this article.