The price of oil futures rose Monday as coalition airstrikes stoked fears of a protracted war in Libya that would keep its crude off global markets for months or even years to come.

Meanwhile, others wondered whether foreign oil companies that abandoned Libya when the uprising broke out would be allowed back, a concern that casts even more doubt over the future of the country's oil industry. 

Brent crude rose 0.9% to $114.96 a barrel, while crude futures in New York settled up $1.26, or 1.2%, at $102.33 a barrel as U.N.-mandated strikes against Libyan targets were aimed at halting the advance of pro-Gadhafi forces on the rebel-held city of Benghazi.

  Lawrence Eagles, head oil analyst at J.P. Morgan, said he expected Libyan production to "remain low and volatile for many years." Libyan oil production has dropped to less than a quarter of the 1.6 million barrels a day it was pumping before the unrest began last month. Many expect crude output and exports to stop completely in the coming days. 

Yet the market's reaction to the airstrikes has been more muted than during previous Western interventions in the Middle East, such as the 1991 first Gulf War and the 2003 invasion of Iraq. "The big question for markets is how long the Libyan supply disruption will last," said  Mike Wittner, a senior oil analyst at Société Générale. "And even with the airstrikes, I don't think we're any closer to an answer." Mr. Wittner said he was assuming Libyan production and exports would be "zero for the next six months."

As expectations of a long, drawn-out conflict rise, traders are wondering when the foreign oil companies that were active in Libya before the violence erupted will return. If Col. Moammar Gadhafi hangs on to power, they may not be welcome. Some companies now fear they will see their oil interests in Libya expropriated or their contracts revoked "due to the supportive stances of their home governments towards the opposition," said  Samuel Ciszuk, a North Africa specialist analyst at IHS Global Insight. Col. Gadhafi has already threatened to strip them of their investments and hand them over to Chinese, Iranian and Russian firms. 

That message was echoed over the weekend by Libya's de facto oil minister, Shokri Ghanem, who urged international energy companies to return to Libya to work, and warned that those that didn't would be replaced by other firms. 

However, oil companies also face pressure from their own governments. International sanctions are likely to complicate the operations of Libya's state-run oil National Oil Corp., potentially making it difficult for foreign companies to buy and trade its crude.

At least publicly, the companies have expressed confidence that they will be permitted to return to Libya, a country that still possesses the largest oil reserves in Africa and before the conflict was the world's 12th biggest oil exporter. 

"Whoever is in power needs to pump oil to get revenues for his people," said Paolo Scaroni, chief executive of Italy's Eni SpA, which has the largest Libyan investments of any Western oil company. That was even more the case after an armed conflict, he added, "because they need to reconstruct."

 Write to  Guy Chazan at guy.chazan@wsj.com 