The lemonade stand. For some teens, this summertime staple is no longer a pastime, it's a profit center.

An estimated 120,000 kids in 31 cities are expected to attend one-day entrepreneur-training events in May, called Lemonade Day. The program, launched in 2007 with 2,600 participants, teaches children and teens how to borrow and repay investors who help start their stands, and what to do with profit, including donating some to charity, says founder  Michael Holthouse, a Houston philanthropist.

 Houston  

 Age: 10

 Business: Snow-cone stand

 Selling Tip: Mixing flavors saves money!

 Balancing Work With Homework: Get as much homework done at school as you can, then finish it right away when you get home. 

 For Stress Relief: I say to myself, 'Everything's going to be all right.'

With summer approaching, an increasing number of high-schoolers around the country are preparing to launch their own start-ups—and not just lemonade stands. With lawn-mowing businesses, hand-painting of tennis shoes or Bosnian-language computer repairs, teens are bucking long odds in the dismal job market and earning their own mall money or cash for college.

"If you can't get a job, you can create your own," says  Steve Mariotti, founder of the Network for Teaching Entrepreneurship, a New York-based nonprofit that provides programs for schools. 

What's more, teen entrepreneurs are borrowing strategies from the pros.  Josh Bostick started Josh's Car Wash Service at age 14, driving around his Flower Mound, Texas, neighborhood in a golf cart toting $20 in sponges and soap he bought at Wal-Mart. Today, the 17-year-old is marketing his services through text-message blasts, newspaper ads and an auto trade-show booth. He is planning to hire two friends this summer to help wash a commercial truck fleet, and he is meeting with car dealers to sell his services. Based on his 2011 business plan, Josh recently increased projected revenue this year by 50% to $15,000. "Things have really been taking off," he says. 

One reason, says John Matthews, one of his customers in the Dallas suburb, is top-flight service: Mr. Bostick watches weather forecasts and warns customers of impending rain, suggesting they delay washing their cars until after the storm. Josh says, "I do lose a good amount of business doing that, but my customers are really appreciative." He hopes to have $50,000 saved when he leaves for college next year.

 Flower Mound, Texas 

 Age: 17

 Business: Josh's Car Wash Service

 Selling Tip:  Try to find something you are passionate about and that doesn't take a lot of money to start up.

 Balancing Work and Homework:Organize your work schedule around schoolwork. 

 For Stress Relief: I play sports at school, work out and make time to hang out with friends.

About 3.7% of high-school seniors are interested in becoming business owners or entrepreneurs, based on a survey of 1.9 million students by the National Research Center for College & University Admissions, Lee's Summit, Mo. Interest among younger high-school students is higher, at 4.1% to 4.4%.

Such programs as the Network for Teaching Entrepreneurship and Lemonade Day encourage young entrepreneurs to get an early start.  Meadow Bob, 10, was so impressed by the cash she and a few friends raised with a Lemonade Day stand two years ago that she came up with a business idea of her own. In search of a product "that will cool us off" during the summer, Meadow, who lives at Boys and Girls Country of Houston, a nonprofit children's home in Hockley, Texas, took $30 from her savings, bought a snow-cone machine and opened a stand selling the frozen treats at $2 a pop to her 83 schoolmates on campus, she says. 

She has banked about $250 after expenses during her first two summers of operation and plans to open the stand again this summer. "It is sometimes hard to work," Meadow says. But she likes running her business; "when you get it all laid out, it's very simple. And I always have a little bit of time where I can make my own snow cone."

Fewer than 30% of teens ages 16 to 19 are likely to find paying jobs this summer, down from 52% in 2000 and about the same as the summer 2010 rate of 29.6%, the lowest since the government began keeping records in the 1940s, says  Andrew Sum, director of the Center for Labor Market Studies at Northeastern University, Boston. Beyond general job-market weakness, tighter legal restrictions on youth labor and adult competition for jobs are crowding teens out.

 Cupertino, Calif.  

 Age: 17 

 Business: Rage Shoes 

 Selling Tip: If you truly enjoy something, share it. There is a market for everything out there.

 Balancing Work with Homework: I plan out every hour of my day, with time for homework, hanging out, cleaning my closet and work. 

 For Stress Relief: I shop.

But teens are finding profitable niche markets in their communities. Bosnian immigrants  Belma Ahmetovic, 18, of Wethersfield, Conn., and  Zermina Velic, 17, of Hartford, Conn., will be working this summer in Beta Bytes, a home computer services business they started last year to serve the Bosnian community. Their 22-page business plan includes sales projections, a marketing plan and a pie chart showing how they manage their time. 

Ms. Ahmetovic and Zermina deliberately undercut corporate competitors' prices, and their community ties foster customer loyalty. When viruses crashed Alma Pejmanovic's old home laptop, the pair cleaned it up for $100 while saving all her data. "The word around the community is that these young ladies really know what they're doing," says Ms. Pejmanovic through an interpreter. The girls are donating 5% of their $2,400 profit so far to One Laptop Per Child, a nonprofit that sends computers to children in developing countries; "Since both of us come from a war-torn country, we know what it is like to have nothing," says Ms. Ahmetovic, who immigrated in 2002, two years after Zermina.

Still other students leverage their Web skills to turn hobbies into profit centers.  Sonika Singh started making hand-painted sneakers as gifts for friends at Monta Vista High School in Cupertino, Calif., embellishing them with what she calls "tame graffiti."

The shoes were so popular that "my friends said, 'You need to start selling those,' " she says. "And what right-minded teen would say no to money?" 

 Wethersfield, Conn.  

 Age: 18 (on the left) 

 Business: Beta Bytes computer services 

 Selling Tip: If you have your mind set on doing something great, someone, somewhere, will realize it and lend you a helping hand. 

 Balancing Work with Homework: Make a monthly schedule and plan in advance. 

 For Stress Relief: I turn to a sketch pad and a hot cup of coffee. 

 Hartford, Conn.  

 Age: 17 (on the right) 

 Selling Tip: Put in your best effort and never fear rejection or failure. 

 Balancing Work with Homework: I set aside a certain number of hours for both schoolwork and Beta Bytes. 

 For Stress Relief: I turn to my family and friends for support, and talk things through.

Sonika tested the market by creating a website with a query box to see whether potential customers would surface. After the site drew "a ton of interest," she says, eliciting more than 50 requests, she launched "Rage Shoes" last summer, filling orders at a price of $35 a pair, a few dollars above her costs. The business "was definitely enough to keep me busy all summer," says Sonika, who is 17. She banked $450 and plans to continue the business part time this summer.

Other teen business owners are already honing a preferred-client list.  Scott Sladecek, 18, of Spring, Texas, who started a lawn-care business in 2004 with his older brother, says some clients in the past have refused to pay after a job was done. "We're honest kids. We did the work. But it's not worth taking them to small-claims court for $100." So he aims his marketing at loyal repeat customers. 

Aided by his brother David, 21, now a junior at the University of Houston, Mr. Sladecek is expanding the company's services to include rock removal, bush trimming and gutter cleaning. The brothers have invested $3,700 in equipment and plan to hire two employees this summer. Scott Sladecek has saved $20,287 for college tuition, and he hopes to have a lot more by the time he departs next fall for Texas A&M University. His intended major: business.

 Write to  Sue Shellenbarger at sue.shellenbarger@wsj.com 