LAS VEGAS—A district court judge Tuesday rejected pleas by  Las Vegas Sands Corp.
LVS


-2.22
%




 to dismiss a high-profile employment case that pits the casino giant against a former manager who claims he was fired in part for objecting to an alleged bribing scheme in Macau.

In the case, filed in the autumn against Las Vegas Sands and its Macau subsidiary,  Sands China Ltd.
SCHYY


-2.40
%




,  Steve Jacobs, the former chief of Las Vegas Sands' operations in Macau, accused the company of wrongfully terminating his employment because he wouldn't comply with what he says were illegal demands from his boss, Las Vegas Sands Chief Executive  Sheldon Adelson.

After hearing testimony on separate motions from Las Vegas Sands and Sands China to dismiss the case, Judge Elizabeth Gonzalez of Las Vegas said that both would be denied. She said that there was sufficient evidence of influence from Las Vegas on Macau operations to justify the jurisdiction of Nevada courts.

Las Vegas Sands denies Mr. Jacobs's allegations. Sands China attorney  Patricia Glaser said after the hearing that the company would decide shortly whether to appeal the ruling. Meanwhile, the case will proceed toward settlement talks, Judge Gonzalez said. 

Las Vegas Sands said earlier this month that the suit had led to investigations by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission and the U.S. Department of Justice, both of which are investigating Las Vegas Sands under the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, which prohibits U.S. companies from making payments to foreign officials to get or keep business. 

The Nevada Gaming Control Board has also initiated an investigation into the same matter. The state and federal investigations into the Las Vegas Sands are expected to continue.

Late Tuesday, Las Vegas Sands Chief Executive  Sheldon Adelson sent via email his first comments to the media regarding the Jacobs case.

"While I have largely stayed silent on the matter to this point, the recycling of his allegations must be addressed," he said. " We have a substantial list of reasons why Steve Jacobs was fired for cause and interestingly he has not refuted a single one of them. Instead, he has attempted to explain his termination by using outright lies and fabrications which seem to have their origins in delusion." 

Mr. Jacobs's attorney, Donald Campbell, said he was pleased by the ruling and had no other comment.

Said Mr. Jacobs: "I'm extremely pleased with the verdict. It's clear that the judge was well-informed on all issues, and I look forward to the next phase of the trial." As instructed by counsel, he declined to answer any other questions about the case.

Mr. Alves didn't return requests for comment.

Macau has become an increasingly important venue for Las Vegas Sands and its major Las Vegas competitors,  MGM Resorts International
MGM


-1.80
%




 and  Wynn Resorts Ltd.
WYNN


-3.10
%




 as revenue from the Chinese administrative region grows; revenue from Las Vegas has shrunk.

Las Vegas Sands and Sands China had argued that Mr. Jacobs would have to bring his case in Macau since he was employed by a subsidiary operating there. Sands China, which was formed soon after Mr. Jacobs joined the company in the summer of 2009, is publicly traded on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange. Las Vegas Sands owns around 70% of Sands China. 

Mr. Jacobs alleged that Mr. Adelson wanted him to employ a Macau attorney,  Leonel Alves, whose employment he thought could be a violation of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act. Mr. Alves was a member of Macau's Executive Committee, a government position. Las Vegas Sands Chief Operating officer  Mike Leven said that this meant he was part of an advising body to the local government and therefore subject to U.S. laws that govern the company's dealings with government officials.

The company hired Mr. Alves after Mr. Jacobs left, Mr. Jacobs said in court filings. 

Mr. Jacobs also alleged that Mr. Adelson wanted him to use "improper leverage" against unnamed senior officials of the Macau government to help the company secure rights to sell apartments at its Four Seasons property. The lawsuit says he was asked to arrange "secret investigations" of the officials so that any negative information could be used against them. 

In his suit, Mr. Jacobs also says he was told to threaten to withhold business from unnamed major Chinese banks "unless they agreed to use influence with newly elected senior government officials of Macau" to get "favorable treatment." 

The company has said it filed a defamation complaint in Macau against Mr. Jacobs, whom it calls a "disgruntled former executive" in Nevada court filings. 

Mr. Jacobs attended Tuesday's hearing, sitting beside his attorneys with fingers clenched. 

His attorneys presented evidence of what Judge Gonzalez said in the end was "pervasive" influence by Las Vegas Sands, the parent company, on its Macau operations, which the judge said was enough to give Nevada jurisdiction. Among the evidence presented by Mr. Jacobs was the alleged existence of a system that allows funds deposited by Chinese gamblers in Macau casinos to be accessed by gamblers in Las Vegas.

—Kate O'Keeffe in Hong Kong contributed to this article.

 Write to  Alexandra Berzon at alexandra.berzon@wsj.com 