The earthquake that hit Japan on a clear spring afternoon is the most tragic of recent blows to a country that has lost much of its global influence and, most crucially, lost its way at home.



The disaster comes with the nation's collective sense of pride already pummeled by caustic political infighting, the ascent of China and seemingly endless economic stagnation.

Just a few hours before the quake hit, Naoto Kan looked likely to be the country's latest prime ministerial casualty, over yet another donation scandal—which would make him the country's fifth premier in two years. The vitriol in parliamentary sessions last week claimed the scalp of Japan's foreign minister. Japan has lurched from one low-level scandal to the next, from match-fixing by sumo wrestlers to cheating on elite university entrance exams to the falsifying of documents by public prosecutors.

Friday's catastrophe, horrific as it is, could serve one positive purpose: It may be the catalyst that will force the country to unify and rally. The shaking had hardly ended before Mr. Kan appeared on national television, wearing a blue emergency-worker's jumpsuit, to tell the people of Japan to "remain calm" and assure them the government was doing everything in its power to minimize the damage. He told politicians resolutely that they needed to "save the country".

And standing behind him were recently warring politicians, offering support and unity in passing emergency relief spending legislation—after weeks of being unable to pass even routine borrowing bills. Sadakazu Tanigaki, leader of the main opposition Liberal Democratic Party, and other political leaders said they will provide full support to the government to help as many people as possible.

Whether this political unity can last remains to be seen. And of course, a natural disaster on this scale is likely to further hit Japan's already weak economy—the hiring environment for job-hunting college graduates is the worst in the country's history.

In the next hours, days, weeks and months, Japan will go about the emotionally painful task of assessing the damage and counting the casualties and injuries. It will rebuild homes, roads and lives for thousands of individuals. For a country that was so lost, Friday's earthquake—however devastating—could help it find its way.

 Write to  Mariko Sanchanta at mariko.sanchanta@wsj.com 