A group of 11 condo buildings reached a deal with the Battery Park City Authority on Tuesday that will lower the combined ground rents for the buildings by about $279 million over the next 30 years. 

The agreement is welcome news for nervous homeowners who feared steep rises in their monthly charges. The deal may help revive Battery Park City's struggling real-estate market where financing for mortgages has been tight due to the uncertainty over the ground rents. 

"The ground rent issue was a potential obstacle," said  Gene Glazer, who has lived in the area for 21 years and was a member of the negotiating committee. "I think we resolved that."

Under the deal, the 11 buildings will pay $525 million in combined ground rents over the next 30 years, rather than the estimated $804 million scheduled in the previous agreement.

Like many other properties in the city, the condos in Battery Park City don't own the land underneath the buildings. In this case, the buildings lease the land from the Battery Park City Authority, a public agency that was formed in the 1960s to develop the then-nascent neighborhood. 

The land-rent fees get rolled into the monthly condo fees that owners pay. In Battery Park City, the current amount paid toward ground rents range from about $30 dollars a month to several hundred dollars per condo unit, depending on the building. 

What sets the Battery Park City condos apart from other properties is how the ground rents were scheduled to rise over time. Most buildings with ground leases have long-term agreements spanning around 100 years with predicable price rises. 

That wasn't the case in Battery Park City. Next year, the ground rents for the 11 buildings were scheduled to rise to a combined amount of $14.7 million a year, which is a 63% rise from their current rates. In 2027, those rates were scheduled to be reset at 6% of appraised fair market value of the land underneath the buildings.

 Since the 2027 rates would be based on an appraised valuation more than a dozen years from now, no one knew how much the property owners would have to pay. The bargaining committee estimated that the total rent fees would jump to $38.9 million that year.

That uncertainty caused lenders to reel in their financing for prospective homeowners and residents who wanted to refinance their mortgages. "It's been a problem for years," said  Richard Martin, senior vice president of DE Capital Mortgage. 

While the rest of Manhattan's market began to rebound in 2010, Battery Park City regressed partly because of the ground rent issue. In 2010, there were 150 homes sold in the area, according to real-estate website StreetEasy.com, down from 168 in 2009, which was a weak year. 

Those numbers may improve now that the ground rent issue has been settled. Residents in Battery Park City "will not be hit with the crippling financial hardships they would otherwise be facing," said  Assemblyman Sheldon Silver, who represents the neighborhood. 

Lenders will likely open up their purse strings as well. "I think it's going to open up the market for financing," said Mr. Martin of DE Capital Mortgage. "It's going to be good for those 11 [condo buildings]."

 Write to  Joseph De Avila at joseph.deavila@wsj.com 