Poor Michelin Man—that iconic, plump cartoon figure made of inflated white inner-tubes. His British avatar, the red guide to Great Britain and Ireland 2011 (£15.99), is celebrating his 100th anniversary. This is by no means the 100th edition, for none was published during either World War, or indeed, between 1930 and 1974, when it was relaunched. 

The 1914 Fat Mich logo looked as though he was made not of parts of tires (still the Michelin company's prime business), but of bandages. This imagery is appropriate for the new edition, for London gastronomes, at least, will regard the 2011 volume not so much as a guide to the best places to eat in the capital, but as a 1,000-page suicide note.

Michelin uses a familiar star system—three for restaurants "worth a special journey," two "worth a detour" and one for "a very good restaurant," plus a symbol for something called "Bib Gourmand" given for "good food at moderate prices." 

Here, in Britain, the three-star category no longer matters. Hard times or no, they are doing splendid business, thank you. Anybody who can afford them already knows their names and addresses. At Bray, there's Heston Blumenthal's Fat Duck and Alain Roux's Waterside Inn, and in London, Gordon Ramsay's beanery in Chelsea and Alain Ducasse at the Dorchester. Never mind that they aren't equally good, and not even the best four eateries in the country—everybody interested also knows that. 

It isn't so much that there is a whiff of favoritism about these awards, and perhaps the older two-stars (there are two new ones this week, Hélène Darroze at the Connaught and Restaurant Nathan Outlaw at Rock, in Cornwall), but that the list of these worthy restaurants is carved in stone. I question the three stars given to the Waterside Inn since 1985, if only because it has never been as good as the two-star Gavroche, which is run by a different branch of the Roux family. But even among the one-stars, there are some impossible discrepancies: as I wrote here about three Edinburgh restaurants last October, you have to question whether the Michelin men know what they are doing up there in the Far North. If Plumed Horse really is a one-star (and I'm sure it isn't), then Martin Wishart is three-star and Kitchin at least two.

However, that isn't the problem Londoners have with Michelin. Especially now, with inflation rising and the bonus-less having to watch their spending, it is the "ethnic" restaurants Londoners most cherish and frequent. Despite having a launch cocktail party for the centenary anniversary edition earlier this week for the 143 starred U.K. chefs, and a superb traditional French lunch the next day for a trainload of French and British journalists (at the Michelin-themed restaurant Bibendum, cooked by the brilliant Matthew Harris—three red knives and forks for the décor, but no award for cooking), Londoners don't need more information about the eateries that most interest the Michelin guide.

Instead Londoners (and visitors) want to know about Chinese, Indian, Vietnamese, Thai, Turkish and Middle Eastern restaurants. Is their cooking superior? Do they cook regional specialities? If so, from which regions and what are the characteristics of the dishes? Which are good value for money?

It is true that I have been making this complaint in print for nearly 30 years. But why does Michelin hire inspectors who don't seem to understand or like cuisines other than French and polite Italian food? The inspectors have rarely been competent to judge, let alone enthusiastic enough to relish, for example, real Chinese food. When they oh-so tentatively give a star to a Chinese place, you can bet there is something French about it, if it's only pink tablecloths and crisp linen napkins, as used to happen in the '80s.

Today, London is bursting at the seams with outstanding, regionally differentiated Chinese restaurants. Barshu, on the corner of Romilly and Frith streets, has started a gratifying trend for Sichuanese restaurants and dishes, and catty-corner from it is Ba Shan, serving Hunanese food. In Pimlico, Hunan restaurant has longed served these dishes as interpreted by a chef from Taiwan (this is a traditional mingling, but no point in trying to explain this to Thick Mich). 

Amaya is probably the best Indian restaurant in London, as even Michelin recognizes by giving it one star. The Knightsbridge restaurant specializes in unusual, delicious grills—a Punjabi tradition—but it also keeps up with what is now so rapidly happening with food in cosmopolitan Mumbai. However, the owners of Amaya also own the terrific Chutney Mary and Veeraswamy, neither of which has had any real notice taken of its first-rate food, but they also run Masala Zone, a small chain with seven London locations, which serves absolutely genuine Indian food, and isn't even mentioned in Michelin. Masala Zone specializes is thali service, the way Indians eat at home, with an entire, authentic meal served on a tray, each dish in an individual bowl, called a katori, along with bread, pickles and chutneys; the most expensive thali is under £12. I'm afraid most Michelin inspectors would be rendered senseless if served with anything looking, smelling and tasting so unlike un repas français.

There are a couple of fine small chains of Turkish restaurants called Sofra and Tas—also not in Michelin—and a slightly upmarket one called Ozer, which is mentioned, but not ranked; the only help the guide gives you is to tell you the food is "authentic Turkish" and that there is "a wide range of appealing hot and cold meze." 

Are any of the rival guides to Michelin any better? Not really. Who needs Hardens or Zagat to aggregate other diners' responses in these salad days of the Internet, when, at a click, you can read the whole of a food blogger's opinion about almost any restaurant you can name? If you are interested in somebody else's views, at least the blogs give you the chance to examine that person's reasoning and prejudices. 

If Michelin would recognize and deal with its own bias, it might stand a chance of survival. I don't think it will.

 Write to  Paul Levy at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 