As gasoline prices surge, Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke is changing his tune when discussing inflation in public—in part to avert criticism that central bankers are out of touch with consumers.

While rising costs of groceries and gas are pinching consumers, that pain isn't reflected in "core inflation," the measure Fed officials often cite, which doesn't include food and energy prices. 

At their meeting Tuesday, Fed policy makers are likely to indicate they expect "underlying" inflation—a synonym for core—to remain low.

Core inflation tends to be a useful predictor of inflation over a couple of years, which they call the medium term, a period key to monetary-policy decisions. But the focus has drawn criticism that Fed officials aren't facing the economic reality that consumers confront at the pump and the cash register, as if central bankers don't drive or eat. 

Now, Mr. Bernanke is taking another tack in his public communications. In two days of congressional testimony this month, the Fed chairman never uttered the words "core inflation" while explaining the central bank's aims and policies. Instead of citing a specific measure, he emphasized the Fed's time frame. "Inflation can vary considerably in the short run," he said. "Our objective is to hit low and stable inflation in the medium term."

He acknowledged that rising food and energy prices have driven overall, or "headline," inflation higher. But he emphasized the importance of looking beyond short-term price spikes when setting Fed policy. Higher food and energy prices generally don't present a broader inflation problem unless they cause sustained increases in other consumer prices as well, he said.

"It was a clever, politically motivated choice of words," said former Fed Governor Laurence Meyer, vice chairman of consultancy Macroeconomic Advisers. "It gives exactly the same message. He probably reduced the intensity of questions he would've gotten if he had emphasized core," a word Mr. Meyer said has become "toxic."

The subtle shift comes as prices for oil, wheat and other commodities jump as a result of rising demand and supply disruptions globally. 

Overall inflation was 1.6% over the 12 months that ended in January, according to the Labor Department's consumer price index. Core inflation was just 1% over the same period.

When Fed officials grow worried about rising inflation, they combat it by lifting interest rates or taking other actions to damp demand. But they base policy on the expected path of overall inflation over a couple of years, rather than on short-term movements.

Fed officials still rely heavily on core inflation to gauge pricing trends. Their economic forecasts include expectations for both core inflation and headline inflation, with the measures converging over three years.

 Write to  Sudeep Reddy at sudeep.reddy@wsj.com and Michael S. Derby at michael.derby@dowjones.com 