A short, intense man, bundled in woolens, burst through the Carnegie Hall stage door 100 years ago for the last concert of his life. Gustav Mahler should not, by rights, have been there. The doctor had ordered him to bed with a head cold, and his relations with the New York Philharmonic had broken down at a hostile board meeting where, as tempers rose, a lawyer was whisked out from behind a curtain wielding a menacing contract. Any maestro today would have canceled the next concert, leaving the orchestra and his agent to concoct a face-saving statement.

Mahler, though, was not a quitter. Ever since he first docked in New York, in December 1907, he had been intrigued by America's musical potential. After a 10-year battle with lazy Viennese habits, he hoped to find a less prejudiced audience and more responsive musicians. Pushed out of the Metropolitan Opera by Arturo Toscanini's animosity, he found the Philharmonic at a low ebb. Taking over as conductor, he fired half of its players and set about reforming America's concert expectations. 

"I intend to let my public and the music critics help me in picking out the musical way we should go," he announced, but on the ship coming over from his European summer he had already sketched out a structure that shapes American concert life to this day.

Mahler split the Carnegie season into four subscription blocs, each with a thematic base, something no conductor had tried before. As well as a Regular Series, he put in a Beethoven cycle "for the education of lovers of classical music, for the education of my orchestra and for students." Sunday concerts were for "workers and students" who could not afford full-price tickets, and a Historical Series set out to demonstrate the evolution of music from Bach to the present, a kind of pre-media documentary. 

Other conductors planned seasons to attract audiences and applause. Mahler redefined the core purpose of concerts, substituting enlightenment for mere entertainment and reaching out to socially diverse audiences. Education and integration were wired into the concert prospectus. 

His radical plan was not designed to please wealthy patrons, and it provoked the influential music critic Henry Edward Krehbiel to accuse the composer of underestimating musical taste. "Mahler never discovered that there were Philharmonic subscribers who inherited not only their seats from their parents and grandparents but also their appreciation of good music," wrote Krehbiel, who feared that Mahler was usurping the critic's function to make sense of the music.

Mahler, unfazed, came up with more themes in his second season—a series of the best music by living composers in different lands, a strand of new works by Anglo-American composers. Early on, he told his board that this breakthrough was too important to be confined to Manhattan, and too expensive. He could save rehearsal time by taking big concerts on tour.

First stop was Brooklyn. The New York Philharmonic had never played before in the borough where most city workers lived (in 2011, it still doesn't). "At last, Brooklyn is really in New York!" exclaimed an evening newspaper. After three events in the Academy of Music, Mahler reached out to the rest of the country. 

It was the first time a conductor had put a full symphony orchestra on a train. They whistled through 10 cities—major centers like Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, Cleveland and Boston, as well as college and blue-collar towns, amplifying Mahler's appeal to workers and students. They played New Haven, Conn., Springfield, Mass., and Providence, R.I., and made New York state stops in Buffalo, Syracuse, Rochester and Utica. At Niagara Falls, Mahler declared, "at last, a real fortissimo," and went on to Washington, D.C. (Program sheets from the tours can be seen in Knud Martner's chronicle, "Mahler's Concerts," newly published by the Kaplan Foundation.)

Mahler's objective was not just to save rehearsal costs. His aim was to raise musical standards across the nation. In Boston, home of America's first orchestra, the composer Arthur Foote wrote that Mahler's "passion for perfection" now stood as "a constant object lesson" to the rest of the nation. 

That edifying impulse is why Mahler defied doctor's orders and his own grievances to conduct that fateful concert of Feb. 21, 1911. He had planned a program of Italian music new to New York, including the world premiere of a wonderful score by the intellectual pianist Ferruccio Busoni, a man after his own heart. Busoni's "Berceuse Élégiaque," a lament for his late mother, had affinities with the adagietto of Mahler's own fifth symphony. Toscanini came to hear it. Krehbiel called it "cacophony."

Halfway through the concert, Mahler complained of a headache. At the close, he was driven back to his hotel with his doctor in attendance. Suspecting subacute bacterial endocarditis—an then-incurable infection of the heart lining—the physician called in Emanuel Libman, the foremost authority on the disease. Mahler could not have been in better hands, but his condition was hopeless. He asked to be taken home, to die in Vienna. The Philharmonic announced that he had "a light attack of grippe."

Mahler died on May 18, 1911, aged 50. His symphonies would wait decades to reach a mass audience. Today, they challenge Beethoven's for popularity at the center of the symphonic canon, and Mahler is acknowledged as a maker of modern culture.

Less appreciated is his impact on American musical life, dominated for half a century by the cult of his enemy, Toscanini. But the Italian was a regressive force who built a canon of Great Composers. Mahler, more flexible, appealed to America's modernity and its appetite for novelty. Revitalizing the concert season, he pioneered education and social integration by orchestras and propounded a dream that a great orchestra should reach all parts of a great country. 

—Mr. Lebrecht's "Why Mahler?" is published by Pantheon. 