A  Morgan Stanley
MS


0.20
%




 banker is under investigation by prosecutors for allegedly leaking information that was relayed to Galleon Group hedge-fund founder  Raj Rajaratnam about a 2006 merger involving  Advanced Micro Devices Inc.,
AMD


0.49
%




 people close to the situation say.

  Kamal Ahmed, 42 years old, is the first Wall Street banker publicly drawn into the Galleon investigation. The government is preparing for Mr. Rajaratnam's trial late in February. 

News of the banker's role surfaced in court filings on Friday after the government filed a so-called superseding indictment against Mr. Rajaratnam on Thursday, adding an additional count of securities fraud and naming seven additional stocks that were part of the alleged insider trading conspiracy.

Mr. Ahmed wasn't named in the filing but people close to the situation say he is the banker referred to anonymously by the government. Mr. Ahmed was put on leave on Friday in connection to the filing. He hasn't been accused of wrongdoing and it isn't clear if he will be charged in the case. 

"Mr. Ahmed is cooperating with Morgan Stanley in its investigation and we are confident when all the facts are known it will be shown that he did nothing illegal or unethical," Mr. Ahmed's lawyer,  Douglas Tween, said on Sunday. Mr. Ahmed did not return calls for comment. 

A Morgan Stanley spokeswoman said in a statement: "If proven to be true, the alleged conduct would be a violation of Morgan Stanley's values and policies. We have placed the banker on leave and are fully cooperating with the government's investigation."

Mr. Ahmed has worked in the Menlo Park, Calif., office of Morgan Stanley since May, 2000, according to regulatory filings. Prior to that he worked at Merrill Lynch & Co. and Credit Suisse Group, the filing says. 



The government filing on Friday said that the unnamed Morgan Stanley banker informed another person that ATI Technologies Inc. was going to be acquired by AMD. The other person, whose name was also redacted from the filing, told Mr. Rajaratnam about the acquisition, the filing says. 

A spokesman for the U.S. Attorney's office declined to comment. 

Prosecutors also alleged in the Galleon case that  Anil Kumar, a former McKinsey & Co. consultant, provided information to Mr. Rajaratnam regarding the AMD acquisition of ATI. Mr. Kumar, who pleaded guilty in the case and is cooperating with prosecutors, has told the government that the was paid $2 million for providing tips to Mr. Rajaratnam. Mr. Rajaratnam has denied paying the money. A lawyer for Mr. Kumar has declined to comment. 

—Jenny Strasburg contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Susan Pulliam at susan.pulliam@wsj.com and Michael Rothfeld at michael.rothfeld@wsj.com 