TOKYO—Seiko Noda, a 50-year-old member of parliament and prominent reproduction-rights advocate, gave birth Wednesday to a baby boy, spurring a national debate over Japan's conservative stance on maternity issues. 

Despite Japan's embrace of innovative medical technologies, egg donation is virtually banned, and the practice of using a surrogate mother is forbidden by the Japan Society of Obstetrics and Gynecology, an official doctors organization. However, artificial reproduction using sperm donation is allowed.

Ms. Noda, who became pregnant via in vitro fertilization using eggs from an American donor, has campaigned for the government to create policies to give infertile couples more options when it comes to bearing children. 

Japan has the second-lowest birthrate in the developed world after South Korea, according to the United Nations, and the number of deaths a year has exceeded births since 2005. The government is desperately searching for ways to encourage couples to procreate, but many Japanese are putting off marriage and child-bearing until they are in their thirties or later. The average age of having a first child rose to 30 in 2009, from 25 in 1970. Abortion, meanwhile, is legal and widespread in Japan. 

Oral contraceptives, or birth control pills, were legalized in Japan only in 1999, following a controversy after the government quickly legalized use of the erectile dysfunction drug Viagra earlier that year. Critics say that the country's older, male-dominated parliament has stymied the passage of more progressive policies for women.

Because of the lack of legal options in Japan, a cottage industry catering to infertile couples has emerged, with "advisers" shuttling women to the U.S. and sometimes India, where they can receive egg donations or find surrogate mothers. 

The majority of these women don't publicize their nontraditional pregnancies because of stigmas and strong traditional beliefs in the importance of blood ties.

In 2003, Japanese television actress  Aki Mukai had twins through an American surrogate mother after cervical cancer left her infertile. In a highly public case, Japanese authorities said Ms. Mukai couldn't be registered as the twins' biological mother. She took the battle all the way to the supreme court, which ruled against her, citing a court decision made nearly half a century ago in which only the woman who gives birth is acknowledged as a child's mother. The twins were considered foreigners until they were officially adopted by Ms. Mukai and her husband, and gained Japanese citizenship in March 2008.

"Because they did not have a koseki—family registration—the twins were treated as if they did not exist," said Ms. Mukai, now 46, in an interview with The Wall Street Journal. "We were like a couple who were taking care of foreign kids. It was a miracle that they were born. But they had been deprived of their rights."

Many Japanese women who have children secretly via a surrogate wear a pillow or a prosthetic "bump" under their clothes to feign pregnancy so their neighbors and friends think they bore the child, according to  Yuki Sumi, a former representative in Tokyo for the Nevada Center for Reproductive Medicine who helped arrange reproductive treatment in the U.S. for Japanese women. 

Ms. Sumi says she has helped more than 500 couples in Japan have children over the past 20 years. 



"There was one woman who wore a fake bump for months," Ms. Sumi said. "Finally, she got on a plane to the U.S. to witness the birth of her baby by the surrogate mom and took off the bump as she was about to board. She saw someone she knew on the plane—and they were shocked. After that, I told clients to keep on their bump, even in the plane."

On Wednesday, the Japan Society of Obstetrics and Gynecology declined to comment on Ms. Noda's childbirth. 

Its website says: "We think it's necessary to consider setting up a law on egg donation from sisters and friends."

Ms. Mukai favors creating a legal framework to recognize children born from surrogate moms and for egg donation. 

But she also thinks the social attitude toward Japanese motherhood has to change. 

"People in the past considered a woman who could not give a birth as incomplete as a person. They discriminated against such a woman. An attitude like that still remains," Ms. Mukai said. "If a woman cannot give a birth, they think it's a shame and don't talk about it. Japan still preserves such attitudes." 

—Miho Inada  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Mariko Sanchanta at mariko.sanchanta@wsj.com 