Import-export tycoon Robert Ross sold Mickey Mouse watches to Soviet soldiers at the end of World War II. He sold $29.95 Romanian suits to New Yorkers who lined up around the block to buy one.

And he founded one of the largest medical schools in the Western Hemisphere, on the Caribbean island of Dominica. 

By the time of his death Saturday at age 92, Mr. Ross had also started a second medical school, a veterinary school and a nursing school. All are for-profit institutions in the Caribbean aimed at satisfying a U.S. market hungry for medical personnel but lacking sufficient university slots.

Ross University, which sends students to U.S. institutions for clinical training, has graduated 7,700 doctors since opening in 1978 and last year placed more physicians in U.S. residencies than any medical school in the world, the university claims.

Mr. Ross dreamed big from the time he was a boy in Detroit with a paper delivery route he claimed was the largest in the city, generating $100 a week at the depths of the Depression.

In the wake of World War II, Mr. Ross said he made a fortune selling some of the earliest televisions—with seven-inch screens—and eventually set himself up in the transistor tube business.

By the late 1960s, on the advice of his lawyer William Casey—later director of the Central Intelligence Agency—Mr. Ross began doing business behind the Iron Curtain."I went over there decked out in a cashmere coat, homburg and a long cigar. I neither lighted the cigar nor smoked it; it was a prop," he told a local newspaper near his Palm Beach winter home in 2000. The East Europeans "couldn't always remember 'Ross,' but they always remembered the white-haired man with a big cigar."

Soon he was bartering coveted Western goods like fax machines and jeans for basic commodities like wheat and plastics. He spent several years trying to introduce the Aro M-461, a Romanian jeep-like vehicle to American drivers. But approval from the Environmental Protection Agency took too long. 

In 1972, Time magazine dubbed him one of the "New Marco Polos" for pioneering East-West trade. His Manhattan-based company, Eastern Europe Inc., had revenue of more than $100 million a year by the early 1990s, he said.

Mr. Ross founded Ross University in 1978 at the instigation of an employee, whose son was having problems getting into medical school. He staffed the university in part with retired U.S. faculty, which gave them a nice post-retirement income in a beautiful part of the world.

Although criticized for accepting students with lower GPAs and test scores than U.S. schools do, Ross University grew and added a veterinary school on the nearby island of St. Kitts. Mr. Ross sold his university in 2000 for $135 million.

By then in his 80s, Mr. Ross stayed interested in medical training, and in 2005 opened the doors to the International University of Nursing on St. Kitts. Two years later, he founded the allied University of Medicine and Health Sciences, set to compete with Ross University at half the tuition. 

Mr. Ross's education stopped partway through college, but he could take credit for a medical marketing innovation of his own: Ysnore, a widely available herbal remedy he discovered when doing business in China.

Frank Neuhauser may have had a bigger challenge spelling his own name than the winning word of the first national spelling bee: gladiolus.

The year was 1925 when the 11-year-old Mr. Neuhauser journeyed to Washington, D.C., to beat out eight other regional finalists for the grand prize: $500 in gold and an invitation to meet President Calvin Coolidge in the White House. His hometown of Louisville, Ky., welcomed him home with a parade and a new bicycle.

Mr. Neuhauser went on to become a patent lawyer. He appeared in the 2002 documentary "Spellbound" about a group of teenagers seeking the 1999 spelling crown.

The winner that year correctly spelled "logorrhea."

"Nowadays the words are just too big," Mr. Neuhauser told the Washington Post in 1993. "I couldn't even get through the first round."

—Email remembrances@wsj.com 