OTTAWA—Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper stated unequivocally Saturday that he is seeking a majority mandate from voters after announcing national elections for May 2, a day after his minority Conservative government was defeated in a no-confidence vote. 

Harper made the announcement at a news conference after Governor General David Johnston granted his request to dissolve Parliament, paving the way for the fourth election in seven years. The request is a formality as the governor general, who is the representative of Queen Elizabeth II, Canada's head of state, acts on the advice of the prime minister. 

Canada's opposition parties toppled Mr. Harper's ruling Conservative minority government on Friday in a historic parliamentary finding of contempt, which doubled as a vote of no confidence. Recent polling data suggest that the Conservatives are in striking distance of a majority, making this campaign, which lasts just over a month, one of the most important in years.

Mr. Harper immediately went on the offensive against the main opposition Liberals, saying that they had a "hidden agenda" to form a coalition if voters don't elect a stable national government, which he said only his Conservatives can form. 

He said it was "crazy" to risk having an "unprincipled" coalition government with a party that wants to break up the country, referring to the separatist Bloc Quebecois, which wants to take the province of Quebec out of Canada. 

The Liberals and the left-leaning New Democratic Party formed a coalition in 2008 backed by the Bloc Quebecois, but the pact fell apart when the Liberals pulled out. Mr. Harper accused the Liberals of "keeping this option open." 

He said he will accept another minority mandate but that this wasn't in the country's best interest. Canada has had minority governments since 2004, with the Conservatives at the helm since 2006. 

Mr. Harper dismissed the contempt of parliament finding against the Conservatives, saying voters don't care and it's "not the substance" of an election. 

Liberal leader Michael Ignatieff denied he had a hidden agenda and ruled out a coalition with the NDP and the Bloc Quebecois. 

Bloc Quebecois leader Gilles Duceppe, speaking at news conference in Montreal, accused Mr. Harper of lying, saying he himself had tried to form a coalition in 2004 when he was opposition leader. 

Mr. Ignatieff told reporters that he will not form a coalition government if the Liberals win a minority mandate. He said Mr. Harper was "engaged in a systematic pattern of falsehood" with his accusations of a Liberal coalition. 

He said a Liberal government won't raise taxes and would restore fiscal balance. He said the Liberals will roll back legislated corporate tax cuts to the 2010 rate of 18%, and use the C$6 billion of savings to reduce the budget deficit and make targeted investments, including post-secondary education and helping family care-givers. 

 Write to  Nirmala Menon at Nirmala.Menon@dowjones.com 