SAN'A, Yemen—Yemeni soldiers fired rockets on protesters in the restive northern province of Amran Friday, killing three people and injuring seven others, according to a Shia rebel spokesperson.

"We were staging a peaceful protest along a main road when soldiers fired rockets on us," said Abu Hashim, a spokesman for the group. Mr. Hashim said there were "thousands of people" at the protest and the dead included a 70-year-old man.

Eyewitnesses said tanks were used and eight people had been killed. Government officials couldn't corroborate these statement.

A security official said the Amran protesters were carrying weapons. "Four soldiers were injured in clashes with armed tribesmen, who tried to pass checkpoints with guns," he said. "Then clashes ensued" between the protesters and the army. 

Friday's protest took place in Semla, a village about 100 miles north of the capital of San'a. The demonstration started peacefully, with crowds chanting for Ali Abdullah Saleh, who's been president for 32 years, to step down. When the group approached a military base just outside the village, soldiers fired rocket artillery, according to eyewitnesses.

In the capital of San'a Friday, demonstrations took place peacefully, with around 30,000 protesters continuing a sit in outside San'a University. "First Mubarak, now Saleh," the protesters chanting, referring to the ousted Egyptian president, Hosni Mubarak.

At one point and mob of around 200 youths marched around the city and had a brief face-off with pro-government men. Water canons and tear gas guns were brought to the scene by riot police, but were not used as the crowds dispersed.

The Shia Houthi rebels, named after their deceased leader Hussein Badreddin al-Houthi, have waged an on-again, off-again war with the government for the past six years, complaining of religious and economic marginalization. In late 2009, Saudi border police were dragged into the conflict when Houthi rebels crossed Yemen's northern border into the oil-rich state.

On Feb. 22, the Houthis officially joined the antiregime protesters, who have been staging sit-ins and demonstrations in the impoverished republic since January. In February 2010, the Houthi rebels and the government signed a truce, but sporadic fighting continues.

Tens of thousands of people took to the streets across the country on Friday, calling for the ousting of Mr. Saleh, who demonstrators say steals from the state and creates a specter of al Qaeda in the country to garner military aid from the U.S. 

Mr. Saleh has been a key U.S. ally in the fight against al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, Yemen's local arm and the most active wing of the group.

Mr. Saleh has promised to step down after elections in 2013, but demonstrators say he must leave power immediately. Opposition party leaders have given the president until the end of this year to leave office peacefully.

The proposed plan seeks to end the turmoil in Yemen, which started when student and human rights activists staged protests in solidarity with popular uprisings in Tunisia and Egypt. Last month, many political groups joined the students, including members of the opposition; defectors from Mr. Saleh's government; the Houthi rebels and the Southern Movement, a loose coalition demanding south Yemen secede from the north.