Nadja Swarovski recalls her father, Helmut, coming home from work with pocketfuls of crystals for her to play with. At the age of six or seven, Ms. Swarovski says, the rocks would keep her playing happily for hours. "But there were no other handouts," she laughs. "I was never spoilt as a child and education was the most important thing." 

Read the complete  Watches and Jewelry report.  

The glamorous 39-year old heiress to the Swarovski crystals empire spent her childhood in Wattens, the small market town in Austria's Tyrol state that is home to the family business established by her grandfather  Daniel Swarovski. 

 She is worthy of his legacy. Ms. Swarovski has been instrumental in revamping the image of the Swarovski brand since she entered the business aged 25. Since 2000, Swarovski has doubled its annual turnover from €970 million ($1.4 billion) to over €2 billion at the end of 2010. Ms. Swarovski is proud that the fashion arm of the business – her personal project – which was at one time responsible for 30% of the company's profit, today accounts for 55%.

Now vice president of international communications and creative director, she is credited with steering the company away from its kitsch side- the crystal Disney figurines and the bling-covered iPod cases – to the fashion shows, the art fairs, the catwalks and the movie premieres. 

Swarovski crystals adorn Hollywood's silver screens – 250,000 of them were used on the ballet costumes in this year's blockbuster Black Swan – while the Swarovski brand is omnipresent at the fashion shows, even hosting its own catwalk event: Swarovski Runway Rocks. At the Oscars this February, 55,000 Swarovski crystals were flown over from Austria to illuminate the stage. Swarovski is also earning a name for itself in the world of architecture and interior design. Leading Israeli designer architect  Zaha Hadid has collaborated with Swarovski on a number of projects for the Swarovski Crystal Palace – a series of installations at the trendiest art fairs. During London fashion week in February, Swarovski sponsored a group of young up-and-coming fashion designers, calling them The Swarovski Collective. Swarovski gave them crystals to use in innovative ways in their designs, winning the brand invaluable kudos. 

But the revamp of the company's image did not take place overnight, says Ms. Swarovski. It took several years and brain power from high-profile fashion icons including the late  Isabella Blow and  Alexander McQueen, Julien McDonald, Viktor & Rolf and  Phillip Treacey, who Ms. Swarovski brought on as ambassadors. 

From her own perspective, she says it helped that she didn't enter the family business straight away, opting to study fine arts in New York before working in an art gallery, and then going into fashion public relations. Although she is part of a wealthy family dynasty, she was encouraged to live a normal life until she was mature enough to handle her wealth and responsibility. "My parents drip-fed me my wealth. My father would call to check I was studying hard enough when I was at University, and not out partying," she says. 

But one day while at work at the New York PR firm, she says she had a light bulb moment. Why was she using her skills and energy on another family's brand, when she could be using her knowledge of the fashion industry to better her own family business? She returned to Austria from the U.S. and joined Swarovski. Ultimately, she brought a fresh perspective to the business, she says, although responsibility was not given to her on a plate. "I had to earn the right to an opinion. At first, my plans for the business were laughed at. I am taken more seriously now."

In many ways Ms. Swarovski modeled her strategy on her grandfather's ethos for running the business: To make the product accessible to everyone, without letting it lose its prestige. It was a tall order but she believes it came down to combining crystals with iconic fashion. Her grandfather pioneered this method, creating costume jewelry with  Coco Chanel in the 1940s, while Hollywood glitterati such as  Marilyn Monroe and  Marlene Dietrich all wore gowns adorned in the crystals. 

In the 1960s,  Audrey Hepburn wore Swarovski jewels in the iconic film Breakfast at Tiffany's. "I learned a lot from my grandfather's success. I am following in his footsteps," she says. "I feel fortunate to have a high powered career that I enjoy but what I love most is being back at home with my family, out in the fresh air. To me family is the most important thing."

 Ms. Loader Wilkinson can be reached at tara.loaderwilkinson@dowjones.com  