Like a defeated boxer itching for a comeback, New York City Mayor  Michael Bloomberg pledged his administration would use the lessons learned from its poor handling of the post-Christmas blizzard to respond to the new storm barreling toward the city.

Forecasts called for 8 to 14 inches of snow to fall in the five boroughs, beginning Tuesday evening. The heaviest snow was to come in the early morning hours of Wednesday before tapering off by midday. Wind gusts were expected to reach 25 miles an hour. Visibility would be limited, forecasters said.

"We didn't do the job that New Yorkers rightly expect of us in the last storm, and we intend to make sure that that does not happen again," Mr. Bloomberg said at City Hall. "We are enhancing our existing snow plan and supplementing it with lessons learned during and after the Christmas weekend blizzard."

Mr. Bloomberg declared a "weather emergency" Tuesday evening, urging people not to drive and warning that cars blocking streets would be towed. The declaration falls short of a formal "snow emergency" that would prohibit people from parking on major streets or driving on them without snow tires or chains. At a City Council hearing on Monday, officials said they erred last month when two commissioners decided not to declare an emergency, a decision that some say left too many vehicles on the roads. 

Officials were to decide by 5 a.m. Wednesday whether schools would open. In anticipation of this storm, the Sanitation Department has 365 salt spreaders and 1,700 plows ready. The equipment is being pre-positioned on designated routes to prepare for work once snow removal operations begin, officials said.

Equipment and personnel from the Transportation, Parks, and Environmental Protection departments will also be plowing city streets from the beginning of the storm. That's a new element included in the 15-point plan unveiled by the administration on Monday to better respond to snow storms. Among other new measures: More private contractors will have equipment positioned before the storm starts, some plows will have GPS systems and Sanitation Department crews with video cameras will send live feeds back to City Hall.

Like the mayor, Metropolitan Transportation Authority chief  Jay Walder will be trying to show that his agency can handle snow. "The bottom line is that we need to be faster to react when forecasts change," Mr. Walder said Tuesday. "In December, we were too slow in reacting to events as they happened."

The result was buses and subways stuck in the snow for hours. The Long Island and Metro-North commuter railroads were shut down for long stretches. Diesel trains meant to rescue stuck subways were left in yards instead of positioned before the storm, leaving passengers waiting on an A train for nearly seven hours as crews dug out a locomotive. 

This time, Mr. Walder said, more people and equipment will be positioned before the storm. All of the MTA's operating agencies will be on their highest alert levels beginning Tuesday night; each one will open a command center to monitor disruptions. 

But he still warned that some snow-induced service changes are inevitable Wednesday and urged people to stay home.

"Providing service during winter storms is always fraught with difficulty," Mr. Walder said, "If you don't need to travel tomorrow morning, please don't."

While the agency planned to evaluate which services it would run throughout the storm, it's likely that express service will be disrupted Wednesday morning. That's because the MTA planned to store trains underground Tuesday night so they wouldn't be covered with snow and ice at rush hour Wednesday morning. 

The Long Island Rail Road, which was almost entirely shut down for more than a day in December, is trying to at least run some service on its busiest branches Wednesday, railroad President  Helena Williams said. 

With New Yorkers still angry over last month's storm, the mayor sought Tuesday to lower expectations.

"Tomorrow morning's commute is not going to be easy and I would assume that tomorrow night's is not going to be easy, either," Mr. Bloomberg said.

"The storm is predicted to be at its heaviest just a few hours before rush hour," he said. "And there's no ways that our city's plows can get to all 6,000 streets in one or two hours."

Many senior centers are expecting to be closed Wednesday, so the mayor urged seniors to call centers before heading out to ensure they're open. He said seniors who receive home-delivered meals would receive two on Tuesday.

At Monday's hearing on last month's snow storm, council members criticized the mayor for his "let-them-eat-cake" attitude during the first 24 hours of the post-Christmas Day storm. On Tuesday, when asked about this issue, the mayor replied, "You know, when things go wrong, you can never have enough empathy."

Still, he said, "You can sit there and you can say, 'I'm sorry! I'm sorry! I'm sorry!' Or you can go out and get a shovel and start to work."

 Write to  Michael Howard Saul at michael.saul@wsj.com and Andrew Grossman at andrew.grossman@wsj.com 