SOHAR, Oman — Protests in Oman's second-largest city lost steam Tuesday, but not before spreading unrest to the mouth of the world's most important oil thoroughfare—the Strait of Hormuz, which controls access to most of the energy produced in the Persian Gulf.

At Sohar's main roundabout, only about 50 protesters remained of the hundreds who blockaded the area on previous days, demanding higher pay, more jobs and the departure of several senior ministers.

Barricades preventing workers and goods entering Sohar industrial port, an economic hub for Oman and site of a large aluminium refinery, were operating only sporadically after a shutdown lasting several days.

After near-daily concessions by the country's rulers, many Sohar residents appeared impatient with the young people who continued to protest and expressed anger at the damage they had caused—a large supermarket and a police station were torched Sunday and windows were smashed in many buildings.

"For two or three days it's OK, but for more than that it's a big problem for me," said Matar, 25, a worker at the aluminium refinery who was picking disconsolately through the broken glass and charred debris by Lulu hypermarket. "It is Omani people who they are stopping from working."

Some people had organized community groups to prevent more damage, according to swimming instructor Abdullah Sahami, 29, who had helped form one such outfit.

Like many residents of Sohar he voiced suspicions, without providing any proof, that the protesters had been paid to stir up trouble by a neighboring country.

After clashes Saturday and Sunday, authorities have avoided attempts to disperse protests. However, 10 armored vehicles monitored the group of protesters at the city's main roundabout, and soldiers chatted amicably with passers by.

Tuesday morning Omanis received text messages from the government promising several measures including the introduction of welfare payments to the unemployed of 150 Omani riyals ($390) a month.

That followed recent steps including a 40% increase in the minimum wage to 200 riyals a month, increased payments to students and a cabinet reshuffle.

Although there never seemed to be any danger of Oman's protests unseating the country's popular ruler, Sultan Qaboos bin Said Al Said, scholars who study the country said a new gap is emerging between the government and younger people.

Inspired by the popular revolts that toppled the presidents of Egypt and Tunisia, young protesters have mostly focused on economic issues, but some also called for the partially elected Majlis al-Shoura assembly to be given a legislative role instead of a purely advisory one.

Advertising hoardings near the roundabout where protests have been focused still displayed celebratory posters put up in 2010 to mark the 40th anniversary of Sultan Qaboos's accession to the throne.

For older Omanis, the moment represents the start of a huge transformation in the country's fortunes from an era when the main gate of its capital, Muscat, was still locked from dusk till dawn, to an age of peace, economic growth and rapid modernization.

However the celebratory mood is difficult for some of the sultanate's younger citizens, who have benefitted from the vast improvements to the country's education system but now struggle to find good jobs, or salaries that match those enjoyed in the neighboring United Arab Emirates.

Some of those who participated in protests that began Saturday also voiced ire at the wealth of the country's business elite, who have traditionally enjoyed close ties to the government.

Although it is a member of the Gulf Cooperation Council and sits along one side of the vital oil transhipment route the Strait of Hormuz, Oman has always been regarded as peripheral to regional politics.

Unlike its solidly Sunni Muslim neighbors, Oman is predominantly Shia —but of a very different sect from Iran, the largest and most powerful Shia country in the region. And while Oman has traditionally been less suspicious of its large council neighbor than other Gulf Arab countries, the two are widely regarded as unlikely allies.