BRATISLAVA, Slovakia—Efforts to defend Europe's common currency by bailing out indebted countries are failing and financial stresses could increase over the next two years, Slovakia's top finance official said Thursday.

Slovak Finance Minister Ivan Miklos said new rules that could require private investors to share the costs of any rescue efforts after 2013 risk "increasing pressure for markets to shift the whole burden onto taxpayers before then."

In an interview with The Wall Street Journal, Mr. Miklos also said that uniting the finances of euro-zone governments isn't the solution to the euro zone's continuing woes.

"The main responsibility, the main effort needs to be at the national level," Mr. Miklos said. Governments need to "respect fiscal rules and convince people there is no free lunch. We have to pay the bills and work hard if we want a better life."

Slovakia's new, right-leaning government, which took office last year, has refused to participate in the $140 billion bailout of Greece and criticized the establishment of the so-called European Financial Stability Facility as a mistake. Slovakia adopted the euro in 2009.

The country, the euro area's poorest member until the tiny Baltic nation of Estonia joined Jan. 1, has said it is unfair for its citizens to foot the bill for wealthier neighbors that overspent.

Since the Greek bailout and a similar rescue of Ireland, fears have mounted that other troubled euro-zone countries, such as Portugal and Spain, could end up needing assistance. And the European Union has scrambled to maintain financial stability. 

"This is very dangerous, it is not effective," Mr. Miklos said of the bailout efforts. "It is destroying confidence in the market economy. What kind of capitalism is it, when profits are private, but losses are nationalized?"

He said there is no reason that national bankruptcies or debt restructurings should cause the euro to collapse. "Loans to Greece were the first mistake; formal debt restructuring would be much, much better," he said.

The Slovak finance minister said that stricter budget-deficit rules for EU members would be useful, but that a complete fiscal union would go too far, threatening the competitiveness of countries such as Slovakia that want to keep taxes and spending low.