Graeme McDowell couldn't have done much better last year. From almost nowhere, the Northern Irishman emerged as one of the world's top golfers, winning the U.S. Open and starring in Europe's Ryder Cup victory.

He finished 2010 with four titles, including a playoff victory over Tiger Woods at the Chevron World Challenge, climbed to 14th in the world earnings list and even earned an MBE (Member of the Order of the British Empire) in Britain's New Year's honors list.

But as Mr. McDowell tees off at the European Tour's season-opening Abu Dhabi HSBC Championship on Thursday, he has taken an unexpected—and possibly downright reckless—approach to staying on top of his game.

He has ditched the clubs that got him there. 

"I am sure a few people are scratching their heads," Mr. McDowell said about the change of equipment at a news conference this month. "Coming off the back of last year, there were always going to be questions."

At a time when athletes in sports from football to tennis are using major tournaments as a chance to unveil new equipment, it's hardly remarkable for a top player to dump a trusted set of tools. Caroline Wozniacki, the world's No. 1-ranked women's tennis player, swapped her old racket for a new model before this month's Australian Open, while last summer's the FIFA World Cup in South Africa saw a bunch of the best football players on the planet attempt to master a brand new ball.

But what's unusual here is that in the world of professional golf, the most important relationship a player has is arguably the one with his clubs. Most top pros are so attached to the putter or driver in their bag that the smallest variation can send their game spinning into the rough. Slight changes in weight or feel can dramatically affect trajectory and distance. Some players won't even change their socks after a sizzling round.

"When you're playing well, you don't want to change anything," said Ian Woosnam, the former world No. 1 and U.S. Masters winner. "The only time most players consider [changing clubs] is when they've stopped finding the fairway." 

That wasn't the case with Mr. McDowell, who has moved from Callaway to the Japanese company Srixon in a multiyear deal valued at roughly €2.25 million ($3 million) a year, according to someone with knowledge of the agreement. "I'm really excited about my decision," Mr. McDowell said in a statement.

Of course, Mr. McDowell isn't the only player to ditch a proven set of sticks for a bag full of strangers and a pile of cash. Endorsement deals are about the closest thing to free agency in golf.  Nigel Currie, a director at London-based sponsorship consultancy BrandRapport, said manufacturers offer top pros "three or four times" what they can make out on the course.

For most players, that sort of money is simply too good to pass up. Which is why equipment companies almost always succeed when they come in with a mega-bucks offer to tempt a player to change clubs. Jim Furyk and Camilo Villegas also signed endorsement deals with new manufacturers this off-season following huge years on the U.S. PGA Tour.

"Success in golf invariably brings off-season opportunities, which means offers to change equipment," said Mr. Currie.

But while switching clubs is nothing new, it's still considered a major risk. Professional golfers are a fragile breed—at least mentally—and any change can upset the balance. Miss a few shots, then miss some more, and suddenly those new clubs look like scrap metal.

The history of the game is littered with players who, having had some success, were tempted by a huge contract to change the clubs with which they achieved that success. Payne Stewart plummeted from sixth to 123rd in the U.S. money list when he switched from Wilson to sign with Spalding in 1994. Steve Stricker was fourth on the PGA Tour money list in 1996, but dropped outside the top 100 the following year after moving from Cleveland to Japan-based PRGR. Ernie Els hasn't won a major since leaving TaylorMade in 2002.

Golf analysts say changes in clubs can cause mechanical and mental problems. "A club can be just slightly more offset and suddenly you are striking the ball differently," said Robert Lee, a former European Tour player and now an analyst for Sky Sports. "Then you make changes in the swing to adjust and the problems begin."

If there's any good news for Mr. McDowell, it's this: When top players have changed equipment in recent times, not much has really changed. Phil Mickelson, the world No. 4, has represented three different manufacturers in the past decade without going into a tailspin.

For starters, many contracts require a player to use only a handful of the sponsor's clubs. While Mr. McDowell's deal stipulates that he must use a Srixon ball, irons and sister-company Cleveland's wedges, he's still free to use his personal choice of driver, putter and rescue club. With those reliable favorites, Mr. Lee says that seasoned pros should be "comfortable" with their clubs. "With those in your bag, how much has really changed?" he said.

In addition, the clubs pros use aren't always the ones they say they carry. Players are now able to give their new equipment companies such precise specifications that they essentially get the same clubs they used to have, just with a different logo.

In any event, golfers are known for giving their clubs extreme makeovers and many of the world's top players spend the days before a tournament customizing their clubs to such an extent that they're often radically different from the ones they endorse. "These aren't the same clubs you see in the pro shop," said Mr. Woosnam.

For now, Mr. McDowell doesn't appear too hamstrung by his change. At his first tournament with the new clubs, the U.S. PGA Tour's season-opening Tournament of Champions in Hawaii, he produced arguably the round of his career—an 11-under-par 62 in the final round—and is now level with Mr. Mickelson at No. 4 in the world rankings.

"I realized it was going to be a difficult way to start the season with the new equipment," said Mr. McDowell. "I just hoped 2010 was more about the Indians than the arrows."

 Write to  Jonathan Clegg at jonathan.clegg@wsj.com 