SANTIAGO--The Chilean government won't likely implement capital controls to stem speculative inflows, a move that would distinguish Chile from other rapidly growing emerging economies that have adopted the measure as a way to curb potential asset bubbles.

Finance Minister Felipe Larraín, who published a book in 2000 on the efficacy of capital controls, said that in the case of Chile, these controls played a limited role when they were used in the 1990s as they didn't reduce the amount of inflows but simply changed their composition. 

"We don't want to go in that direction, and the President (Sebastián Piñera) has already said so," the 52-year-old Mr. Larraín said in an interview Thursday. 

Since the onset of the financial crisis in 2008, money has been flowing into emerging economies that have continued to grow at a fast clip. Many nations such as China, India and Brazil have implemented measures to prevent sudden inflows from having destabilizing effects.

Mr. Larraín, who has a doctorate in economics at Harvard University, outlined the measures the government is taking to keep the peso competitively valued and to avoid the deleterious side effects of high copper prices on the Andean nation's economy. As the world's largest copper exporter, high prices for the metal can have a major economic impact, particularly on the local currency. 

The Chilean peso has recently been trading at 32-month highs against the dollar as a result of strong economic growth and rising copper prices. That has prompted the country's exporters to call for the central bank's intervention. 

Early this month, the monetary authority announced a currency-market-intervention program to buy a total $12 billion during the year. 

"But there's no such thing as a free lunch," Mr. Larraín said. "There was a small increase in local market rates as the intervention needs to be sterilized," he said. 

The central bank neutralizes the impact of its dollar purchases by issuing local bonds in pesos. 

Mr. Larraín praised the intervention, noting that the peso lost 5% in the first few days following the announcement. He said the timing was good, as the peso had gained so much that it was hurting job-intensive exporters in the agricultural and industrial sectors. 

The mining industry, which produces a third of the world's copper, didn't see its competitiveness fall as much, as high copper prices countered the peso's strength, he said. 

The minister, however, didn't rule out that these same high copper prices--currently around $4.40 a pound, with highs even expected to reach $5--put the country at risk of what is known as the "dutch disease," a dynamic by which domestic manufacturers are hurt when high revenue from commodities exports causes the local currency to appreciate. 

"There is a risk, but we are trying to avoid that," he said. 

Among the measures the government is taking to keep the peso competitive is reducing fiscal spending, raising taxes, granting exporters greater access to derivatives to cover exchange risk and dollar-denominated loans, and reducing red tape in general. 

"In 2009, fiscal spending grew 18% in real terms and the peso's exchange rate firmed 20% in real terms. This, in our view, was excessive," he said. 

In 2010, Chile faced the extraordinary task of recovering from the fifth-strongest earthquake on record, but this year, fiscal spending will slow down significantly, he added. 

"In the 2011 fiscal budget, spending will increase 5.5% in real terms, and gross domestic product is expected to grow between 6% and 7% this year," he noted. 

To partially finance post-quake reconstruction, for the first time ever, Chile last year issued peso-denominated bonds on the international market. 

The $500-million issue was oversubscribed 7.3 times, Mr. Larraín said. 

"We may likely go back in to the international markets in the near future," he said, adding that the sale amount would need to be carefully analyzed to avoid putting any more pressure on the already strong currency. 



 Write to  Carolina Pica at carolina.pica@dowjones.com 