ROME—Italian prosecutors have placed Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi under investigation for allegedly patronizing a prostitute and for abuse of office in a case involving an under-age Moroccan woman, prosecutors and Mr. Berlusconi's lawyers said on Friday. 

  More interactive graphics and photos  

The probe is likely to rekindle controversy over the Italian leader's personal life just as he faces ongoing political troubles.

Prosecutors in Milan have asked Mr. Berlusconi to undergo questioning in the presence of his lawyers as part of their ongoing investigation, according to a statement by Edmondo Bruti Liberati, Milan's chief prosecutor. The prosecutors allege that Mr. Berlusconi gave gifts to Karima El Mahroug—a Moroccan woman who goes by the nickname Ruby—in exchange for sexual favors early last year when Ms. El Mahroug was 17 years old, according to the statement and Mr. Berlusconi's lawyers. 

Prosecutors also allege that Mr. Berlusconi abused his power in an attempt to cover up his alleged actions, the prosecutor's statement and lawyers said. Mr. Berlusconi has not been charged in the investigation. Ms. El Mahroug is not under investigation and is considered an "injured party" in the investigation, according to the statement.

A lawyer for Ms. El Mahroug did not return phone calls seeking comment on Friday.

In an audio message to his supporters, Mr. Berlusconi criticized the investigation as an attempt to smear him and "subvert the fundamental rules of democracy." He added that prosecutors were "jealous," because he had never invited them to private parties at his villa.

Niccolo Ghedini and Piero Longo, two of Mr. Berlusconi's lawyers, called the allegations "absurd and groundless" and described the probe as an "extremely serious intrusion" into Mr. Berlusconi's private life. Piersilvio Cipolotti, another lawyer for Mr. Berlusconi, said in a telephone interview the premier was unlikely to heed the prosecutors' request to undergo questioning. Mr. Cipolotti said Mr. Berlusconi never had sexual relations with Ms. Mahroug, adding that the premier had "many reasons to give a gift without committing a crime."

Mr. Berlusconi has often made light of his penchant for late-night parties with young women, but the soirees have become a lighting rod for debate and scrutiny and have alienated some of his allies and some Church officials. Veronica Lario, the premier's wife, announced she was seeking a divorce in 2009, accusing the premier of "consorting with minors."

Last year, prosecutors began investigating whether members of the premier's entourage allegedly operated a prostitution ring involving Ms. El Mahroug. On May 27, Ms. El Mahroug was detained by police in Milan for allegedly stealing cash from an acquaintance. In October, Mr. Berlusconi acknowledged publicly that he had called the police station that night to press for Ms. El Mahroug's release. 

Mr. Berlusconi justified that call, saying he was a person "of the heart." Prosecutors maintain the premier intervened in an attempt to prevent Ms. El Mahroug from telling police about her alleged relations with the Mr. Berlusconi, according to the prosecutor statement and the premier's lawyers.

In the early hours of May 28, shortly after Mr. Berlusconi's phone call, police released Ms. Mahroug without charges, and Nicole Minetti, a regional councilor in Mr. Berlusconi's political party, came to pick her up. Police have searched Ms. Minetti's apartment as part of the probe and placed her under investigation for aiding and abetting prostitution, according to Mr. Bruti Liberati's statement. Daria Pesce, a lawyer for Ms. Minetti, declined to comment on the investigation. In October, Ms. Minetti, a former cabaret dancer in a show aired by Mr. Berlusconi's Mediaset SpA TV empire, issued a statement saying she knew Ms. El Mahroug but had never hosted her in her home.

Last year, during an interrogation with prosecutors, Ms. Mahroug said she had attended late-night parties at the premier's villa where he showered her with expensive gifts, according to people familiar with the probe. Mr. Berlusconi has said media reports of Ms. Mahroug's description of the parties at his private residence were "trash." Mr. Cipolotti, his lawyer, said the premier met Ms. El Mahroug during a party at his Milan villa in early 2010, adding that the premier was unaware of her age at the time. 

In a Jan. 10 video interview posted on the Web site of Italian newspaper La Repubblica, Ms. El Mahroug described her visits to Mr. Berlusconi's villa as "normal dinners" that featured singing by the premier, dancing and talk of politics.

The investigation comes at a delicate time for the premier. For months, the billionaire media mogul has been struggling to shore up his wafer-thin majority in Parliament following the defection of the co-founder of his political party. On Thursday, Italy's Constitutional Court struck down part of a law that had allowed the prime minister's office to postpone criminal trials facing top government officials. Mr. Berlusconi is facing three trials on charges of tax fraud, embezzlement and corruption.

Mr. Berlusconi has repeatedly denied those charges, asserting that he is the victim of persecution by leftwing judges. In their statement on Friday, the premier's lawyers decried the investigation, saying it had "no precedent in the judicial history of the country and shows the unbearable state of relations with some magistrates."

—Nathania Zevi and Gilles Castonguay contributed to this article.

 Write to  Stacy Meichtry at stacy.meichtry@wsj.com 