BRIELLE, N.J.—One evening last May, jobless executive Paul Terlizzi described his deep frustrations about his fruitless search to his wife Sandy as they sat in the spacious living room of their renovated carriage house.

The former CEO of Capezio Ballet Makers Inc. had been forced out of the financially-ailing company in March 2009 at age 48. He had led the biggest U.S. maker of dance shoes since 1998. The family-owned concern, founded by his great great uncle, once counted Gene Kelly and Fred Astaire among its customers. 

The heart-to-heart with his wife marked the low point in Mr. Terlizzi's long quest to reinvent himself. "I questioned my value at being employed and respected again,'' he recalls telling her. "I am going to have to expand this search beyond New Jersey for a job or a business to buy.'' (The New Jersey native had never lived anywhere else.)

Mr. Terlizzi is not alone: More than half of unemployed managers and executives during 2010 were out of work for at least 27 weeks, the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics reports. That's up from 19.3% in 2007, before the recession hit.

Many CEOs displaced during the downturn prefer to command a similar size business again. "It's challenging for any executive on a well-delineated career track for years to think beyond that," observes Allen Schoer, head of the TAI Group, a New York leadership consultancy. And some, like Mr. Terlizzi, try to "do something completely different yet personally meaningful."

Mr. Terlizzi now runs a tiny Colorado producer of custom cushions and pillows, which he purchased Dec. 29 for about $750,000 of his money plus a six-month loan from the sellers. "Losing a job doesn't have to be the end of the world,'' the barrel-chested executive says. 

At my request, Mr. Terlizzi kept a journal during most of his protracted search. He gleaned powerful insights after battling despair and insomnia. The most crucial lesson: Leverage your best skills, relying more on your resourcefulness than networking. He also discovered the importance of letting go of your past. 

Here's a close look at his painful, but inspiring reinvention:

"He was very, very lost." remembers Mr. Schoer who counseled him for months soon after his unexpected exit. 

Indeed, Mr. Terlizzi says he initially felt too depressed to pursue his potential goals of business ownership, solo management consulting or full-time work. Instead, he fixed up his residence until September 2009. "All I could do was plant trees and carry lumber." 

He carried out his reinvention journey from a dark, cramped corner of his attic bedroom. The 4'x8' space "is a bit oppressive," he says. It was far smaller than his Capezio office, where "I had very nice windows,'' he adds. 

Mr. Terlizzi figured buying a small business would free him of "advice governed by the multiple agendas of relatives." Hunched over his computer at 5:30 every morning, he reviewed more than 1,500 listings of New Jersey firms for sale.

"Today felt like a day in a salt mine, sifting through tons of sand to find perhaps a few grains of salt,'' he lamented in his journal. "Not happy." Still, the grueling process made him realize that he knew plenty about acquisitions from doing six deals for Capezio. 

A landscaping supply yard attracted Mr. Terlizzi. He couldn't arrange a bank loan, however. He next considered a psychometric testing firm, which assessed applicants and staffers. He didn't make an offer because sellers refused to divulge key information. 

Nor did Mr. Terlizzi fare well peddling advice to midsized companies. He wrote 130 businesses in two local counties with at least $10 million in annual revenue. The pitch letters described his nearly 20 years of management experience. 

He even showed up unannounced at certain consulting targets. "I got absolutely no responses," he recollects.

So, Mr. Terlizzi revamped his resume, approached recruiters and applied for 141 top management posts. He sought to become chief operating officer of Gibson Guitar Corp. and CEO of Renaissance Learning Inc., for instance.

Gibson and Renaissance ignored him. In fact, Mr. Terlizzi says, "I can count on one hand the number of rejection letters I got.'' 

Such setbacks intensified his distress over his job loss and alienation from close relatives who had ousted him. "I am angry over what has happened,'' Mr. Terlizzi stated in his journal. "Why is that the family and I could not come to some other arrangement?" 

In another entry, he fantasized about rejoining Capezio. "Stress can stir your emotions and make you long for the comforts of home,'' Mr. Terlizzi wrote. He now says he just yearned to be productive again.

A life coach and hypnotist helped Mr. Terlizzi to overcome his anger, learn meditation chants and look harder. "I have been given a great gift of time to sort through…beliefs I have about myself and my place in this world,'' another journal entry noted.

By last spring, however, Mr. Terlizzi worried about running out of time -- and his generous severance, due to expire early this year. Meanwhile, his outreach to his extensive network wasn't bearing fruit.

Mr. Terlizzi renewed his request for introductions from 87 contacts such as former colleagues, suppliers and customers. None materialized. But an out-of-work neighbor he met while walking his dog proposed using Indeed.com, a jobs search engine.

That's how Mr. Terlizzi landed a July interview to be executive director of the Colorado Ballet. Though he wasn't hired, he decided to explore possible takeovers in Colorado – fulfilling his promise to look beyond New Jersey. 

One prospect was American Down and Feather Inc., a profitable start-up based in Henderson, Colo., with eight employees. Its retiring owners accepted his September offer. Mr. Terlizzi took command Jan. 10. 

He says he doesn't mind that he'll earn 25% of what he made at Capezio -- and that he'll no longer run a far-flung operation. 

"Now, I have this one little business,'' Mr. Terlizzi says, grinning proudly. "It's all in one place and it's all mine." 