WASHINGTON—The Barack Obama who spoke Tuesday night sounded less partisan, less populist and less ambitious than the president who delivered the State of the Union address a year ago.

Pick the words that you think best complete the president's sentences.

Review the main topics and words used in President Obama's address this year and compare with 2009 and 2010. 

Last year, Mr. Obama called for the parties to work together — then suggested Republicans cared more about short-term politics than leadership. This year, he made the same call for bipartisanship, minus the digs. 

"What comes of this moment is up to us," he told lawmakers.

It's hard to know whether the president's rhetorical flourishes will translate into action, especially given the two years of rancor, as well as the fundamental differences between the parties, including policies on health care and government spending. The president acknowledged this gap at the top of his speech.

There were similarities to a year ago. His big idea on the deficit in 2010 was to freeze non-security domestic discretionary spending for three years. This year, he set a goal of five years. 

Both addresses were heavy on economic and domestic issues. Though the U.S. remains at war, there was only a short section on national security. A major theme for 2011 was pushing innovation to build America's future, a topic he discussed last year, too.

This time last year, the president was coming off a big political loss. His party had just lost an important Senate election and with it its filibuster-proof majority. Populist fury had engulfed his health-care proposal, and Mr. Obama's stance was combative.

"I don't quit," he declared, as he urged Congress last year to complete work on his aggressive legislative agenda: health care, financial regulatory reform and energy bills. He got two out of the three. 

This year, the president also spoke after electoral defeat, this one much bigger. Two and a half months after his party's drubbing in the November election, the president made another move toward reinventing his presidency to accommodate its reduced circumstances in Washington.

Last year's address included anti-business digs scattered through the text. "Each time a CEO rewards himself for failure or a banker puts the rest of us at risk for his own selfish gain, people's doubts grow," he said. 

This year, he said: "Our free enterprise system is what drives innovation." The president promised to eliminate unnecessary regulations, overhaul redundant agencies, support free trade and simplify the corporate tax codes. They are areas that have the potential to draw bipartisan support, but also face hurdles.

As with most State of the Union speeches, Mr. Obama's address Tuesday included a collection of proposals, about a dozen in total, including calls to make permanent a college tuition tax break and deploy wireless coverage to 98% of Americans.

Last year's speech also included about a dozen specific proposals, but with Democrats controlling both chambers of Congress, they were more ambitious. A year ago, he wanted lawmakers to pass a comprehensive energy bill with incentives against carbon use. This year, he set his sights lower: setting a goal that by 2035, 80% of electricity come from "clean energy" sources, including nuclear power, clean coal and natural gas. as well as wind and solar.

Last year, he threatened to veto financial regulatory overhaul if lawmakers watered it down, a challenge to Republicans looking to scale back the bill.

This year, he threatened to veto legislation that includes special interest earmarks, siding with Republicans who have also pushed to ban them. And, with the economy showing signs of life, Mr. Obama took an optimistic tone. Unlike last year's address, he did not remind listeners that he inherited a bad economy and a big deficit. It seemed that the sell-by date for blaming President George W. Bush for the economy has come and gone.

—Laura Meckler