Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orban confronted critics in the European Parliament on Wednesday, defending his economic policies and a new media law as his country takes on the presidency of the European Union.

When Mr. Orban rose to speak in the parliament's chamber in Strasbourg, France, dozens of members of the EU legislature put tape over their mouths in protest against what they see as overly restrictive limits on freedom of expression in Hungary.

Mr. Orban, outlining the agenda for Hungary's six-month stint in the EU's rotating presidency, said that if European politicians tried to interfere improperly in Hungary's domestic policy-making, "obviously, I am ready to fight."

Criticism of Hungary's media law, enacted at the end of last year, has overshadowed the start of Hungary's presidency and threatens to slow progress on important EU measures aimed at bolstering the stability of the euro and speeding the bloc's economic recovery. If Hungary's media law continues to distract attention, Mr. Orban warned, "it won't be Hungary that sees the detrimental effects but the EU that will." He said that if the EU could find persuasive legal reasons for changing the law, it would be amended.

The prime minister said the EU needs to focus on improving cooperation in order to create jobs and boost economic growth. The group is considering ways to enforce greater budgetary discipline among its members in the wake of massive bailouts for Greece and Ireland.

Mr. Orban said that Hungary's public debt outstanding would shrink next year, and pledged to keep the state budget deficit below 3% of the country's gross domestic product. Hungary's total public debt is now equivalent to 80% of GDP, the highest rate in Central Europe.

Mr. Orban has faced criticism from the EU and even the governor of Hungary's own central bank, which argue that Budapest is relying too much on short-term tax increases to achieve its budget targets and that some policies could hurt growth and add to indebtedness in the long run.

At a conference in Vienna Tuesday, a Hungarian economy ministry official said the government in February would announce a series of "large-scale permanent measures" mainly aimed at cutting state spending.

Roland Natran, a deputy state secretary, said the steps would amount to a savings to the budget of an average of 1% of GDP annually from 2011 through 2013.

On the media law, José Manuel Barroso, the head of the European Commission, the EU's executive arm, has said he is seeking "clarification" from Budapest and then would "assess the situation."

In the meantime, Mr. Barroso said Hungary needed other EU member states' backing so the group could make progress on pressing economic matters.

—Margit Feher in Budapest and Flemming E. Hansen in Vienna contributed to this article.

 Write to  Gordon Fairclough at gordon.fairclough@wsj.com 