 Orlando, Fla. 

Last week, while watching the cocky 26-year-old Gary Woodland walk off with his first PGA Tour trophy at the Transitions Championship in Tampa, Fla., it struck me that we're seeing a lot more personality in professional golf than we have for some years. Woodland, who played college basketball before veering into golf, may be the new longest hitter on Tour. He hit a couple of two-irons last week more than 280 yards. He joins four-time winner Dustin Johnson, also 26, who can dunk a basketball and is a known party hound, in the Tour's swelling ranks of swaggering jocks.

You've also got your Boo and your Bubba (Weekley and Watson, respectively), a fine pair of oddball Southern boys. Weekley rode his driver like a hobby horse, a-whoopin' and a-hollerin', down a fairway at the 2008 Ryder Cup at Valhalla, in Louisville, Ky. Watson is known for never having had a golf lesson and breaking down in tears during press conferences.

Then there's Rickie Fowler, 22, who on Sundays dresses in bright orange from head to toe and grew up racing dirt bikes competitively. And Anthony Kim, 27, no stranger to Las Vegas casinos. And those lads from the British Isles—Lee Westwood, Rory McIlroy, Graeme McDowell and loud-trousered Ian Poulter—who enjoy nothing so much as busting each other's chops in public forums about such things as eating habits and bad rounds. "Good old English banter," Poulter calls it.

These characters stand in contrast to the "robopros" golf fans complain about, corporate automatons bred in country clubs with no emotion or sense of fun.

Good fodder for a column, maybe. Could we be on the verge of new era of characters on the PGA Tour, harkening back to the days of Lee Trevino, Sam Snead and Chi Chi Rodriquez?

"No way. Not even close," said veteran Kenny Perry when I suggested as much Tuesday at the Arnold Palmer Invitational tournament at Bay Hill here.

"I don't see it," concurred Andy Bean, 59, who is in the field as a former champion and well remembers the time when, for some pros, the side-wagering money games during Tuesday practice rounds were a primary source of income. "I can't assess the young guys today, because I don't know them all, but it's hard to think they're having as much fun now as we did back then," he said.

Weekley doesn't disagree. "Back in them old days, when they got done playing, they went straight to the bar in the clubhouse and sat around talking about it. They enjoyed each other's company. You don't see guys doing that anymore," he said. For one thing, they can't afford to keep their entourages (swing coaches, trainers, agents, shrinks) waiting outside. 

Weekley, from the Florida Panhandle, is the closest thing the Tour has today to the folksy backcountry Virginian Mr. Snead (he's got a book from St. Martin's Press coming out Monday, titled "True Boo," that builds on his Southern persona). He sees increased media attention as a major reason the players themselves aren't having as much clubhouse and on-course fun as in the old days.

"When the time's right, players still get together, but mostly it's after you leave the course. Out here, you say the wrong thing with all the media listening in, no offense to you, it'll get blown out of context, and the next day you got yourself a squabble on your hands," he said.

A few minutes later, I saw this principle in action when I asked Johnson to share a bit about his party habits. "Well, yeah, we have some fun. We got some personalities out here, sure," he eventually said, very carefully, making sure to give an answer that wouldn't alarm the grownups.

"The scrutiny on people is much more intense these days than it was 30 years ago," said Jim Furyk. "But I'm not crying about that. I see it as a good thing. That same scrutiny is what allows us to make such a good living."

Steve Marino, 30, one of the Tour's noted Good Time Charlies, said that for some pros, the amount of money to be won on Tour these days has a stifling effect. "It's a serious business. You see a lot of the guys really buckle down," he said.

He estimates that only a quarter of the Tour pros, including him, still typically play money games on Tuesday. Even Weekley plays most of his practice rounds solo. "The course is who I'm competing against, not them other guys, and the practice rounds is the only time I got to learn it," Weekley said.

Charlie Rymer, the former Tour pro turned Golf Channel commentator, said that in the old days players had to sell themselves if they wanted to get rich. "Nowadays you make the big money inside the ropes by staying inside your bubble, head down, and playing as well as you can," he said. That holds even for the lesser-known midlevel pros striving to qualify for the Tour's generous retirement plan, which is based on the number of career cuts made. "Every cut matters. Everything that happens out there matters," Rymer said.

That's why even as outgoing a character as Watson feels compelled to grind on the course, as much as he says he'd prefer to clown around with fans. To compensate, he tweets like mad—34,356 tweets so far—and posts madcap videos, often in collaboration with Fowler.

So maybe, to some extent, my inkling that suddenly there are more characters in pro golf is a result of players' newfound awareness of the power of personal branding and their ability to express themselves through social media. Another possibility: The white-hot celebrity sun that was Tiger Woods has dimmed enough to reveal that, lo and behold, there are a few other stars up in the sky.