As the nuclear disaster in Japan has intensified,  General Electric Co.
GE


0.19
%




, which designed the stricken reactors at the Fukushima Daiichi power plant, continued to step up efforts Thursday to prevent a meltdown, which could lead to a massive release of radiation. 



The U.S. conglomerate's delivery of equipment and expertise may help an overwhelmed customer,  Tokyo Electric Power Co.
9501


0.14
%




, deal with an unprecedented crisis. Its expertise could also help GE begin controlling the collateral damage to the company's reputation from the failure of the reactors' cooling systems after the devastating earthquake and tsunami that hit Japan last week. 

The extensive media coverage linking GE to the reactors could hamper the company as it competes to sell new reactor designs around the world through its nuclear joint venture with Japan's  Hitachi Ltd. Billions of dollars in reactor sales are potentially at risk, and billions more in vendor contracts to service them. 

Though they are based on a design decades older than the ones GE currently markets, all the endangered reactors at the Fukushima Daiichi plant are the boiling-water type, which the company still offers, and that may cause potential customers to raise questions about the technology.

"Just like the whole industry, we want to look at the details of what happened here. There is going to be a lot of discussion, and we're part of that process," a GE spokesman said, adding that the company's immediate focus is providing assistance. 

, when asked about the potential impact on the company's reactor businessGE said Thursday it has dispatched teams of nuclear experts to a Japanese emergency response center where they are working with Tepco, government officials and other nuclear experts in a quest to resolve the crisis by finding ways to restore the reactors' ability to cool themselves. 

Never before has a single operator faced the possibility of multiple reactor meltdowns following after a natural disaster that has made it tough to get emergency equipment—even such basics as lights—to a plant site.

The crisis at the Fukushima Daiichi complex now threatens three of six reactors and four of seven pools in which nuclear waste is stored. Cooling problems have resulted in damage to radioactive fuel rods, hydrogen gas explosions, fires and radiation releases.

"The mode we're in right now is to understand what's happening," said  James Klapproth, a chief engineer at GE-Hitachi Nuclear Energy Inc. "The difficulty at this point is that a lot of the data coming in is conflicting at times." 

Last weekend GE activated a command center in Wilmington, N.C., staffed with 70 engineers and technical experts working full time on the crisis. In addition, GE said it has tapped a network of more than 1,000 current and retired engineers. Retirees have been providing necessary historical information on the reactors, including walking through in detail the modifications made to the containment designs decades ago.

GE isn't in direct contact with Tepco. It is working instead through its venture with Hitachi. The venture's teams have been directly advising the Japanese and U.S. governments. 

"A lot of our pensioners and longer career employees have had familiarity with that," Mr. Klapproth said.

On Tuesday, Tepco requested 10 GE truck-mounted gas turbines, which can provide temporary power, for use in the emergency-response effort. The power plant's backup diesel generators and their fuel supplies were destroyed by the tsunami. GE said that three of the 10 trucks are ready in Florida, awaiting air transport.   

GE, based in Fairfield, Conn., helped pioneer the nuclear-power industry in the 1960s and is pursuing nuclear projects globally through its venture with Hitachi, which was formed in 2007. Its nuclear business brings in $1 billion a year in revenue, just a fraction of its overall annual revenue of $150 billion. 

Still, GE has a lot at stake. It is trying to get two designs for advanced reactors certified for use in the U.S. by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, and is marketing the reactors in many other nations, including throughout Asia. 

GE is currently offering the ESBWR, short for Economic Simplified Boiling Water Reactor, and the slightly older ABWR, or Advanced Boiling Water Reactor, which previously was approved for U.S. use, but is undergoing modifications based on concerns raised after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.

However, the reactor that is selling the best, at least in the U.S., isn't a GE design. It is the AP 1000 reactor, a pressurized water reactor, sold by Westinghouse Electric Co., a unit of  Toshiba Corp.
TOSYY


-2.05
%




 

 Write to  Rebecca Smith at rebecca.smith@wsj.com and Ellen Byron at ellen.byron@wsj.com 