NEW DELHI –India's oil ministry will decide by early February whether to allow  Cairn Energy
CRNCY


3.92
%




 PLC to sell a majority stake in its Indian unit to  Vedanta Resources
VED


2.85
%




 PLC, a senior government official said Monday. 

The government approval is necessary for the proposed deal, which was agreed in August, to sail through. 

"The final documentation with some conditions from Cairn Energy has been received by us by end November. We require six to eight weeks to examine that. So hopefully we will have a decision by end month or very early February," federal Oil Secretary S. Sundareshan told reporters. 

Edinburgh-based Cairn Energy is awaiting regulatory approval to sell up to 51% of Cairn India Ltd. for as much as $8.5 billion to London-based mining conglomerate Vedanta. Cairn Energy owns a 62.36% stake in Cairn India. 

The proposed sale has lingered for months. India's Oil Ministry says the deal needs its approval as the sale would involve transferring ownership of exploration blocks. Cairn Energy has applied for the government's approval to transfer the stakes in ten blocks held by Cairn India. 

Ambiguity on the Vedanta deal remains an overhang on the Cairn India stock, which continues to be rangebound despite strengthening crude price, Dayanand Mittal, an analyst at Mumbai-based brokerage Anand Rathi said in a Jan. 5 note. 

"Standoff on the deal with the government has resulted in delay in government approval for ramping-up production from Mangala Field to 150,000 barrels a day from current 125,000 barrels a day and may impact development of Bhagyam and Aishwarya fields," Mr. Mittal said. 

Mangala, Bhagyam and Aishwarya are part of RJ-ON-90/1 block in northwest Rajasthan state. The Rajasthan block's production accounts for about 17% of India's total crude output. Cairn India owns a 70% stake in the block, while state-run Oil & Natural Gas Corp. holds the remaining 30%. 

ONGC has been paying the complete royalty on production from Rajasthan block under a government program to give incentives to attract private investment in the sector. 

ONGC now wants to pay only its share of royalty on the production and wants the government to resolve the issue, while deciding on approving Cairn-Vedanta deal. 

 Write to  Rakesh Sharma at rakesh.sharma@dowjones.com 