France and the U.K. called on the North Atlantic Treaty Organization to more aggressively defend civilians, particularly in the besieged Libyan city of Misrata, from Col. Moammar Gadhafi's forces, but NATO officials said the allies were doing a good job and reported strikes in the area.

The signs of friction came on the eve of an international meeting of the so-called Libya contact group, which brings together Western and regional governments, in Doha, Qatar, on Wednesday. Ministers from NATO countries are also scheduled to meet, on Thursday and Friday in Berlin.

On Tuesday, troops loyal to Col. Gadhafi pounded Misrata, in western Libya, with artillery and mortar rounds, and continued attempts to make incursions into the city, Libya's third-largest.

Ayman Abu Shahma, a doctor with the rebels, who have been in control of parts of the city since late February, said there were also clashes between rebels and government forces along a road leading to the port, the rebels' only outlet in the weekslong siege by Col. Gadhafi's troops.

French Foreign Minister Alain Juppé said Tuesday that NATO wasn't doing enough to stop Col. Gadhafi's forces from killing civilians in rebel areas. "NATO has to play its role in full," Mr. Juppé said.

Britain's Foreign Secretary William Hague said the allies must "intensify" their efforts.

Those concerns echoed rebel leaders in Benghazi, who on Tuesday again pressed for further action by NATO to stop the assault on Misrata. 

Mr. Juppé, speaking on France-Info radio, also urged the European Union to do more to get humanitarian aid to Misrata.

Brig. Gen. Mark van Uhm, chief of allied operations, said NATO was doing a good job protecting civilians against the regime's "hit-and-run tactics" in Misrata. Later Tuesday, NATO said its aircraft had destroyed five tanks that were threatening the civilian population in Misrata, in addition to strikes elsewhere in the country. 

"The enemy knows if they use tanks, they are going to be hit," he said.

Track the latest events in Libya.

See some key dates in Col. Gadhafi's nearly 42-year reign.

A rebel leader said coalition airstrikes destroyed several tanks belonging to Col. Gadhafi's troops in an area known as al-Dafiniyah on the western outskirts of Misrata.

France and the U.K. were early proponents of international military intervention in the conflict in Libya. After the U.S. withdrew its strike aircraft last week, France ramped up sorties and the U.K. committed more aircraft capable of striking ground targets. 

Mr. Hague suggested Tuesday that more aircraft would be beneficial, citing the U.K.'s contributions. "Of course, it will be welcome if other countries also do the same. There is always more to do," he said.

"I think with the assets we have we do a great job," NATO's Gen. van Uhm said. "If you get more, you can do more."

A Pentagon spokesman Tuesday said NATO hadn't asked it to resume flying raids. The White House said from the start of the mission it intended to hand the leading role in military operations to allies after the first week of airstrikes took out the bulk of Col. Gadhafi's air defenses.

On Tuesday, the White House expressed faith in NATO's ability to carry out the mission, while the State Department dismissed talk of discord in the alliance.

Meanwhile, the International Committee for the Red Cross, which formally established a presence in Tripoli on Monday, said it was negotiating with the Gadhafi regime to get access to Misrata by land to deliver humanitarian assistance. The ICRC was particularly concerned about an estimated 7,000 migrant workers marooned in Misrata's port for weeks, said spokesman Christian Cardon.

Dr. Abu Shahma, the rebel doctor, said hundreds more workers flocked to the port Tuesday after hearing that more ships were on the way.

A 1,000-passenger ship chartered by the International Organization for Migration left southern Italy on Tuesday for Benghazi, en route to Misrata, the IOM said. It said it would load up humanitarian assistance in Benghazi before sailing for Misrata.

A Turkish ship evacuated about 950 Egyptians from Misrata on Monday, according to Dr. Abu Shahma. 

In another development, former Libyan Foreign Minister Moussa Koussa, who recently defected to the U.K., traveled to Qatar for Wednesday's meeting, Britain's Foreign and Commonwealth Office said. 

Mr. Koussa planned to meet representatives of the Libyan rebel administration, the Transitional National Council, a person familiar with the matter said.

Hafiz Abdel Goga, the spokesman for the council, said the rebel leadership had no contact with Mr. Koussa. Rebel officials said a priority at the conference would be to convince the international community to lift sanctions on eastern Libya. Such a step is necessary to free up cash in Libyan bank accounts abroad and allow banks in eastern Libya to obtain foreign currency and transfer payments to banks overseas, in order to import basic commodities and other goods.

"We are hoping the international community will agree to our demand. We don't want to face a food shortage crisis," said Abdallah Shamia, a senior economic official in the rebel government.

Mr. Koussa, the former foreign minister and intelligence chief, arrived in the U.K. late last month. On Monday he released a statement to the British Broadcasting Corp. saying he had been "devoted" to his work for 30 years under Col. Gadhafi but that after recent events "things changed and I couldn't continue." 

"I know that what I did to resign will cause me problems, but I'm ready to make that sacrifice for the sake of my country," he said in a statement in Arabic translated by the BBC. 

Mr. Koussa also warned against the risks of civil war and the possibility of his country becoming "a new Somalia."

Libyan authorities in Tripoli refused to comment on Mr. Koussa's statements. Ibrahim el-Sharif, minister for social affairs, called Mr. Koussa a "longtime friend" and refused to acknowledge that he had defected. "Maybe he was kidnapped," he said.

—Alistair MacDonald and Adam Entous contributed to this article.

 Write to  Sam Dagher at sam.dagher@wsj.com, Charles Levinson at charles.levinson@wsj.com and John W. Miller at john.miller@dowjones.com 