In spring 1945, as battle-hardened American and British soldiers entered Germany, they came upon shocking evidence of mass murder. The sight of the living skeletons and mounds of bodies at Buchenwald and Bergen-Belsen fills the soldiers' letters home as they tried to record and understand what they were seeing. On April 15, in Gardelegen, in middle Germany, GIs found the remains of more than a thousand concentration-camp prisoners. They had been burned alive in a barn. Some of the corpses were still smoking.

The newspapers and the newsreels made such sights the singular image of Nazi horror. In the decades since, as we have begun to understand the special character of the Holocaust, these appalling images of abuse and slaughter have come to stand for the mass killing of the Jews of Europe. But as Daniel Blatman points out in "The Death Marches," his admirable new book, this is not quite right. The concentration camps still functioning in Germany were not killing facilities. In the last months of the war, they were stressed by war and overwhelmed with prisoners evacuated from other sites further to the east. These evacuations were death marches in which some 250,000 people were killed, either during their woeful journey or after they reached their destinations. Some of the murdered were Jews, others were not. And so it was in the camps liberated by U.S. troops.

As Mr. Blatman, a professor of history at Hebrew University, notes, "The history of the concentration camps does not necessarily coincide with the Final Solution." Horrible though this is to contemplate, for Jews a concentration camp could be a step away rather than toward certain death. The Holocaust generally took place in killing fields and death factories, not at concentration camps. It began in the occupied Soviet Union in 1941, where most of the victims were shot. It spread to occupied Poland, where Polish and European Jews were gassed at Chelmno, Belzec, Sobibór, Treblinka, Majdanek and Auschwitz-Birkenau. But in 1942, as the policy of extermination was spreading from the occupied Soviet Union to occupied Poland, the Nazis found themselves short of labor. Thus some Jews were "selected" to be slave laborers in camps rather than immediately killed.

Over the death pits and in the extermination camps, Jews died among other Jews. In the concentration camps, Jews joined people sentenced for many reasons: Soviet prisoners of war, Poles, French Resistance fighters, Yugoslav communists, German Jehovah's Witnesses. Jews, like the others, were killed here when they were no longer useful as slave labor. But, Mr. Blatman notes, the "extermination of prisoners was not the main objective of the concentration camps." The main objective was to support German industry, especially the arms industry.

 By Daniel Blatman  (Harvard, 561 pages, $35)

Mr. Blatman's subject is the fate of these prisoners as various camps were dissolved near the end of the war. Because the laborers were regarded as units of economic utility, those who could be moved were transported west to work in the Reich as the Red Army approached. (Those who could not be moved were mostly shot.) Because the evacuated prisoners had no significance in the Nazi view beyond the economic, they were killed when the evacuation became senseless. For guards, escorted prisoners were a ticket away from combat duty. By this logic, prisoners who slowed the march were a hindrance and killed. Prisoners marching through Germany and Austria were also now among civilians who didn't scruple to kill them. As bombs fell and enemy armies approached, the haggard prisoners were seen by the locals as a security threat. They represented the populations that, according to Nazi propaganda, should be cleansed from Europe.

Mr. Blatman is scrupulous and fairminded. He writes of instances when "Polish, Czech, and German citizens handed out food and water" and records the cases of Polish and Lithuanian Catholics who sheltered Jews who had slipped away from death marches. The fate of the prisoners, Jewish or non-Jewish, was in his account essentially the same. Yet in some respects the death marches should perhaps still be seen as part of the history of the Holocaust. Unlike most of the others on the death marches, Jews knew that their families were already dead. In a number of the murders here chronicled, it is clear that it was easier for the German and Austrian murderers to pull the trigger when they saw their victims as Jews. Mr. Blatman convincingly demonstrates that the spirit of genocide that Germans had brought with them to Eastern Europe had returned, by the end of the war, to the German heartland itself. 

There is no greater symbol of that spirit than the burning barn. Jan Gross's 2001 book "Neighbors" showed how Poles murdered Jews by burning them in a barn in the town of Jedwabne in 1941. (German historians such as Peter Longerich have pointed out that such pogroms were inspired by Germans as part of a deliberate policy.) In Soviet Belarus in 1942 and 1943, the Waffen-SS and other German forces murdered thousands of civilians by rounding them up in a barn, setting it alight and shooting those who tried to escape. In "The Death Marches," Mr. Blatman provides the most complete description ever written of a crime of this kind: the 1,016 evacuated concentration-camp prisoners killed in Gardelegen. Those dying in the flames represented a number of different groups; they sang the "Marseillaise," the "Internationale" in Russian and the Polish national anthem. The murderers were "local townspeople"; the organizer of the crime, never prosecuted, died peacefully decades later in West Germany. 

Mr. Blatman chronicles, authoritatively, an important chapter in the history of Nazi Germany. But because the death marches and associated massacres do not fit our presumptions about genocide, his important book opens again the crucial question of the 20th century: why we kill.

—Mr. Snyder is professor of history at Yale University. His most recent book is "Blood lands: Europe Between Hitler and Stalin" (Basic Books).