Daimler Chief Executive Dieter Zetsche received €8.7 million ($12 million) in remuneration for 2010, double the amount of the previous year, the company said in its annual report. In total, the German auto maker paid its six executive board members €25 million for 2010, up from €10.6 million for 2009. 

Start-up Coda Holdings is on track to begin selling its first all-electric sedan in the U.S. in the second half, Chief Executive Philip Murtaugh said, moving it closer to its goal of leveraging Chinese manufacturing and battery technology to make inroads in the electric-vehicle market. 

 Bombardier said it has received an order from NetJets for as many as 120 business jets, in a deal that could be valued at more than US$6.7 billion, which it said is the largest business-jet order in the company's history.  

Europe's aviation safety regulator is canceling an order requiring airlines flying Airbus A380 superjumbos powered by Rolls-Royce engines to perform frequent engine checks. The order was issued in November after the Rolls-Royce Trent 900 mounted on a Qantas A380 disintegrated in flight after takeoff from Singapore. 

 The International Air Transport Association trimmed its forecast for airlines' net profit this year, due to the soaring cost of fuel which has been exacerbated by political tension in the Middle East. 

Japan Airlines retired its last two Boeing 747s, becoming the latest carrier to give up the jumbo jets in favor of more fuel-efficient models. For JAL, the airline's last two 747-400s were retired after the jets landed at Tokyo's Narita Airport on Tuesday afternoon after flights from Honolulu and Okinawa, Japan, respectively. 

 Standard Chartered posted a 29% increase in 2010 net profit to a record $4.23 billion, driven by increased wholesale income and a reduction in loan-impairment charges. 

Finmeccanica, the Italian defense-and-engineering company, said net profit fell 20% in 2010 to €557 million ($777 million).

Also, Chief Executive Pier Francesco Guarguaglini said the company will soon decide whether to sell a significant stake of its Ansaldo Energia unit to U.S. private-equity firm First Reserve.

Building-materials company Holcim reported a 19.6% drop in annual net profit to 1.18 billion Swiss francs ($1.27 billion). 

German sportswear and equipment maker Adidas said net profit in the fourth quarter fell by almost two-thirds to €7 million ($9.64 million) compared with €19 million a year earlier, due to increased marketing and sales costs.

Malaysian state-owned oil and gas company Petroliam Nasional's fiscal third-quarter net profit rose 74% to 21.21 billion ringgit ($7 billion), on higher oil prices and one-time gains. 

Sony's Sony Music Entertainment said it hired Doug Morris, the outgoing chairman of Universal Music Group, as its top executive. Though the hiring has been in the works for several months, people familiar with the matter said it was slowed by complex negotiations with Universal parent Vivendi.

Sony Music's current CEO, Rolf Schmidt-Holtz, is set to step down when his employment contract expires at the end of March, people familiar with the matter said.

 AIG is accelerating plans to cash out of its entire stake in MetLife through public offerings that could raise more than $9 billion in proceeds, most of which will be used to repay U.S. taxpayers for the AIG bailout. 

Swiss Re estimates the insurance industry faces losses of up to $12 billion from the recent earthquake in New Zealand, saying its own share of the loss may amount to $800 million.

A joint 13 billion Australian dollar (US$13.1 billion) bid for wealth manager AXA Asia Pacific by parent AXA and AMP passed its last major hurdle when the target's minority shareholders voted in favor of the deal.

 Top officials for TMX Group and London Stock Exchange Group defended their planned merger of the Toronto and London exchanges before the Ontario provincial government at the first of several public hearings, amid skepticism about the deal among some of Canada's political and business leaders.  

Deutsche Börse Executive Director Jochen Thiel said the current round of global consolidation among stock exchanges will increase the competitive pressure to find merger partners. Deutsche Börse and NYSE Euronext last month said they were in talks regarding a $10 billion merger that would create the world's largest financial-exchange group. 

Bourse operator Hong Kong Exchanges & Clearing said net profit rose 7% in 2010 to 5.04 billion Hong Kong dollars (US$647 million), boosted by an increase in average daily turnover value on the stock exchange and a record year for initial public offerings. The company also said it isn't in talks with other exchange operators. 

 Hoping to persuade British regulators to approve its attempted purchase of U.K. pay-TV giant British Sky Broadcasting Group, News Corp. has proposed a spinoff of the Sky News channel from BSkyB, people familiar with the matter have said.  

U.K. broadcaster ITV said it will resume paying a dividend in July after reporting its 2010 net profit more than doubled to £269 million ($437.3 million) from £91 million a year earlier, due to a strong recovery in the advertising market and further cost-cutting.

ArcelorMittal, the world's largest steel maker, said it has signed agreements to purchase a 40% stake in Thailand's publicly-listed steel producer G Steel. In a filing, G Steel said ArcelorMittal will buy 11.92 billion new shares in G Steel for 7.5 billion baht ($245.5 million). ArcelorMittal didn't disclose a final transaction figure in its statement.

 Russian-owned Severstal North America said private-equity firm Renco Group Inc. is buying steel operations in four U.S. states in a $1.2 billion deal that includes the repayment of $317 million in debt. New York-based Renco also assumes labor and environmental liabilities totaling $650 million. 

 Germany's Merck said it failed to win approval for its oral multiple-sclerosis drug cladribine from the U.S., pending further information, but analysts largely consider a rejection the most likely scenario. 

 Roche Holding said the European Commission is backing its cancer medicine Avastin for treating breast-cancer patients, providing support to the Swiss pharmaceutical giant's drug franchise.  

Australia's Westfield Group said joint founder Frank Lowy will relinquish his executive role at the shopping mall giant and hand over power to two of his sons. 

 Apple CEO Steve Jobs, who took a medical leave earlier this year, made a surprise appearance at an event in San Francisco to unveil the company's new iPad tablet.  

The iPad 2, which has a dual core processor and two cameras, is thinner and lighter than its predecessor. The new version will start at $499, the same price as the original, and begin shipping March 11. 

Yahoo has been in talks to potentially unload its 30% stake in its popular Japanese namesake, the country's most-visited Web portal and dominant Internet player, among many other options, according to a person familiar with the matter.

PPL of the U.S. will buy Central Networks, the U.K.'s second-largest electricity distributor, from E.ON for $5.6 billion in cash plus assumed debt, to expand its British footprint and overall business.