BEIJING—Chinese officials said water conservation will be their top agricultural priority this year and targeted up to $12 billion for irrigation and related projects, while also acknowledging the country could have to import more farm goods over the long term.

Chronic droughts have parched aquifers in China's northern plains and weighed on grain output, even as the stock of arable land is under pressure from urban encroachment amid a massive continuing population shift from country to city.

Speaking at a press briefing Sunday, senior Chinese officials said they aim to set aside 10% of the revenue from sales of government land for irrigation and water conservation, part of a broader emphasis on water issues in the government's "No. 1 document," its annual manifesto on agricultural development.

"If we could get 10% of the land-transfer revenues, based on last year's figures, we believe we could get 60 billion yuan to 80 billion yuan ($9.1 billion to $12.2 billion) in funding this year," Minister for Water Resources  Chen Lei said, adding his ministry was working with the Ministry of Finance on the proposal.

China suffers from an annual shortage of 40 billion cubic meters of water, the minister said, with two-thirds of cities having trouble accessing water.

The water shortage is one barrier in the way of the government's goal of meeting demand for important grains from domestic supplies. While the government has continued to declare statistical self-sufficiency, grain purchases from abroad surged last year, with imports in key categories reaching their highest levels in 15 years.

Speaking to reporters on the sidelines of Sunday's briefing,  Chen Xiwen, one of China's leading agricultural policymakers, said that "with changes in global trade and resources, our self-sufficiency may decrease." But he added that self-sufficiency is "still an important concept…. It's dangerous for a country with a population as large as China not to defend self-sufficiency in grains."

Last month, Mr. Chen, director of the State Council's Office of Rural Work Leading Group, wrote an essay for an influential Chinese magazine asking whether the notion of self-sufficiency needed to be revisited in the light of current agricultural economics.

On Sunday, he also said the government is likely to increase spending on the agriculture sector this year by no less than 12.8%. Last year, China spent about 818 billion yuan ($124 billion) on the sector.