A scion of the Fendi family, the 85-year-old luxury-goods company famous for its handbags, sold a Midtown apartment after cutting and then raising the price several times over nearly two years.

  Luca Formilli Fendi sold the two-bedroom apartment at One Beacon Court for just below the most-recent asking price of $6.1 million, according to  Giampiero Rispo of Domus Realty, the listing broker. The sale was about 38% above his 2005 purchase price.

Mr. Formilli Fendi initially put the condo up for sale in March 2009, asking $7.75 million. Brokers say that price was out of step with a market hammered by the financial crisis, and he cut the asking price by 23% to $6 million three months later, according to StreetEasy.com.

By early 2010, he raised the asking price to $6.5 million. Mr. Formilli Fendi made two more price cuts and one more increase before finding a buyer last month. He couldn't be reached for comment. "I suggested he sell it. Anytime I was close to the price he wanted, he would raise the price," Mr. Rispo says. "He finally accepted this price because he wants to buy something more impressive downtown now." 

Mr. Formilli Fendi, who had worked as lawyer for the company in the Rome office, now invests in real estate and has other commercial ventures. He's also a competitive speedboat racer. 

Mr. Formilli Fendi spends most of his time in Europe and viewed the apartment as an investment, usually renting it over the past five years. He is currently in discussions to buy a loft apartment in Lower Manhattan. He is expected to use it as a second home more often than he did with the One Beacon Court apartment, a person who knows him said.

Fendi was founded in 1925 by Edoardo and  Adele Fendi, Luca Formilli's grandparents, as a leather and fur company. The brand took off in 1960s after Fendi hired  Karl Lagerfeld as creative director. 

Luxury-goods conglomerate LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton now controls Fendi, though many of the Fendi family still work for the company.

 Write to  Craig Karmin at craig.karmin@wsj.com 