TOKYO—The Bank of Japan offered emergency funds for a fourth consecutive day, continuing its effort to calm concern about the economic impact of the earthquake and nuclear-power crisis.

Thursday morning, the central bank offered 5 trillion yen (about $60 billion) in same-day funds, of which financial firms took up 1.122 trillion yen. It then offered an additional 1 trillion yen in the afternoon. Same-day funds effectively make money available immediately to cash-strapped financial companies.

The total is the second-largest amount of the week, after the BOJ announced an immediate injection of 7 trillion yen into the short-term money market, the biggest amount ever for a single operation, on Monday morning. It decreased the size of the morning same-day operations over the next two days, to 5 trillion yen on Tuesday and 3.5 trillion yen on Wednesday. 

But Thursday's offer was back up again, after a system failure at Mizuho Bank increased concerns about financial stability and after the yen rose steeply against the U.S. dollar. The dollar breached its previous record postwar low of 79.75 yen to touch 76.25 yen before recovering much of the loss.

Japan's central bank has been flooding the short-term money market with liquidity after Friday's earthquake, tsunami and nuclear crisis heightened concerns about banks' ability to meet a surge in demand for funds from companies and households.

The BOJ has offered a total of 55.6 trillion yen in short-term funds in the past three days, including 28 trillion yen in same-day loans. Banks haven't taken up the offers in full, but with no end to the crisis in sight, analysts expect the central bank to keep pumping cash.

Although Japan is unlikely to experience a credit crunch, "funds tend to be unevenly distributed among banks at the moment," said  Akito Fukunaga, chief rates strategist at RBS Securities Japan. So even if bids from financial firms don't reach the BOJ's offer amount, "the BOJ is likely to continue the daily fund provision constantly until the market regains stability."

Thursday morning, the central bank also offered to buy 3 trillion yen in Japanese government bonds via a reverse repurchase agreement, receiving 2.013 trillion yen in demand from the financial sector.

Other regular market operations include outright purchases of 300 billion yen in treasury discount bills, 310 billion in Japanese government bonds maturing within one year and 250 billion yen in JGBs with maturies of one to 10 years.

 Write to  Megumi Fujikawa at megumi.fujikawa@dowjones.net 