  Q: I own a 2000 Buick LeSabre with 103,000 miles that runs smoothly. The only problem is that the engine just quits while driving. I coast to a stop, turn off the ignitions and it will restart with no problem. It doesn't leave a code and will run a day, a week or a month without a reoccurrence. Any thoughts as to what the problem might be?  

— Stanley Broadwin, New York 

A: LeSabres and other GM vehicles (as well as other makes) of the same vintage are known for this kind of stalling. In the Buick, it is often the result of a sticking idle-air-control motor. Carbon buildup can cause it to stick and a careful cleaning can solve the problem though you may have to replace the part. Vacuum leaks and problems with mass air-flow sensors can also cause this kind of stalling, though they typically activate an engine-warning light. Discuss these possibilities with your mechanic.

  Q: After being a committed "no car" person for many years I moved to Florida and, for convenience's sake, bought a 2004 Nissan Xterra from a friend. Surprisingly I love driving it; the handling is very nimble plus I appreciate its clearance which provides great sightlines above other vehicles. Eventually, though, I'd like to upgrade to a similar-sized SUV with a more luxurious interior. I want to keep the sporty, truck-like feel, so anything on a car chassis is out.  

— Pamela Mitchell, Miami 

A: The Xterra is among my favorites as well, but I can understand the desire for more up-market features. One option is the Nissan Pathfinder, which is available in higher trim levels than the Xterra. The other is the Toyota 4Runner. In general truck-based, body-on-frame style SUVs are becoming rare species as SUVs from Ford, General Motors and Jeep have switched to more car-like crossover chassis. 

  Q: I purchased my pre-owned 2005 Lexus ES 330 three years ago. I have all the service done at the Lexus dealership. But the service bills every 4,000 miles seem to be getting higher. Do you recommend having servicing done at non-Lexus service operations that say they service the Lexus or staying at the dealership?  

— John Hunter, Winston-Salem, N.C. 

A: I typically recommend finding independent mechanics as a way to avoid what is often just a mark-up that dealership service centers charge. However, finding service quality with which you are truly happy can be difficult whether you go to a dealership or not. Try a non-Lexus shop for the next service visit, and compare the cost and quality of work. You may wind up trying a few different mechanics over time. You'll either find that the dealership was overcharging, or that its work really has been worth the extra cost. 

  Q: I own a 2006 GMC Envoy Denali with 38,000 miles on it. I have always had it serviced at the dealership and now they are telling me I need a transmission flush ($125), a fuel injector flush ($93) and a coolant system flush ($93). Can they be right? My owner's manual doesn't address anything except the coolant and then only at 100,000 miles.   

— Jim Holland, Yukon, Okla. 

A: Sometimes mechanics see excessive-wear problems that can be solved by changing fluids more often than recommended. And sometimes they play on the fear we often feel about possibly neglecting our vehicles. In general, just draining the old fluid and refilling with the new is enough. Adding "flush" to the language of the service visit implies the use of pressure, solvents or other aggressive methods for getting the old fluid out—and raising the price. Ask if they could just drain and fill.

—Email mecar@wsj.com 