MEMPHIS—Carmelo Anthony, the newest New York star, delivered the best moment of his two-week-old Knick career on Wednesday night, hitting a fadeaway jumper with 0.5 seconds left to end a wild and frustrating 110-108 win over the Memphis Grizzlies.

The win came after the Knicks blew the 17-point lead they held late in the third quarter and after the Grizzlies had tied the game when Anthony fouled Zach Randolph on a 3-point play with 14 seconds left.

Knicks coach Mike D'Antoni said he did not call a timeout on the last play because "it gives the other team the chance to put its best defenders out there."

Amar'e Stoudemire said the last play would have either been an Anthony jumpshot or one by Stoudemire himself. He had, however, positioned himself for a rebound or a pick-and-roll, so Anthony took control.

Anthony had 31 while Stoudemire had 26. Toney Douglas, who started at point guard, had 18 points and 10 assists, while Landry Fields had 16 points.

It was the first real survival test for a Knicks team that is still jelling for the playoffs. The wacky final minutes featured a blitzing Grizzlies team pressuring the Knicks repeatedly and outscoring them in the fourth quarter 26-14. The Knicks showed some cracks—with 1:30 to go, Douglas missed a 3-pointer that bounced off the top of the backboard, from there Grizzlies forward Darrell Arthur dunked the ball over Jared Jeffries, who also fouled him. Still, the Knicks were bailed out by Anthony, who hit 12 of 24 shots and three of five 3-pointers.

The Knicks as a whole had one of their best shooting outings of the season—they made 60% of their shots through three quarters and 53% by game's end. The Knicks built an eight-point lead at halftime by making 26 of their 43 shots and eight of their 13 3-point attempts. The dominance was surprising considering the Grizzlies shot 12 free throws, and made all of them, before the Knicks had one attempt. By the time the Knicks had 98 points, they had taken only two free throws. The Grizzlies had 31 at that time.

The Knicks were nearly flawless in other areas: They scored baskets on the Grizzlies' first 11 turnovers. The Grizzlies, who lead in the league in steals, caused 16 turnovers but scored just 11 points off of them.

The team was once again without point guard Chauncey Billups, who missed his fifth straight game with a leg injury. Though he's been battling bruised quadriceps, Billups said on Wednesday he's also been hampered by a sore knee. Billups, who worked out on his own in Memphis on Wednesday, said he felt comfortable simulating half-court offense but could not sprint or move much in general. He likely won't play on Thursday against Dallas but Knicks coach Mike D'Antoni said he could play Sunday against Indiana. Ronny Turiaf and Bill Walker were both healthy after being out with sore knees but had limited impacts in their return. Turiaf played just 11 minutes, in favor of Jeffries, and Walker is apparently out of the rotation, not logging a minute while Roger Mason Jr. played 21 minutes and made four of his seven shots.

It was a homecoming for Shawne Williams, the Knicks' small forward who grew up four minutes from where the Grizzlies now play. He struggled on the night until he hit an important 3-pointer with 7:06 to go to give the Knicks a 99-90 lead and kill an 8-0 Grizzlies rally. It was the Knicks' first score of the fourth quarter.