To stop their seasons from ending short of the Super Bowl, the Jets first and foremost have to become a more consistent team, their general manager said Friday, and the team's performance in 2010 bears out the truth of Mike Tannenbaum's evaluation.

Of the five games they lost during the regular season, the Jets didn't score a touchdown in four. Their defense, ranked as the third-best in the NFL based on the total yardage it surrendered, allowed at least 20 points eight times in 16 games. Their special teams featured a kicker who missed nine field goals during the regular season and a punter who had six touchbacks during the postseason.

For Mr. Tannenbaum, though, the task of making the Jets more consistent, in smoothing over those sharp edges, will be especially challenging this offseason. Not only is the NFL's collective bargaining agreement set to expire on March 4—a development that would lead to a work stoppage of indeterminate length—but the Jets have 18 free agents, a number that suggests there will be no small amount of turnover on their roster before next season (if there is a next season). The more new players the Jets bring in, the harder it presumably becomes for head coach Rex Ryan to assimilate them into the team's system.

"That's a fair point," Mr. Tannenbaum said in a conference call. "We always talk about sustainable success, and in my mind, you look at the last two years, and I think the foundation is there. There's going to be turnover in a free-agent system in any sport. But I think because of the infrastructure that Rex has created here, we have great teachers downstairs, and they allow players to come in" and play well.

As part of the continuity he and Mr. Ryan want to maintain after consecutive trips to the AFC Championship Game, Mr. Tannenbaum said Friday that though other teams have asked permission to speak with some Jets assistants regarding coaching openings, he hoped to have Mr. Ryan's staff "back and intact." Offensive coordinator Brian Schottenheimer is "certainly coming back" next season, according to Mr. Tannebaum, even though Mr. Schottenheimer has sustained criticism for his play-calling since joining the Jets in 2006.

Mr. Tannenbaum also made it clear that he wants to retain as many of the players from the 2010 Jets as possible, starting with linebacker David Harris and wide receivers Braylon Edwards, Santonio Holmes and Brad Smith. Given the uncertainty over the NFL's labor situation, it's unlikely that Mr. Tannenbaum would sign any player before March 4, but he did say he would consider using the league's franchise tag during that time to retain Mr. Harris for another season. Mr. Harris has led the Jets in tackles each of the last two years.

Whether the Jets would have the financial ability to re-sign both Mr. Edwards and Mr. Holmes, each of whom would likely seek a contract commensurate with the status of being a team's top wide receiver, remains to be seen. The Jets do expect running back LaDainian Tomlinson and linebacker Jason Taylor, a pair of veterans who remain under contract for 2011, to return next season, according to Mr. Tannenbaum, despite their advanced ages (in football years). Mr. Tomlinson is 31; Mr. Taylor is 36. But Mr. Tannenbaum praised the leadership that each provided. He has made no decision, he said, about whether fullback Tony Richardson, 39, or offensive tackle Damien Woody, 33, who tore his Achilles' tendon earlier this month in the Jets' wild-card game at Indianapolis, would be back.

He was a bit more definitive about the future of defensive end Vernon Gholston, a former first-round pick who has been an abject disappointment in his three years with the team.

"It's something we're going to take a long look at and see if there's a role that makes sense for him," he said. "If there is, obviously we'll keep him. If not, we'll move on."

It was even too soon, Mr. Tannenbaum added, to know what positions or players the Jets might target in this year's NFL draft. So much depends on the rules of the new CBA—and the timing of an agreement—that like the other 31 teams in the league, the Jets are juggling multiple plans of action.

"Those plans would be in pencil," Mr. Tannenbaum said. But "as soon as we know what the rules of engagement are, we'll be ready."

 Write to  Mike Sielski at mike.sielski@wsj.com 