TOKYO—Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan's new cabinet is making clear that it is serious about enacting an unpopular increase in the nation's consumption tax to restore Japan's tattered finances, a stance that has led to electoral defeats for previous governments.

Underscoring this drive, Finance Minister Yoshihiko Noda said Tuesday that the government would live up to a legislative promise—originally made by a rival party—that requires a tax overhaul be in place by the end of the fiscal year ending March 2012. The provision was in legislation approved by parliament when the now-opposition Liberal Democratic Party was in power in 2009.

"The provision requires us to make a decision by March 2012, so I think we will deal with the matter within that realm," Mr. Noda said at a news conference Tuesday.

The statement is seen as an attempt to put pressure on the opposition to live up to its own previous commitment. Mr. Kan's administration has already promised a tax overhaul proposal by the end of June to address the problem.

The 2009 law had returned to the spotlight on Monday when the new deputy chief cabinet secretary Hirohisa Fujii, himself a former finance minister, said lawmakers of all political parties should stick to the promise.

Mr. Fujii is part of a new team brought in by Mr. Kan on Friday with an ambitious agenda to overhaul the nation's tax system by raising the consumption tax to support growing retirement and health-care spending while cutting corporate taxes to spur job growth.

Mr. Kan had previously toned down his calls for a sales tax rise after a major defeat in upper chamber elections last summer. But he has now apparently resuscitated the campaign after going through the budget-making process over the past few months, when he saw firsthand the difficulty of reconciling Japan's shortage of tax revenue with its growing social security expenses and debt servicing costs.

An equivalent of Europe's value-added tax, the consumption tax was introduced in Japan at a rate of 3% in 1989 and raised to the current 5% in 1997. Imposed on almost everything consumers buy in Japan, the tax has weighed on economic growth and has been unpopular among Japanese voters, who punished those lawmakers who launched and increased the levy.

But the government hopes that the steadily worsening fiscal state will make voters realize that the time has come for a tax increase. The view seems to be gaining traction: A nationwide poll conducted last weekend by the Kyodo news agency found that 54.3% of respondents supported a consumption tax rise, compared with 43.3% who were opposed.

Experts see a consumption tax rise as one of the best tools for Mr. Kan's government to meet its promised fiscal overhaul goals, including balancing the combined main budget of the national and local governments by the fiscal year ending March 2021.

That is a tall order given that for the new fiscal year, borrowing makes up 48% of the revenue needed to finance outlays in the national budget.

While Mr. Kan's Democratic Party of Japan dominates the lower chamber, it needs backing from the opposition-controlled upper chamber to pass most legislation, including changes to the tax code. The LDP is the largest opposition party and has been growing increasingly uncooperative as the prime minister's public support remains at low levels, currently around 30%.

Doubts remain over whether the strategy will work. Few opposition parties have so far signaled willingness to work with the government on tax changes, and even some lawmakers within the ruling party oppose higher sales taxes.

In addition, while the 2009 tax law says the tax system must be overhauled, there is no penalty for failure to do so, reducing its potential use as a way to push the opposition parties.

The cabinet has offered few details on when, and by how much, it wants to raise the consumption tax. But economists say the government may need to triple or quadruple the rate to fix public finances.

  Masamitsu Sakurai, chairman of one of Japan's most powerful business lobbies, said in a recent interview that the government should lift the consumption tax to 17% within six years to solve the budgetary problem.

"The current system is fiscally unsustainable, and it's also very unbalanced," he said.

The consumption tax is popular with the powerful Ministry of Finance because it generates fairly stable revenue despite the sluggish state of the economy. It has brought in around 10 trillion yen ($120.9 billion) annually since it was raised to its current level.

A one-percentage-point rise in the consumption tax is estimated to bring in 2.5 trillion yen in tax a year, meaning that an increase to 15% could generate an additional 25 trillion yen if economic conditions remained unchanged.

That amount is a little less than two-thirds of the total tax revenue the central government expects to receive for the current fiscal year.

A higher consumption tax is also seen by some experts as having a smaller impact on future economic growth than increases in personal or corporate income taxes, which could backfire by undermining the economy's long-term growth potential and thus be counterproductive in raising revenue.

The tax debate could affect the timing of elections in the Lower House, which chooses the prime minister.

Japan's new trade minister, Banri Kaieda, said Tuesday that if the government lifts the consumption tax, it should probably "first create a final draft plan and then call a snap general election to gain the people's understanding."

 Write to  Takashi Nakamichi at takashi.nakamichi@dowjones.com 