Japan's nuclear crisis is drawing attention to aging U.S. reactors, especially the 23 most similar to reactors at the Japanese plant where workers are racing to avoid a full-scale meltdown.

Eleven U.S. utilities, including industry giants such as  Southern Co.
SO


0.20
%




,  Entergy Corp.
ETR


-0.64
%




 and  Exelon Corp.
EXC


0.12
%




, own similar reactors in 14 states. Most of them are operating beyond their initial 40-year licenses and have been granted 20-year extensions by federal regulators.

The Japanese crisis, in which problems at four reactors have led to dangerous releases of radiation in the surrounding area, could lead to safety-related changes at similar U.S. plants. Operators said that, even if they're not ordered to make changes by regulators, they might do so to restore public trust.

U.S. regulations require plant owners to make sure plants can survive any expected threat, even if that means they have to retrofit facilities that already have licenses.

"If there's a change in a significant safety rule, it can be imposed retroactively," said Richard Meserve, a physicist and former chairman of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.

Plant operators already are pledging to learn from Japan's accident.

"We want to look at our systems and procedures and operator training to prevent a complete loss of power to our units" in a natural disaster, said Jeff Gasser, executive vice president of Southern Co.'s nuclear division. Its Edwin Hatch plant in Georgia has two reactors similar to the Fukashima Daiichi plant's reactors.

Some critics say the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission should rethink the way it assesses risks and create even more conservative safety standards.

One former nuclear plant operator who opposed the license extension at Entergy Corp's Vermont Yankee plant in Vermont, one of those similar to Japanese units, thinks the NRC and utilities will have to take a hard look at the "design basis threat"—or the maximum threat—that plants face. 

"What used to be considered a non-credible threat is now credible, given what's happened in Japan," said Arnie Gundersen, a former senior vice president of Nuclear Energy Services, a provider of engineering and technical assistance to nuclear plants. He said he thinks safety margins should be increased.

Though the exact causes of the Japanese problems remain unclear, experts said several areas appeared to be a probable focus of regulatory attention in coming months.

One key lesson, Mr. Gasser said, was that plants need to be able to restore power quickly in the event of an emergency. The Fukushima Daiichi plant lost power in the tsunami that followed Friday's massive quake, leaving reactors without normal water-circulation cooling. As a result, fuel rods inside the reactors overheated, leading to a series of explosions and radiation releases.

American plants have backup generators and powerful batteries, but some only have enough battery power to run critical instrumentation and controls for four hours. The Japanese units had eight hour's worth and it was insufficient.

For example, the Monticello reactor in Minnesota that's operated by  Xcel Energy Inc.
XEL


0.24
%




 only has four hours of battery life if it loses grid power and diesel generators.

Terry Pickens, director of nuclear regulatory affairs for Xcel, said it was likely the NRC and the Institute of Nuclear Power Operations, an industry group created after the 1979 Three Mile Island nuclear accident in Pennsylvania to improve operator training and safety practices, would reconsider "how long they've asked us to cope with a station blackout" and, possibly, make improvements.

Another focus could be the adequacy of containment structures—a last line of defense to prevent radiation release. So-called Mark I containment structures surround the nuclear reactors at Fukushima Daiichi and the 23 U.S. reactors. But they are smaller and weaker than containment structures built later —Mark IIs and Mark IIIs—which can withstand greater internal pressure. In an emergency, operators of the later plants would have more ability to vent heat from a crippled reactor and hold it within containment structures without needing to release it to the atmosphere to relieve pressure, as Daiichi's owners have done repeatedly. Venting has led to at least three hydrogen explosions and radioactive release.

  General Electric Co.
GE


0.19
%




 said modifications were made to Mark I structures, at least in the U.S., in the 1980s after tests of Mark III designs exposed weaknesses common to all the structures. GE said it suggested similar changes in Japanese units but was still trying to determine if they were made.