TOKYO—Japanese authorities warned of more intervention to weaken the yen, while the level of cash in the country's banking system rose to record levels, amid efforts to ease financial strains that could hamper the country's recovery from the March 11 earthquake.

Meanwhile, officials in China and Australia said the earthquake and tsunami would have a short-term impact on trade and their economies but reconstruction efforts would later make up for some of the losses.

Japan's Nikkei Stock Average jumped 4.4% on Tuesday as fears receded further about the threat of a widening crisis at damaged nuclear power plants near the stricken areas.

The yen remained largely unchanged amid the possibility that authorities could jump into currency markets once more after a rare intervention by the Group of Seven industrialized nations Friday. The G-7's move pushed the dollar to its current level of around ¥81, well above the record low of ¥76.25. Midmorning Tuesday in New York, the dollar traded at ¥80.93.

Bank of Japan data and market estimates of fund flows indicated Friday's yen sales by Japan and its G-7 partners amounted to about 530 billion yen ($6.55 billion), much less than the 2 trillion yen some traders originally estimated.

While traders wondered whether intervention was limited to last Friday, Finance Minister Yoshihiko Noda on Tuesday noted that the G-7 statement said the group would monitor exchange rates and "cooperate as appropriate," adding: "That tells you everything."

A Japanese government bureaucrat familiar with the nation's currency policy added more explicitly that no decision was made to limit intervention to one day.

A strong yen harms large Japanese exporters by making their goods more expensive aboard, cutting into sales and profits.

The Bank of Japan's cash injections into money markets Tuesday pushed its current-account balance—the funds that financial institutions in Japan keep at the central bank, which they can use for lending or other needs— to a record ¥41.72 trillion, or $514.42 billion. The flood of liquidity pushed down overnight interest rates near to zero.

In Beijing, Chinese Commerce Ministry spokesman  Yao Jian said Tuesday that Japan's exports to China of certain electronics, chemical and steel products as well as spare parts will decline as many of the manufacturers of these goods are located in the northeastern areas of Japan most affected by the earthquake and tsunami. The region's shipping and port operations were also damaged, he said at a regular news conference.

China's exports of garments and agricultural products to Japan will also fall in the near term, Mr. Yao said. Japan was China's third-largest trade partner, its largest source of imports and the fifth-largest destination of its exports as of the end of last year, he said.

Australia's economy will likely take a hit from the events in Japan, Reserve Bank of Australia board member  Graham Kraehe said Tuesday. "It will slow us down for six months probably," he said. "Long term, it shouldn't be major."

Japan is Australia's second-largest export market behind China, and economists estimate the disaster could shave around 0.2 percentage points from Australia's growth in the second quarter. Hardest hit will be steel-related exports such as coal, iron ore and natural gas.

But Mr. Kraehe, who is also chairman of steel maker  Bluescope Steel Ltd.
BSL


6.35
%




, said Australia should recover once the rebuilding process begins and demand for materials ranging from natural gas to steel picks up.

—Yajun Zhang in Beijing  and Enda Curran in Sydney  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Takashi Nakamichi at takashi.nakamichi@dowjones.com 