 The yen rose to a record high against the dollar even though Japan is battling multiple disasters. The rally stems from Japan's status as a creditor nation and traders' experiences following the 1995 Kobe earthquake.  

 U.S. stocks posted gains after three sessions of losses. Japanese stocks fell again, but closed well above their lows for the day.  

 The Tokyo Stock Exchange said trading would continue, despite some calls to suspend operations amid fears over radiation. Several foreign banks had pressed for a temporary shutdown to avert a market meltdown. 

 Pressure mounted on manufacturers world-wide to find alternative sources of supplies disrupted by events in Japan. Many said they had stockpiles ready, but some firms expressed concern. 

 India's central bank raised its two key interest rates by a quarter-percentage point each, continuing its tightening measures as the fight against inflation trumps concerns of a global slowdown in growth after the Japan quake.  

 PetroChina's earnings increased 35% in 2010 as strong energy demand outweighed lower refining margins.  

 China Overseas Land, the biggest Hong Kong-listed mainland property developer, said its 2010 net rose 66%. Other property firms' earnings rose as well. 

 China Resources Power's net profit fell 7.9% last year as higher fuel costs more than offset increased power output.  

 Alibaba.com said its earnings increased 46% in the fourth quarter from a year earlier as it pledged further steps to overcome a fraud scandal that prompted its chief executive to resign.  

 FedEx raised its guidance and kept a bullish outlook for revenue despite the uncertainty created by Japan's unfolding crisis.  

 South Korean regulators will stiffen supervision of the distressed savings-bank sector, imposing tighter caps on the loans the banks can make.  

 The U.S. probe of possible manipulation of the Libor benchmark is focused in part on Citigroup, Bank of America and UBS.  

 China's ZTE said its full-year net profit rose 32% on strong orders from overseas markets.  

 U.S. sales of Diet Coke overtook those of Pepsi-Cola for the first time in 2010, making it the No. 2 carbonated soft drink in the nation behind Coca-Cola. 

 Macquarie Group Chairman David Clarke resigned due to ill health; independent director Kevin McCann will succeed him.  

 A leaked U.S. diplomatic cable suggests that India's ruling Congress party offered bribes to win a crucial confidence vote in parliament on the U.S.-India nuclear deal in 2008.  

Pakistan's army chief condemned a U.S. drone attack that killed at least 38 people, saying the missiles struck a peaceful meeting of tribal elders.

 China said a young Tibetan Buddhist monk died after setting himself on fire in a Tibetan area of Sichuan on the anniversary of anti-Chinese protests in 2008.  

Malaysia was probing whether seized equipment being shipped illegally to the Mideast could be used to make nuclear weapons.

Three Pakistan cricketers were ordered to stand trial in a British court over spot-fixing allegations.