Hedge-fund giant Raj Rajaratnam made many successful gambles while amassing a net worth exceeding $1 billion. Few of those likely were as risky as his plan to take the stand in his own defense at the insider-trading trial set to start this week.

The 53-year-old founder of Galleon Group has told people close to him that he intends to testify at his own trial, the biggest legal showdown over insider trading in a generation. A spokesman for Mr. Rajaratnam declined to comment on his potential testimony, and it is possible Mr. Rajaratnam and his lawyers will decide against the move.

Such a strategy is relatively rare in white-collar criminal cases because of the danger something will go wrong during cross-examination by prosecutors. In 2005, WorldCom Inc. founder  Bernard Ebbers was found guilty of an $11 billion fraud at the telecommunications company. Jurors said afterward that they couldn't square Mr. Ebbers's insistence that he was unaware of the fraud with his hands-on image.

Former Enron Corp. President  Jeffrey Skilling and  Tyco International Ltd.
TYC


-0.35
%




's former finance chief  Mark Swartz also took the stand at their criminal trials. Both men were convicted and sent to prison.

"The decision whether to call a defendant as a witness, other than whether or not to plead guilty, is the hardest decision to make in any trial," says  James DeVita, a lawyer at Day Pitney LLP in New York who represented  L. Dennis Kozlowski in two criminal trials of the former Tyco chief executive.

Mr. Kozlowski didn't take the stand at his first trial, which ended in a mistrial. At the second trial, Mr. Kozlowski testified and was convicted with Mr. Swartz on 22 of 23 counts related to bonuses and other improper compensation they received while working as Tyco's top executives. Mr. Kozlowski has been locked up since 2005.

At Mr. Rajaratnam's criminal trial, which starts Tuesday in a New York federal court, whether he takes the stand probably will be determined by how incriminating taped conversations of Mr. Rajaratnam sound—and if any of the recordings work in his favor.

Mr. Rajaratnam's voice was captured on some of hundreds of hours of wiretaps. He is charged with 14 counts of fraud and conspiracy. Federal prosecutors are likely to play tapes of the hedge-fund manager receiving information, and he might be forced to testify in order to convince jurors that he didn't know the information was material or that his source had a duty not to disclose it, according to legal experts. The hedge-fund manager might be able to avoid taking the stand if some of the wiretaps contain conversations that sound favorable to Mr. Rajaratnam. His lawyers could play those tapes and "pretend that he testified," says  Charles Stillman, a lawyer for Mr. Swartz, the former Tyco executive. 

A similar situation helped former Bear Stearns Cos. hedge-fund manager  Ralph Cioffi avoid testifying at his criminal trial for alleged fraud related to subprime mortgage deals, says  Edward Little, a lawyer representing Mr. Cioffi in civil litigation. The defense was able to respond to incriminating emails introduced by prosecutors with other emails that were more favorable. Mr. Cioffi and another Bear fund manager,  Matthew Tannin, were acquitted in 2009.

Another corporate defendant represented by Mr. Little, former Westar Energy Executive Vice President  Douglas Lake, beat some charges at his second trial, and the charges against him were dropped last year. After a fierce debate, his defense team took the "calculated risk" of having Mr. Lake testify. 

"People thought I was crazy," Mr. Little says. "He was a brilliant witness, so we were very lucky."

Many lawyers believe juries in white-collar cases want to hear directly from the defendant. The reason: Fraud prosecutions depend highly on the accused person's state of mind, or whether they knowingly committed a crime. 

In many other cases, "there is a dead body, a broken window, a missing television, so the issue is more about who committed that crime," said  Lawrence G. McMichael, a lawyer for  John Rigas and  Timothy Rigas. The father and son were convicted in 2004 of looting cable company Adelphia Communications Corp. "The question in white-collar cases is whether there was a crime at all." The Rigases didn't take the stand at their 2004 trial but are planning to do so at a tax-related trial expected next year, Mr. McMichael says.

In some white-collar prosecutions, defense lawyers are forced to put their clients on the stand because there is no other way to give jurors an alternative version of the alleged crime. Messrs. Lake and Swartz testified to neutralize testimony from company directors who said they didn't approve their compensation.

"I've retried the case 50 times in my mind, and I still come up with the same answer, that I would've put him on the stand," Mr. Stillman said, referring to the former Tyco executive. Ultimately, "it was pretty tough to get jurors to say anybody deserves $100 million," an amount exceeded by the bonuses to Messrs. Swartz and Kozlowski.

Testifying also can humanize a defendant—and backfire if the defendant isn't likable. Jurors look for hesitation, lack of eye contact or other behavior often interpreted as a sign of guilt.

Criminal complaints and developing disclosures in the Galleon insider trading case allege a far-reaching and complex scheme. Here, the known and alleged relationships.

"If they are one of those people who can only talk as if they are talking to board members or shareholders, the risk is really, really high of alienating the jury," says  Reiko Hasuike, a founding partner at R&D Strategic Solutions, a jury-consulting firm that worked on Mr. Skilling's case. By taking the stand, defendants also open the door for traps laid by prosecutors to catch them in a lie or introduce unflattering, even unrelated, episodes. "For instance, the prosecutor happens to casually say: 'You didn't file a tax return in 1982, did you?....It's because you made $17 million that year and you tried to hide it,' " said  Philip Anthony, chief executive of jury consultant DecisionQuest."For most witnesses, there's some baggage."

After Mr. Kozlowski's first trial ended in a mistrial, he and his lawyers decided to put the former Tyco CEO on the stand during his second trial. "I thought he would do better, because he was a very articulate, very likable man," Mr. DeVita says. During cross-examination, though, Mr. Kozlowski was presented with financial documents and had to tell jurors that he wasn't personally involved with what they showed. 

"They think that if you're the CEO of a $25 billion company, that you know everything down to the last nickel and dime," Mr. DeVita says. "The reality is: They don't."

 Corrections & Amplifications  James DeVita is a lawyer at Day Pitney LLP in New York who represented L. Dennis Kozlowski in two criminal trials of the former Tyco International Ltd. chief executive. An earlier version of this article said he was a lawyer in Arlington, Va. 

 Write to  Michael Rothfeld at michael.rothfeld@wsj.com and Joanna Chung at joanna.chung@wsj.com 