Singer Joyce Bowden recalls that she was out on tour singing backup with the Tom Tom Club and the Ramones back in 1991 when she decided to share the music of her friend and onetime bandmate Arthur Russell, who at the time was suffering complications related to AIDS. "I told my friend Joey Ramone that Arthur's music was something he should listen to," Ms. Bowden said over the phone from her home in North Carolina. In response, the legendary rock singer esteemed: "Arthur's music was like a prayer." 

Within a year, Russell, a prolific cellist and composer, would pass away at age 40, little known in the music world. But some two decades on, he is the subject of a renaissance and reappraisal that is gaining momentum. A biography appeared in 2009, as well as a DVD documentary, and no less than eight albums of his music are now in print. And Ms. Bowden, in collaboration with a handful of Russell's former bandmates, continues to celebrate his music in the group Arthur's Landing. The band is in the middle of a monthlong Monday-night residency at the Nublu jazz club on Avenue C, which will culminate with a record release party on Jan. 24.

"The band as you see onstage today did not exist in the past," said Peter Zummo, a trombonist in Arthur's Landing who recorded and collaborated with Russell for many years. From the late 1970s into the early '80s, Russell's music varied greatly, touching on many different genres. His oeuvre stretches from collaborations with poet Allen Ginsberg to disco music mixed by DJs such as Larry Levan and Nicky Siano. He also performed cowboy songs, recorded electro-pop, and scored large-scale compositions. 

Arthur's Landing pays tribute to these facets of Russell's music and comprises players who worked in his many ensembles, though few of them had actually worked together until this band formed. The group includes Ms. Bowden and Mr. Zummo, as well as guitarists Stephen Hall and John Scherman, bassist Ernie Brooks, drummer Bill Ruyle, keyboardist Elodie Lauten and percussionist Mustafa Ahmed.

In collaborating with these musicians, Ms. Bowden realized that Russell's gifts went beyond music. "He brought together so many different people as if they were the instruments that he had in his mind," she said. "As if I was one instrument and Ernie was another, Peter Zummo another. He played that brilliant person like an instrument."

Mr. Brooks met Russell while still an original member of 1970s cult-pop outfit the Modern Lovers. The pair would form two new-wave groups, the Flying Hearts and the Necessaries. Neither band was fated for stardom, due in part to Russell's mercurial nature, yet after all these years Russell's music remains close to Mr. Brooks's heart. "I don't want to say someone is the 'best songwriter,' but something about what Arthur wrote touched me deeply. Still does," he said near the band's rehearsal space in Long Island City. 

Mr. Brooks insists that Arthur's Landing isn't a cover band. And judging by the studio album the group has recorded, it's not beholden to Russell's mythology, either. Rather than sounding like a tribute or elegy, it has a relaxed air, like friends convening to recount warm anecdotes about their departed colleague. There are old songs that never got recorded—Russell was known for leaving songs unfinished and coming back to them—as well as different takes on finished music. One of Russell's more successful endeavors, a bright disco single from the late-70s that he often played at the Paradise Garage on King Street, "Is It All Over My Face?," gets recast. But the band slows down the upbeat original, revealing something more seductive.

Russell's music continues to resound not only within the dance-music community, but with indie-rock listeners as well. "I don't think Arthur preferred one genre over another—he was just trying to make interesting music," said Mr. Brooks. "Arthur's interests ranged wide and the ensembles he formed to realize his ideas often dispersed rapidly, leaving records of the work that was fragmentary and incomplete." 

Arthur's Landing exists to realize some of the music that got left behind, unfinished or unrecorded. After keeping Russell's music to herself for years, Ms. Bowden realized that sharing it with others allowed her to grasp the spiritual nature inherent in his songs. "It was egotistical of me to think I had some sort of special understanding of Arthur's music," she said. "His music was much more universal than even I understood. I had never thought that Arthur could touch people like the way that he touched me."