FORT CAMPBELL, Ky.—President Barack Obama capped a week of somber and sometimes celebratory events following the successful strike against Osama bin Laden with a rally for U.S. troops, where he held up the al Qaeda leader's slaying as evidence that his Afghanistan war strategy is working. 

"This has been an historic week in the life of our nation," Mr. Obama said, addressing more than 2,000 uniformed service members in an aircraft hangar used to welcome home troops from Afghanistan.

"The terrorist leader who struck our nation on 9/11 will never threaten America again," he said. "Our strategy is working, and there is no greater evidence of that than justice finally being delivered to Osama bin Laden."

Before stepping on stage, Mr. Obama spent more than an hour with some of the special operations forces who carried out the late-night raid in Abbottabad, Pakistan, that killed bin Laden.

They briefed Mr. Obama and Vice President Joseph Biden on the operation. During the closed-door meeting, the president awarded the units involved the Presidential Unit Citation, according to the White House, the highest such honor that can be given to a unit.

"These Americans deserve credit for one of the greatest intelligence and military operations in our nation's history," Mr. Obama later said in his remarks.

For the first time in his public statements since bin Laden's death, Mr. Obama pivoted toward the next critical foreign policy decision of his presidency: how many troops to pull out of Afghanistan in two months, the start of a deadline he set for beginning the drawdown of forces. 

He said the U.S. mission in Afghanistan, which began 10 years ago this fall to overthrow the Taliban regime that had harbored bin Laden, is "moving into a new phase."

Roughly 100,000 U.S. troops are currently serving in Afghanistan since Mr. Obama ordered a surge 17 months ago. Mr. Obama's strategy calls for troop withdrawal to begin in July, but the number of departing troops is not clear. The U.S. and other ally nations have agreed to maintain a presence in Afghanistan through 2014, although the White House has said it would keep troops there longer if the Afghan government requests.

Some members of Congress, including Sen. Carl Levin, the Michigan Democrat who is chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, are making the case that bin Laden's death should propel a significant drawdown of U.S. troops this summer. 

Mr. Levin this week said that most Democrats and many other Americans favored a "robust reduction" of troops in Afghanistan.

But officials at the Pentagon and elsewhere have cautioned against a withdrawal that threatens recent gains in the country.

As he made the rounds this week to punctuate the demise of the man who was behind the deadliest attack on U.S. soil in modern history, Mr. Obama has strained to keep celebrating from crossing the line to gloating. 

The hangar where Mr. Obama addressed the troops was brimming with energy. Some had arrived in the U.S. fewer than 24 hours earlier, following their third or fourth tours in Afghanistan. As a live band warmed up the crowd for the president and vice president, some of the troops got up and danced.

Sgt. 1st Class Marcus Miller, a 32-year-old medical platoon leader, learned bin Laden was dead just as he finished up his third tour in Afghanistan. He was still in the country, about to head home to Fort Campbell.

"I was happy," Mr. Miller said. "For us it was very important since it was one of our top priorities."

Mr. Obama noted that few have felt the burden of the post-9/11 world more than American troops, many of whom have spent years in Iraq or Afghanistan.

"I know it hasn't been easy for you and it hasn't, certainly, been easy for your families," Mr. Obama said. "Since 9/11, no base has deployed more often, and few bases have sacrificed more, than you."

"We are going to ultimately defeat al Qaeda," Mr. Obama said. "We have cut off their head and we will ultimately defeat them."

While welcoming the death of bin Laden, some military members questioned whether bin Laden's death would do anything to lessen the strain.

"I think it means things will heat up," said Pfc. Aron Mock, who at 25 years old was in high school in Hawaii when terrorists crashed four planes into the World Trade Center, the Pentagon and the countryside in Pennsylvania.

At the White House on Sunday night, Mr. Obama had thanked his national security team, specifically CIA Director Leon Panetta, for their work on the bin Laden operation. 

By the end of the week, he had addressed the American people, spoken with members of Congress, visited with 9/11 families and first responders and publicly and privately congratulated members of the military.

Mr. Obama's most somber moments came Thursday when he appeared at Ground Zero in Lower Manhattan. He laid a wreath at the site of the terrorist attacks there and spent time with the families of those who were killed on September 11, 2001. The president also had lunch with firefighters in who lost colleagues that day.

But the White House's handling of the aftermath of bin Laden's death has not been entirely smooth. In a rush to get out information about the raid in Pakistan, Mr. Obama's aides mixed ups several key facts about the last moments of bin Laden's life – asserting at first that he was armed and used his wife as a human shield. Officials later said both statement were incorrect.

Mr. Obama's approval rating shot up six points, to above 50%, in a Gallup poll taken in the aftermath of the bin Laden killing. Other presidents have seem similar upticks after foreign crises or successes that rally the nation, but the effect has generally worn off after a few months.