 'Episodes,' Showtime, Sunday 

In this new comedy, Matt LeBlanc takes on a risky role…himself. The actor known for his dim-witted Joey from "Friends" is the punch line in this joint production with the BBC about a British couple with a hit TV show which Hollywood executives adapt for the U.S. They choose Mr. 

LeBlanc to play the erudite headmaster of an elite boarding school. "We had this idea about a show that was handed the worst piece of casting in the world and we both thought: Matt LeBlanc," says co-creator David Crane, who also co-created "Friends." The half-hour comedy will air on BBC Two in the U.K.

 'The Importance of Being Earnest'  American Airlines Theatre, Thursday

An Oscar Wilde play that thrives on mixed-up identities includes one of its own: The comedy's domineering matriarch, Lady Bracknell (at right), is portrayed in this production by a cross-dressing Brian Bedford. The actor, 75 years old, won critical raves at the Stratford Shakespeare Festival in Ontario last year for his convincing portrait of the aristocratic doyenne wound as tight as her corset. The play, by the Roundabout Theatre Company, now takes its ninth turn on Broadway. The first was in 1895. 

 'The Artist Toolbox,'   American Public Television, Friday

The artists on the new series "The Artist Toolbox" aren't competing for Hollywood fame or a shot at a grand prize. This is American Public Television and the subjects on the 13-part half-hour series include novelist Isabelle Allende, R&B musician John Legend, chef Daniel Boulud and others at the top of their chosen fields. Seattle-based director John Jacobsen drops in on designer Isabel Toledo, actor Tom Skerritt and others to pry out their life lessons. Great artists have to have "audacity and cockiness," Mr. Legend says, "because they have to believe whatever they have in their mind is something worth selling." Air dates vary by city.

 Cake,  'Showroom of Compassion,' Tuesday

Don't worry, "Federal Funding," the song leading off Cake's first album in six years, isn't a treatise on government stimulus money. It's a new vehicle for the sound the rockers introduced in the 1990s as a sly offshoot of grunge. Deadpan Devo-esque lyrics ("Strategize the presentation. Make them see that you're the man"), modular guitar riffs and marching bass notes stack up to a climactic yelp by front man John McCrea, echoing the one in Cake's biggest hit, "The Distance."

—Amy Chozick, Ellen Gamerman, John Jurgensen