BENGHAZI, Libya—Col. Moammar Gadhafi's forces Saturday penetrated deep into Benghazi and heavily shelled the rebel capital's residential neighborhoods, threatening to snuff out the month-old Libyan revolution. 

The speedy advance of government troops and the deadly barrages of Grad rockets, tank and artillery fire contradicted the Libyan regime's claims of a ceasefire, and defied Thursday's United Nations Security resolution urging Col. Gadhafi to stop killing his own people.

French, U.S. and U.K. forces, meanwhile, launched an attack to destroy Libya's air defenses, joining an international air campaign against the Gadhafi regime.

Col. Gadhafi's forces, deployed some 100 miles south of Benghazi on Friday afternoon, launched a rapid two-pronged armor assault from the south and the west overnight, outflanking rebel defenses. By Saturday morning, regime tanks, some of which witnesses said were later disabled or captured by the rebels, reached a key bridge less than two miles from the rebel headquarters in a courthouse on Benghazi's Mediterranean corniche.

The shelling, which began before dawn, hit neighborhoods across Benghazi, flattening homes and particularly devastating the Bin Najila area in the west of the city. One shell landed in the parking lot of the Ouzo hotel, where many international news organizations still present in Benghazi are based, showering vehicles with shrapnel.

By 4 pm, however, the shelling stopped as French fighter jets patrolled the sky above Benghazi. Rebel fighters said they have been given orders to cease fire, and said they thought Col. Gadhafi's forces have withdrawn to Benghazi's outskirts.

Throughout its two-week offensive to retake rebel-held cities, Col. Gadhafi's regime consistently employed the same trademark tactic. A stealth invasion of city centers, accompanied by heavy shelling, was followed by a pullback, more shelling the next day, and then a slow strangling of the remaining rebel forces.

Witnesses and rebel leaders put the civilian death toll in Benghazi at at least 30 killed and many more dozens injured by Saturday afternoon. "The international community is already too late," said Mustafa Gherriani, a spokesman for the rebels' transitional government. "There is a lot of damage, and we think there is quite a lot of other people who have been killed."

The official Liyban translation of Moammar Ghadafi's letter to Barack Obama:

I have said to you before that even if Libya and the United States of America enter into a war God forbid you will always remain my son and I have all the love for you as a son.  I do not want your image to change with me. I want to remain with the same image.  I have all the Libyan people with me and I am prepared to die and they are prepared to die for me: men, women and even children.  We are confronting Al-Qaeda in what they are called Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb nothing more.  And Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb is an armed organization and it is fighting from Libya to Mauritania passing through Algeria and Mali.  What would you do if you found them controlling American cities with the power of weapons?  Tell me, how would you behave so I could follow your example?

Preparing for bloody street battles in the city center, the rebels erected barricades with everything they could get hold of—using tree branches, tires, and in one case a boat that was hauled ashore and placed across a street.

Loudspeakers in mosques all over Benghazi relayed nonstop chants of "Allahu Akbar"—"God is Great"—as rebel fighters took up their positions.

Track events day by day.

"We shall not retreat, we shall not retreat, we shall not retreat," the rebel radio broadcast. "It will be victory or death."

On Saturday morning, as the artillery cannonade approached Benghazi, Col. Gadhafi's fighter jets streaked in the skies above. Then, the rebels unleashed their anti-aircraft guns and one of the jets erupted in a flash of fire, hurtling downwards and setting off a thick plume of smoke.

On the way to the downing site, a reporter encountered panicked rebels directing traffic away and warning about incoming gunfire. Further down the road, about one mile from Ouzo hotel in the upscale neighborhood of Tabalino, rebel gunmen with light arms crouched behind a wall.

Col. Gadhafi's forces, they said, were already in the university campus some 800 meters down the road. "They have a tank and pickup trucks," one of the revolutionaries shouted. Then, suddenly, incoming bullets started crackling in the air, followed by loud thumps of shell explosions. "Run away, run away," the fighters yelled as they sought cover behind buildings.

According to witnesses and Mr. Gherriani, some of Col. Gadhafi's forces—dressed in civilian clothes and riding civilian cars—infiltrated Benghazi neighborhoods overnight, taking up positions in the university campus and on rooftops. 

Thousands of Benghazi citizens, fearing Col. Gadhafi's promised retribution, started fleeing the city on Saturday, clogging roads leading to the Egyptian border and creating giant lines at petrol pumps.

In emotional scenes in towns all along the way, Libyans converged at road intersections, offering free shelter in their homes, and thrusting bottles of water, juice and freshly baked bread into passing cars.

In the town of Marj outside Benghazi, one man with a thick wad of money took it upon himself to hand out several 5-dinar notes, each worth some $3, to every fleeing Benghazi family.

--Muneef Halawa contributed to this article.

 Write to  Yaroslav Trofimov at yaroslav.trofimov@wsj.com 