In the premiere episode of "Harry's Law," a new legal drama by David E. Kelley, a man falls from the skies and lands on the heroine (he'll be her first client). That's just before she's hit hard by a car (the driver will join her law firm). An accident that should have left her seriously injured has left her unscathed, a puzzled doctor observes. It's our clue that Harriet "Harry" Korn—a patent attorney bored with her successful career and high income, now turned lawyer for the poor—is a mightily resilient force. It's soon clear, as well, that the admirable Kathy Bates, who plays Harry, may herself require all the resilience she can muster to get through this exercise in chaos.

It may come as some relief to viewers who caught that first episode that the second installment, airing next Monday, settles down to a coherent story line or two, though the broad strokes laid on earlier, intended evidently as whimsy, remain front and center.

Harry's law office is deep in a Cincinnati slum, a neighborhood supposedly impoverished, crime-ridden and in other ways terrifying. Just the place for a shoe store specializing in treasures from Prada and Jimmy Choo—or so we're left to conclude from the script, which has Harry's office in a space recently occupied by such a store, and also enriched by large quantities of its abandoned stock. Harry's assistant, Jenna (Brittany Snow), an airhead not lacking in pragmatism, decides that the law firm should include a retail business on the side. So it happens, if you're still following this plot line, that Harry's legal establishment, dedicated to advancing the rights of the oppressed and underserved, goes under the name "Harriet's Law and Fine Shoes."

 Harry's Law  Mondays, 10 to 11 p.m. EST, NBC

 Silencing the Song: An Afghan Fallen Star  Wednesday, 8 to 8:45 p.m. EST, HBO 2

None of this prevents the oppressed from finding Harry. Malcolm (Aml Ameen), the black college student who fell from the skies—in a suicide attempt, it turns out—beat a drug rap in episode one, thanks to Harry, and works as an aide at Harriet's Law and Fine Shoes. The street-tough Damian (Johnny Ray Gill), who delivers protection for local merchants, also escapes prison time thanks to the firm. And there's Adam (Nathan Corddry), a legal whiz kid who was, like Harry, tired of success and high income at a big firm—a place, he explains, where he found himself surrounded by partners with deadened eyes. Aggressive in a courtroom and the rest of the time, one of those nerd-heroes now a staple of TV series, Adam has found happiness at Harry's, where he gets to argue some strange cases. 

That won't come as any surprise; "Harry's Law" is heavy with echoes of earlier Kelley projects. Among these, "Boston Legal," whose scripts concerned fantastic cases impossible to imagine in any courtroom—the occasions for lawyers' arguments that regularly exploded into diatribes about some outrage or other against justice and progressivism committed by the forces of evil in the world. You know who they are.

The echoes come roaring back in force with episode two, which has Harry muttering a casual aside about the state of Arizona—if you don't know who the forces of evil are supposed to be, the script makes things clear. And never more so than in the case Adam argues on behalf of a Chinese employer who has fired an American working at his Cincinnati business because she has become pregnant a second time. A violation of the one-child-per-family rule, the angry boss declares. This is the U.S., the employee's attorney points out. No matter: Adam delivers an impassioned courtroom defense of China's one-child-per-family policy, scoffs at suggestions that China is a repressive state, and concludes with a lyrical eruption about overpopulation as the greatest of dangers to the survival of our planet—against which China alone has heroically struggled.

The difference between "Harry's Law"—an enterprise distinguished largely for its toxic levels of treacle—and "Boston Legal," which could claim a certain artfulness, is considerable. Its single major asset is Kathy Bates, who gets through line after line of skin-crawling mawkishness in regal style. 

 "Silencing the Song: An Afghan Fallen Star" concerns the uncertain fate of Setara, a singer who outraged religious traditionalists in Afghanistan. The trouble began with her appearance on "Afghan Star" (the country's version of "American Idol"), where she violated the ban—this is in post-Taliban Afghanistan—on dancing and other proscribed immodest entertainments. Among other offenses, her head-covering slipped—a sight that caused some Afghanis to shudder, as candid camera shots show. She's denounced by a government minister, a male viewer says she should be killed—because she was "moving around" on that show. Setara herself, now married, remains defiant—"I wouldn't have cared if all my clothes had fallen off" she says, recalling her sorrow at losing the contest. A film compelling for its view of Afghanistan, and, above all, for what it tells about yearning for the limelight, which, once tasted, doesn't go away, whether in Kabul or Kansas City. 

 Write to  Dorothy Rabinowitz at Dorothy.Rabinowitz@wsj.com 