Big was bad when it came to airline service last year. Delta, American, United and its merger partner Continental placed last in the annual Middle Seat customer-service rankings of major domestic carriers in 2010.

Best among major airlines: smaller carriers. Alaska Airlines and AirTran Airways had the highest percentages of on-time flights and generally lower rates of lost bags, cancellations, passengers bumped from oversold flights and complaints filed with the Department of Transportation. Those two airlines were the only two majors to decrease their complaint totals in 2010—the rest shot higher.

Size can bog down an airline operation. Scheduling planes, crews and maintenance tasks can get increasingly complex as airlines get bigger. Flying to more cities exposes the daily operation to more storms. Bigger waves of connecting flights mean more possibility for lost luggage or misconnected passengers. Bigger work forces get more difficult to manage and motivate.

"The larger the hubs, the more connections you have to make. There are so many more variables," said  Robert Isom, chief operating officer for US Airways, which had the best year in its history in 2010 in terms of airline operations performance. Overall, with high scores in on-time performance and baggage handling but low rankings in overbooking and complaints, US Airways ranked fifth out of nine. 

Southwest Airlines is flying into many of those big-airline headwinds as it grows. The low-fare carrier used to be an on-time machine, regularly providing flights so punctually that it was a major marketing point for the airline. But Southwest ended 2010 in sixth place among the nation's nine major airlines in on-time arrivals, according to data compiled by FlightStats.com, a flight-tracking service, and the DOT.

As Southwest has pushed into more big-city hubs often plagued by delays, it has increasingly struggled to avoid late flights and resulting problems like misconnected baggage. Southwest ranked No. 6 in baggage handling and seventh in the frequency of involuntarily bumping passengers from its flights. 

Southwest still ended up in third place overall on the scorecard, largely because it had the lowest rate of customer complaints and second-best in how frequently it cancels flights.

Southwest says its ranking among airlines fell because others improved and it slipped some. Last year, Southwest had 79.5% of its flights arrive within 15 minutes of schedule—the DOT definition of "on time." That's close to the airline's historical 80% to 83% on-time rate, but still a decline.

  Greg Wells, Southwest's senior vice president of operations, said fuller planes were the primary problem. Southwest squeezed more connecting passengers onto flights last year—its load factor, or percentage of seats filled, jumped to 79.3% from 76% a year earlier and historical averages around 70%. Southwest typically held planes for connecting passengers rather than depart on time and leave customers behind, he said.

 See major airlines ranked from best to worst in key operational areas. 

Southwest, however, is planning changes this year to "try to get things ironed out," Mr. Wells said, and boost its on-time performance. The company also wants to get its operation moving better before it begins integrating with AirTran. Southwest's proposed acquisition of AirTran is still pending regulatory approval. 

"There's no doubt that with 540 airplanes across 70 cities, complication is a big deal," Mr. Wells said.

For the industry, complaints and cancellations were up sharply last year, reflecting the challenges of flying in 2010. The number of complaints filed with DOT through November was up 30% for all airlines combined, and that likely could go higher with all the traveler unhappiness during the December holidays, when snowstorms left passengers stranded for days.

The number of flights canceled last year jumped 22% to 153,000, or 1.8% of all flights, according to FlightStats. In 2009, 125,637 flights were canceled, or 1.45% of the total scheduled. Airlines blamed the increase on devastating blizzards last February and last month, plus disruptions from volcanic ash, a runway repaving at busy New York Kennedy airport and compliance with the new federal tarmac-delay rule, which threatens heavy fines if airlines leave passengers stuck on grounded planes for more than three hours.

The on-time arrivals rate improved a bit in 2010 over the previous year, as did baggage handling. Through the first 11 months of the year, 1.8 million bags on domestic flights were "mishandled"—the DOT's term for bags that don't show up as scheduled—compared to two million in the same period of 2009.

The Middle Seat scorecard uses data on airline operations from FlightStats.com, which uses airline and Federal Aviation Administration data to track flights, and DOT data. DOT has yet to report December data, so baggage handling and complaint rankings reflect results through November; involuntary bumping statistics reflect the first nine months of the year.

Seattle-based Alaska posted the best on-time arrivals rate of the year among major airlines. According to FlightStats, 87.4% of Alaska's flights in 2010 arrived on time, up from 83.2%. Alaska also scored first in canceled flights, with only 0.65% of the carrier's flights canceled during the year. Worst in punctuality last year among major carriers: jetBlue. The New York-based airline also had the biggest increase in complaints, followed by Continental, American and Southwest.

Delta, the largest carrier after its merger with Northwest Airlines, was second-worst in punctuality and baggage handling, and it had the highest rates of canceled flights and consumer complaints filed with the DOT.

Delta said cancellations were up because of the major weather events of the year, plus the European shutdown from volcanic ash clouds. In addition, the airline canceled flights more aggressively ahead of significant storms to "ensure compliance with the new DOT tarmac rules," said  Neil Stronach, senior vice president of operations control.

US Airways saw the number of flights it canceled increase by 17% last year compared to 2009, according to FlightStats. The airline canceled 1.28% of its flights, compared to 1.06% the previous year.

US Airways says the main culprit was February blizzards on the East Coast. After that, airlines had lots of good weather, with little hurricane impact, for example, until the Christmas blizzard. Without the February storms "it would have been a record year for us" in terms of few canceled flights, Mr. Isom said.

US Airways counted 536 flights—140 at the main airline and the rest among regional airline partners—that it canceled primarily because of the tarmac rule, which took effect in April. Those flights, about 2% of the total cancellations for the year at the main airline, carried about 9,000 passengers who had to be rebooked instead of waiting out long delays.

"If the weather was any worse, those numbers would have been much larger," Mr. Isom said.

 Write to  Scott McCartney at middleseat@wsj.com 