COLUMBUS, N.M.—Even in a border town where smugglers have moved contraband to and from Mexico for generations, no one here expected the mayor, the police chief and a town councilman to be accused in an international gun-running scheme. 

Federal agents last week arrested the men along with seven other people for allegedly conspiring to smuggle hundreds of semi-automatic weapons into Mexico.

Gun-Smuggling Raid in New Mexico

"People over there are dying and we're supplying the guns," said Philip Skinner, a longtime resident who runs a sandwich shop out of a trailer on the town's dusty main drag. "How much more terrible can you get?"

The arrests were part of a broader crackdown by the U.S. in the wake of pleas by the Mexican government to stop the flow of American firearms used by drug gangs in the deadly violence south of the U.S.-Mexico border. 

Since the beginning of the year, U.S. agents have arrested dozens of suspected smugglers, including one Texas man allegedly linked to the gun used to kill Jaime Zapata, the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement special agent who was shot and killed on a Mexican highway last month.

Ten of the eleven alleged members of the trafficking ring are scheduled to be arraigned Tuesday on charges of conspiracy, smuggling and making false statements in connection with firearms purchases. One defendant, 24-year-old Ignacio Villalobos, is a fugitive, prosecutors said.

The mayor, Eddie Espinoza, allegedly served as a so-called straw buyer for 22 pistols, and he leased an apartment in a gated El Paso, Texas complex that was used to store weapons, according to the indictment.

Police Chief Angelo Vega allegedly bought bullet-proof vests and other body armor to be smuggled, participated in a cash pickup in Albuquerque, and twice called federal agents to try to intercede on behalf of a village councilman, Blas Gutierrez, according to the indictment. Mr. Gutierrez is also accused in the smuggling scheme. 

Lawyers for Mr. Espinoza and Mr. Gutierrez said they expected their clients to plead not guilty at Tuesday's arraignment. In the government indictment, the lawyers said, federal authorities presented neither an explanation of how the weapons were transported into Mexico nor their clients' involvement in any alleged smuggling operation. 

Mr. Vega's attorney declined to comment in an email, saying that information about the case is still sparse.

The accused gun smugglers are deeply intertwined with the community. Roberto Gutierrez, who owns the local grocery store and is a village councilman, is now the acting mayor. He has not been implicated in any wrongdoing. Among those arrested were his brother-in-law—the mayor—as well as his son, the councilman, a daughter and a nephew.

"It's a very trying time for our family," Mr. Gutierrez said. He said he wasn't aware his relatives were allegedly involved in any illegal business. 

"Under the law," he said, "you're innocent until proven guilty."

Most of the weapons were bought in the community of Chaparral, N.M., which is about 20 miles north of El Paso. Ian Garland, one of the men arrested, is accused of selling weapons from his home. He allegedly advertised on signs posted around Columbus: "AK-47, Romanian, new, $550," reads one sign at a highway intersection.

Palomas, across the U.S.-Mexico border from Columbus, has been shaken by a years-long turf battle between two Mexican cartels. The fight has hurt business in both communities, and increased the temptations to smuggle, locals say.

Luna County Sheriff Raymond Cobos has stepped up patrols and has suggested that his deputies take over security in Columbus from municipal police.

Mexicans have recently complained that U.S. authorities have allowed some guns to cross the border in the course of their arms-trafficking investigations, as agents follow the weapons to the buyers. One Mexican congressman alleged last week that such weapons have been used in 150 murders. U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder has promised to investigate the claim.

In the Columbus raid, U.S. prosecutors said, they tried to conduct their investigation without any guns reaching Mexico. "Every effort was made through the course of this investigation to keep that from happening," said Kenneth J. Gonzales, U.S. Attorney for New Mexico.

Even so, some weapons found in Mexico have been traced to the Columbus gang, Mr. Gonzales said. He added that he could not provide any information about the circumstances or name the buyers in Mexico.

On Saturday, few residents would talk about the raid. Some said they were afraid of repercussions. Others said they didn't want to speak ill of the mayor.

The weekend focused on a different raid that happened here in 1916. That year, Mexican revolutionary Pancho Villa charged into town to seek revenge on local gun dealers who sold him faulty ammunition, according to local lore.

The event has been transformed into a festival to celebrate bi-national friendship. Hundreds of riders on horseback from both sides of the border convened on Saturday for a day of music and food.

"Today is Columbus's day to shine," said Glenda Sanchez, a bartender, bilingual kindergarten teacher and an organizer of the event.

Among the souvenirs at the festival were history books and pictures of Mr. Villa. One T-shirt on sale had a more contemporary message: "Columbus, N.M. Gun Sale, tomorrow only."

 Write to  Ana Campoy at ana.campoy@dowjones.com and Leslie Eaton at leslie.eaton@wsj.com 