WASHINGTON—The White House said Wednesday it wants an independent board to assist the federal government in selling thousands of unnecessary buildings for about $15 billion in savings over three years. 

"The federal government is far and away the largest property owner in the country—1.2 million individual properties," said Jeffrey Zients, deputy director for management and chief performance officer of the White House's Office of Management and Budget. He said operating the federal government's unneeded warehouses, supply sheds and outdated Federal Aviation Administration towers costs about $20 billion annually. 

The federal government has already identified 14,000 buildings and structures to sell. The sales, which will begin in a few months, come at a time when the real estate market is still on shaky grounds. 

Mr. Zients said the government shouldn't wait to sell the buildings. "I don't think we're market timers, and we need to get rid of this real estate, stop paying for unnecessary upkeep and bring the money back to tax payers," Mr. Zients said. 

Mr. Zients said the government will sell some of the properties through an electronic auction to ensure they get the best price for the real estate. 

The independent board, which will consist of private and public sector leaders, will help identify structures to be sold or consolidated. Congress would then vote on whether to accept the board's recommendations on an up-and-down vote. 

Congress would also need to approve the creation of the board. 

Mr. Zients said the board is needed because for the government to sell property there are more than 20 requirements it must fulfill. "Red tape, financial barriers, political interests—that's why the government owns thousands of properties it doesn't need, and is wasting taxpayer dollars," Mr. Zients said. 

A Government Accountability Office report released earlier in the week criticized the federal government for having too many duplicative and redundant federal programs. 

"We're on the same page with GAO. There's a tremendous overlap between GAO's recommendations and what we're doing," Mr. Zients said. As examples of the administration's efforts to reduce waste and overlap, Mr. Zients mentioned the administration's efforts to reduce improper payments, revamp federal contracting and eliminate outdated regulations. 

 Write to  Jared A. Favole at jared.favole@dowjones.com 

