MEMPHIS, Tenn.—It seemed a reasonable decision to members of the 99-year-old Union Avenue Methodist Church. With its building and finances crumbling, and just 40 members left, the congregation voted 18 months ago to sell its property to CVS Caremark Corp. for about $2.3 million. 

Merging with a nearby congregation, members agreed to use some of the money from the sale for projects such as soup kitchens and missionary work. That seemed to make more sense than spending money on repairs. "Every fourth person in Memphis is hungry, so how can you justify paying $4 million to restore a building?" said Birgitte T. French, Union Avenue's minister at the time.

But the move has been anything but simple. Today church members and CVS are locked in a fierce battle with preservationists opposed to CVS's plans to bulldoze the church—built in 1912—and erect a pharmacy. The preservationists backed an unsuccessful effort to sell the building to a Presbyterian congregation for about $800,000. 

"Based on what I've seen, greed has won over the community," said June West, executive director of Memphis Heritage, a nonprofit preservation group. 

The fight here is part of a broader national debate over what to do with historic urban churches as their denominations dwindle in cities across the U.S. 

Union Avenue's problems date to the 1950s, when members began moving to the suburbs. Nationally, membership at churches and synagogues has declined to 61% of American adults. That number stood at 70% in 1999, according to a Gallup poll of U.S. adults. 

At the same time, membership in large, nondenominational churches rose faster than in Roman Catholic and major Protestant churches.

The younger generation doesn't feel as compelled to commit to a single religion or format, said Anthea Butler, an associate professor of religious studies at University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, who studies church populations. 

"When you need a spiritual fix, you don't necessarily want to sit for two hours in a pew," said Ms. Butler. 

The shift has brought about a brisk business in church real estate, along with some spiritual angst. In Haverhill, Mass., residents and the city's historic society helped block the sale of a 163-year-old Armenian Apostolic church to a developer who planned to raze it and build a Burger King. Walgreen Co. recently built stores on former church sites in New York and Kentucky. Rite Aid Corp. opened a location in 2008 at the site of a former Protestant church in Pennsylvania. 

Churchgoers once packed the 800-seat Union Avenue church every weekend. But by July 2009, with its shrunken congregation, the church had less than $10,000 in its bank account. Weekly donations came nowhere close to covering monthly expenses. Repairs went unmade. There were holes in the sanctuary's walls, and rainwater dripped from the domed ceilings.

Still, from the outside, nothing seems amiss with the red-brick church, with limestone columns framing a pair of entrances, arched windows and a large cupola.

Church leaders engaged real-estate agent Charlie Callis to explore a sale. Things started off smoothly, said Mr. Callis. "Then, lo and behold, the local historical people start raising their head and opposing it," he said.

Among them was Memphis Heritage. The preservation group has worked to create and maintain an urban feel in Midtown, an area teeming with live theaters, art studios and boutique shops. The area already has several national fast-food joints—and a handful of Walgreens and Rite-Aids—but preservationists say the loss of Union Avenue Methodist would be a big blow to their efforts. 

The congregation vacated the church last spring. Ms. West claims congregants approved the sale because the mostly elderly church members were pressured by parish leaders. Ms. French denies church leaders coerced anyone. No one from the preservationist group is a member of the church. 

At a packed city council meeting in August, the Methodists showed up wearing red-and-white buttons that read: "CVS=Jobs." They argued the sale would create 25 new positions. Preservationists from Memphis Heritage and other groups wore stickers showing a red line slashed through the letters "CVS." The City Council voted 10-2 to approve the building application for the pharmacy. 

The preservationists didn't relent. Memphis Heritage helped unearth a nearly century-old church deed stipulating the building remain a church into perpetuity. But last month, a Shelby County judge ruled the sale could go ahead.

CVS still needs to apply for a demolition permit before it can start construction, but says it is committed to building a new store at the Union Avenue site.

Ms. French says the church has yet to close the sale with the drugstore chain.

The preservationists plan to keep fighting, even building support for a boycott of the CVS store.

Walking through the sanctuary of the Union Avenue church recently, the Rev. Mark Matheny stepped over clumps of plaster piled on top of the carpet. White paint flaked from the walls. A blue tarp stretched over the wooden pews, to catch rainwater leaking from the ceiling.

Mr. Matheny, minister of the Methodist church Union Avenue members now attend, said the people looking to save this church were doing too little, too late. "If you look through the New Testament, it says next to nothing about the preservation of buildings," he said. 

 Write to  Timothy W. Martin at timothy.martin@wsj.com 