

SEOUL—Hyundai Motor Group on Friday signed a preliminary agreement to buy Hyundai Engineering & Construction Co. in a deal worth up to $4.72 billion, a step that brings nearer the completion of the drawn-out sale process for South Korea's largest construction company, which has been marked by a fierce family feud. 

Hyundai E&C, the founding component of what was once the country's largest conglomerate, was put on the block in July. The Hyundai conglomerate lost many of its affiliates in the wake of the 1997-98 Asian financial crisis because of a business model that relied heavily on debt and focused on sales growth rather than profitability. 

The construction company came under the control of nine creditors in 2001 after a bailout package. The creditors have been trying to offload their stake since Hyundai E&C exited a bankruptcy workout program in 2006. 

Two other parts of the former Hyundai conglomerate, Hyundai Motor Group and Hyundai Group, submitted bids for Hyundai E&C in November. The bids pitted family members against one another in what was seen as an emotive struggle to reclaim a key part of the Hyundai business. 

Hyundai Motor's chairman is Chung Mong-koo, the second son of Hyundai conglomerate founder Chung Ju-yung. Hyundai Group is headed by Chairwoman Hyun Jeong-eun, widow of founder Chung's fourth son, Chung Mong-hun, who died in 2003. 

Questions were asked about how suited the E&C construction business was for either bidder. Automotive conglomerate Hyundai Motor counts Hyundai Motor Co. and Kia Motors Corp. as key affiliates, while Hyundai Group's main businesses are a shipping line and an elevator maker. 

Hyundai Group was initially named the preferred bidder, but the creditors ended up walking away from its 5.51 trillion won (about $5 billion) offer after a dispute over how the bid would be financed. The creditors then turned to Hyundai Motor, which submitted a smaller bid but has a strong cash position. 

Lead creditor Korea Exchange Bank said Friday that the creditors have signed a memorandum of understanding with Hyundai Motor to sell their collective 34.88% stake. The conglomerate will start due diligence for the acquisition next week, KEB said. 

An official at one of the creditors told Dow Jones Newswires earlier Friday that creditors aim to sign a sale agreement by mid-February; the final price can be adjusted by as much as 3% above or below Hyundai Motor's 5.1 trillion won offer in November based on the terms of the agreement.

Hyundai Group had filed for an injunction to stop the creditors from opening talks with Hyundai Motor, but that was denied by the Seoul Central District Court in early January. Hyundai Group subsequently filed an appeal to the Seoul High Court, which is yet to be reviewed.

On Friday, Hyundai Group reiterated its intent to pursue legal action but said it hasn't heard from the Seoul High Court on when the appeal will begin. The creditors have said they plan to proceed with the sale as scheduled regardless of the legal challenge. 

The market expects Hyundai Motor to be able to conclude the deal without trouble.

 Write to  Se Young Lee at vincent.lee@dowjones.com 