A smaller audience tuned in for the Academy Awards Sunday night on ABC, reversing two years of growth for one of television's biggest events. 

About 37.6 million people watched, down 9.9% from the 41.7 million, a year ago, according to early Nielsen Co. data. "The King's Speech," broadly viewed as the favorite, picked up the top honor. 

The ceremony ranked as the fifth lowest since at least 1974, according to Nielsen. That could add urgency to deliberations within the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences over whether to move the Oscars a month or so earlier, to get ahead of other film awards, which have sapped some of the suspense around the gold statuettes.

Organizers had set out to woo a more youthful audience, in part by bringing in young actors James Franco, 32, and Anne Hathaway, 28, as co-hosts—to mixed reviews. Last year, the median age topped 50 for the first time in recent history. 

ABC, owned by  Walt Disney Co.
DIS


0.83
%




, partially succeeded, in that the ratings among people ages 18 to 34 declined about 4.5% compared to a year ago. Among women between 18 and 34 years old, the Oscars lost only 2% of last year's audience, ABC said. 

"You look very appealing to a younger demographic," Ms. Hathaway said to Mr. Franco near the top of the telecast.

ABC also aimed at younger viewers by offering live backstage video on oscar.com and through apps for Apple Inc.'s iPhone and iPad. The network said more than 3 million videos were viewed across those offerings on Sunday.

The Oscars audience peaked in the half-hour between 9 p.m. and 9:30 p.m. EST and then tapered off until a spike as the final awards were given, according Nieslen. 

ABC said its "Red Carpet Live" from 8-8:30 p.m. ET pre-show averaged 26.4 million people, its largest audience since 2007. Comcast Corp.'s E! network said the audience for its two-hour "Live from the Red Carpet" pre-show rise roughly 9% to 4 million viewers. 

The audience information doesn't have any immediate financial impact on ABC or the Academy. Prices for commercials in this year's Oscars were up sharply from last year. Like those in the Super Bowl, slots are sold without guarantees on audience size, ad buyers and ABC executives say. But ratings can affect prices for the following year, and an event on the downturn has a harder time than one on the upswing. ABC last week renewed its contract to air the Oscars through 2020. 

Most of the big winners on Sunday night had already been showered with awards at a host of other award shows in the past two months, including Natalie Portman as Best Actress for "Black Swan" and Colin Firth as Best Actor for "The King's Speech." Some analysts at media-buying agencies had said before Sunday night's show that the lack of suspense could undercut the show's appeal.

The decline comes as audiences for live events have been growing in recent years, with the Super Bowl and Grammy Awards seeing increases in the last month. But the results could cast some cold water on the theory that social-networking services like Twitter are forces for driving more viewers to live shows by creating an instant water-cooler effect.

Some viewers gave Ms. Hathaway and Mr. Franco hosts poor marks -- complaints that ricocheted across the Web as the show progressed. 

"Tweets can be negative, getting people to turn off the show," said Brad Adgate, senior vice president for research at Horizon Media. "The telecast wasn't compelling TV."

 Write to  Sam Schechner at sam.schechner@wsj.com 