WELLINGTON, New Zealand—With New Zealand's economy weighed down by a budget deficit and volatile global currency markets, the central bank is pegging its prospects to a factor that seems more reliable: the country's all-conquering, top-ranked rugby team, the All Blacks.

"Our expert team of forecasters predicts that on average, the All Blacks will beat Australia in the final" of the World Cup,  Alan Bollard, governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, said in a speech to the Canterbury Employers Chamber of Commerce, according to a text provided to Dow Jones Newswires Friday. The forecasters even predict a margin of victory over the arch-rival Australians: nine to 14 points.



And Mr. Bollard further declared that victory in the six-week event, being hosted by New Zealand starting in September, will help spark a sluggish economy that's been hit by an earthquake that ruined parts of the country's second-largest city, Christchurch, and a slump in tourists put off by the country's overvalued currency. 

"Winning the World Cup would also boost general confidence," he added.

Of course, first New Zealand actually has to win. And though the team is currently ranked No. 1 in the world by the International Rugby Board—Australia is No. 2—the central bank's confident prediction, calculated from what a spokesman describes as a "simple average of the winning and losing scores from professional forecasters within the bank," overlooks a certain uncomfortable matter of history: When it comes to the crunch of the sport's top competition, the once-every-four-years World Cup, those all-conquering New Zealand players have a reputation for, well, losing.

The All Blacks, named for their dark uniforms and famous for greeting opposing teams before a match with a fierce haka, or Maori challenge dance, have won the event only once, in the inaugural 1987 edition. At the last one, four years ago in France, they entered hotly tipped and, just as they are now, ranked No. 1 in the world—and failed even to make the semifinals, marking a low point for this rugby-crazy nation.



But say this time it's different, and the bank's prediction comes up aces—after all, the All Blacks' one championship did come the last time New Zealand was host. Does the rest of Mr. Bollard's outlook hold up?

  Brendan O'Donovan, chief economist at  Westpac Banking Corp.
WBK


0.48
%




, is dubious. A World Cup championship provides "a temporary feel-good factor for a while but it doesn't change an economic reality," he says. On the other hand, being host pays off: "What does provide the benefit is the exposure the country gets, the ongoing recognition both as a tourist destination and in terms of product recognition."

Mr. Bollard puts a figure on that, too: He expects the World Cup to generate 700 million New Zealand dollars (US$540 million) in revenue for New Zealand's economy, enough to boost the gross domestic product by about a third of a percentage point. This could help ease the urgency for the government to move up asset sales aiming to raise up to US$6 billion and return the budget to surplus a year ahead of schedule.

The outcome of the World Cup could have wider implications for the government of Prime Minister  John Key, who is expected to wait until after the event to call an election, according to the online prediction market iPredict. In 1987, when New Zealand won, the Labour government of  David Lange, unpopular and lagging in the polls, gained re-election. The next time an election coincided with the World Cup, in 1999, the All Blacks lost—and so did then-Prime Minister  Jenny Shipley.

 Write to  Rebecca Howard at rebecca.howard@dowjones.com 