MILAN—Italy's government said Saturday that it would put a freeze on Libyan assets in Italy, in accordance with sanctions imposed by the European Union on Feb. 28 as a result of the turmoil in the North African country.

The government stopped short, however, of agreeing to freeze the assets of the Libyan central bank and the Libyan Investment Authority, which is the country's sovereign wealth fund, which both own stakes in several key Italian companies.

In effect, Italy is adopting a narrower interpretation of the EU's sanctions; Italian officials have said that they don't feel the EU sanctions provide the legal basis for targeting institutions that are integral to Libya's sovereignty.

In a statement, the Italian government added that it would "wait for possible new decisions by the European Union regarding the freezing of Libyan assets in member states.

"The ministry made the statement after a meeting held by the committee responsible for financial security, or CSF by its Italian acronym, whose members include officials from the ministry, central bank and other bodies.

It didn't identify the assets to be frozen. This week, the EU imposed a travel and arms-sale ban as well as a freeze on the assets of 26 Libyans, including Col. Moammar Gadhafi, his family and close associates.

EU member states are close to agreeing on widening these sanctions to include investments held by Libya's sovereign wealth fund and its central bank, a senior EU official said.

The imposition of sanctions have been a divisive issue within the EU. Some member states argue that the investments held by the bank and the fund are already covered by the latest sanctions because they are effectively controlled by the Gadhafi regime.

But others including Italy say they don't."We have to make a distinction between the assets of the Libyan people and the interests that are instead held by a family," Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi was quoted as saying in Helsinki on Friday by Ansa, an Italian news agency. "So we have to be careful." 

In Italy, Libya's sovereign wealth fund, called the Libyan Investment Authority, or LIA, owns 2.594% of  Unicredit
UNCFF


-1.02
%




 SpA, according to the website of the bank, one of Italy's biggest. The Central Bank of Libya owns another 4.988%. 

The LIA also owns 2.01% of defense and aerospace group  Finmeccanica
FNC


3.16
%




 SpA , while the Libyan Arab Foreign Investment Company SpA holds a 7.5% stake in  Juventus Football Club
JUVE


2.08
%




 SpA, according to the Consob market regulator's website. 

 Write to  Gilles Castonguay at gilles.castonguay@dowjones.com 