Behind the undulating glass wall of One Jackson Square, a new 11-story condo in the West Village, an empty duplex penthouse has lingered on the market for 2½ years, with a sticker price of $21.75 million.



Now that most of the building has been sold, the developers have focused on marketing the penthouse. They cut the price by $2.8 million.

And they have commissioned a prominent young interior designer,  Brad Ford, to convert the 5,695 square feet of echoing bare white walls and glass into a finished apartment. 

 The vast apartment includes a loft-like, 55-foot-wide open living room lined with a curved wall of glass and a 1,690-square-foot terrace with a pool and outdoor kitchen. 

"With the glass walls, people, really needed help conceptualizing how to live in the space," said  James Lansill, a senior managing director at Corcoran Sunshine.

A furnished model apartment is nothing new in real estate, but it was Mr. Ford's first such commission from a developer. He took it as a challenge of "warming up" what—despite the curves and unusual architecture—he said was "still a white box, so to speak."

The results were rooms with natural touches, from vintage furniture upholstered in natural linen to wool and silk rugs and rough-hewn wood. There are also tubular kitchen bar stools with seat covers made from very long-haired Mongolian lamb. 

The open living room is dominated by a 6-by-7-foot table fashioned from a natural-edged slab of redwood sliced in half and joined together on a walnut base. 

The table, by  Mira Nakashima—the daughter of  George Nakashima, the well-known Japanese-American craftsman—was borrowed from a dealer, and is listed for sale in a catalog of furnishings for $200,000.

"It was a beautiful centerpiece to instantly bring some earthiness to this industrial type architecture," Mr. Ford said. 

The craft-like details, including an ottoman upholstered in zebra skin, were mixed with modern furniture to keep the edginess of the downtown neighborhood, he said. 

Furniture and artwork in the condo were borrowed, and most are listed for sale, with total price tags topping $1.5 million.

  David S. Penick, vice president of development for Hines Interest, the lead developer on the project, said Mr. Ford was chosen because his nature aesthetic complemented the building's certifiably green footprint.

The soft curves of the outer walls, constructed of a skin of aluminum and irregularly sized glass panels, were echoed in thick wavy panels of pungent bamboo plywood in the lobby, he said. 

So far, Mr. Penick said 27 of 33 apartments in the building, near Eighth Avenue and West 13th Street, have been sold. One of the remaining five units was a small studio that hasn't yet been put on the market. Hines put up the building in partnership with RFR Realty. 

The penthouse was originally designed as two separate apartments, but they were combined as the demand for very large apartments soared during the boom years, Mr. Penick said. 

Many units that closed in the last year sold for between 6% and 10% below the asking prices. The new list price on the penthouse brings the asking price down to $18.95 million, a cut of 12.9%.

Mr. Ford said the lavish furniture and artwork were brought in, to attract the type of buyer who might want to buy a penthouse—a "person who would have an interest in high-end furniture, antiques, and blue-chip art."

 Write to  Josh Barbanel at josh.barbanel@wsj.com 