Nothing says home quite like a mudroom. The smell of waxed coats and Wellingtons mixed with a little damp dog and, well, mud. Even a back door lined with hats and coats, everyone's boots lined up Goldilocks-style nearby, feels like the soul of a house. But this high-traffic area can quickly devolve into a chaotic heap of outerwear. To impose some order, follow these simple guidelines.

—Rita Konig

 GET HOOKED UP: Coat hooks are to back doors what bookcases are to studies: They add color and life. And you need a lot of them. I love the vintage faux bamboo racks from Balsamo, which come in a range of sizes. Consider two racks: one hung high, for adults, and a lower one that's within reach of the shorter members of the family. While hooks look great with scarves, jackets, hats and bags hanging on them, mad as it may sound, they need a little styling. It's necessary in order to avoid being ambushed by piles of coats. Maintain order by hanging current coats on hooks and keeping the rest in the closet. Faux Bamboo Hat Rack (shown above), balsamoant.com  

 PUT SHOES IN BINS: Corral shoes, both outdoor and indoor ones, in shallow baskets and boxes that can slide under a bench. Bins are also very good for storing hats and gloves. Balsamo's brightly colored old textile boxes from France are so cheerful and just what you need to perk up what can look like the lost property section of a small train station. I also like IKEA's simple wicker basket. Byholma, $17, ikea.com  

 TAKE A SEAT: If you have space for it, a bench is lovely and so useful as a place to sit while pulling on boots. Old benches are the nicest and can be found in antique shops, or at auction (try Brimfield antiques fair, 1stdibs or liveauctioneers.com). Wisteria.com has old ones that are good looking and suitably "country." I also like CB2's Skinny Dip Coffee Table-Bench. French Six-Legged Bench, $600, wisteria.com  



 BUY A GOOD DOOR MAT: A large, tough mat is essential. Coco matting is the best—it really gets the mud off. Buy it in rolls at  mats-inc.com.  

 MAKE LIFE EASIER: Boot pulls are a must-have—one of those simple inventions that can't really be bettered. My favorite is the Col. Littleton No. 45 Boot Jack. 