"Obama Says Race a Key Component in Tea Party Protests," reads the headline at U.S. News & World Report. But the article--an excerpt of a new book, "Family of Freedom: Presidents and African Americans in the White House," by the online magazine's White House correspondent, Kenneth T. Walsh--does not justify its sensationalistic headline.

You have to read to the end of the nearly 1,800-word excerpt to get to the anecdote behind the headline's claim. It is an imprecisely told story:

This is a head-scratcher. "Bankers, automakers, irresponsible people who had defaulted on their mortgages, and the poor" are not racial groups, so the last sentence in this paragraph does not support the penultimate one. It's unclear whether Obama raised the question of race first, then switched to nonracial resentment.

Our best guess is that the story actually begins with the last sentence of this paragraph and the penultimate one is meant to foreshadow what comes next, which is this:

It sounds as if the guest is the one who brought up the racial question. Obama "didn't dispute" the guest's assertion, and in Walsh's telling seems to have assented to it. But consider carefully what the president actually said, according to Walsh: only that a "subterranean agenda" exists. Whatever one may think of the truth of that claim, it is far milder than the one the guest had made.

The guest's claim, by the way, was ludicrous. Talk of "taking back" the country is so unremarkable as to be a cliché, as NewsBusters.org's Lachlan Markay sarcastically pointed out last October:

Our guess is that Obama found himself in a situation that is quite common among those of us who socialize with people who are interested in politics: Some blowhard at a party says something outrageous. You don't want to get into an argument, but you have enough integrity that you don't want to pretend to agree with him either. What do you do? You say something noncommittal--something the blowhard will agree with even though it is well short of an endorsement of his position.

That is to say that in what Walsh characterizes as one of the president's "most candid moments," Obama was probably just being polite.

  The New Black Panther Incident: An Eyewitness Report   Our item yesterday about Eric Holder, his "people" and the New Black Panther Party voter-intimidation case prompted this email from our friend Harry Lewis, a New York lawyer:

Meanwhile, one Adam Serwer, filling in for Washington Post's lefty blogger Greg Sargent, utterly misses the point of our item yesterday:

We're pretty sure this column has never referred to either Obama or Holder as "racist against white people." Nor is it accurate to say that we are "frustrated that Holder referred to a 'subset of Americans.' " Rather, we are appalled that Holder, in his official capacity as attorney general, referred to that subset of the populace as "my people." When you are the top law-enforcement official in America, your people are the American people--all of us.

  Mystery Motive   "What Was the Motive in Shooting Deaths of 2 US Airmen?" asks the headline at AOLNews.com. Writer Dana Kennedy tries to puzzle it out:

The BBC reports that "prosecutors in Germany say they suspect Islamic militancy as the motive." They may be rushing to conclusions, though. After all, don't most killers these days shout "God is great" in Arabic?

  Chavez Earns His Prize   "Muammar Gaddafi has accepted an offer from Venezuela to mediate in Libya's political crisis after talks with Hugo Chavez, the Venezuelan president," Al Jazeera reports:

The Boston Globe notes in an editorial that Chavez is a past recipient of the Gadhafi International Prize for Human Rights. The Globe bravely urges the latest recipient of the prize, Turkey's Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, to repudiate the "ludicrous prize." It notes that other recipients have included, in the words of the prize's website, "The American Moslem freedom-fighter Louise Farakan [sic]" (1996) and the late "Freedom-Fighter President Fidel Castro" (1998). If a firefighter fights fires, what does a freedom fighter fight?

The Globe leaves out some other, more respectable recipients, including, "The Great African freedom-fighter President Nelson Mandela" (1989) and "The Red Indians" (1991). The website hasn't been updated since 2004, but at least as far as we can tell, Gadhafi hasn't given a prize to Yasser Arafat, Jimmy Carter, Al Gore or Paul Krugman. There are standards.

  Peking Envy   We thought the New York Times's Thomas Friedman was supposed to be on book leave, but he keeps producing columns, each one more hilarious than the last. In his most recent effort, he enumerates "my own back-of-the-envelope guess list of what I'd call the 'not-so-obvious forces' that fed this mass revolt." in Egypt. Among them:

People sometimes criticize America for assuming that everyone else shares our values. Friedman, the only American who wishes America was China, takes this fallacy to a new extreme. He assumes that everyone else shares values that are his alone.

He even throws a China non sequitur into his next item: "Chinese had to give up freedom but got economic growth and decent government in return." Remember how free Red China was back in the 1950s?

 Two Papers in One! 

 A Haughty Spirit Before a Fall 

  We Blame Global Warming   "Gore Church Moving Mid-March"--headline, Tillsonburg (Ontario) News, March 2

  'Could You Say Senator? . . . I Worked So Hard to Get That Title'   "VIDEO FEATURE: Chris Rock Discusses M-----f---er With the Hat"--headline, Playbill.com, March 2

 With DNC in Mind, City Bans Carrying Urine, Feces 

  He Should've Done That When He Founded Human Rights Watch   "HRW Founder Bernstein Starts Advancing Human Rights"--headline, Camera.org, March 3

  So Much for the War on Drugs   "Bong's: So Healthy!"--headline, Pacific Northwest Inlander (Spokane, Wash.), March 1

  The Lonely Lives of Scientists   "Scientists Trying to Determine Whether Life on Earth Is Quickly Heading Toward Extinction"--headline, San Jose Mercury News, March 3

  Go West, Young Man   "Eastern Cougar Declared Extinct, Confirming Decades of Suspicion"--headline, CNN.com, March 2

  That's Cause for Paws   "Dog Eats Diabetic Man's Toes, Part of His Foot"--headline, MSNBC.com, March 3

  Hey, Kids! What Time Is It?   "Now Is the Time to Ask, 'What if Cats and Dogs Had Opposable Thumbs?' "--headline, AOLNews.com, March 3

 Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking   "What the Yukon Can Teach Us About Fixing Health Care"--headline, Globe and Mail (Toronto), March 2

  Look Out Below!   "Fiji to Drop Queen From Currency"--headline, Daily Telegraph (London), March 2

  It's Always in the Last Place You Look   "Amelia Earhart Clue Found in Clumps"--headline, Discovery.com, March 2

  Too Much Information   "Ukraine's Tymoshenko Energized by Probe"--headline, Associated Press, March 3

 News You Can Use 

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  It's the Eponymy, Stupid   David Lynch is dead, reports Sacramento's KOVR-TV. No, not the David Lynch who directed "Mulholland Drive" but the one who lived on Merlindale Drive in Citrus Heights, a suburb of the California capital.

"Lynch was a well-known power player in the white supremacy movement," the station reports--and with a name like that, he must've been hard to forget. "Friends and members of various groups said Lynch was capable of bringing together various organizations that were at odds with each other." He was a uniter and a divider!

Bill Roper, head of the Arkansas-based White Revolution, is quoted as saying, "He was the kind of guy who could and did get along with everyone." Believe it or not, not all professional haters are that nice.

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Ed Lasky, T. Young, John Sanders, Ethel Fenig, Michele Schiesser, Peter Huntsman, David Gerstman, John Bobek, Joseph Heschmeyer, Chris Papouras, Joe Jackson, Rick Weisehan, Paul Gross, Monty Krieger, Chris Green, Chris Hayes, Joel McLemore, Bob Rayner, Shraga Simmons, Zack Russ, David Schlosser, Rowe Sergent, Stuart Creque, Steven Aucella, Paul Strada, Ed Grinberg, Joe Perez and Darin Zimmerman. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)