Keen on a private peek into the Chicago Police Headquarters, Melbourne's historic Treasury Reserve or Barcelona's posh equestrian club, Circulo Ecuestre? Get in line—and more importantly, make sure you've got the right weekend. 

In more and more cities around the world, private buildings—homes, studios, offices and monuments—are being opened to the public for two-day annual events known as Open House ( openhouseworldwide.org ). The weekends allow architecture buffs (or the simply snoopy) to tour buildings that are normally off limits, free of charge. Just show up, wait in line and try not to break anything. 



The first Open House took place in London in 1992 and the concept has since expanded around the world—to four locations this year alone, with Rome, Chicago, Helsinki and Slovenia joining in.

"Travelers usually experience cities from the outside, but Open House lets them view it from within," said Victoria Thornton, founder of the London event. 

The Open House season kicks off May 20 in Tel Aviv, followed by Open House Melbourne in July, and then London, New York, Dublin, Galway, Barcelona and Jerusalem in September and October. Check the event websites for details; though most tours are first-come, first-view, a clutch of high-profile sites, as well as organized walking yours and lectures, require advance reservations. Here are highlights from this year's events. 

—David Kaufman

 New York's ninth annual Open House will include buildings that represent Gotham's increasingly "green" architecture. Head up to Harlem to see Curtis + Ginsberg Architects's conversion of PS 90, a 105-year-old public school transformed into light-filled condos. At the other extreme is 174 Grand Street in Williamsburg, pictured here, the first new New York building adhering to the ultra-strict "passive-house" eco-ethos developed in Germany. Back in Manhattan, check out Mercedes House, designed by Mexico City-based TEN Arquitectos. The half-block project has a stable for New York's mounted police, a neighborhood market and 27 floors of residences. ohny.org 

More than 200,000 visitors are expected to tour more than 200 sites across London this year, including Norman Foster's orb-like City Hall on the Thames's South Bank and Richard Rogers's iconic, "inside-out" Lloyd's building, shown here. Close to St. James Park is the normally off-limits Victorian-era Foreign Office and Indian Office complex, whose highlight—the dazzling Italy-meets-India Durbar Court—is a three-story riot of Doric and Ionic columns capped by a magnificently frescoed vaulted ceiling. openhouselondon.org.uk 

In just three years, Melbourne Open House has grown from a mere eight sites to almost 80. For 2011, it offers a look at the Australian city from the underground up. Visitors must don protective gear to see the subterranean switch rooms in the Russell Place Substation, which has helped power Melbourne since 1882. Close to the Central Business District, visit the new Pixel Building (above), whose confetti-like facade covers Australia's first carbon-neutral structure. On the gentrifying Docklands, the historic Mission to Seafarers is a Victorian landmark that sheltered sailors from across the globe. melbourneopenhouse.org 

Sponsored by the Chicago Architecture Foundation, this debut Open House will top 100 sites. In Hyde Park, 90-year-old Hotel Del Prado (left) will show off its partially complete overhaul by cutting-edge architects Studio Gang. More high-tech is the headquarters of DesignLab, where theatrical lighting and special effects are developed. openhousechicago.org 

The city that Gaudí built will put itself on display for a second year with buildings dating from the 16th century to the present. In the heart of the Ramblas, the modernist Casa Garriga Nogues, designed by Gaudí contemporary Enric Sagnier will welcome visitors. Built as a private home in 1902 and now a cultural foundation and gallery, it boasts sumptuous neo-Baroque interiors. In the 22 District is local architects Cloud 9's Media Tic building, whose façade (above) is covered in reflective, triangular Texlon panels to capture heat from the sun. 48hopenhousebarcelona.org 

Launched in 2007, Tel Aviv's Houses from Within now draws more than 100,000 visitors to 200 sites city-wide. This year's offerings reflect the best of Tel Aviv's Jewish/Arab/Christian character. The Mediterranean-front 96 HaYarkon Street is a meticulously renovated Bauhaus building from the 1930s being transformed into 45 of Israel's most expensive apartments. In up-and-coming Noga is the Maine Friendship House, a wooden home built in 1866 and brought from Maine to the Holy Land by American missionaries. In ancient Jaffa, there are tours of Italian architect Massimiliano Fuksas's starkly elegant Peres Center for Peace a shimmering, sea-front glass and concrete confection. batim-il.org 