With one seemingly minor trade, the entire Yankee landscape shifted Friday morning. Nearly every outstanding question now has an answer, and the 2011 Yankees are taking shape with less than a week to go before Opening Day.

Early Friday, the Yankees traded pitcher Sergio Mitre to the Milwaukee Brewers for outfielder Chris Dickerson. Mitre was one of the four pitchers in competition for three roster spots, and his departure makes it a near certainty that Ivan Nova, Freddy Garcia and Bartolo Colon will make the major-league club.

"You don't want to say everything is etched in stone, but it's a little clearer, for sure," said manager Joe Girardi. "We talked about three of the four guys going, now you take one away. Could things change? Yes, they could. But we've said all along that it would probably be three out of those four."

And from the hints that Girardi is dropping like breadcrumbs, Colon will pitch in the bullpen as the long reliever, while Nova and Garcia will start the year in the rotation. 

"I think Bartolo's velocity might play up if you put him in the bullpen. I'm not sure about Freddy's," Girardi said, following that up with this statement:

"I think Bartolo, you could use a number of other ways if we decided to put him in the bullpen," Girardi said. "If we were to put him in the bullpen—and I say if—the first time out, I don't think we'd ask him to go back to back [days]. For the first three weeks, we may not ask him to go back to back because he's not prepared for it."

In a court of law, that would be considered "beyond a reasonable doubt."

Mitre was a valuable member of this Yankee team for the past two seasons as a starter, reliever and a Girardi favorite. He'll have a chance to win a spot in Milwaukee. 

The man Yankees received in return, Chris Dickerson, could play a role right away.

Curtis Granderson is still ailing with an oblique injury, and there's no timetable for him to hit yet—placing his status for Opening Day in jeopardy. Dickerson is a lefty-hitting center fielder with major-league experience, making him a solid replacement in the short term, general manager Brian Cashman noted.

"It gives us another choice as an alternative if Curtis doesn't make opening day," Cashman said. "I don't think this is a long-term issue, but I can't tell you whether it's a few days, or a week, or 10 days."