SINGAPORE—Consumer prices in Singapore rose faster than expected in December, prompting some analysts to say that the central bank may tighten monetary policy again in April. 

The rapid recovery of Asian economies in 2010 from the global recession and a recent spurt in food prices following weather disturbances is likely to fuel inflationary pressures in Asia. 

Singapore, which is likely to hold general elections in the second quarter of this year, may pull out all the stops to curb inflation and mitigate its impact on consumers. The government budget, due next month, may detail the authorities' plans to combat higher prices, including measures that make use of some of the revenue that it raked in last year. 

The consumer price index gained 4.6% in December from a year earlier, compared with a 3.8% increase in November because of costlier cars, housing, food and fuel, the Department of Statistics said in a statement Monday. The pace was the fastest in two years and beat the median 4.5% forecast from 10 analysts polled by Dow Jones Newswires. 

"It's not such a huge surprise. It's because of the low base (of comparison) and rising commodity costs. The very solid growth in Asia is putting pressure on prices," said Song Seng Wun, an economist at CIMB who had forecast the CPI to rise 4.5% in December. "If this continues, the Monetary Authority of Singapore may tweak its policy a bit in April, meaning another round of tightening." 

The MAS, which tightened monetary policy at both its reviews in April and October last year, had said that it expects inflation to approach 4% by the end of 2010, and to remain high in the first few months of 2011 before easing. 

For the whole of 2010, the consumer price index rose 2.8%, within the central bank's expectation of 2.5% to 3%. 

Singapore Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong said Sunday that he expects food prices, which he said have risen because of weather woes in countries such as China and Australia, to stabilize in the next few months, according to local media reports. 

The local media also reported Senior Minister Goh Chok Tong as saying that Singapore's budget next month may contain some steps to help alleviate rising prices. 

"We expect this increase in commodity prices, especially food, to continue. There is danger that Asian central banks may fall behind the curve and then tighten their monetary policy sharply in a bid to catch up," Robert Subbaraman, managing director and chief economist for Asia ex-Japan at Nomura, said at a media briefing in Singapore before the data were released. 

Singapore's economy grew 14.7% in 2010 according to preliminary estimates released on Jan. 3, the fastest pace of expansion in its 45-year history since independence. 

The CPI data showed that the cost of transportation, which has an index weighting of 16%, gained 12.8% in December from a year earlier due to higher car and fuel prices. 

Housing prices, which make up 25% of the index, climbed 5.1% on higher electricity tariffs and accommodation costs while food prices, which have a 22% weight in the CPI, rose 2.1% on year on costlier prepared meals, fresh seafood, vegetables, rice and other cereals, the data showed. 

From a month earlier, the CPI rose 0.9% in seasonally adjusted terms, faster than a 0.4% increase in November and beating all individual estimates in the Dow Jones poll. The median estimate in the poll was for CPI to have risen 0.6% on month in December. 

 Write to  Gaurav Raghuvanshi at gaurav.raghuvanshi@dowjones.com 