Wherever you live, expect a blizzard next month: the year's first barrage of mutual-fund prospectuses and shareholder reports.

Read the complete  Quarterly Investing in Funds report .

The load has lightened a bit since 2007, when letter carriers stuffed roughly a billion mutual-fund books and booklets into investors' mailboxes, according to estimates by the Investment Company Institute in a 2008 report commissioned by the Securities and Exchange Commission. To save trees and costs, the SEC no longer requires funds to regularly distribute full-length prospectuses, which often ran 30 pages or more for a single fund; a several-page summary now will do in most cases. 

Fund investors also can elect to receive their literature by email, clogging only their personal in-boxes instead of the entire U.S. Postal Service.

But industry sources say investors have not rushed to accept electronic deliveries. And even with leaner summary prospectuses being printed, third-party estimates and limited disclosures by fund companies suggest probably 400,000 trees were cut down to produce mutual-fund literature last year—literature that few investors even read, according to shareholder surveys. Indeed, many mutual-fund booklets go straight into the trash without making it out of the envelope.

A fund's investors annually receive a prospectus, giving the aims and structure of the fund, and two reports on the fund's progress—the annual and semiannual report. Those updates are required to go out less than 60 days after the midpoint and end of a fund's fiscal year.

Shareholder reports, which weren't covered by the new SEC rules, still range in size; when updates for several funds are wrapped into one report, it can run 120 pages. In 2006, American Funds estimated that the 5.6 million annual reports sent to investors in its  American Funds Growth Fund of America alone filled 17 tractor-trailers and weighed 600,000 pounds.

So things have improved, if only a little. Boston financial-service consultant Aite Group estimates the new rules are saving 39,000 trees a year. The rules, which took effect last January, give funds the option to distribute a summary prospectus as long as they make the full-length legal prospectus available online and upon request.

For many companies, the summary rule meant "moving from a 40- to 50-page prospectus to a four- or five-page document," says Dana Johnston, a vice president of e-business development at DST Output LLC, a unit of  DST Systems Inc.,
DST


0.50
%




 Kansas City, Mo., which distributes literature and keeps records for the mutual-funds industry.

Nearly 80% of all prospectuses were likely delivered in summary form last year, according to DST Output and  Broadridge Financial Solutions 
BR


0.02
%




Inc., which disseminates financial documents and data. But even so, the SEC has estimated that the annual cost of mailing and printing prospectuses is still close to $147 million.

Observers and industry insiders agree that more trees, and costs, can be saved. One simple proposal comes from giant Fidelity Investments: make electronic delivery the default option. "Let investors know that fund materials and other investment account information will be delivered online, while continuing to offer investors the option to receive paper documents instead," a spokesman says.

In the meantime, of course, investors can choose the email option for themselves.

 Mr. Curran is a writer in Denton, Texas. He can be reached at rob.curran@dowjones.com. 