The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers said Friday that it planned to open the Bonnet Carré Spillway in Louisiana on Monday to reduce pressure on levees in New Orleans, as a historic flood crest bears down on Southern states along the Mississippi River.

Meanwhile, the Coast Guard closed a section of the river at Caruthersville, Mo., where the flood is expected to crest Monday within six inches of the top of a flood wall that protects the city of about 7,000, according to the Associated Press. The move is expected to spare the flood wall from added pressure caused by the wakes of passing barges.

In Memphis, police went door to door urging residents of about 1,000 homes in low-lying areas to evacuate immediately, according to AP. The crest is expected to reach Memphis at just below a record level on Wednesday.

The crest isn't expected to reach New Orleans until May 24, but the Corps will activate the Bonnet Carré spillway Monday to ease pressure on the city's levees. The spillway opens with a gate structure and is 28 miles north of New Orleans. It channels water for about six miles to Lake Pontchartrain and on to the Gulf of Mexico, bypassing the city.

Corps officials said they never activate floodways lightly, but the decision to open Bonnet Carré was nothing like the high drama surrounding the opening Monday night of the Birds Point-New Madrid Floodway in Missouri by blasting a nearly two-mile hole in a levee. The blast sent a torrent of water over 130,000 acres of prime farmland and reduced water levels where the Ohio River flows into the Mississippi.

See the latest data from flood gauges throughout the Midwest and South.

"There's nothing in the Bonnet Carré spillway except recreational uses and some borrow pits," where clay is being dug up for a levee improvement project, said Ken Holder, a public-information officer for the New Orleans district of the Corps. He stressed that there were some environmental concerns about opening the spillway, but that the Corps would monitor the situation closely.

The Corps said Bonnet Carré was first opened during the flood of 1937, and eight other times since, most recently in 2008. Birds Point and Bonnet Carré are two of four floodways developed under a comprehensive plan first mapped out after the great flood of 1927. Corps officials said this could be the first flood to activate all four.

 Write to  Joe Barrett at joseph.barrett@wsj.com 