British interior designer  Tara Bernerd is bringing her bold, luxurious style to Asia. 

Ms. Bernerd got her start at  Philippe Starck's design firm Yoo before creating her own company, Target Living, in 2002. Two years later, she won the  Andrew Martin Interior Designer of the Year, a well-regarded industry award that has been given in years past to Briton  Kelly Hoppen and American designer  Thomas Pheasant. 

Last January, Ms. Bernerd established an office in Hong Kong. Her most recent project was a 775-square-meter penthouse in  Tsuen Wan, and she has more Hong Kong projects in the pipeline. 

The city, she says, is shedding its opulent "tycoon flavor" décor for sleeker designs, and cites examples such as the Upper House hotel in Admiralty and the Pawn restaurant in Wanchai. 

"Hong Kong is really opening up its doors for a design revolution," says Ms. Bernerd. "It's the most exciting time of change." 

Looking to redesign? Here are Ms. Bernerd's top picks for stylish investment pieces for your home. 

1. Ceccotti D C Bed. 

"Ceccotti is recognized for its incredible attention to detail. The D C Bed introduces leather and bronze finishes that create a very handsome piece that is unique yet elegant."

2. Molteni & Co, W Collection – Table and Chairs. 

"The W Collection by Molteni is beautiful in its simplicity. Look more closely, however, and the subtle lines and interesting angles show off the exquisite woods and marbles."

3. Minx Sofa by Somerville Scott & Company. 

"British designers  Amy Somerville and  Stuart Scott are amongst my favorite contemporary furniture designers of the moment. Their Minx sofa has a strong Modernist flavor, with an attention to detail, such as the brass finishing strip at the foot of the sofa."

4. Max Ingrand Dahlia Chandelier, vintage 1950s. 

"I have a passion for both vintage Italian glass and great lighting. Max Ingrand's 1950s Dahlia chandelier brings these passions together in one rare, handsome and collectable object."

5. Vitra Cite Chair by Jean Prouvé. 

"Le Corbusier said Jean Prouvé combined the soul of an engineer with an architect, and Vitra's re-edition chair shows what he meant." 