Don Kirshner was lauded in the music business for his "golden ear" and claimed to have sent 500 records up the pop charts starting in the late 1950s.

Known to a later generation primarily as the late-night impresario and host of the syndicated "Don Kirshner's Rock Concert," Mr. Kirshner was one of the seminal forces behind the rise of rock music, especially bubblegum pop.

Mr. Kirshner, who died Thursday at age 76, was at first a music publisher who purchased songs and matched them up with performers. 

Thanks in part to his efforts, Little Eva had a hit with "The Locomotion," The Shirelles topped the charts with "Will You Love Me Tomorrow," and the Righteous Brothers scored with "You've Lost that Lovin' Feeling," said by BMI to be the most-broadcast song of the 20th Century.

In the 1960s, Mr. Kirshner supplied the music that made The Monkees into a television and pop-music double-whammy. When the group fired him, he developed The Archies, whose signature song "Sugar Sugar" sold more than one million copies.

"I said, 'Screw the Monkees. I want a band that won't talk back,' " he told the Washington Post in 2004.

Mr. Kirshner in person bore next to no resemblance to the stiff, monotonic television host, parodied by Paul Shaffer on "Saturday Night Live." He was instead a profane fast-talker with a reputation for honesty in a business that wasn't always on the level.

In 1966, a Time Magazine profile said he had 14 phone lines in his South Orange, N.J., home and an 11-channel radio-telephone in his chauffeured limousine. "If I drove, I'd probably daydream and go through three red lights," he said in the Washington Post interview.

He dreamed big, calling himself the Walt Disney of rock and comparing himself to Broadway super-producer David Merrick.

Raised in Manhattan and the Bronx, N.Y., Mr. Kirshner was the son of a tailor whose clients included Dina Washington and Pearl Bailey. He caught the music bug at an early age, and while attending Upsala College in East Orange, N.J., teamed with a young performer named Robert Walden Cassotto to write songs.

The pair met with little success outside of selling an advertising jingle to a New Jersey furniture store, and the partnership soon foundered, though the friendship endured. Both parties were headed for pop-music glory. Mr. Cassotto soon became famous, renamed Bobby Darin.

Operating far more on chutzpah than experience, Mr. Kirshner in 1958 partnered with music industry veteran Al Nevins to form the publishing company Aldon Music. The pair wooed a few aspiring writers and managed to convince Connie Francis to record Neil Sedaka's "Stupid Cupid." The song went to No. 14 on the pop charts, and Mr. Kirshner's career was launched.

Over the next few years Mr. Kirshner put under contract a stable of young writers who were identified with Manhattan's Brill Building, including Carole King, Gerry Goffin and Neil Diamond.

In 1963, Messrs. Kirshner and Nevins sold Aldon to Columbia Pictures Corp. for $1.6 million in cash plus stock, and Mr. Kirshner became an executive at Columbia supervising music publishing and a record label. It was from this perch that he engineered the music side of The Monkees. 

It was Mr. Kirshner's innovation to bring full-fledged rock concerts to television, without the trappings of elaborate stage sets or talk-show hosts. As initially produced for ABC-TV in 1972, the concerts included a stereo-FM radio simulcast, making the sound quality dramatically better. The next year, he left ABC and put the show in syndication, where it ran in late-night slots for nearly a decade. Guests included top acts like The Rolling Stones and Jim Croce.

When "Don Kirschner's Rock Concert" shut down in 1982, some said it was the victim of its own success, which inspired MTV. 

Mr. Kirshner retired after that to enjoy his millions, rarely granting interviews. He never learned to use a computer, but in recent years he worked with a pair of start-ups geared at discovering new talent via the Internet.

Email remembrances@wsj.com

 Write to  Stephen Miller at stephen.miller@wsj.com 