NUREMBERG, Germany—Germany's labor market improved sharply in February and unemployment declined by much more than expected, owing to the country's solid economic upswing. 

The number of people unemployed declined by 52,000 when adjusted for seasonal swings, after falling by a revised 18,000 in January, the Federal Labor Office said Tuesday. 

That pushed down the adjusted jobless rate down to 7.3% from 7.4% previously—the lowest rate since records for this measure began in 1999. 

"Demand for labor is increasing further," said  Frank-Jürgen Weise, who heads the office. The outcome was better than expected. Economists had expected a decline in the number of unemployed of 15,000 and an adjusted jobless rate of 7.4%. 

But a spokeswoman at the labor office cautioned that the seasonally adjusted data are prone to revisions during the winter months. 

The unadjusted jobless rate decreased to 7.9% in February from a revised 8% in January. 

A total of 3.317 million people were unemployed in February, compared with a revised 3.35 million in January. That was the lowest jobless total recorded for a February since 1992, when 3.154 million people where unemployed, the spokeswoman said. 

Mr. Weise said the total number of unemployed "could fall below three million before the summer", and definitely by October or November. The number of jobless in 2011 will average three million people, he estimated. 

The labor office said changes to the data collection in the German states of Saxony and Saxony-Anhalt had led to some revisions to pan-German jobless data in January. 

Separately Tuesday, the European Commission said Germany is set to lead Europe's continued economy recovery. The commission predicted in an interim forecast that Europe's largest economy will grow 2.4% this year.

That is slightly ahead of the German government's official forecast of 2.3% growth in 2011, after a record 3.6% growth in gross domestic product in 2010, the best rate since reunification. 

The European Commission, the EU's executive arm, said domestic demand would continue to bolster Germany's export dominance this year, so that "economic activity should continue to expand steadily, confirming the outlook for a broad-based recovery." 

"Further gradual employment gains and a pickup in wage growth should underpin the momentum of private consumption," the commission said in a statement. "Likewise, full order books, favorable real interest rates and lower capital exports after the end of asset booms abroad contributing to the absence of credit supply bottlenecks, should further sustain domestic investment." 

—Christine Popp in Nuremberg and Patrick McGroarty contributed to this article.