SYDNEY—As the estimated cost of the flooding in Queensland hits 20 billion Australian dollars (US$19.9 billion), Australia's government said Tuesday it is forming a business task force to help marshal reconstruction.

Prime Minister  Julia Gillard said the group, led by a number of leading corporate executives, will help to "further leverage corporate support for the recovery and rebuilding in Queensland." Executives at several banks, including two of the country's largest lenders,  Commonwealth Bank of Australia
CBAUY


0.00
%




 and  National Australia Bank Ltd., told Dow Jones Newswires this week that preliminary discussions with government officials had taken place over how best to fund rebuilding.



  Michael Luscombe, chief executive of  Woolworths Ltd.
WOW


2.09
%




,  David Stewart, chief executive of  Leighton Holdings Ltd., and  Catherine Livingstone, chairwoman of  Telstra Corp., will lead the task force that hopes to boost corporate donations and offer expertise to help businesses recover. Others on the panel are road-hauling magnate  Lindsay Fox and  Jock Laurie, president of the National Farmers Federation.

Economists from  Australia & New Zealand Banking Group
ANZBY


0.71
%




 warned Tuesday that the cost of the floods could blow a hole in the government's pledge to return the budget to surplus by the end of the 2012 financial year. So far, the federal government has refused to back down from the plan to go from deficit—A$55 billion this past fiscal year—to surplus even as the total cost of the flooding escalates.



The creation of the task force comes as record flooding in neighbouring Victoria continues to worsen, adding to the total economic impact of abnormally wet weather on the nation's economy, which up to the recent flooding had been a standout among its global peers.

"With over 1,000 houses and businesses impacted, the damage bill will be noteworthy," ANZ said in a note to investors. "The Queensland premier's statement that 28,000 homes will need to be rebuilt will alone come at a cost of around A$8 billion on our estimates, suggesting the total rebuild effort could be in the order of A$20 billion."

—Enda Curran contributed to this article.

 Write to  Geoffrey Rogow at geoffrey.rogow@dowjones.com 