HONG KONG— Coach Inc.
COH


-2.54
%




 said it plans a secondary listing of its shares in Hong Kong by year's end, the latest luxury brand seeking to use a presence on the local exchange to boost its profile among China's fast-growing affluent class.

Coach's shares are already traded on the New York Stock Exchange, and it doesn't plan to raise extra capital via the issuance of Hong Kong depositary receipts, underscoring that the exercise is more about marketing than finance.

"This listing, if approved, will raise awareness of the Coach brand among investors and consumers in the China market as well as throughout Asia," said  Lew Frankfort, Coach's chairman and chief executive officer.

Coach markets accessories and gifts for women and men, including handbags, business cases, footwear and watches. The company intends to file a listing application with the Hong Kong stock exchange, which, if approved, will mean it can list before the end of 2011.

Based on this timing, Coach is likely to be the first U.S. domestic issuer to do a secondary listing in Hong Kong.

Other internationally recognized brands are flocking to Hong Kong with the same goal in mind. Italian fashion house Prada SpA and U.S. luggage maker Samsonite are pushing ahead with plans for a primary listing in Hong Kong in the coming months.

For luxury-goods makers in particular, Asia represents an important area of growth. Coach said about a quarter of its sales come from Asia. For the 12 months ended April 2, the company's global sales totaled just under $4 billion, a spokesperson said.

Foreign resource companies are seeking a presence in Hong Kong, too. Swiss commodities trader Glencore International AG is in the process of marketing shares to investors ahead of a planned dual listing in London and Hong Kong.

Brazilian mining giant  Vale SA, whose share were already listed in São Paulo, Paris and in New York, listed in Hong Kong last year, also without raising new funds. It used its Hong Kong listing partly as a way of forging closer links with resource-hungry China, and to boost the liquidity of its shares. Vale was the first company to issue Hong Kong depositary receipts after the regulatory framework for the securities was established two years ago. 

Some bankers caution that trading volumes in companies that don't issue new shares before listing can be low, as the natural demand and supply of the stock is concentrated in its existing listing venue, and that can lead to volatile trading.

Hong Kong legislators criticized the structure after shares in Chinese orange-plantation owner  Asian Citrus Holdings Ltd.
ACHL


-2.04
%




 rose more than eight times the value of its stock listed in London on their first day of Hong Kong trading in November, then plunged.

Since then, companies have started to use bankers to arbitrage between a company's shares to iron out valuation differences in their stocks. Two that did so are Singapore-listed  Fortune Real Estate Investment Trust, which listed in Hong Kong in February without issuing new shares, and  Prudential PLC, which listed in the same manner in Hong Kong in May 2010.

Overseas companies seeking a listing in Hong Kong helped make the city the most sought-after venue for IPOs in the world in 2010, the second year running. 