Science fiction is old enough now to have developed a sort of taxonomy. All its subgenres go back to some kind of "What if?" question. What if history had taken a different turn—such as the Confederates seizing Little Round Top, winning the Battle of Gettysburg and going on to win the Civil War? That's "alternate history," as exemplified by Ward Moore's "Bring the Jubilee" (1953). What if time travelers could go back, on purpose, to make history take a different turn? Operatives of opposing sides would start contending to influence the course of events—a "change war" scenario. (See Fritz Leiber's "The Big Time," 1961.) What if there are any number of universes and you could skip between them? That leads to "parallel universe" stories, of which there are many examples, from Keith Laumer, H. Beam Piper and their successors.

Eventually these subgenres start cross-pollinating. The big newcomer in the 1980s was "cyberpunk," which posited that hackers would be heroes in a future dominated by computers. OK, but what if information technology had developed earlier, but in an alternate world without electronics and microchips? Could you have a computerized world running on mechanical computers? The thought gained attraction because there really had been mechanical computers, going as far back as Charles Babbage's calculating machines from the 1840s. What if you imagined that those early, abandoned experiments had advanced further? You got "The Difference Engine" (1990), written by two pioneers of cyberpunk, William Gibson and Bruce Sterling. Since then countless novels, comic books and even films have used similar conceits to transpose futuristic plots to the age of petticoats and steam power. 

 By Robert Jackson Bennett  Orbit, 466 pages, $13.99

This subgenre, however, had even earlier roots. (Sci-fi is old enough to have a history as well as a taxonomy.) Some authors looked back to the Founding Father of sci-fi, H.G. Wells, and wondered what if some of his devices— now comically out of place, like the time-bicycle from "The Time Machine"—actually worked. This led to books like "Morlock Night" (1979), by K.W. Jeter (who invented the term "steampunk"), or Stephen Baxter's "The Time Ships" (1995). A sort of steampunk (without so much of the "punk" element) was there as early as Harry Harrison's extravaganza of super-Victorian technology, "A Transatlantic Tunnel, Hurrah!" (1973).

Today, Stephen Hunt's "The Rise of the Iron Moon" is able to borrow with both hands from the whole of sci-fi's ever-lengthening history and ever-ramifying taxonomy. One character, Purity Drake, is a teenager on the run from something called the Royal Breeding House (where she would be used to freshen up the royal gene pool). Then there's Coppertracks, the "steamman," a robot straight out of the 1940s: heavy, clumsy, not humanoid at all but fearfully intelligent. 

Coppertracks is an astronomer, too, and sees flashes of light—the flares of launching spacecraft—from a nearby planet. What they portend is that—just as Wells had written at the start of "War of the Worlds"—an old, arid world with its dried-up canals is now intent on conquest. Will the earthly airships, "fin bombs," and "transaction engines" of Purity's kingdom (these sound like 1890s technology) be enough to stem the invasion? Not unless somebody "heals the land"—a formula familiar from fantasy—for there's something wrong deep down in the kingdom. A female vision keeps appearing, with shield and trident (just like Britannia), and she's not happy. 

Mr. Hunt's is quite the whirliest of contemporary cross-pollinated steampunk visions, with enough in it to keep three or four ordinary books going. It thus helps to have read the two previous items in the "Kingdom of Jackals" sequence, "The Court of the Air" and "The Kingdom Beyond the Waves." Sci-fi likes to overload the reader with information, but Mr. Hunt takes off at racing speed.

By contrast, Robert Jackson Bennett's slower, more thoughtful "The Company Man"made me realize how far sci-fi has come in my lifetime. In a way, this is a crime-noir novel, with detectives investigating strange murders in the city of Evesden on the West Coast. It's 1919, but an "alternate" 1919, in which World War I did not take place, thanks to the dominance of new American technology controlled by the McNaughton Co. 

That Company owes its dominance to a single strange hermit, who came up with device after device like nothing seen before—developments already leading toward interplanetary (and even faster-than-light) travel. Meanwhile, in developments reminiscent of real-world 1919, there's a struggle going on between the Company and the unions. Is this what's driving the murders?

 By Stephen Hunt  TOR, 455 pages, $26.99

Bits of "The Company Man" read like sections of "Das Kapital," with its images of abandoned children in filthy tenements, men worked till they're worn out and then discarded, and Company goons searching out union ringleaders. One of our goons, though, can read minds—or, rather, he can empathize. Half an hour with him and he's your best friend, whoever you are: a useful quality for an interrogator. Trouble is, he's picking up messages from something that isn't human, and that explains the strange hermit's technology breakthroughs as well.

The mind-reader who picks up alien thoughts in a modern city: Real old-timers will remember Eric Frank Russell's invention of that plot in "Three to Conquer" (1955). But once you've said that, you've pretty much gotten the gist of the Russell story. Half a century later, how much more the sci-fi writer has to do! Yet Mr. Bennett does it, following the detection plot through from the inexplicable murders at the start and creating a thoroughly credible character drama along the way. Eventually a triangle develops among Hayes, the empath; Samantha Fairbanks, the nice English girl foisted on him by the Company as an assistant; and Garvey, the hard-boiled city cop trying to do an impossible job.

George Eliot once wrote that the trouble with fantasy fiction was that it was just too easy. If she could ever read "The Company Man"—the thought is half a steampunk plot by itself—she would have to change her mind. Its fog-and-sewer settings she would know from Dickens; its people aren't too far from Wilkie Collins. But the steampunk interplay between what we know now and what people knew then brings in a whole other dimension. Some things only science fiction can do.

—Mr. Shippey reviews science fiction frequently for The Journal.