PARIS—Recent pension reforms in developed economies aren't sufficient to deal with increasing life expectancy, and people will have to work longer in future, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development said in a report. 

The study, released Thursday, came as many leading economies face public finance problems after the financial crisis and recession, which led to higher budget deficits and rising levels of outstanding debt. 

Many now face a dilemma: run the risk that their pension system not be sustainable; or cut benefits—as the U.K. has done—to the extent where they might not be enough to live on comfortably. 

"In the U.K., the system is sustainable, but there are worries about the adequacy, as the public pension is meager," said  Edward Whitehouse, lead author of the report. "We don't want to return to 50 years ago, when most old people were poor. In most OECD countries very few old people are poor" at present. 

Countries in the OECD on average reduced the retirement age during the 1970s and 1980s until this reached a low point in 1993, when women were entitled to a pension at 61 years old and men at 62.4—both around two years lower than the figures for 1949. In some countries this was due to a belief that removing older people from the workforce would free up jobs for younger people and thus reduce unemployment. 

Due to financing pressure on pension systems plus a lack of effect on jobless rates, countries have since then raised the ages. Women now retire at an average of 61.8 and men at 62.9. 

And pension benefits have declined some 20% over the past 15 years, said  Monika Queisser, head of the OECD's Social Policy division. "In some countries there's not that much more scope for reduction" of benefits, she said. 

Changes up to now are, however, still not adequate, the OECD concluded. 

The key problem: Life expectancies in the countries surveyed are rising faster than retirement ages. Women can now expect to live an average 22.3 years after retiring compared with 17.3 years in 1960 and 21.7 in 1993. Men live 18.5 years now after retiring, compared with 13.4 in 1960 and 16.7 in 1993. Life spans after retirement are forecast to rise further in coming decades. 

"Recent reforms will still be insufficient to cover increased pension costs in the future, despite increases in retirement ages in half of OECD countries," the report concluded. 

There are three key ways that governments can try to fix their pension financing, the OECD said. 

First, people could work longer. This, says Ms. Queisser, is already being carried out in Nordic countries and in Japan, which has a tradition of post-retirement jobs. To encourage the trend, governments also need to take action against age discrimination by employers and to provide older people with more training opportunities, the OECD said. 

A link between pension ages and life expectancy is also effective, though this hasn't been widely adopted. "This policy would have the advantage of providing a clear signal of the need to work longer," the OECD said. "And it would allow annual benefits to be maintained at a higher level than if people continued to draw their pensions at the same age as life expectancy increases." 

A second way to ease pressure on pension systems is greater redistribution. Countries could prevent old-age poverty while keeping their systems sustainable if public pensions targeted the neediest people. This, however, "involves a weakening of the link between individual contributions and benefits." 

A third solution is to encourage people to save for their retirement to make up for reductions in public benefits. 