A former Guantanamo detainee was sentenced to life in prison Tuesday after he was convicted last year of conspiracy in the 1998 bombing of U.S. embassies in Africa.

Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani, 36 years old, was the first former detainee of the prison in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, to be tried in a U.S. civilian court. 

In November, a jury convicted Mr. Ghailani of one count of conspiracy but acquitted him of more than 280 other counts in connection with two truck bombings outside U.S. embassies in Tanzania and Kenya that killed 224 people and injured thousands.

"It was a cold-blooded killing and maiming of innocent people on an enormous scale," U.S. District Judge Lewis A. Kaplan said in Manhattan federal court on Tuesday as he sentenced Mr. Ghailani, who is Tanzanian, to life in prison. 

"The very purpose of the crime was to create terror by causing death and destruction on a scale hard to imagine in 1998 when it occurred." As part of the sentence, the judge also ordered Mr. Ghailani to pay $33 million in restitution.

Lawyers for Mr. Ghailiani, who has been in U.S. custody since 2004, including at Guantanamo from 2006 to 2009, argued for leniency. They cited his mistreatment while in U.S. custody. Mr. Ghailani didn't address the court himself during the sentencing.

While being held by the Central Intelligence Agency, Mr. Ghailani was subjected to so-called enhanced interrogation techniques, according to his lawyers. His lawyers have said those techniques amount to torture. "Nothing developed through the history of our system of justice ever envisioned the use of torture in a criminal matter," said Peter Quijano, one of Mr. Ghailani's lawyers.

The judge said his sentencing decision shouldn't be taken as condoning any mistreatment Mr. Ghailani may have suffered. He said Mr. Ghailani may have remedies for any "any illegal and improper actions by our government." The judge said: "Today is about justice not only for Mr. Ghailani, but for the victims of his crimes."

During the trial, which lasted more than a month, lawyers for Mr. Ghailani had argued that he was duped by more sophisticated people into purchasing material used in a bombing outside the U.S. embassy in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.

However, federal prosecutors in Manhattan said Mr. Ghailani, who later became a bodyguard for Osama bin Laden, was a full-fledged member of the conspiracy. Prosecutors claimed he knew what he was doing when he purchased a truck and other materials used in the Tanzanian bombing, including gas tanks containing pure oxygen and acetylene.

"To have a spouse murdered in the way I did has been excruciatingly painful," said Sue Bartley. Ms. Bartley lost her husband, Julian, the U.S. consul general in Nairobi, Kenya, in 1998 and her 20-year-old son, Jay, a college student in Kenya, in the Nairobi bombing. "The pain is with me every day. Oftentimes, it is unthinkable," she told the court on Tuesday before the judge handed down the sentence. 

Mr. Ghailani was transferred from Guantanamo to New York in 2009 to face trial before opposition grew against holding major terrorism trials just blocks from the site of the World Trade Center in lower Manhattan.

In 2009, U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder announced plans to try Khalid Sheikh Mohammed and other plotters of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks in civilian court in New York. However, those plans have been since put on hold following a backlash from New Yorkers and members of Congress over security and other concerns.

President Barack Obama has vowed to close the detention facility at Guantanamo. However, the administration will have to navigate new congressional restrictions signed into law in December on moving prisoners to the U.S. from Guantanamo for trials. 

The Defense Department is expected to soon approve military-court proceedings against Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri, who is accused in the 2000 attack on the U.S.S. Cole in Yemen.

Some 173 prisoners remain at Guantanamo. The administration wants to put some on trial and send others to third countries, and it also wants to detain dozens indefinitely without trial.

 Write to  Chad Bray at chad.bray@dowjones.com 