As violent protests tore through the streets of Egypt in January, one scene warmed hearts around the world. In Cairo, anxious residents were seen forming a human chain around a museum. Their aim? To protect the collection of ancient treasures after looters broke in and destroyed two pharaonic mummies.

Read the complete  Wealth Adviser report .

In spite of the risks, antiquities can be a relatively cheap and exciting way to begin art collecting, as long as you follow some simple rules, says Mr. Ede. 

The contents of the museum were priceless, they said. They were probably wrong. Most antiquities are cheaper than you might think. A fact that has been stoking increasing interest amongst investors. 

In the drive to diversify away from traditional stocks and bonds, the emotional and aesthetic appeal of millennia-old antiques is starting to attract a broader range of buyers. But to many it remains an impenetrable market, which is fraught with the danger of being sold a dud, or worse, an illegally excavated artifact. 

The prices of antiquities, defined as artifacts mainly derived from the ancient civilizations of the Mediterranean, including Egypt, the Near East, Greece and Rome, have soared tenfold over the last decade, according to  G. Max Bernheimer, Christie's International department head of antiquities.

Since 2006, sales at the privately-owned auction house have quadrupled from $10.2 million (€7.5 million) to $42.7 million. What is more, unlike other parts of the art market, sales have steadily increased throughout the recession.

"Buyers find comfort in investing in tangible assets that have stood the test of time – quite literally," says Mr. Bernheimer.

Some recent blockbuster auction sales have thrown a spotlight on the market. In December, Sotheby's offered a collection of 38 antiquities from the collection of the late  Clarence Day, an American philanthropist. It was a sell-out. The star of the show was a marble bust of the Roman deity Antinous from 130-138 AD, which sold for $21.2 million to a European collector – 10 times its pre-sale estimate. 

Two days later at Christie's a new auction record was set for a figure from the 3000 BC Cycladic civilization in Greece, when an 11 inch statue of a female sold for $15 million – triple the estimate. 



Aside from the headline sales, antiquities are undervalued. Unlike newer parts of the art market which were subject to speculative buyers pushing up prices, antiquities have so far commanded an esoteric following by a small group of ardent collectors. 

  Clare Dewey, insurer AXA Art's claim manager in the UK, says: "On the whole antiquities are inexpensive in comparison to other areas of the art market."

Individuals with wallets of any size can enjoy collecting, although most of the stock is beyond the grasp of many. Every November, Mayfair-based antique dealership Charles Ede Antiquities publishes a Christmas "stocking-filler" catalogue. Prices ranged from £90 to £6,000 last year, with a c. 1400 BC pale green Egyptian amulet priced at just £90. 

However a diminishing supply is pushing up prices as more antiquities end up in museums and out of private hands.  John Ambrose, director of U.S.-based antique dealer Fragments of Time, says: "We see more than 10,000 ancient objects each year but it is becoming increasingly difficult to find good quality objects. This is not just in the traditionally difficult areas of Attic pottery, Egyptian objects and glass, but in every area including Roman pottery. The lack of supply is pushing up demand."

Experts say another reason for the current vogue in antiquities is the resurgence in contemporary art. Perhaps counter-intuitively, contemporary and ancient art make the best bedfellows, says  Isabella Poerio, a retired architect and passionate art collector. "If your art is all of the same era and style, your house feels like a gallery," she says.

Ms. Poerio likes to juxtapose contemporary and ancient art of all different media. The  Jason Wallis Johnson she recently purchased – a large, ultra-modern black and white line drawing of concentric circles – "brings to life" her Greek marble bust of Aphrodite from around the first century BC. "Young art rejuvenates the old, while the old gives weight to the young – it is an essential combination," she adds. 

  James Ede, the managing director of Charles Ede antiquities, agrees: "The minimalist style interior which is currently so popular particularly sets off the beauty of ancient artifacts."



Although they are gaining a following amongst the more populist audience, there are a number of factors which put buyers off antiquities. 

The chronology of objects dating back several thousand years can be difficult to pinpoint, and frauds and fakes abound, according to  Philip Hoffman, a former finance director of Christie's who now runs The Fine Art Fund Group.

One of the most famous forgery scandals involved the so-called 'Bolton Forgers'. This involved a family who spent two decades creating and selling fake paintings and antiquities to unwitting museums, before finally being discovered in 2007. The Bolton Museum paid $440,000 for a fake Egyptian statue from the Boston Forgers which its experts dated from 1350 BC. 

Discoveries of this type are only "the tip of the iceberg," says Mr. Hoffman. He says that he considered antiquities as an element of his fund when he was setting up, but found the market too impenetrable. "A large number of the antiquities offered to us [while I was employed] at Christie's turned out fake or forgeries. Although some can be age tested there are still many around."

Another risk to the market is the lack of liquidity. Unlike other parts of the art market where this has been addressed through launching investment funds, there is a marked absence of vehicles investing in ancient artifacts. 

This has not always been the case. In the 1970's, the British Rail Pension Fund invested 2.9% of its portfolio – around £40 million – in more than 2,000 objects including antiquities. Fifteen years later the fund sold its art investments – gaining an annual compound return of 11.3%. Around the same time U.S. bank Merrill Lynch set up two funds –Athena I and II - to invest in ancient coins and antiquities. It poured over $30 million into these under the management of coin and antiquities dealer  Bruce McNall. After two-and-a-half years the managers reported a 36% net gain. 

Another problem facing the market is the trade in illicit antiquities, says Mr. Hoffman. "Buyers have had their fingers burned acquiring pieces which later turned out to be illegally excavated. Many were forced to return them and lost millions," he says. 

Experts point to the well-known example of U.S. financier  William Koch who spent around $3 million on a large collection of ancient Greek silver coins in 1998, which he later discovered had been smuggled out of Turkey into Munich. He was obliged to return the coins, presumably losing the price of their purchase.

The export of antiquities is now heavily controlled by law in almost all countries, but a large trade in illicit antiquities continues, Mr. Bernheimer says. "Buying through an auction house, where due diligence is incredibly thorough and everything is openly published in the catalogue, limits the possibilities over ownership and repatriation issues later on." On the down-side, auction houses siphon off a lot in fees, which can rise to 25% of the value of the item.