 Museum of the Moving Image   3601 35th Ave., Queens  (718) 777-6888, March 27

When critics talk about the landmark film of 1980, it's nearly always Martin Scorsese's "Raging Bull" that gets the love. But someone could marshal as strong a case for "Melvin and Howard." Its director, Jonathan Demme, was little-known at the time, with a background in Roger Corman exploitation ("Caged Heat," "Crazy Mama") and a couple of off-beat successes (a trucker comedy "Citizen's Band," and the thriller "The Last Embrace"). This big-hearted fable put him on the map.

Bo Goldman's Oscar-winning script is based on the real-life story of a Utah gas-station owner named Melvin Dummar (Paul Le Mat) who claimed to be the beneficiary of a will left behind by Howard Hughes (Jason Robards). As the legend goes, Mr. Dummar happened upon the eccentric billionaire stranded along a Nevada roadside one night, and offered him a lift back to Las Vegas. As a reward for Melvin's good deed, the wizened recluse left the usually luckless Samaritan a fortune. The courts disagreed, but it made a hell of a story, and an even better movie. Mr. Demme latched onto the basics and turned the film into a celebration of blue-collar Americana that's part casual social critique, part trailer-park fever dream. And he did so a quarter century before sitcoms like "My Name Is Earl" and reality competitions like "Survivor" began valorizing magic hayseeds and truck-driving mamas for a mainstream demographic.

"Melvin and Howard" is presented as part of a weekend series, "Dave Kehr: When Movies Mattered," which marks the publication of a new anthology by the critic, compiling reviews penned for the Chicago Reader between 1974 and 1986. Mr. Demme was one of several emerging directors celebrated by Mr. Kehr, who curated the succinct five-film survey.

Mr. Le Mat, who debuted in "American Graffiti" and also starred in "Citizen's Band," scored the role of his lifetime as Melvin, a dreamer, a striver, an Everyman, whose encounter with Hughes (an indelibly grizzled Robards in a rare comic turn) changes his life. The movie's theme song, which booms over the opening credits, is Creedence Clearwater Revival's "Fortunate Son," whose chorus laments "It ain't me …" with the blare of defiance, not resignation. Along with serendipitous performances from Mary Steenburgen (who also won an Oscar playing Melvin's first wife, Lynda), Pamela Reed (as his second, Bonnie), the indispensable Michael J. Pollard, and even Dabney Coleman, the song buoys the film's unsinkable spirit. Dreams don't always abide, but in this case the dreamer does.

 Film Society of Lincoln Center  165 65th St.  (212) 875-5601, Through April 3

This series, now in its 40th year, is the springtime flipside of the New York Film Festival. Each year, it announces an emerging generation of first-time directors whose work may, or may not, declare a visionary in the making. A joint presentation with the Museum of Modern Art, which also hosts screenings, the mini-festival claims as discoveries such major figures as Steven Spielberg, Ken Burns, Spike Lee and Pedro Almodóvar. The rise of high-profile, first-look film festivals such as Sundance and South by Southwest has undercut ND/NF's significance, but the event always offers filmmakers a coveted stamp of approval. This year, its 28 selections (plus shorts) promise some real surprises. Good bets include Göran Olsson's "The Black Power Mixtape (1967-1975)," "Tyrannosaur" (the debut feature by British actor Paddy Considine), Nicolás Pereda's "Summer of Goliath" and "Microphone," whose look at contemporary Egyptian bohemia is of timely interest.

 Film Forum  209 W. Houston St.  (212) 727-8110, March 30-April 12

Perhaps the most unusual entry in the 2010 New York Film Festival, this is a near-wordless evocation of the life cycle in a village in the craggy southern Italian region of Calabria. Directed by Michelangelo Frammartino, its 88 minutes constitute more of a poetic essay than a documentary, as the camera calmly observes the death of an old shepherd, the ongoing life of his goat herd, and the hard-scrabble existence of the villagers who are intimately connected to the natural world that sustains them. The images flow with their own logic—by turns surreal and naturalistic, unsettling and comic—as the soundtrack resonates with bells, bleating, barking and the shouts of men at rugged labor.

 IFC Center  323 Sixth Ave.  (212) 924-7771, March 29

Here's one of the more bizarre premises for a documentary in a while: During the early 1980s, mysterious tiles began appearing in the streets of two dozen major cities in North and South America, including New York, Philadelphia and Buenos Aires. The colorful slabs broadcast a message in yellow, red, green and blue (the same color scheme as Google, oddly enough). The message was this: "Toynbee Idea in Movie 2001. Resurrect Dead on Planet Jupiter." Filmmaker Jon Foy explores the enigma, tracking leads that include a David Mamet play, Larry King, and Toynbee-inspired efforts to hijack local newscasts.

 reRun Gastropub Theater  147 Front St., Brooklyn  (718) 797-2322, through March 31

This is the way the world ends, not with a bang but a whimper. Irish director Conor Horgan takes T.S. Eliot to heart in this post-apocalyptic drama, which takes a smoldering rather than explosive approach to a familiar genre scenario. Two couples make do in a country cabin after some unexplained devastation has apparently leveled Society As We Knew It. The intimate unit contends with looters and food-snatching cops, but as the film unfolds, we discover that the real threat to communal well-being lies within the human heart. Solid acting and stellar cinematography (via the RED system) accomplish more than a truckload of special effects. Mr. Horgan will be on hand for a Q&A at Friday's screenings.

