SEOUL—South Korean farmers and agriculture officials are struggling to contain an outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease that has forced them to kill about 12% of the nation's swine and a sizable number of cattle.

The outbreak, the fourth in South Korea in the past decade and by far the worst, started about six weeks ago and has spread to most regions of the country.

On Tuesday, officials estimated more than $1 billion worth of livestock have been lost to the highly contagious viral disease and efforts to stop its rapid spread. 

"The outbreak is the most serious in Korea's history," said  Kim Jae-hong, a veterinary science professor at Seoul National University. "It is hard to predict when we can contain the spread of the disease, but the most important thing right now is to control movement in and out of the farmhouses that are affected, and thoroughly disinfect the cars around the area," he added.

South Korean officials are also monitoring the spread of avian flu among chicken farms. An outbreak of the H5N1 influenza virus was reported in chickens at two farms two weeks ago, likely coming from migratory birds. About 200,000 of the nation's more than 10 million chickens have been culled as a result.

Avian flu can spread to humans, but foot-and-mouth disease poses no such risk.

With more than 100 confirmed cases of foot-and-mouth disease in South Korea since late November, veterinarians, students and agriculture officials have been mobilized to participate in the biggest animal culls the country has ever seen. The campaign has killed more than 1.2 million of the nation's 10 million swine and 107,000 of its approximately three million cattle.

Vaccinations against the disease are available but, according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture, must be matched to the specific type and subtype of virus causing the outbreak. In South Korea, officials are scrambling to vaccinate unaffected animals to prevent the further spread of the disease.

Veterinarians and agriculture officials in some areas are also overwhelmed by the scale of the culls. Local media reported incidents of swine being buried alive to speed up the killing, and an agriculture ministry official on Tuesday confirmed some incidents but said they have been few.

"Officials are rushed to stop the spread, and the number of people involved is too small for the operation," Mr. Kim said.

In Paju, a city northwest of Seoul near the North Korean border, approximately 70% of farms have been forced to cull livestock, a local official said. He said a cold snap, in which temperatures have been below freezing for the past two weeks, contributed to difficulties combating the spread because hoses and pumps for spraying disinfectant have frozen.

In South Korea's groceries, meat prices and supplies haven't been significantly affected, though economists say they are watching for an impact on meat supplies and shopping during next month's Lunar New Year holiday, when gifts sets of meat are popular.

The disease has damaged the livelihoods of hundreds of farmers, however. The government compensates farmers for livestock killed as a result of efforts to contain the disease, but farmers argue the pay isn't enough.

Kim Hee-dong, a farmer in Pocheon, a small city northeast of Seoul, said authorities culled his 465 head of cattle on Dec. 30 and 31, then dug four large holes in his field to bury them.

"I just couldn't watch it. But I was asked to go out briefly to check out the holes, whether they were all right, and had to witness about 100 head of my cattle lying dead," he said. "I fainted at that moment and was taken to the hospital."

Mr. Kim said 36 farms of 40 in the area had herds that were stricken with foot-and-mouth disease. He estimates it will take years for him to rebuild his business. "I started this farm 20 years ago with one bull in the beginning, and I have never experienced something like this before," he said.

 Write to  Evan Ramstad at evan.ramstad@wsj.com 