TOKYO—Japanese electronics conglomerate  Sony Corp. said a shipment of PlayStation 3 consoles is being held at a port in the Netherlands as part of a continuing patent dispute with South Korea's LG Electronics Inc. regarding Blu-ray technology. 

The shipment is being held because a Dutch court handed down a 10-day temporary injunction from distributing the console in Europe. Sony said it is checking exactly when the injunction was issued and is investigating the next legal steps to take. 

Ken Hong, an LG Electronics spokesman, said it was the company's policy not to comment on pending legal matters. Separately, Im Seye, a spokeswoman at LG Electronics, said LG has filed a patent complaint against Sony with regard to its Blu-ray video technology used in PlayStation 3 machines but wouldn't elaborate further. 

The temporary trade ban is an unusually extreme measure for this type of regularly occurring patent dispute, which is often resolved by licensing agreements between the two parties. 

LG Electronics filed a complaint against Sony with the U.S. International Trade Commission on Feb. 4, saying that the Japanese company violated its patents with certain electronic devices having a Blu-ray Disc Player and other related components. It sought to block sales of Sony Bravia televisions and PS3 consoles in the U.S. 

Late last year, Sony brought a patent infringement claim of its own against LG Electronics to the ITC. It claimed that LG mobile phones violated its intellectual property and sought to prevent handsets from being shipped to the U.S. 

A person familiar with the situation said the halted shipment in question involved tens of thousands of PS3 consoles. This person also said PS3 supplies in the region should not be disrupted because Sony will use other points of entry into the European market since the injunction is only enforceable in the Netherlands. 

If LG is successful in its patent claims, Sony would be forced to pay royalties for every PlayStation 3 console that uses the technology in question. Since launching the game system in 2006, Sony has sold nearly 50 million PS3 consoles globally. 

 --In-Soo Nam contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Daisuke Wakabayashi at Daisuke.Wakabayashi@wsj.com 