MADRID—Spain's central bank said the country's lenders will need €15.15 billion ($21.07 billion) in new capital, but Moody's Investors Service published a far higher estimate that spooked markets and called into question the credibility of Spain's figures.

The Bank of Spain's disclosure on Thursday, aimed at providing a new yardstick for the cleanup of the country's ailing banks and shoring up investor confidence, was overshadowed as Moody's downgraded its rating on Spanish government debt to Aa2 with a negative outlook, from Aa1 previously. The ratings firm cited as one of the reasons for the action its estimate that Spanish banks have capital needs of between €40 billion and €50 billion, in line with many analysts' estimates. In a more stressed scenario, it estimated they could need €110 billion to €120 billion.

The downgrade contributed to a selloff in global stock markets and caused Spain's cost of funding to jump, with the difference between the interest Spain pays above the German benchmark rising to 2.27 percentage points from 2.20 percentage points Wednesday. The euro also slumped against the dollar.

Spain is the euro zone's largest troubled economy, and investors worry the region's other governments might lack the will or resources to rescue Spain if it can't pay its debts, potentially sinking the common currency.

In a separate report, Fitch Ratings said Spanish banks could need between €38 billion and €96.7 billion in new capital.

  Michael Symonds, credit analyst at Daiwa Capital Markets, said, "It is easy to see why the market may doubt" the Bank of Spain's estimate when both Moody's and Fitch published much higher ones.

Some analysts pointed out that Spanish regulators use different definitions of core capital, a key measure of a bank's ability to absorb unexpected losses. They don't require Spanish banks to deduct investments in insurance companies, for example, and allow them in some cases to include mandatory convertible bonds—a type of debt security that converts to equity under certain conditions. Regulators in the U.K. and elsewhere don't. 

The Spanish regulators "are a little more generous" when it comes to defining capital, said  María José Lockerbie, an analyst with Fitch. 

Differences such as these in the way countries assess capital have spurred concerns over the rigor of new Europewide bank "stress tests," whose results are scheduled to be unveiled in June. 

  Joseph Dickerson, an analyst at Espirito Santo investment bank in London, said the Bank of Spain's figures weren't useful in gauging the health of the Spanish banking system. "What you really want to know is how much capital these banks need in a reasonable scenario of stressed asset quality," he said. 

The Bank of Spain's disclosure follows from new Spanish regulations requiring all listed banks to have a core capital ratio of 8%. It set a 10% level for unlisted banks.

The government has given banks until September to cover their capital shortfalls with money from private sources. Otherwise, the state-financed Fund for Orderly Bank Restructuring, or FROB, will give it to them through stake purchases. The government will, however, in certain cases grant extensions to December for stake sales to private investors and to March 2012 for initial public offerings. 

Thursday's estimate of a €15.15 billion total capital shortfall is in line with an initial estimate of a €20 billion maximum shortfall the government gave last month.

At a meeting with journalists, Spanish Prime Minister José Luís Rodríguez Zapatero defended the figure. "It is difficult to call into question the credibility of the Bank of Spain, built up over decades," he said.

In a statement, the Bank of Spain said Bankia, the recently created entity of seven unlisted savings banks led by Caja Madrid, had the biggest capital shortfall at €5.78 billion. However, it if goes through with its planned initial public offering, it will have to cover a shortfall of only €1.8 billion because listed companies have lower capital requirements.

Just three listed banks were shown to have capital shortfalls: Bankinter SA and the Spanish units of Barclays PLC and of Deutsche Bank AG.

The Bank of Spain said Bankinter's upcoming €406 million convertible-bond issue will cover its capital shortfall.

A Barclays spokesman said the bank is aware of the new capital requirements and has said it will comply by the September deadline, adding that the new requirements "are within our capital planning and consequently there is no requirement for additional external capital to be raised."

Deutsche Bank said in a statement that it "is fully committed to comply with the new capital requirements in Spain.… The Bank consequently intends to increase the core capital ratio of its Spanish subsidiary Deutsche Bank Sociedad Anonima Española to more than 8.0% by September 30, 2011."



 Write to  Sara Schaefer Muñoz at sara.munoz@wsj.com 