Euro-zone governments are working towards an increase in the capacity of the European Financial Stability Facility to help members that have problems borrowing from the bond markets, Belgian Finance Minister Didier Reynders said. 

A number of weaker euro-zone countries want to raise the total amount of emergency financing available from €750 billion ($996.3 billion) to around €1 trillion, but Germany is opposed to the idea, preferring instead to ensure that the full €440 billion pledged by euro-zone governments is actually available for lending. 

The European Commission said it launched raids against companies in the truck industry for allegedly breaching antitrust rules. Swedish truck maker Scania, as well as German companies MAN and Daimler confirmed they had been included in a European Union investigation. Italy's Fiat Industrial's Iveco truck unit also confirmed being part of the investigation. 

 The European Bank of Reconstruction and Development said it waived diplomatic immunity for four officials assigned to it by the Russian government to allow U.K. and Russian police to investigate them, in what could be the highest-level case of alleged corruption ever at the international lender. 

 Ireland's embattled Prime Minister Brian Cowen won a vote of confidence in his leadership, clearing the way for him to lead his fractured Fianna Fail party into the next general election.  

 U.K. consumer-price inflation accelerated sharply in December, underscoring the view that the Bank of England's most likely next move will be to tighten policy, but the economy's fragility suggests that action is a while off yet.  

Britain's former top legal official says Tony Blair insisted the U.K. could join the 2003 invasion of Iraq without additional backing from the U.N., despite legal advice which told him that was untrue. 

A British judge fined a Christian couple for refusing to allow a gay couple the use of a double room at their hotel in southern England. Judge Andrew Rutherford says Peter and Hazelmary Bull broke the law when they turned away Martyn Hall and his partner Steven Preddy in late 2008. Bull and his wife cited religious objections, but insisted their policy was not solely aimed at homosexuals but all unmarried couples.

 German economic expectations improved sharply in January, indicating that the euro zone's largest economy is set to continue growing in the months ahead despite the debt crisis in the region, the ZEW think-tank said.  

 Polish officials blamed Russian air-traffic controllers for blunders they say contributed to the plane crash that killed Poland's president in Russia last year, amid an intensifying bout of mutual finger-pointing over who is responsible for the tragedy.  

 Russian President Dmitry Medvedev met for the first time with a prominent journalist who had been badly beaten in November and voiced renewed interest in the case. 

 U.S. manufacturing, viewed as a lost cause by many Americans, has begun creating more jobs than it eliminates for the first time in more than a decade. The number of manufacturing jobs in the U.S. last year grew 1.2%, the first increase since 1997, government data show.  

 President Barack Obama intends to issue an executive order to initiate a government-wide review of federal regulations, aiming to eliminate rules that stymie economic growth.  

China was a net seller of U.S. Treasurys in November, slimming its holdings but remaining the largest foreign holder, the Treasury Department said. 

Meanwhile, Japan continued to be a net buyer of Treasurys, notching a record level in November and continuing to threaten to become the top foreign holder. Overall, foreigners were net buyers of long-term U.S. financial assets in November, according to a monthly report.

Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao said China must avoid an abnormal increase in bank lending at the beginning of this year and will continue to use various monetary policy tools to maintain a reasonable amount and pace of financing in the country. 

 A Chinese firm has signed a letter of intent to invest $2 billion in a North Korean industrial zone, representing one of the largest potential investments in Kim Jong Il's authoritarian state and a challenge to U.S. policy in the region. 

China Investment Corp. has chosen Toronto for its first foreign representative office, an extension of the $300 billion sovereign-wealth fund's broader internationalization effort that highlights Canada's relative openness to Chinese investment. 

Nearly one-third of the missiles fired by the Taiwanese military during an air-defense drill missed their targets, raising concerns on the island's defense capabilities amid China's rising military dominance in the region. The defense ministry said six out of 19 missiles failed to hit their targets at a test staged at the Jiupeng base in Taiwan's southeastern coast. 

The Hong Kong government said it is "striving" to pass legislation allowing it to comply with United Nations sanctions against Iran, after the U.S. Treasury Department blacklisted 24 shipping companies—20 of them based in Hong Kong—it said were fronts for the Iranian state shipping line. 

Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan's new cabinet is making clear that it is serious about enacting an unpopular increase in the nation's consumption tax. Finance Minister Yoshihiko Noda said the government would live up to a legislative promise—originally made by a rival party—that requires a tax overhaul be in place by the end of the fiscal year ending March 2012. 

A 7.2-magnitude earthquake jolted southwestern Pakistan early Wednesday in a sparsely-populated area near the nation's borders with Iran and Afghanistan, according to the U.S. Geological Survey. There were no immediate reports of large casualties. The quake's epicenter was 30 miles west of Dalbandin, a town in Pakistan's Baluchistan province.

 U.S. allies in Europe and Kabul have questioned the U.S. military's plan to expand Afghan security forces by 72,400 troops, forcing the abrupt postponement of a meeting intended to formally approve the new ceiling. Concerns from Germany, Italy, France and others, and last-minute objections by Afghan President Hamid Karzai, led to the cancellation. 

A suicide bomber blew himself up in a crowd of Iraqi police recruits, killing at least 45 people and undercutting security efforts as the nation struggles to show it can protect itself. Police said the bomber joined a crowd of more than 100 recruits and detonated his explosives-packed vest outside the police station in Saddam Hussein's hometown of Tikrit, some 80 miles north of Baghdad.

Russian President Dmitry Medvedev gave a political boost to the Palestinians, backing their claim to east Jerusalem as a capital and their demand that Israel must freeze all settlement construction before peace talks can resume.

 Tunisia faced renewed instability as three ministers in the new caretaker government resigned under pressure from the country's powerful labor union, illustrating the myriad new forces struggling for influence following last week's ouster of the country's authoritarian president. 

The leader in exile of Tunisia's Islamic movement Ennahdha wants to return home but is waiting for the new government to declare a full amnesty on sentences passed during the rule of recently ousted president Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali, Ennahdha officials said.

Sudanese security forces arrested the country's top Islamist opposition leader overnight after he called for a Tunisia-style uprising in the country, family members said. 

 U.K. Secretary for Defense Liam Fox emphasized the importance of the next generation U.S. F-35 Joint Strike Fighter to counter China's development of its own stealth jet, after Britain and Australia agreed to strengthen defense cooperation in Asia during talks in Sydney. 

Australia's government said it is forming a business task force to help marshal reconstruction, as the estimated cost of the flooding in Queensland hits 20 billion Australian dollars (US$19.9 billion).