ZURICH—The Museum Rietberg—already world-renowned for its tribal and native art exhibitions and its broad collection of art works from Asia, Africa and South America—has beaten its high standards with one of the first panoramic shows of Indian painting that is focusing on individual artists.

The show, dubbed "The Way of the Master," covers a span of around 800 years from 1100 to 1900. It exhibits some 240 works of more than 40 Indian artists about whose lives and development little has been known to date, as past research and exhibitions almost exclusively centered on elucidating the subject matter chosen by the artists.

Unlike in Europe, where the genius cult surrounding the artists of the Renaissance-inspired writers like Giorgio Vasari to document the lives of adepts such as Leonardo da Vinci and Giotto, and thus help create the exalted status from which Western artists still benefit today, no similar endeavor has ever been undertaken on the Indian subcontinent. 

Although monarchs such as Jahangir, who was the ruler of the Mughal Empire from 1605 to 1627, claimed that his restless effort to help artists elevated the quality of art in India, many artists on the subcontinent considered themselves as craftsmen and either didn't sign their works at all or marked their paintings with terms such as "servant," "from the lowest of the unworthy" or even "slave."

For this reason, the Rietberg show, which from September until January will be exhibited at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, pays homage to individual artists, or artist groups where the identification of an individual has been too difficult to establish. Usually three to eight paintings from a single individual or a specific school are exhibited, thus carving out a path for a deeper and better understanding of the development of painting in India.

To a Western audience many of the paintings, especially the early ones that carry religious motives such as the 12th-century painting "The Wish-Giving Green Tara" by an unknown Mahavihara master showing a dancing goddess, look schematic as they are laden with symbols and cryptic references. But as Indian artists and their aristocratic patrons always felt a penchant for strong and clear colors, human and animal figures and ornaments, many of the paintings can be understood readily and open the view to a familiar, yet novel world.

A painting from artist Payag, who worked during 1591-1658, called "Darah Shikoh on the Antelope Hunt," shows a hunter with a rifle in pursuit of game. One of his fellow hunters takes shield behind a cow to come up closer to the antelopes and attack them from a short distance. The painting gives a very accurate rendering of the animals and the forest in the background and uses a blurring technique, similar to the sfumato technique used by da Vinci for his "Mona Lisa," for the scrub in the foreground, behind which six more hunters are hiding themselves. The human figures and animals are shown in movement, but seem wooden and stylized because artists rarely used techniques such as perspective painting.

But paintings such as "Ibrahim 'Adel Shah II on the Falcon Hunt" by Farrok Berg excel through the use of strong colors and a meticulous depiction of the landscapes, which seems similar to the Dutch school of early landscape painting. 

While much of Indian painting is indebted to tradition and dictated by the taste of the patron-rulers, the artists' mastery in handling color, form and ornaments expresses their individuality and justifies the exhibition's effort to raise the profile of India's little-known masters.

 Until Aug. 21  

  www.rietberg.ch  

 Write to  Goran Mijuk at goran.mijuk@dowjones.com 