TUCSON, Ariz.—Rep. Gabrielle Giffords, recovering from a gunshot wound to the head, is opening both eyes, moving her arms and legs, and undergoing intense physical therapy, her doctors said Thursday. 

Doctors at the University Medical Center in Tucson said the congresswoman was rubbing her eyes and yawning, and that her eyes could also track people's movements—a sign that she could see. 

"This is a major leap forward," said G. Michael Lemole, chief of neurosurgery at the University Medical Center in Tucson. "This is a major milestone for her, and we are hoping she crosses through many more."

Asked by a reporter Thursday if her progress has been miraculous, Dr. Lemole said, "A lot of medicine is outside of our control, and we are wise to acknowledge miracles."

In the coming days, doctors may try to remove Ms. Giffords's breathing tube to see if she can speak, they said. She remains in critical condition. 

Ms. Giffords, an Arizona Democrat, was severely wounded in a shooting rampage on Jan. 8 outside a Safeway supermarket in Tucson. Jared Lee Loughner, 22 years old, has been charged with two counts of murder, two counts of attempted murder and a count of attempted assassination of a member of Congress.

Doctors are still monitoring Ms. Giffords for potential setbacks, but they said she was following simple commands, including lifting her legs as they were dangled over the side of the bed during physical therapy. 

She was also doing "fairly specific things with her left hand," Dr. Lemole said.

Dr. Lemole said the "unexpected familiarity" of friends from Washington may have prompted Ms. Giffords to open her eyes, indicating that she was aware of her surroundings and that her brain's arousal center—the one that causes people to wake up in the morning—was starting to recover.

"This is the part I think that doctors have the hardest time with, those intangibles in medicine," he said. "We can't really quantify that component that family and friends bring, but we know that it exists."

Ms. Giffords first opened her left eye during a visit with friends from Congress Wednesday afternoon just after President Barack Obama left her hospital room. Two of her closest friends, Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand and Rep. Debbie Wasserman-Schultz, were taking turns holding her hand.

One of Ms. Giffords's eyes was damaged by the bullet that tore through her brain and was bandaged. But the other eye began flickering. Her husband, Mark Kelly, urged her on, Ms. Gillibrand said. "Gabby, open your eyes! Open your eyes!" he said.

She struggled for maybe 30 seconds. "Then she finally opens her eyes and you could tell she was desperately trying to focus," Ms. Gillibrand said. Mr. Kelly said if she could see him, to give a thumbs-up. After a few moments, Ms. Giffords lifted her arm, Ms. Gillibrand said.

Ms. Gillibrand and Ms. Wasserman-Schultz recounted the events in the hospital room to reporters on Air Force One while returning to Washington late Wednesday, after a memorial service that Mr. Obama attended in Tucson. 

The senators were taking turns holding Ms. Giffords's hand, telling their friend of all the things they would do together once she got better: pizza dates with their husbands, and summer vacations in New Hampshire.

Ms. Giffords was gripping and rubbing their hands back, making clear that she could hear them, Ms. Gillibrand and Ms. Wasserman-Schultz said.

When she opened her eyes, "it felt like we were watching a miracle," Ms. Wasserman-Schultz saidThe doctor told the group it was a milestone for her recovery. "This is amazing, what she's doing now, and beyond our greatest hope,"' Ms. Gillibrand recounted the doctor saying.Later, on the way from the hospital to the service, Mr. Kelly told the president what had happened in the hospital room. With Mr. Kelly's permission, the president gave the news to the packed arena an emotional highlight of his speech.

Ms. Giffords then tried to reach and hug her husband. He asked her to touch his ring. She touched it, and then grabbed his watch.

The group, which also included House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, was asked to leave at that point, because it was too much excitement for Ms. Giffords and doctors said she needed to rest.

"And I want to tell you...right after we went to visit, a few minutes after we left her room and some of her colleagues in Congress were in the room, Gabby opened her eyes for the first time," he told the crowdwhich responded with applause. "Gabby opened her eyes for the first time." 

Doctors said on Thursday that while Mr. Obama spoke, Ms. Giffords continued to move her eyes while the speech played on the television in her hospital room.

 Write to  Laura Meckler at laura.meckler@wsj.com and Michael Rothfeld at michael.rothfeld@wsj.com 