The number of Chinese over 60 years old is on pace to exceed the entire population of the U.S. by 2050. The big change has caught the eye of U.S. senior-housing developers, which are pouring into China in search of the opportunity—and maybe the risk—of a lifetime.

Major U.S. senior-housing companies and private-equity funds are opening offices in China, holding talks with Chinese developers and officials, and touting opportunities in Asia to their investors. Among those scouting the market:  Emeritus Corp., Life Care Services LLC, hedge-fund giant  Fortress Investment Group
FIG


-0.40
%




 LLC and even  John C. Erickson, an industry pioneer whose empire of retirement communities toppled in the wake of the financial crisis.

In January, about 30 Chinese business representatives toured retirement communities in Arizona and Maryland and attended a lunch held for them at the annual meeting of the American Seniors Housing Association in Phoenix.

At the lunch, the Chinese group presented U.S. senior-housing operators with some stark demographic trends: China already is home to 167 million people over the age of 60, more than the total population of France and Germany, while nearly half of older adults live alone. The number of Chinese senior citizens will increase by about eight million a year over the next five years, while their share of the total population will rise to 15% in 2015 from 12.5% in 2009, according to real-estate consultant DTZ.

Chinese developers "are seeking America's experience and expertise to help them achieve world-class standards," says  Nie Meisheng, president of the China Real Estate Chamber of Commerce, the Beijing-based trade group that organized the trip.

So far, analysts and investors say, U.S. developers making the new push have yet to break ground on their own projects. Among the obstacles: an uncertain regulatory framework, an untested business model and centuries of family tradition in China dictating that elderly parents live with their children. It also isn't clear how many Chinese families would be willing or able to afford U.S.-style care.

For now, Chinese developers are interested in U.S. expertise because of their lack of experience in senior housing. Once they gain sufficient knowledge, they may no longer need U.S. companies around—which is why some U.S. operators are looking to establish joint-venture platforms that would allow them to have an equity stake in projects rather than just earning consulting fees.

The Chinese government has encouraged new investment in senior housing amid worries that the burgeoning elderly population will make the country's traditional ways of caring for the seniors unsustainable. 

New wealth has given growing numbers of Chinese families options they never had before. And social attitudes are changing, with many young couples now solely responsible for four parents because of China's one-child policy.

Bullish senior-housing executives say the nascent state of the industry in China reminds them of the U.S. a few decades ago, when demand for elder care outside the home was on the rise but was largely the purview of nonprofit organizations and government agencies.

"In China, there's lots of money trying to meet a filial obligation, but there's no product," said  Chris Alberti, a former Morgan Stanley banker in China who is advising Emeritus through his firm, Taconic Alliance LLC.

As U.S. companies look to the East, capital for new development could come from Chinese sources as well as U.S. private-equity firms. Fortress said last week that its former head of investor relations,  Lilly Donohue, is moving to China to lead its efforts in senior housing there. 

M3 Capital Partners, a Chicago-based real-estate private-equity firm with $2.9 billion in equity commitments, is also evaluating the market and looking for a senior-housing partner in China, according to M3 managing director  Christopher Vallace. 

The number of independent-living and assisted-living facilities in the U.S. soared to 10,155 in 2010 from 4,591 in 1995, according to the National Investment Center for the Seniors Housing and Care Industry.

"It is definitely becoming a more competitive industry,"  Bill Pettit, chief executive of Seattle-based retirement-community operator Merrill Gardens, said of the U.S. senior-housing business. Mr. Pettit, whose company owns 56 communities in 10 states, recently opened an office in Shanghai to look for business there.

Mr. Erickson, founder and former chief executive of Erickson Retirement Communities, says he has made several trips to China and India to offer consulting services and seek out joint ventures there but hasn't done any deals yet. Erickson filed for Chapter 11 in 2009 after an aggressive, debt-driven expansion drive, and emerged from bankruptcy as Erickson Living after a Baltimore-area investment firm acquired most of its assets.

Other companies interested in China include Emeritus, one of the largest senior-housing companies in the U.S. by the number of units it manages, which says it is joining a Seattle private-equity firm founded by its chairman to seek out development opportunities in China. 

Also, Life Care Services, a Des Moines, Iowa, firm that manages 104 U.S. retirement communities, says its CRSA subsidiary is consulting a Chinese firm, Oursjia Rental Service Co., that has senior-living developments underway in the cities of Nansha and Beijing. "We're looking at the China market and saying, 'That's where the U.S. was in the 1960s,' " says Life Care's chief executive,  Ed Kenny.

Any bet on senior housing in China will likely be haunted by past failures abroad by U.S. senior-housing companies. Independent-living giant Holiday Retirement Corp. built a retirement community outside Shanghai in the late 1990s that never opened. It has since been converted to a budget hotel, says former Holiday Chairman  Dan Baty. Holiday is now owned by Fortress.

"We sold our interest at a substantial discount and went home," says Mr. Baty, who is now chairman of Emeritus and is looking to China once again. "We were a little early." 

—Andrew Browne and Guan Yanjuan contributed to this article.

 Write to  Anton Troianovski at anton.troianovski@wsj.com 