Billionaire hedge-fund manager  Steve Cohen has joined the bidding for a minority stake in the New York Mets, as the baseball team attempts to raise about $200 million to cover losses and pay down debt, according to people familiar with the matter.

Mr. Cohen, the founder of SAC Capital Advisors LLC whose net worth is estimated by Forbes magazine at $7.3 billion, is a longtime Mets fan who knows its controlling Wilpon family socially. He manages about $12 billion in assets.

A spokesman for the Mets declined to comment.  Jonathan Gasthalter, a spokesman for Mr. Cohen's SAC, declined to discuss any bid.

Several other Wall Street financiers also are vying to gain a minority stake in a team with heavy debt, declining attendance, and the cloud of $1 billion in claims against the Wilpons by the trustee for victims of the  Bernard Madoff Ponzi scheme.

The Mets recently requested that potential investors submit nonbinding letters confirming their interest in the team, including their bid price and size of the stake, which could range from 25% to 49%.

Among other bidders is a team led by  Steve Starker, the co-founder of Wall Street trading firm BTIG LLC. His group includes  Kenny Dichter, a co-founder of Marquis Jets, and Douglas Ellin, creator of the HBO show "Entourage."

Another group with Wall Street credentials is the team of  David Heller, an executive of  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.,
GS


-0.33
%




 and  Marc Spilker, the president of Apollo Global Management LLC, the private-equity fund.

The sale is taking place against the backdrop of the $1 billion lawsuit filed against team owners  Fred Wilpon and  Saul Katz and their associates by  Irving Picard, the trustee in the Madoff bankruptcy case.

Mr. Picard has claimed the Mets owners either knew or should have known Mr. Madoff was running a Ponzi scheme. Messrs. Wilpon and Katz have denied any wrongdoing.

The Mets played their home opener Friday in front of a near-sellout crowd of 41,075 at Citifield. Since then, the team has averaged 30,600 fans, below last year's average of 31,600 when the Mets led Major League Baseball in attendance declines. That makes it tougher for the team to regain profitability and command an attractive price for the minority stake.

 Write to  Randall Smith at randall.smith@wsj.com and Matthew Futterman at matthew.futterman@wsj.com 