Federal prosecutors have accused a former commodities broker of threatening to kill 47 current or former members of the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission and other regulators.

Vincent P. McCrudden, 49 years old, sent a series of emails to lawyers at the CFTC after the commodities regulator accused him last month of operating unregistered investment funds, according to federal prosecutors in Brooklyn. They charged him with two counts of making threats, which each carry up to five years in prison. Mr. McCrudden hasn't responded to the CFTC complaint, which is still pending. 

Mr. McCrudden was ordered held without bail at a hearing Friday. Bruce Barket, Mr. McCrudden's lawyer, said his client has fired off inappropriate emails for years when he's involved in litigation. He said Mr. McCrudden has been fighting with the CFTC for years and has never taken any steps beyond threatening emails. However, the CFTC decided to have him arrested this time, Mr. Barket said.

"He posted nasty things on a website. He's been sending inappropriate emails for decades," Mr. Barket said. "He's not a threat to anyone."

Mr. McCrudden is divorced and has been living in Singapore with his girlfriend, Mr. Barket said. Mr. McCrudden has been trading futures for himself and isn't a danger to the community, Mr. Barket said. "It's ludicrous to say he is," he said.

Mr. McCrudden previously resided in Dix Hills, N.Y., and was arrested Thursday at Newark Liberty International Airport on a return trip to the U.S.

He allegedly posted an "execution list" on the website of a management company for a commodities fund he controlled, listing the names of 47 current or former officials of the CFTC, the Securities and Exchange Commission and other securities regulators.

He also sought home addresses and other personal information from the public via the website about nine government officials he described as "corrupt," including the chairpersons of the CFTC and the SEC, prosecutors said.

"This has got to stop and stop now," his website said, according to prosecutors. "Quit your jobs. Stop paying your taxes. Go buy a gun, and let's get to work in taking back our country from these criminals. I will be the first one to lead by example."

Mr. McCrudden, who had several previous run-ins with regulators, had a history of responding with "threatening communications," according to prosecutors.

In 2008, the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, a self-regulatory organization, embarked on enforcement actions against him over alleged "threatening, abusive, harassing, coercive, intimidating and/or vulgar communications" to employees of the firm he was working at the time in a dispute over expenses and commissions. He was fined and suspended November. 

Mr. McCrudden allegedly wrote a threatening note to a committee that reviews Finra's disciplinary decisions. "I will fight and seek revenge," he said, according to prosecutors. "I do not have a forum to fight this powerful cottage industry, so I will arrange my own court and punishment. So, I am making a list. And I will execute revenge."

Finra's chairman and chief executive as well as its former chief enforcement officer were on the alleged list, according to prosecutors. 

Finra declined to comment. The SEC and the CFTC didn't immediately respond to requests for comment. 

Separately, Mr. McCrudden was charged with criminal mail fraud in May 2000 in relation to a commodity investment fund he ran in 1996 and 1997, according to court records. Those charges were dismissed a month later but were opened again in 2002. He was acquitted in 2003. 

"All this time the charges are on my licenses, which now can never be taken off. I am writing to make you aware as a citizen how unfair the process is and your direct role in that process," he wrote in a letter to the court following his acquittal.

Mr. McCrudden played soccer at the University of Rhode Island from 1980 to 1983 and said on his website that he played professionally for two teams in the North American Soccer League. His professional soccer career couldn't immediately be independently verified. 

 Write to  Chad Bray at chad.bray@wsj.com 