Egypt's first vice president in three decades, and a possible successor to President Hosni Mubarak, has for years been a key interlocutor for U.S. diplomats, military officials and congressional delegations, diplomatic cables suggest. His elevation Saturday raises intriguing possibilities. 

Diplomats have long considered Omar Suleiman, the head of Egyptian intelligence services, a possible vice president—he had been promised the job years ago—and indeed the likeliest successor to the president if Mr. Mubarak failed in his bid to create a family dynasty. He is considered both a loyalist to Mr. Mubarak and a serious rival to the president's son, Gamal Mubarak. 

His candidacy to lead the country should Mr. Mubarak fall also suggests how a transition of power might be accomplished. Mr. Suleiman enjoys the support of army, intelligence and security leaders, in addition to that of the U.S. 

Yet in his mid-70s he is considered too old to contemplate a multi-year presidency himself. And despite Washington's respect for Mr. Suleiman, U.S. officials are increasingly coming to believe that this military man isn't the long-term fix Cairo needs. They say his closeness to Mr. Mubarak is probably too high a hurdle for him to clear, and that he is, at best, a transitional figure.

"It's pretty clear he's not the one the people are calling for," a U.S. official working on the Mideast said.

According to dozens of diplomatic cables sent over the past five years and released by the WikiLeaks website, most high-level U.S. delegations in recent years to Cairo have included a visit with Mr. Suleiman. That includes visits by Secretary of Defense Robert Gates, Gen. David Petraeus and FBI Director Robert Mueller, numerous congressional delegations and regular contacts with the ambassador and political officers, according to the cables.

In the view of U.S. diplomats in Cairo, Mr. Suleiman is a key figure in the Mubarak regime, responsible primarily for the Arab-Israeli peace talks; management of the Gaza strip tinderbox, Hamas and associated arms-smuggling in Sinai; relations with regional troublemakers, especially Iran and Syria; and broad counterterrorism cooperation with the U.S.

A succession of rallies and demonstrations, in Egypt, Jordan, Yemen and Algeria have been inspired directly by the popular outpouring of anger that toppled Tunisian President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali. See how these uprising progressed.

He has played an active role in the Mideast peace process, particularly in trying to forge a compromise between rival Palestinian factions, Fatah and Hamas, and has been at the forefront of the Egyptian effort to crack own on arms smuggling from Egypt into Gaza.

Mr. Suleiman has been "the point person on both the U.S. relationship and the Israel-Egyptian relationship," Jon Alterman, Mideast director at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, told the Associated Press. "He's very reassuring both ways."

The diplomats in the cables describe Mr. Suleiman as ruthless but a straight shooter and a reliable partner in the war on terror. In a 2009 cable, the embassy in Cairo reported that Mr. Suleiman and Interior Minister Habib al-Adly "keep the domestic beasts at bay, and Mubarak is not one to lose sleep over their tactics." 

When it came time to repatriate Guantanamo prisoners, Mr. Suleiman was the key go-between with the U.S., and his promises of lawful treatment were taken seriously. His word "is the [Egyptian government's] guarantee, and the [government's] track record of cooperation on [counterterror] issues lends further support to this assessment," one cable said.

Mr. Suleiman on most issues has echoed President Mubarak, the documents noted, though he placed as much emphasis on the long-term dangers posed by Iran's nuclear program as on its short-term efforts to destabilize the region. Mr. Mubarak worried more about Iran's meddling in Arab affairs. 

Mr. Suleiman told U.S. visitors in 2008 that an attack on Iran's nuclear program would backfire, and urged stiffer sanctions instead, according to the cables. He said "such an attack would not destroy Iran's nuclear capabilities and would only unite Iranians with their leadership and against the U.S. He repeated the need to make Iran 'busy with its people' by effective sanctions, citing the successful example of Libya."

Much like Mr. Mubarak, Mr. Suleiman views Islamic radicalism as one of the clearest threats to Egypt, saying the regime is "circled" by Islamic radicals and pointing to Hamas, Hezbollah, Iranian support for Egypt's Muslim Brotherhood and wider radical activities in the region, including Sudan and Somalia. He includes the Muslim Brotherhood in this wider radical universe, even though it appears to be a nonviolent movement today.

—Jay Solomon contributed to this article.

 Write to  Keith Johnson at keith.johnson@wsj.com 