WASHINGTON—Ireland's new prime minister flatly ruled out raising his country's low corporate-tax rate, despite pressure from the European Union to do so as part of a bailout package.

"I'm not willing to consider it," Enda Kenny said in an interview here with The Wall Street Journal, as he prepared for meetings with President Barack Obama and other top American officials. Part of his purpose in visiting the U.S., Mr. Kenny said, is to provide American companies investing in Ireland with "absolute clarity about Ireland's corporate tax rate, that it will remain as it is."

Mr. Kenny, who has been in office less than two weeks, is wrestling with other European leaders over the terms of a €67.5 billion bailout fund created by the EU and the International Monetary Fund to help Ireland work through large deficits created by a national banking crisis. The interest rate on the loan was set at 5.8%. Mr. Kenny called that rate so high that it is "penal," and Ireland is seeking a reduction.

In return, other EU leaders are urging Ireland to raise its corporate tax rate of 12.5%, a level that has attracted significant investment from a variety of multinational companies, including U.S.-based ones. 

The Irish leader called his nation's relatively low corporate tax rate "fundamental to our attractiveness, as a nation, for foreign direct investment." Mr. Kenny said raising it now would amount to a "massive breach of trust" with multinational companies that have invested in Ireland.

Of the attempt to use the terms of the bailout to force a change in the rate, Mr. Kenny said: "These two things are entirely unrelated." European treaties make clear, he argued, that tax levels are a matter for individual nations to decide.

Still, he stressed that he expects a reduction in the interest rate Ireland is being charged on its bailout package anyway. IMF officials, he said, have declared the rates too high, and he noted that Greece was recently granted a one-percentage-point reduction in a similar package it has received.

In addition, he indicated that his new government would seek more flexibility to require banks to shoulder more of the cost of Ireland's rescue of its financial system. The lending practices of those banks, he argued, were an underlying cause of a real-estate bubble that burst in Ireland, much as one did in the U.S.

"We take the view that it's unfair to expect the Irish taxpayer to fork over 100% for the recklessness of banks and lending practices that brought this about in the first place," Mr. Kenny said. 

Ireland's previous government had sought to protect and support insolvent banks.

Otherwise, he said, Ireland is able to deal on its own with its budget and debt problems, though he said the austerity required to do so presents "a degree of challenge."

 Write to  Gerald F. Seib at jerry.seib@wsj.com 