As an introduction to the little known and less read Joseph McElroy, the slim volume "Night Soul and Other Stories" could hardly be bettered. It's a breeze compared to the author's magnum opus, "Women and Men" (1987), which weighed in at 1,241 pages. It's also comparatively accessible, the narrative shifts and mild divergences from straightforward plotting almost inconsequential when measured against the many arcane passages of his novels. "Night Soul and Other Stories" contains a few gems, a fair sampling of its author's compositional strengths, a couple of longer stories that serve as temptations to try the longer works—and enough premonitory signals of the difficulties the reader will find there to give warning to the faint of heart.

For Mr. McElroy is nothing if not difficult. Any author repeatedly im pressed by critics into the Thomas Pynchon-William Gaddis-David Foster Wallace armada sails in heavy seas. The author began with the firmly Modernist "A Smuggler's Bible" (1966), which on its release drew comparisons to Gaddis's "The Recognitions" and Malcolm Lowry's "Under the Volcano." The eminently respectable Alfred A. Knopf was Mr. McElroy's publisher through the prime of his career, including his impossibly dense science-fiction endeavor Plus (1974) and ending with 1989's lovely, elegiac "The Letter Left to Me." The fact that his books have appeared at smaller and smaller publishing houses since then—the novel "Actress in the House" (2003) at Overlook Press, a book of essays at an Italian publisher and an odd recent fragment, "Preparations for Search," at Small Anchor Press (2010)—is indicative not only of Mr. McElroy's eclipsing reputation but of the disappearing market for challenging fiction. 

Mr. McElroy, now 80, seems to have given his first story collection a purposefully retrospective feel, featuring favored types, settings, themes and images, so that the stories loosely correspond to the phases of his long career. Unlike his supersizing colleagues— with their fondness for silly names, precocious children and the generally old-school, male-centric world of wars and sports and business (think of Gaddis's "JR," Don DeLillo's "End Zone" or "Underworld," Wallace's "Infinite Jest" and all of Pynchon), Mr. McElroy tends to write about adults with jobs and families. Typical McElroy characters are musicians, public intellectuals or scientists. They tend to enjoy biking and swimming, though they also go in for the kind of knotty, paranoia-inducing encounters with oddballs that will feel familiar to fans of Pynchon and the gang.

The novel "Lookout Cartridge" (1974), often cited as Mr. McElroy's finest achievement, is full of late 1960s radical lore and Pynchonian paranoia. Mysterious and sometimes violent plot elements give a noirish tint to an international cast of characters who are tracking down a missing cartridge of film. It's an exemplary achievement, though the anti-establishmentarian connections it makes among seemingly random events ("But OK, how does the stabbing fit the pattern?") might put off contemporary readers used to a less theoretical progression of events. They may also find its filmmaking descriptions dated and amateurish ("like Super-8 weekenders," Mr. McElroy writes) in a world where the public relation's arm of the movie business takes us behind the scenes of every release.

The stories in "Night Soul" feel more with it. Its longest entry, the novella-length "Mister X," explores a few months in the life of a famous architect, subtly enfolding politics into a fascinating study of a public figure, his circle of friends and his encounters with an acupuncturist. It's told from deep within its hero's perspective, the sentences clipped and packed with information and capable of quick shifts in time and place and register: the hallmarks of Mr. McElroy's style. "He went there to lie down and have her treat him. Courtesy between them like fine lust. Appointments came and went." The story echoes, in character and incident, the author's enormously satisfying recent novel "Actress in the House." Both contain a sly indictment of U.S. foreign policy, a character or two who work at highly technical jobs and a somewhat hard-bitten middle-aged hero's temporary involvement with a younger woman. 

For any reader taken by these stories, "Actress in the House" should be the first place to turn. It tells the tale of a brief affair between a tough-guy Manhattan lawyer named Daley and a young stage actress. The lawyer has an unsavory past in southeast Asia and a structural-engineer brother with a knack for international trouble. It is Mr. McElroy's most felicitously written book: the dialogue clattering with aggression, the descriptive passages typically to the point, full of the staccato rhythms of thought and the competing agendas of the characters. "What was he feeling? she said, running water, turning it off, finding a toothbrush, staring at herself in the mirror. He was thinking about sleep." Mr. McElroy's writing can be boldly stark and psychologically acute, and Daley is richly drawn, thanks to a skillful interweaving of his eventful past and his present affair: "Daley's friends, two or three who knew, did not really glean anything better or worse of him, or didn't say. An early riser of robust constitution. What man cares whether or not his friend hooks up with someone or marries for that matter?" 

By Joseph McElroy  Dalkey Archive, 293 pages, $14.95

But the resounding fascination in "Actress in the House" is the actress. The reader is made to fall as firmly under her spell as Daley, who can't help himself—even though he has every awareness that the affair cannot last. Mr. McElroy captures as few have the combination of guts, narcissism, bawdiness and nuttiness—borne of difficult and even abusive childhoods—that defines certain public personalities, actors and actresses prime among them. "A woman with a thrifty bio, bless her. Good to talk to, a challenge to even just think with. Educated. Someone slightly abandoned who made a point of doing the leaving herself, you'd expect."

This telling portrait of a woman underscores another important difference between Mr. McElroy and the authors to whom he is frequently compared (and dare one say his difference from the vast majority of postwar American male novelists?): His women are more than assemblies of body parts. They have careers, make art and are formidable presences. In the story "Silk, or the Woman with the Bike" in the current collection, it's the hero's female lab partner, an enthusiastic and rigorous researcher, who sees most clearly what's at the root of a chance, freighted encounter the hero has had with a terminally ill woman and her bicycle. In another story here, "The Campaign Trail," male and female candidates (with noticeable resemblances to the 2008 Democratic primary frontrunners) meet as equals—and with guns—in an overtly political parable from a writer whose work often has a political edge. "Actress in the House" is thus a pinnacle of Mr. McElroy's long career, and in some ways representative of it: inclusive, difficult, smart, unexpected. 

The stories in "Night Soul" will suggest all sorts of antecedents to readers interested in the literature of the last 50 years, particularly its edgier manifestations. "Annals of Plagiary" puts a new spin on Borges's "Pierre Menard, Author of the Quixote." "The Man with the Bagful of Boomerangs in the Bois de Boulogne" invokes the long tradition of French experimentalism. ("Wo men and Men" in truth, for all the understandable comparisons the novel has drawn to Gaddis et al., has a more direct connection to Georges Perec's "Life: A User's Manual"—both involve characters whose connection is geographical rather than relational.) Finally, the premier achievement in "Night Soul," the masterful family drama "Particle of Difference," about a forgotten jazz pianist, seems to point directly back to Mr. McElroy himself: a man working in an underappreciated medium, with great heart and soul, and little reward beyond the occasional nod of appreciation.

—Mr. Kamine, who writes about fiction for the Times Literary Supplement, was the production manager of "The Fighter" and co-producer of Jonathan Demme's "Neil Young Trunk Show."