  Boeing Co.
BA


-0.35
%




 said Tuesday it now plans to deliver its first 787 Dreamliner sometime in the third quarter, more than three years behind schedule. 

Boeing's long-awaited 787 Dreamliner has been dogged with problems. See stock price, key events and, in red, production delays.

The latest delivery setback—the seventh official delay—for the Dreamliner program comes more than two months after an in-flight electrical fire and subsequent emergency landing forced Boeing to halt flight testing across its fleet of six test Dreamliners. The first delivery had been expected next month. 

"The revised timeline for first delivery accommodates the work we believe remains to be done to complete testing and certification of the 787," said  Scott Fancher, general manager of the 787 program.

 Delays are a natural part of the airplane supply business. They promise an unreasonable delivery date to lock up customers before a competitor can deliver an aircraft. The trick is to not have too long of a delay that it impacts your credibility. 

—Steve Swenson

The wide-body jet's first customer, Japanese carrier  All Nippon Airways Co.
ALNPY


5.35
%




, said it hasn't received delivery-schedule information beyond its first 787. It's possible the airline may this year receive only one of its 55 Dreamliners on order.

All Nippon said the update was a "positive step," but the airline has been irritated by the ongoing delays, many of which are a result of production and supply-chain problems that have stretched back for years. "The aircraft is now three years late and has been delayed seven times so we will be looking to Boeing for assurance that it can meet this latest delivery date," a spokeswoman said.

The airline also said it would press Boeing for a full delivery schedule so it can "prepare properly for the introduction of the new aircraft and plan our future route network and fleet expansion strategy."

The delays have been highly embarrassing for ANA as well as Boeing. ANA already has its livery painted on one of the six test-flight planes and has likely received hefty concessions from Boeing as a result of the mishaps.

Boeing hasn't said how many 787s it expects to deliver in 2011, but it has orders for 847 Dreamliners from 56 customers.

The latest delay to the program leaves a slew of other airlines with early 787 delivery slots in continuing limbo, too. Lan Airlines, Royal Air Maroc and Air India had all expected to receive planes in 2011. Other early customers include Continental Airlines, a unit of  United Continental Holdings Inc.,
UAL


-2.57
%




 and Japan Airlines International Co.

On Monday, Chicago-based Boeing restarted the flight test certification program, resuming the long process required by the Federal Aviation Administration to officially certify the planes for commercial use. In a statement, it said that it was "gradually returning individual airplanes to the flight test program" after installing interim hardware and software fixes to the electrical system.

Nearly 30 Dreamliners have already been built at Boeing's Everett, Wash., final assembly plant. They remain parked on the factory grounds and at the adjacent airport, awaiting not only the installation of engines, but in many cases, major re-work of the interiors and the planes' systems to get them ready for delivery.

Boeing has already paid more than $5 billion in penalties and delay concessions to airlines that have been forced to wait for their planes, requiring them to keep older aircraft in service and, in many cases, to delay new routes that were designed specifically for the Dreamliner.

In the U.S., for instance, Continental is planning to inaugurate nonstop Houston to Auckland service with its first 787.

The company already has recorded historic, multibillion dollar write-downs as a result of Dreamliner problems.

Boeing said it doesn't expect the latest announcement to have a material impact on its 2010 financial results and will discuss any impact on its 2011 financial guidance in an earnings conference call slated for Jan. 26.

The Nov. 9 fire in a major electrical panel underneath the cabin floor caused a series of cascading electrical failures as the plane was on final approach to the Laredo, Texas, airport after a routine test flight. That incident called into question Boeing's claims of extreme reliability for the Dreamliner's new state-of-the-art electrical system.

More than any other commercial aircraft, the largely carbon-fiber composite Dreamliner relies heavily on its electrical system to operate nearly everything on the plane. Boeing and electrical panel supplier Hamilton Sundstrand, a unit of  United Technologies Corp.
UTX


-0.04
%




, have worked feverishly to come up with a permanent hardware and software fix in the wake of the fire. That fix must be approved by the FAA before the plane can be certified.

Boeing has declined to comment on details of the fix or when it might be finalized.

The company is also working to fix other flight test issues, including excess condensation, or "rain in the plane," that has repeatedly occurred. It's also dealing with engine supplier  Rolls-Royce Group
RYCEY


0.98
%




 PLC as that company continues to implement a plan to tweak its Trent 1000 engines, which last summer suffered a major failure during ground testing in England.

Additionally, Boeing continues to struggle with issues surrounding its vast network of global suppliers. They have faced not only parts shortages and shipping delays, but widespread quality control issues that have required Boeing to spend time fixing completed parts once they've been delivered and installed on 787s awaiting completion at the Everett factory.

 Write to  Peter Sanders at peter.sanders@wsj.com and Doug Cameron at doug.cameron@dowjones.com 