On Friday Irish voters gave Fine Gael control of the Dáil. As the center-right party enters coalition talks with Labour, the biggest question before the new government will be how it will deliver its promise to relieve taxpayers of some of the burden of their banks' ongoing meltdowns. 

On the campaign trail, Fine Gael pledged to try to unload some of the banks' debts on the banks' private creditors. "I think it is an obscenity that you would in every instance expect the taxpayer to front up for what's happened in the banking system," Fine Gael leader Enda Kenny, likely Ireland's next prime minister, said last month. 

Indeed, the EU's €67.5 "Irish bailout" was always something of a misnomer. It was the creditors of Ireland's banks, not Irish taxpayers, who have received the benefit of, first, the Irish government's bank guarantees and, more recently, the EU's aid package. Irish taxpayers themselves have already shelled out more than €50 billion to keep their banks' creditors whole, and they're likely to need billions more to keep covering their losses. 

At this time last year, according to the Bank for International Settlements, German and French banks alone held some €45 billion in bonds from Ireland's banks. Unfortunately for Mr. Kelly and Irish taxpayers, much of that debt has since been shifted into official hands—either to the Irish government itself or to the European Central Bank, from which Irish banks have now borrowed €126 billion—that's roughly 91% of Ireland's 2009 GDP. 

It is here that the moral case for easing the terms of the Irish bailout resides. That bailout, and the guarantee from Dublin that preceded it, redounded chiefly to the benefit of the banks' foreign creditors, who represented some three-quarters of the money lent to the banks. Ireland, in other words, was merely the conduit for bailouts of Continental (and British) banks who stood to absorb large losses on their bets on Irish lenders. 

Fine Gael can't undo what the previous government has already done, but it could do a service to all European taxpayers by making it clear just who has benefited from these bailouts, and demanding a better deal for their own taxpayers.