In 2010, stocks retook territory not seen since the collapse of Lehman Brothers, as investors laid bets on stocks tied to emerging markets and commodities and—in the latter half of the year—began to wager heavily on the U.S. economy.

Read the complete  Year-End Review report .

U.S. blue chips ended the year up solidly, climbing above the point they were at before Lehman Brothers' collapse, but the ride there was anything but smooth

To be sure, challenges to the stock market lurk. U.S. unemployment will likely remain high in 2011, at least by historic standards. Housing remains soft. State and local governments shoulder hefty debt loads. Across the Atlantic, a sovereign-debt crisis continues to simmer. And Chinese policy makers are beginning to put the brakes on their economy, along with a slew of emerging markets trying to keep the lid on inflationary pressures.

Exposure to such emerging markets was crucial to the performance of U.S. stocks in 2010. Case in point:  Caterpillar Inc.,
CAT


0.98
%




 the highest flier in the Dow Jones Industrial Average last year. It jumped 64.3%, on the machinery giant's fast growth in emerging markets like China, India and Latin America as well as its ties to the metals and commodities its backhoes and diggers help mine.

"One of the trends that was true of the year before but continued on last year was the widening gap between developing-world growth and developed-world growth," said  Barry Knapp, managing director of equity research at Barclays Capital. "It definitely continued and was a major factor in what worked."

Indeed, it was a good year for heavy industrials writ large as the global economy began to chug forward, albeit with some fits and starts. The Standard & Poor's Industrial sector was the second-best performing area of the market, up 23.9%.

Slick technology issues spent plenty of time in the spotlight in 2010, especially  Apple Inc.,
AAPL


-0.04
%




 which rose 53.1%, thanks in part to the arrival of the iPad. Fellow tech highfliers  Netflix Inc.
NFLX


-0.71
%




 and  F5 Networks
FFIV


1.08
%




 ended the year atop the S&P 500, rising 219% and 146%, respectively. Perhaps less noticed was the index's bronze medal winner, truck-engine maker  Cummins Inc.
CMI


-0.25
%




 The Columbus, Ind., firm rose 140%, as investors cheered its exposure to Latin America and Asia.

Farm-equipment maker  Deere
DE


0.14
%




 & Co. was another strong industrial performer, finishing the year up 53.5%, as surging agricultural commodity prices buoyed farmer incomes.

A less obvious commodity-related play that ended near the top of the Dow industrials:  DuPont Co.
DD


-0.13
%




, which rose 48.1%. The chemical giant—which has an agriculture arm which sells seeds—surged in lock step with agricultural commodities as the market prepared for the Federal Reserve to begin a second-round of quantitative easing, or QE2, in the late summer and early fall.

Even more successful than industrials were consumer-discretionary stocks, with the S&P consumer-discretionary sector the best performing in the index, rising 25.7%. It began to pull ahead of the broader market in late August as reports of back-to-school spending came in better than expected, economic data improved and expectations for QE2 grew.

Consumer-discretionary stocks such as  McDonald's Corp.
MCD


0.36
%




—which also has a strong emerging-markets presence—rose 22.9%.  Ford Motor Co.
F


1.16
%




, which rose 67.9%, also helped power the sector higher. Ford, which has somewhat less exposure to emerging markets than  General Motors Co.
GM


0.28
%




, represents "a concentrated and highly levered bet on the recovery of U.S. light vehicle sales," Morgan Stanley auto analyst  Adam Jonas said in a note last year.

In another apparent bet on the U.S. recovery, small-cap stocks started surging as investors bought into riskier assets toward the end of the summer. The Russell 2000 index of small-capitalization stocks finished the year up more than 25.3%, besting other key indexes.

Some see the rise in the Russell 2000 as a reflection of optimism over the U.S. economy, as small-caps have more domestic exposure relative to the more global large-caps. At any rate, observers argue that U.S. economy will be the linchpin for stocks in 2011.

"In general it's been economic sensitivity, in particular U.S. economic sensitivity, which has pushed performance at the end of the year," said  Michael Shaoul, chief executive at brokerage firm Oscar Gruss. "I'd be fairly optimistic that there's future in that trade."

Others seem to share that optimism. In part that is due to the improving tenor of economic data releases. The $858 billion package of tax cuts and spending President Obama signed into law in December bolstered that optimism on the economy. The deal includes an extension of unemployment benefits, widely considered an effective form of economic stimulus.

Of course there are still potential risks to U.S. growth such as a soft housing market and heavily indebted state and local governments, and persistently high unemployment. For now, it seems investors expect the U.S. expansion to continue. "The debate over growth, at least for the short run, is pretty much over," said  Richard Berner, co-head of the global economics team at Morgan Stanley.

But how much will investors want to pay for earnings that such growth generates? 

Issues of profit margins and price-to-earning multiples seem almost quaint next to the global financial and macroeconomic crises investors faced in recent years. Yettsuch market fundamentals may well turn out to be the key to the future direction of stocks.

One could argue that current valuations for the S&P 500 don't look too stretched. Industry analysts expect roughly $96 in earnings for S&P 500 companies for the 2011 calendar year, according to Thomson Reuters data. At current levels, that puts a 13.1 price-to-earnings ratio, or multiple, on the S&P. Some analysts expect that multiple to move higher as investors become less enamored with bonds and more excited about riskier assets like stocks.

For instance, in their 2011 stock-market outlook in which they put a target of 1450 on the S&P 500, Goldman Sachs analysts wrote that they expect the multiple on the S&P 500 to rise to about 13.9 times expected forward earnings by the end of 2011. (By Goldman's count, the multiple was 12.6 when the forecast was issued in early December.) They note that historically price-to-earnings multiples averaged 16, when real interest rates—that is the difference between 10-year yields and inflation—hovered between 2% and 3%, which is what they forecast.

Others are less optimistic about the prospects for so-called multiple expansion. In his 2011 outlook,  Douglas Cliggott, U.S. equity strategist and a managing director at Credit Suisse Group, suggests that the market is close to a peak in profit margins.

"When we look back at prior profit cycles, P/E multiples tend to move down when the market perceives profit margins to be unsustainably high," he wrote in an email. As a gauge of profit margins, Mr. Cliggott looks to the Bureau of Economic Analysis' national income accounts definition of corporate profits, which in the third quarter showed roughly 13% of national income accruing to corporate profits. "Something like a 14% of income accruing to profit is as high as you ever get," Mr. Cliggott said. "We're not at the absolute peak right now but we're a heck of a lot closer to the peak than the bottom."

Other market observers also have been watching high profit-margin levels with concern. In a Dec. 28 note, analysts at Strategas Research Partners wrote "Profit margins are also at worrisome levels as companies have been forced to do more with less. One hopes that marginal increases in capital and labor expenses can continue to drive top-line growth—that's likely the story for 2011."

 Write to  Matt Phillips at matt.phillips@wsj.com 