‪Tel Aviv -- The Jerusalem municipality said on Wednesday it recently approved 14 new housing units in a former Israel police headquarters in East Jerusalem, widening the foothold of Jewish settlers in a predominantly Palestinian neighborhood.‬ 

‪The new units would strengthen Israeli claims to the Mount of Olives, located directly opposite the walls of Jerusalem's Old City and with a Jewish cemetery thousands of years old.‬

‪The units are located across the street from the Jewish settlement of Ma'aleh Zeitim, a fortress like complex with some 110 apartments in the middle of the Arab neighborhood of Ras al Amud.‬

‪The Obama administration has publicly clashed with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu over numerous Israel building projects in areas of Jerusalem claimed by Palestinians as the capital of a future state.‬

‪Mr. Netanyahu has been under pressure from settler groups this week to advance plans for hundreds of housing units in large settlements around the West Bank. Since the expiration of a 10-month freeze in housing starts in the West Bank at the end of September, Mr. Netanyahu nonetheless resisted advancing several new projects.‬

‪Israel claims the right to build throughout East Jerusalem, which it annexed. The international community did not recognize the move and considers Jewish neighborhoods there as settlements.

A spokesperson for Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu declined to comment.

On Feb. 17, a Jerusalem municipal planning board approved a plan to convert the former police building for residential use. The Jerusalem municipality said in a statement the project has passed all phases of authorization, and that the building is located on private land belonging to a Jewish trust. A final building permit has yet to be issued, the municipality said.

‪Advocates of Jewish settlement throughout East Jerusalem hope that site of the old police building will bolster Israel's presence on the Mount of Olives, which is directly opposite the Dome of the Rock mosque, the site of the ancient Jewish temple. 

‪``Outside of the Temple Mount, there is no more important neighborhood,'' said  Daniel Luria, a spokesman for Ateret Cohanim, a group which promoted the Ma'aleh Zeitim housing project across the street from the policy building. ``Hopefully in the future there will be more families.'' 

‪Critics of the authorization said the building is one of several projects by Jewish settlers in East Jerusalem aimed at torpedoing prospects for dividing city between Israel and the Palestinians. 

‪``If the government and the municipality weren't behind this, they couldn't achieve this,'' said  Joseph Alalu, a long term Jerusalem council member from the dovish Meretz party. ``The aim is very clear: they are trying to undermine'' a compromise.‬