HONG KONG—A behind-the-scenes power struggle for control of one of the world's biggest casino empires has burst into the open, revealing deep fissures in the family of ailing 89-year-old billionaire  Stanley Ho.

Opposing members of Mr. Ho's family brandished contradictory letters—purportedly signed by the patriarch—and publicly accused each other of trying to seize Mr. Ho's controlling 18% stake in  SJM Holdings Ltd.
SJMHF


-4.07
%




, the Hong Kong-listed operator of his flagship Macau casinos. The stake is estimated to be worth $1.7 billion.

Mr. Ho has a complicated family tree, which includes four women whom he and others refer to as his wives. Ownership of parts of his empire by the women and their children have complicated the outlook for SJM's succession.

At the center of the family feud are two of the most prominent and powerful businesswomen in Asia, part of the sprawling and occasionally brawling Stanley Ho clan. Mr. Ho has acknowledged 17 children from four different women, including one who died in 2004. Mr. Ho refers to his children's mothers as his wives, though it is unclear which—if any—of them are legally married to the gambling mogul. These four families form the core of the continuing fight.

This time, industry observers say the quarrel is being driven by resentment between wife No. 4 ,  Angela Leong, and  Pansy Ho, one of five children from his second family. A former dancer and local legislator, Ms. Leong holds an executive position in the family's flagship casino operation that was strengthened late last year when Mr. Ho gave her shares that boosted her stake to 8%, making her a top contender to control the casino business.

On the other side is Pansy Ho, widely regarded as the head of the second family faction. She has launched her own gambling franchise and is managing director of  Shun Tak Holdings Ltd., the listed property and real-estate firm founded by her father. Pansy's siblings Daisy and Maisy hold executive positions at Shun Tak as well. Pansy's brother,  Lawrence Ho, has set up a rival Macau casino. Together, those siblings form a block in the complicated holdings of Mr. Ho's empire. 

SJM Holdings didn't respond to requests for comment. The company said in a regulatory filing that the quarrel wouldn't affect its management or strategy.

Questions over Mr. Ho's legacy began when he fell ill in August 2009 and underwent brain surgery. He retreated from day-to-day management and began slowly doling out portions of his Byzantine holdings to his family.

Depending on which side wins, Ms. Leong could emerge with an even bigger stake and the upper hand in the casino. Or, the children of the second wife, Lucina Laam, could have a larger and possibly controlling block in SJM. Macau law forbids holding more than one casino license, so it is unclear whether Pansy Ho wants to take the reins of her father's business.

 Market Share: See a slideshow of Macau's gambling kings. 



A person close to the Ho family said Pansy aligned with Mr. Ho's low-profile third wife, Ina Chan, to counter Ms. Leong's rising power. In correspondence made public by his second and third families, Mr. Ho reaffirmed that he would make a gift of his stake in his casino empire to his second and third families. 

The release on Monday of regulatory filings showed Mr. Ho had split his own SJM stake roughly in two, with slightly less than half going to the children of the woman he considers his second wife and the rest to the woman known as his third wife, leaving Mr. Ho with nearly nothing.

But in a surprising reversal, lawyers claiming to represent Mr. Ho later denied he had ever authorized the restructuring of his holding company and accused the second and third families of having "hijacked" his shares without his knowledge and threatened to sue his children to get them back. Instead of a two-way split, Mr. Ho said in a letter provided by lawyers at his law firm, Oldham, Li & Nie, that he always planned to share his part of the company in four equal segments among the families. "This has always been my intention and wish," Mr. Ho wrote in a letter dated Jan. 5 that was provided by the law firm, and addressed to Daisy Ho, a daughter from his second wife.

Then on Tuesday, representatives of families two and three released personal communications from Mr. Ho and his four families to prove their claim to a controlling stake in Lanceford Co., a vehicle that holds nearly one-third of Sociedade de Turismo e Diversoes de Macau, the company that controls SJM. The holders in the stake stand to benefit from a gambling boom in Macau, where revenue is expected to rise some 30% this year to about $35 billion, compared with $7 billion on the Las Vegas Strip.

In the note, Mr. Ho complained to his daughter that she hadn't been returning his phone calls. "I have tried to call you and contact you through [text messages] and your secretary in order to come personally to explain to me what is going on. However, you have not responded so I have no other way but through this letter to command you to come to my house," he wrote.

Then, families two and three responded with a letter dated Jan. 7. In it, Daisy Ho replied to her father's allegations, addressing him as "Dear Dad."

"Firstly, I want to apologise for not being able to see you on Wednesday afternoon as I was very tied up," she wrote, adding that her sister and wife No. 3 did meet him later that evening, "and I am glad that any misunderstanding there might have been has been cleared up."

In another twist, early Wednesday morning in Hong Kong, representatives of Mr. Ho's second and third wives released two Chinese-language letters, one of them purportedly handwritten by Mr. Ho on Tuesday, saying that the tycoon was firing the law firm Oldham, Li & Nie and that the share transfer hadn't been made under any undue influence and that the splitting of his empire was final.

"The recent stir over the Ho family has caused an uproar. I think it's time to put an end to this," he said in the handwritten note. "Family matters should not involve lawyers, and suing one another in the courts is troublesome! I also hope the media will not misunderstand. My health is very good, and there's no need for anyone to be concerned."

See a timeline of Mr. Ho's casinos business.

In the other statement, Mr. Ho said his decision to divide the Lanceford stake was his alone. "Under no circumstances, did I receive any pressure or orders from anyone," the statement said.

Stanley Ho couldn't be reached for comment. Ms. Leong during an interview with a local radio station declined to comment on the latest power struggle but added that Mr. Ho was in good health and clear-minded. Other family members either couldn't be reached or declined to comment. Representatives of Oldham, Li & Nie couldn't be reached for comment.

Trading in SJM shares was suspended Tuesday. Royal Bank of Scotland Group PLC gambling analyst  Philip Tulk said shares in SJM, which have more than tripled in the past year, could fall when trading resumes. "Ever since I've been covering this company, the concern has been about Stanley's succession plan. Those worries seemed to be going away, but now they look like they could come back with a bang," Mr. Tulk said.

The verbal back and forth could develop into a protracted legal battle among members of the tycoon's family, said  Billy Ma, a lawyer specializing in probate and succession cases and a member of the Hong Kong Law Society's Probate Committee. "Any move at this stage can potentially unleash a chain of lawsuits. This is about a huge amount of money," he said.SJM's properties include 20 casinos, four slot-machine lounges and two hotels.

—Polly Hui  and Jonathan Cheng contributed to this article.

 Write to  Shai Oster at shai.oster@wsj.com and Kate O'Keeffe at kathryn.okeeffe@dowjones.com 