Barely a week has passed since India's government promised to keep its spending under control. Already, this claim is in serious doubt.

One big threat comes from oil prices: Nymex crude oil futures for April settlement, at over $102 per barrel, have gained 4.5% in just this week. Of course India, like other Asian importers, isn't the only one facing a trade deficit pain. But it fares worse than its neighbors because of its policy of setting low market prices for most fuels to make them affordable and then compensating its oil refiners for some of their losses. 

When oil prices rise, so does that bill: Every $10 increase in the price of a barrel of crude oil costs New Delhi up to $3.3 billion, or 0.2% of the gross domestic product, assuming it compensates companies for one-third to half of the lost revenue, CLSA estimates.

 India Seeks Parliament Approval to Spend More 

So in predicting its budget deficit to equal just 4.6% of gross domestic product this year, New Delhi may have got its math wrong. That target-which is lower than 5.1% of GDP this year-is based in part on expectations that expenditures will rise by just 3.4% in the year starting in April. But the understatement of fuel-cap related subsidies means the shortfall could be higher by as much as 5.4%,  Morgan Stanley
MS


0.03
%




 says.

Oil doesn't impact expenditure alone. New Delhi is counting on solid tax collections to offset some of its spending, but that depends on the economy delivering strong growth in the coming year, and companies churning out big profits. 

Both these scenarios look uncertain: HSBC says the 9% economic growth target is too optimistic-the house expects 8.1% growth-and vulnerable to the fragile global recovery and the commodity price cycle. For companies, which don't benefit from subsidized fuel like consumers do, input cost pressures are mounting and passing them on to consumers remains difficult.

It means investors, in the bond markets in particular, may have cheered the budget too soon. Government bond prices have risen since the budget was announced, mainly because New Delhi set a lower-than-expected target for borrowing from the market.

Crude oil prices alone could douse this euphoria soon.

 Write to  Harsh Joshi at harsh.joshi@dowjones.com 