NEW YORK— Genworth Financial Inc.
GNW


1.17
%




 is pulling out of the business of selling variable annuities to consumers, a retirement-income product that caused losses to many insurers during the 2008-09 stock-market meltdown and whose profitability now is hurt by low interest rates. 

On Thursday, Genworth alerted stock brokerages, financial advisers and other distributors that it would discontinue sales of the annuities and would concentrate its efforts on life insurance, long-term-care insurance and other types of retirement-income products. 

Genworth shares rose 67 cents, or 4.9%, to $14.21 in 4 p.m. New York Stock Exchange composite trading Thursday, with more than three times the average daily volume changing hands. 

Genworth's move is the latest sign that "there will be fewer variable-annuity companies out there," but with more than a dozen insurers continuing to sell versions, there remains "plenty of consumer choice" for the time being, said  Scott Stolz, president of Raymond James Insurance Group. Longer term, he said, the question is how the product will evolve if low interest rates persist. 

Variable annuities are a tax-advantaged form of investing in mutual funds. For an added fee at many insurers, investors buy downside protection: If funds perform poorly, the investor can receive lifetime payments of a guaranteed-minimum amount. 

Before the 2008-09 market slide, life insurers competed to offer more generous guarantees for their variable annuities, but the promises of lifetime income payments strained insurers' finances amid the turmoil. Now, low interest rates are wreaking havoc on some designs, because insurers back up the products with financial hedging programs that are tied to interest rates. The lower rates go, the costlier the products are to insurers, according to consultants and analysts. 

Genworth was a top-20 seller of variable annuities as recently as 2008, with $2.3 billion in sales that year. But it has fallen out of the leaders' pack since then, a period of major change for the industry as insurers retooled their offerings to make them less generous to investors, and thus less risky to the insurers. 

Industrywide, sales of variable annuities have fallen to about $102.8 billion for the first nine months of last year, down from $155.6 billion for all of 2008, according to industry research firm Limra. The market has been concentrated at giants  Prudential Financial Inc.
PRU


0.16
%




;  MetLife Inc.
MET


0.14
%




; and Jackson National Life, a unit of  Prudential PLC. 

Two big variable-annuity sellers,  Hartford Financial Services Group Inc.
HIG


1.33
%




 and  Lincoln National Corp.
LNC


-0.66
%




, accepted money, since repaid, from the government's Troubled Asset Relief Program as they dealt with the fallout from the financial crisis, including the damage to their variable-annuity business.  ING Groep
ING


0.71
%




 NV, meanwhile, took a bailout from the Dutch government and is being forced to spin off its insurance operations. 

Genworth started informing distributors today about the changes to its strategy, spokesman  Tom Topinka said. He said the company plans to work with its distributors to discontinue new sales of variable annuities by the end of the first quarter in most cases. 

In a release, Genworth said it expects to record a pretax charge of about $12 million in the first quarter related to severance, outplacement support for affected employees and other costs associated with this action. 

Analyst  David Havens at Nomura Securities said in a note the change "shouldn't have major credit or financial implications for" Genworth, but it indicates the company "is moving on and is streamlining its operations." 

Mr. Topinka wouldn't comment on why Genworth shares traded higher Thursday. 

 Write to  Leslie Scism at leslie.scism@wsj.com 