LONDON—Moves in the yen's exchange rate in the immediate run-up to Standard & Poor's downgrade of Japan's sovereign-debt rating raised some eyebrows in global currency markets Thursday.

In the minutes before the release, at 4:53 p.m. Tokyo time, the dollar reversed its declines against the yen and suddenly began rising. The volume of trading also picked up in those moments, traders noted. 

The gains were small—the dollar rose from about 82.20 yen to almost 82.40 yen ahead of the time the news was released—but noticeable. 

When the official announcement was made, a shock moved through currency markets. The yen fell hard and the dollar jumped. 

Other currencies perceived as risky—such as the euro and the Australian dollar—also tumbled in a broad rush to safety by nervous investors. The Swiss franc, deemed a haven currency, rose.

In a note to clients Thursday, Citigroup said the dollar was attracting heavy selling against the yen in Tokyo trading hours, taking it down to the 82 yen area against the Japanese currency.

But the dollar "quickly looked bid," or in demand, at that point, the bank said, "almost as if someone knew what was about to happen."

While it caused some buzz in the currency markets in London and Tokyo, it gained little attention in the U.S., in part because the move was so small. 

Currency markets are known for being volatile. The markets move at such a breakneck pace, with such a huge range of sellers and buyers making up the enormous $4 trillion in daily flows, that it is close to impossible to tell what prompts anyone to trade at any point.

An S&P representative in London declined to comment directly on the talk, saying only that the downgrade announcement was released through the normal channels.

The odd trading in the dollar-yen comes two weeks after unusual trading was spotted in the foreign-exchange market ahead of an unexpectedly strong private-sector jobs report from payrolls processor Automatic Data Processing Inc. 

The trading on Jan. 5 raised suspicions that someone obtained the report ahead of its official release. 

In late trading in New York Thursday, the yen was at 82.8775 to the dollar. 

 Write to  Katie Martin at katie.martin@dowjones.com 