For a part-time author, Jed Rubenfeld has been popping up in the book pages quite a bit lately. The professor at Yale Law School just released his second novel, "The Death Instinct" (Riverhead). Like his 2006 debut, the international best-seller "The Interpretation of Murder," his new book is a well-plotted historical thriller, this time based on the 1920 bombing of Wall Street that killed 38 people. 

At the same time, Mr. Rubenfeld is currently a supporting character in another book, Amy Chua's "Battle Hymn of the Tiger Mother." Mr. Rubenfeld is married to Ms. Chua, whose memoir about raising the couple's two daughters sparked a debate over the tactics of strict parenting. (In the book, Mr. Rubenfeld is portrayed as the patient, more relaxed foil to his overachieving wife.)

Mr. Rubenfeld, 51, grew up in Washington, D.C., and has lived for two decades in Connecticut, writing fiction when he's not teaching or authoring law articles. He recently spoke with the Journal.



Why were you so interested in the 1920 bombing on Wall Street? 

I had never heard of it until I was doing legal research of my own on past terrorist acts in the United States. When I first read about it, I actually thought somebody was making it up. It was a terrorist bombing, around the corner from Ground Zero, on a September morning. But it's true. I was amazed to find out about it and equally amazed to find out we still don't know who did it. 



Why do you think the bombing is largely forgotten? 

I think there's a sense in which people want to forget about the dangers that they can't do anything about. Even now you're beginning to see people wanting to turn away from 9/11—a date that we all believed then, and still believe now, the country could never forget. And yet we're already seeing that we would prefer to focus on something else and not have to think about it, because the war on terrorism is frustrating. 



Did you harbor an interest in writing fiction before you taught law? 

I would have loved to be an actor if I had any talent at it. I went to Juilliard in the drama division for a couple of years. The Juilliard drama division is very hard to get into. The statistic they threw around at that time was they admitted 20 people out of 1,000 who applied, so somebody thought I had some talent—but they must have been mistaken. 



Has it been an interesting last few weeks in your house, given the huge attention your wife's memoir has received?

Amy's book has sparked an intense conversation, in this country and now around the world. I think that's a great thing. I don't myself like talking much about my family in public. I can say one thing to you on the record: Amy Chua is a great mom. Her daughters love her and whatever you might have read or heard, both Sophia and Lulu, my daughters, as anybody who knows them will tell you, are strong, confident girls who are doing great. That's what's important to me. 



If you wrote your own parenting memoir, how would it differ from your wife's book? 

Number one: I would never write a memoir of my own. And number two: I'm in complete agreement with all the values by which Amy and I tried to raise our kids. 



Do you foresee a time when you only write novels?

Absolutely not. I see myself as a law professor. That's my job, that's my career, and I have a hard time thinking of myself as a writer. I was very lucky with "The Interpretation of Murder"; that book sold over a million copies. But it never tempted me to give up being a law professor at Yale Law School. 



Are you working on another book? 

I'm well into a book. But it's a law book. I'll be lucky if six people buy it and in that six I'm counting my family. I wish that more people read my law books, but one has to be realistic about that. You hope that a few people will read them and it might change the way people think about certain legal issues and eventually make a difference in the way courts decide cases. 