LONDON—A pair of linked exhibitions at the Wellcome Collection looks at the relations between superstition, magic and religion. "Infinitas Gracias: Mexican miracle paintings" are thank-yous to a Roman Catholic saint, usually done on small tin roof tiles or plaques. They depict the local iconic representation of the saint, whose miraculous intercession has cured the donor's terminal illness, restored his or her sight or severed limb, or led to the conception of a child—with a narrative of the otherwise inexplicable happening.

Though often made by "professional" ex-voto artists, the level of skill is seldom high. But these votives from the 18th century to the present day, though they make us smile at their naïve reattribution of cause and effect in nature, rarely fail to be touching. Best of all is the entire wall of contemporary ex-voto artifacts—pinned-up wedding-dresses, drawings on plastic takeaway plates—from a church in Guanajuato; and a filmed interview with a woman convinced that her favorite saint has performed a genuine miracle by improving her tortillas.

In another gallery, London artist Felicity Powell looks at the superstitious/magical beliefs of Edwardian working-class Londoners, by making a wonderful display of Edward Lovett's collection of 1400 amulets and lucky charms. "Charmed Life: The solace of objects" shows that things aren't always all that rational in this country either.

At the Whitechapel Gallery is a riveting selection by historian Simon Schama of works from the British Government Art Collection, "Travelling Light." An exemplary booklet accompanies it, in which Mr. Schama gives his reasons for his choices, sometimes theoretical, sometimes biographical, and often playful—but always remarks that make you look at the work more closely. Star of the show: Bloomsbury Group earth-mother Vanessa Bell's "Byzantine Lady" (1912). It isn't a particularly good painting, but the roll-call of ambassadors who have borrowed it for their embassies is astonishing.

The show's full of treats: Howard Hodgkin's paradoxical "Mud on the Nile" (1993), Leonardo Guzzardi's portrait of a diminished, battle-weary Horatio Nelson (1799) and Grayson Perry's hilarious, self-referential "Map of an Englishman" (2004).

 "Infinitas Gracias" and "Charmed Life" until Feb. 26; www.wellcomecollection.org  

 "Travelling Light," until Feb. 26; www.whitechapelgallery.org  

 Write to  Paul Levy at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 