TOKYO—Japanese airlines cancelled hundreds of flights, grounding thousands of passengers, while other airlines diverted or suspended flights bound for Tokyo Friday after the massive earthquake struck northeast Japan. 

The quake, Japan's worst, caused untold death and damage, triggering a devastating tsunami in coastal areas and disrupting communications and power supply in the worst-hit areas. The death toll stood at 44 based on the latest estimates but was expected to rise. 

Tokyo's major airports halted flights, though Haneda Airport was later reported to have reopened several runways. Operations at Narita airport remained suspended late Friday. All Tokyo-area trains were halted, and the shinkansen bullet train service in the quake-torn areas has been suspended. 

Japan's  All Nippon Airways Co.
ALNPY


4.20
%




 said 131 domestic and international flights were cancelled, grounding 32,700 passengers. Including flights which changed destinations, the earthquake affected 162 flights and 37,800 passengers, ANA said. 

An ANA spokesman said all flights coming into and out of Tokyo's Narita airport and an airport in Sendai in northern Japan had been cancelled from 0900 GMT. But he said the Haneda airport in Tokyo is partially operating for takeoff and landing. 

Japan Airlines said that 27 of its flights had changed destinations, affecting 5,290 passengers, while it was still calculating the number of flight cancellations. 

  Cathay Pacific Airways Ltd.
CPCAY


-1.38
%




 said it expects flights to Japan to continue to be affected in the coming days. The Hong Kong-based carrier said in a statement two of its flights to Tokyo's Narita Airport from Hong Kong were diverted to Nagoya and Osaka on Friday, while a flight to Nagoya from Taipei was diverted to Osaka. 

As of 0900 GMT, Airport Authority Hong Kong, which operates the city's airport, said two flights to Tokyo that were scheduled to depart Friday have been delayed to Saturday, while another flight was canceled. 

British Airways, part of International Consolidated Airlines Group SA, cancelled two flights to Tokyo from London. Two flights from Japan to the U.K. departed before the earthquake struck, so the carrier has no planes in the country. 

A British Airways spokeswoman couldn't say when flights to Japan would resume, but said the carrier was keeping the situation under review. 

Singapore Airlines Ltd. diverted two flights bound for Tokyo to other airports after Tokyo's Narita Airport was temporarily shut down. 

The two flights, one from Singapore and one from Los Angeles, have landed safely at Fukoka and Haneda airports respectively, a spokeswoman for the airline told Dow Jones Newswires by telephone. 

South Korea's two major airlines also said they had suspended some flights to Japan. Korean Air Lines Co. initially halted flights to Narita and Haneda airports, but later said it had resumed flights to Haneda airport as of 0800 GMT. 

Asiana Airlines Inc. said it has stopped flights to Narita, Haneda and Sendai airports for now. 

  Malaysian Airline System Bhd. said flights to Narita and Haneda airports would be disrupted with one Narita-bound flight already diverted to Taipei. 

"We have received notification from the airport authorities to suspend our flights in and out of Narita Airport and Haneda Airport," Malaysia Airlines Director of Operations, Captain  Azharuddin Osman said in a statement. "We will only be able to confirm our flight schedules once we receive clearance from the relevant civil aviation authorities. 

"It is likely that flights to Japan may continue to be affected in the coming days. We will monitor the situation closely, especially the operation status of the affected airports," he added. 

Franco-Dutch airline Air France-KLM hadn't decided whether to operate two services from Europe to Japan Friday. One flight to Tokyo was diverted to Osaka. 

At  Deutsche Lufthansa AG
DLAKY


1.29
%




, one flight to Japan was postponed, spokesman  Michael Lamberty said. There were no reports of Lufthansa employees affected, he added. 

Its Swiss unit still was planning to operate a flight to Japan later Friday. 

—Joanne Chiu in Hong Kong, Kyong-Ae Choi in Seoul, Gaurav Raghuvanshi in Singapore and Jonathan Buck in London contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Hiroyuki Kachi at hiroyuki.kachi@wsj.com 