 Pix N' Love Rush 

Grabbing gold coins for points is a task as old as gaming itself and, accordingly, the chunky, retro pixel art of "Pix N' Love Rush" is straight out of your neighbor's Atari 2600 you coveted so much. However, the translucent neon lighting—which shifts from gold and purple, to red and blue, and so on—is decidedly more modern. You collect tasty "plus" coins while avoiding flying enemies, the color palette morphing as you rack up combinations with consecutive grabs. It's a trippy, visual treat, but beware: Coins and harmless "good" bats can look an awful lot like their combo-wrecking counterparts, depending on the color scheme. It can be frustrating to start, but combine the iridescent eye candy with tight controls, and you'll be hooked.  From $1, available on iPhone, iPad 

 League of Evil 

If you played one, you ended up playing them all: "League of Evil," with its blocky, Crayola-colored characters and double-jumping action, looks like a dead ringer for tried-and-true classics like "River City Ransom," "Ninja Gaiden" and a whole slew of addictive 8-bit side-scrollers. There's just one big difference: Expect a lot of trial and error. Although your bionic-armed secret agent can pummel foot soldiers and hapless evil scientists with ease, there's no health bar, so he's also instantly splattered by everything from electrified spikes to enemy peashooters. Back in the good old days, you'd quickly run out of lives, but here? Gamers these days being a bunch of softies, they just let you try, try again.  $2, available on iPhone 

 Karoshi 

"Karoshi" is derived from a Japanese word meaning "death from overwork"…so that should tell you something about this rather demented yet perversely charming puzzle game. In it, your character, Mr. Karoshi, decides that the only solution to his soul-crushing corporate drone-dom is to, um, off himself. Achieving your objective is harder than it sounds, though: The traditional dangers are turned on their head, as harmless walls, pits and innocuously bouncy "enemies" block you from the sweet embrace of spikes, electric fields and flamethrowers. Suicide has never been this hard! OK, so it's not exactly the most positive message, but take one look around your own office, and damned if you don't relate to the poor, cubicled cube-head just a little. $1, available on iPhone 

—Dennis Tang