WASHINGTON—For 62 years, the mahogany-paneled Town & Country Lounge has been a metaphor for the capital itself: a clubby haven for unfashionable elites, with plenty going on in the shadows. 

In 1948, the year the bar opened at the Mayflower Hotel here, Republicans celebrated—briefly—Thomas E. Dewey's defeat of Harry Truman. In 2008, liberals toasted there before running six blocks to the White House to celebrate Barack Obama's win. The Town & Country is where many an over-served lawmaker was given what the wait staff discreetly calls "the yellow light," a soft drink on the house and the offer of a taxi home. 

On Saturday, the Town & Country will shake its last martini and close its doors for good. And in what denizens say is a final insult, the lounge will be turned into a Thomas Pink haberdasher. 

This week a Weimar atmosphere has prevailed. A silver-haired woman danced the Twist to tunes played Tuesday night by longtime pianist Dan Ruskin.

A new bar—chic, not patrician—will move in near Pink's current digs across the lobby, sandwiched between a new restaurant and a cavernous event space.

Washington is aghast. "As if we need more overpriced shirt stores here," said John McKechnie, director of congressional affairs at the National Credit Union Administration.

The bar has long been a place to spot the rich, famous and infamous, though its policy is to not name names. Managers quietly acknowledge that former New York Gov. Eliot Spitzer imbibed in the bar before his assignations with a prostitute in room 871. Former Irish Prime Minister Bertie Ahern hoisted a few pints here every St. Patrick's Day during his 11 years in charge. 

"This is a problem," Mr. Ahern said of the closing. "I must say, I like the tradition of old-style pubs."

London's Sunday Times ranked the Town & Country on its list of "star bars" alongside Los Angeles's Polo Lounge, the Hotel Nacional's bar in Havana and Harry's New York Bar in Paris.

One reason is Sambonn "Sam" Lek, head bartender since the Carter administration, who has kept Washington's boozy secrets on the 5 p.m. to 2 a.m. shift. He can tell Republicans from Democrats by their drink orders (Republicans favor mixed drinks, Democrats, wine and beer.) He can mix any drink—allegedly he's the only barman in the city who knows how to make a proper Jack Rose (applejack, grenadine and lime juice), a cocktail ordered in Ernest Hemingway's "The Sun Also Rises."

When patrons' political arguments get too heated, Mr. Lek distracts them with magic tricks. He says he can remove the bra from a woman without using his hands, a maneuver he won't try without permission. A green-light was granted Wednesday night. "No no, too crowded," he said, and levitated a $20 bill instead.

"Whoa—huh!" said James Jackson, a 30-year-old first-timer at the bar. "I'm kind of upset this place is going away, now that I've found it."

Some of Washington's youth have come to prefer bars without the old-school feel, like the 18th Street Lounge, an artsy rooftop bar furnished with mismatched make-out couches. The older, expense-account crowd has the sumptuous Off the Record lounge in the Hay-Adams Hotel, or the Willard Hotel's Occidental bar, its walls hung with grainy photos of dead diplomats.

Everybody has an opinion of the Town & Country and a theory to explain its loss. Some gripe about the prices, the fustiness or, before hardwood floors were installed a year ago, the gamey carpeting. Others speculate the place suffered when the George W. Bush administration brought in a slew of teetotalers.

Keith McClinsey, the Mayflower's marketing director and the author of a book about its history, said the bar's replacement is part of a $5 million lobby renovation, the Mayflower's first since the 1980s. Mr. Lek will stay, but his duties may change based on the new bar's focus. 

Marriott International Inc., which runs the Mayflower, didn't announce the lounge's closure until Tuesday. Its final night will pass without fanfare.

"We like to call it the home of the $15 port," said Joe Galushka, a Federal Aviation Administration employee from New Jersey who travels to D.C. regularly on business. "The last big name I saw in there was [conservative pundit] Bill Kristol, partying with a gang of interns," Mr. Galushka said.

"I'm sure what he means is that I was mentoring some future political leaders and promising journalists," Mr. Kristol said.

 Write to  Elizabeth Williamson at elizabeth.williamson@wsj.com 