What private-equity honchos once received from initial public offerings: instant cash, heady gains and quick exits from their investments.

What they likely will get from a coming surge of IPOs: muted initial gains, help reducing staggering debt loads and hope of finally handing some cash back to investors.

Private-equity shops are set to unleash a wave of public offerings of companies they control, beginning with this week's expected IPO of Nielsen Holdings BV—the largest private-equity-backed IPO in the U.S. in nearly four years.

The last flood of such IPOs, from 2004 to 2006, resulted in annual returns of about 35% for the leveraged-buyout firms and their investors, say people involved in those deals.

This time around, investors in LBO firms are especially eager for profits. Many firms have handed back only small amounts of cash to investors in funds launched around 2006. But the gains, while decent, stand to be more meager than in the past.

"We're very focused" on seeing private-equity firms return cash from earlier funds, said  John Morris, a managing director at Harbourvest Partners LLC, which invests in big LBO firms like  KKR
KKR


0.38
%




 & Co. and  Blackstone Group
BX


-0.15
%




 LP.

The stakes are high, because firms like KKR, Carlyle Group LP and Apollo Global Management LLC are expected to try to raise new funds in the next year. Coming IPOs "will be key to developing investors' appetite" in new buyout funds, Mr. Morris said.

Here is the problem: Most of these companies were purchased at the top of the market, before financial markets cracked in 2008. Many piled on huge amounts of leverage as part of their deals. As a result, a number of the coming deals likely will use proceeds of any IPO to pay down debt rather than reward private-equity investors.

Indeed, two of the first companies expected to go public, Nielsen and medical-device company Tournier BV, purchased by Warburg Pincus in 2006, say they will use any cash raised to pay down debt, some of it held by private-equity backers, rather than lavish big rewards on LBO investors. That also was the plan of Harrah's Entertainment Inc., the world's largest casino operator by revenue, which is owned by Apollo and TPG and shelved an IPO last year. That deal could return to the market in 2011.

"We'll see more deleveraging events that don't result in cash back to investors," said  Erik Hirsch, chief investment officer of Hamilton Lane LLC, a large investor in private-equity firms. "A lot of these companies have a lot of debt to pay down."

Nielsen is a sign of coming deals that will result in respectable, though not outsize, gains. In the summer of 2006, a consortium of buyout specialists, including KKR, Carlyle, Blackstone and Thomas H. Lee Partners LP, paid more than $4 billion for Nielsen, then called VNU NV, which tracks consumer behavior, such as television viewing and Internet use.

To improve operations, the owners brought in new management to sell troubled magazines Billboard and The Hollywood Reporter. They expanded Nielsen's overseas business and pushed it into new media, including a joint venture with Facebook Inc. Revenue has grown, and earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization is up more than 50% since the purchase.

Now, the company is selling 21% of itself as part of its expected IPO. But all the money from the offering will be used to pay down Nielsen's $8.6 billion debt load, much of which was piled on as part of the LBO.

Based on the midpoint of the expected offering price, Nielsen's equity will be worth $7.3 billion after the deal. As such, the 79% stake the private-equity giants will hold after the IPO will be worth about $5.77 billion. The firms will score paper gains on their original investment of about $1.7 billion over the past four and a half years, or an annual return of about 9.5%.

That handily beats the .07% gain for the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index during that period. 

And the investors will hold on to their stake in Nielsen and hope it rises in value. But for now, the gains are less than the annual gains of more than 20% many investors say is their goal when they lock up money with LBO firms.

Other coming IPOs, such as HCA Holdings', could be more lucrative. Based on dividends already paid out by the largest U.S. hospital operator and recent valuations placed on the company by holders like KKR, the buyout firm has scored gains amounting to two times the approximately $1.3 billion KKR originally paid to buy a 25% stake in the company. Bain Capital LLC and  Merrill Lynch
C


0.72
%




 also were major participants in the buyout.

But the companies likely to go public soon, according to Renaissance Capital, such as BankUnited Inc., Kinder Morgan Inc. and Toys "R" Us Inc., are the best in the private-equity inventory. The cupboard remains stuffed with deals that for now have negative or very meager returns, including TXU, Clear Channel, Harrah's and Univision.

"Given the scale of some of these businesses and the amount of leverage, we'll see some [private-equity firms] accessing public markets to pay down debt," says Mr. Hirsch of Hamilton Lane. "We're thrilled that companies a lot of people once wrote off are going to go public. Now the question is, when will investors get their money back?"

 Write to  Gregory Zuckerman at gregory.zuckerman@wsj.com 