TOMIOKA-MACHI, Fukushima Prefecture—Friday's giant earthquake and tsunami have caused hardship for many Japanese in the past few days. Those who live and work near the star-crossed Fukushima nuclear power facility have borne an even greater burden.

Colliding plates under earth's surface make Asia Pacific one of the most tectonically active region on earth.



Many evacuees left their homes for a refugee center located in a seaside town in the shadow of the two plants, known as Fukushima No. 1 and Fukushima No. 2.

But then, as the reactor struggled to contain damage from the tsunami, the local government urged them to another facility 10 kilometers away from the plant. Later that evening, after an explosion at the plant, the central government asked them to relocate again—this time 20 kilometers away.

A contingent of about a dozen or so senior town officials stayed behind at the makeshift facility in Tomiokamachi, which had run out of food and water earlier in the day. After watching a group of mostly younger officials prepare to depart, they grimly donned bright yellow protective body suits with air intake hoods at about 3:15pm local time. 

Two of these officials spoke with The Wall Street Journal, whose reporters left with the last group of evacuees, mostly lower-level municipal employees. 

"What else is there to say?" said Hideo Sato, department head of general affairs for the town. "You had better leave now."

The town had been overwhelmed by a record 8.9-magnitude earthquake, followed by a seven-meter tsunami 30 minutes later, and then evacuated due to unspecified problems at the nuclear plant. 

"This was way beyond our contingency efforts," said Shiro Tanaka, head of the town's planning department. "We never anticipated all three happening in succession."

The tsunami that hit the town destroyed a protective sea wall and raced about one kilometer inland, "wiping out" about 80 homes, Mr. Tanaka said. Yet he added that the town had counted only two dead and some nine others missing.

Tomiokamachi was eager for more help, but received only a token visit by two advance Japanese Self Defense Forces members and no help from the central government. Instead, it relied on briefings from Tokyo Electric Power, which owns and operates both plants.

"We had to do it all by ourselves," Mr. Sato said, referring to the evacuation.

As in much of northeastern coastal Japan after the twin blows of a massive earthquake and tsunami, the town had no fixed-line or mobile phone service late Friday or Saturday.

The local officials had organized the evacuation of some 10,000 area residents earlier Saturday from the community center next to the nuclear plants. They were moved to a shelter in the mountain town of Kawauchi, about 10 kilometers away.

The last of a dozen buses filled with women and children departed around 2 p.m. for a more distant shelter in a crowded junior high school. 

While the town officials seemed unsure of exactly what the problem was at the plant hit with the explosion, they were aware its internal temperaturee had been rising, and worried the same fate might befall the Fukushima No. 2 plant.

Several local officials involved in the town's evacuation effort said the two nuclear plants, which send all of the power they generate south to Tokyo, had never been problematic before. Some said this may have led town officials into a false sense of complacency.

 Write to  Chester Dawson at chester.dawson@wsj.com and Yoree Koh at yoree.koh@wsj.com 