Freddie Mac reported net income of $676 million during the first quarter, its strongest performance since the company was taken over by the government in 2008.

The mortgage-finance giant paid $1.6 billion to the government and didn't ask the U.S. Treasury for any new aid for the first time in more than a year. 

The report could signal that Freddie, buoyed by U.S. job growth, has turned the corner after reporting a string of losses in 13 of the previous 14 quarters. 

The improvement stems from a decline in new mortgage defaults and from better results on mortgages where payments have been modified. Freddie and its larger sibling, Fannie Mae, have also tightened up loan standards since 2009. Those newer loans are replacing riskier loans that the companies bought or guaranteed as the housing boom turned to bust.

"We're encouraged by the trends," said Ross Kari, Freddie's chief financial officer. But he added, "we're not putting up a 'mission accomplished' sign on the front of the building either."

Continued improvement depends partly on the future of home prices. Declining home prices will lead to bigger losses because the company must sell its bloated inventory of homes at reduced prices. And any further deterioration in the economy would also reverse the recent improvement in delinquencies.

Freddie reported Wednesday that the volume of nonperforming loans on its books fell for the first time in more than four years. About 3.6% of loans guaranteed by Freddie were 90 days or more past due in March, the lowest level in 18 months, helping to reduce its provision for loan losses by $1.1 billion from the fourth quarter.

In recent months, the bottom lines at Freddie and Fannie have fared better than even the "best-case" estimates made by the firms' federal regulator last fall. The Federal Housing Finance Agency projected in October that Freddie Mac would need between $7 and $20 billion in aid for the last half of 2010. Instead, the company needed $600 million over that span.

The federal government took over Fannie and Freddie in 2008 and has agreed to pump unlimited sums to prop the companies up and keep mortgage markets from collapsing. So far, taxpayers are on the hook for around $133 billion. 

In exchange, the government receives preferred shares that pay a 10% dividend. Consequently, even after the firms stop losing money, they may still have to ask the government for funds to make those payments to the Treasury. At the current rate, Freddie must pay the government $1.6 billion each quarter and Fannie must pay $2.3 billion.

The payments, which were structured by the Bush administration when it placed the companies into conservatorship, were designed to force Congress to overhaul the companies and to effectively wipe out the firms' shareholders.

 Write to  Nick Timiraos at nick.timiraos@wsj.com 