SYDNEY— Woodside Petroleum Ltd.
WOPEY


0.69
%




 selected  Peter Coleman, a 27-year veteran of  Exxon Mobil Corp.
XOM


-0.42
%




, as its new chief executive, showing how energy companies increasingly prize expertise in major natural-gas developments. 

Mr. Coleman—a surprise selection as successor to  Don Voelte at Australia's second-largest oil and natural-gas producer by output after  BHP Billiton Ltd.—will take the reins on May 30 as Woodside faces several challenges to its ambition of capitalizing on rapidly growing demand in Asia for cleaner fuels. 

His priority will be ensuring that Woodside's flagship 14 billion Australian dollar (US$14.97 billion) Pluto liquefied-natural-gas project off the coast of Western Australia state starts up this year without further delays and striking a deal with rival producers to process their gas through Pluto. Mr. Coleman also faces a deadline next year to decide on construction of the US$30 billion-plus Browse liquified-natural-gas, or LNG, project. 

Rapid industrialization in Asia and global concerns over climate change are transforming the energy industry, prompting companies like Woodside and Exxon to bet billions of dollars on natural gas playing a critical role in meeting the world's future energy needs.  Chevron Corp.
CVX


-1.37
%




 is developing five multibillion-dollar gas projects in the Asia-Pacific region that will ship supplies to major economies like China and Japan. 

Mr. Coleman's appointment was made against a backdrop of persistent speculation that Perth-based Woodside is a takeover target for BHP Billiton, which has made no secret of its desire to grow its oil-and-gas unit. BHP last month quashed speculation that it was preparing a bid. 

Woodside hopes Mr. Coleman, a 51-year-old Australian, can draw on his involvement in the US$15 billion Exxon-led PNG LNG development to push forward its own pipeline of LNG projects. PNG LNG—the largest-ever foreign investment in Papua New Guinea—is arguably the most challenging of the big LNG projects planned in Australia and Southeast Asia. 

Access to the resource in Papua New Guinea's remote highlands region involved complex negotiations with tribal leaders, while infrastructure such as pipelines needs to be built over rugged terrain just to reach the processing terminal at the coast. 

"While Coleman is not likely to be well-known by the Australian market, his extensive operating career and solid development experience are likely to be viewed favorably," Macquarie Group said in a note Thursday. "In addition, given he is an external hire, he is likely to provide a fresh approach to the challenges facing Woodside's LNG growth projects." 

In addition to the Pluto and Browse projects in Western Australia, Woodside is operator of the proposed Sunrise LNG project, which is currently stalled due to a disagreement with the government of East Timor over how the gas should be processed. 

"The board is delighted that Mr. Coleman has agreed to lead Woodside through the company's next phase of growth. [He] brings to the role a wealth of experience across all aspects of the oil and gas industry," said Woodside Chairman  Michael Chaney in a statement. 

Mr. Coleman will be paid an annual salary of A$2.1 million, along with other incentives based on his performance. 

He will also receive A$3 million in stock to join Woodside, which the company said reflected various entitlements given up when he left Exxon Mobil. The one-time incentive will vest at a rate of one-third each year. 

The departing Mr. Voelte, an American, said in October that he intended to retire from Woodside after more than seven years with the company. 

 Write to  David Winning at david.winning@dowjones.com and Cynthia Koons at cynthia.koons@wsj.com 