There are about 40 ways to clink and toast at the Hurricane Club, a pan-Polynesian tiki restaurant and bar in the Flatiron district. Drinks are served in everything from fresh coconuts to Schott Zwiesel martini glasses. Glassware was sourced from eBay, Jamali Floral & Garden Supplies in the flower district and online retailer Tiki Farm.

The key to making the eclectic glassware work in a flashy restaurant is "to have some Pearl River and some high-end mixed in," said owner Michael Stillman. With more than 125 sipping rums and 250 seats in the dining room, there's a lot of glassware to wash. Mr. Stillman employs two dishwashers just for glassware and one guy is the dedicated coconut driller. At Riff Raff's, Mr. Stillman's new nightclub next door, there is bottle service—that is, a bottle of liquor served in large vessels, like a giant plastic tiki head, to be shared among friends.

A strawberry-and-mint cocktail, like a mojito, is served in a custom totumo bowl imported from Colombia. Mr. Stillman ordered 1,000 bowls and a woodworker sous chef tweaked the design so it can handle more wear and tear. "People really freak out when they see it," said Mr. Stillman. "It has this really natural, homemade feel"

Served in a coconut, this popular drink includes rum, coconut, cardamom and passionfruit. Those who order it cradle the coconut "like little babies, they love them," Mr. Stillman said jokingly. "It's weird and awkward and funny," something "you've seen in the movies."

A take on the classic Mai Tai is served in a clear glass tiki mug. Mr. Stillman thinks the glasses might have been purchased at Wal-Mart. He liked that the glasses didn't detract from the appearance of the cocktail. 

A white rum, cucumber and mint frozen concoction is Mr. Stillman's favorite drink. It is served in a double wall glass made by Bodum. "The glass gives it a more modern twist," he said.

This pretty "boat drink" made with white rum, hibiscus syrup and tropical fruits is served in what Mr. Stillman jokingly called a "bong glass. It's big, it's bright and it looks like a bong. What can be bad about that?"