 Paul Gigot: This week on "The Journal Editorial Report," Obama's oil panic. As gasoline hovers around $4 a gallon, the president points fingers and orders investigations. But will it bring down pump prices or bring up his poll numbers? And Big Labor clips Boeing's wings. The latest in their bid to stop a nonunion plant in South Carolina. Plus, the NFL draft gets under way amid the continuing battled between owners and players. Who's right and who's wrong in this $9 billion fight?

 Gigot: Welcome to "The Journal Editorial Report." I'm Paul Gigot. 

Well, Ben Bernanke may think it's temporary, but as gas prices climb past $4 a gallon in some places, Washington's energy panic is kicking in. In a letter to congressional leaders this week, President Obama called for eliminating what he says are unwarranted tax breaks for the oil industry. Even House Speaker John Boehner got in the act, saying that oil companies, quote, "ought to be paying their fair share." And Attorney General Eric Holder has launched an investigation into the oil run-up after the president suggested that illegal activity by traders and speculators may be responsible for rising pump prices. 

Joining the panel this week, Wall Street Journal columnist and deputy editor Dan Henninger, Washington columnist Kim Strassel and senior economics writer Steve Moore. 

So Steve, let's start with some basics here. We've got a big run-up on oil prices. I attribute it to rising demand around the world for oil, the Fed's weak-dollar policy. What else would you give as reasons for it? 

 Moore: Well, no question that the weak-dollar policy has had a huge impact on the higher price of oil. And by the way, Paul, as you know, you see that reflected in the higher price of all commodities now--

 Gigot: Right. 

 Moore: --silver, copper, cotton and so on. So that, I think, is the primary culprit. 

But the other, I think, villain here is the Obama administration. While it's sitting there criticizing and attacking the oil industry, every policy that this administration has pursued for the last three years has been anti-oil production and gas production. And there is no question in my mind that those kinds of policies increase the price of gas that you pay at the pump. 

 Gigot: Yeah, but Steve, I mean, the one thing I forgot to mention was this Mideast turmoil, which is also--

 Moore: Right. 

 Gigot: --I think, increasing prices by some extent. But I'll tell you what, in the short term, at least, it seems to me that there's nothing--that the Obama administration's policies can't make that big a difference in oil prices. The drilling--yes, they've been hostile to drilling. But what they haven't done--but you can't say those policies have really reduced the current supply of oil. 

 Moore: Well, no, but Paul, look, if we had been drilling for the last two or three years--or, by the way, the last 10 or 20 years--there's just no question we'd have a greater supply. We'd be importing less oil. But, look, there's no question that Ben Bernanke's monetary policy is really what explains this. You know, if you look over the last 25 years, the price of oil always rises when you have a weak-dollar policy. I mean, it's a very clear relationship.

 Gigot: Right, because oil is priced in dollars, and so--

 Moore: That's right. 

 Gigot: Oil is priced in dollars. It's a global commodity. So when the dollar is weak, anything priced in dollars tends to go up. 

 Moore: Well put. 

 Gigot: OK, so, Kim, what about the politics of this? The president taking on, blaming speculators and traders and so on. What's the strategy here? 

 Strassel: Well, it sounds like 2008 all over. Look, the administration has a major problem. As prices go up, Americans become even more unhappy with the economy. Right now, his approval ratings are going down, in particular on his handling of the economy. So they feel that they need to blame this on someone else and certainly make it look as though there are nefarious forces behind these price rises. So the first thing is to point your fingers at speculators. This is what Democrats did back in 2008. It's a lousy argument. Actually, the existence of the markets out there, actually helps improve the liquidity of the oil market, probably keeps the prices lower. Their new thing, though, which is mind-boggling--

 Gigot: So, you're saying--wait a minute, you're saying speculators and traders keep the price of oil down? Kim, is that what you're saying? 

 Strassel: Yeah, I know. Surprising. Exactly.

 Gigot: Now--but that was an exact finding of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission when they looked into it in 2008. So you're not just making that up. 

 Strassel: Nope.

 Gigot: That's actually the finding of a government agency. So--

 Strassel: Exactly. And when they do this investigation this time, if anyone's being honest, that is what they'll find, too. 

 Gigot: All right. Dan? 

 Henninger: But Paul, on the politics of this, the president's position, it seems to me, is completely incoherent. Out at Facebook, at the town hall, he said, yes, gasoline prices are hurting people and that's why we need to invest in alternative fuels, like solar, windmills and biofuels. And then he attacks Exxon yesterday, saying their profits are too high; we should instead be investing that money in alternative fuels. Everyone agrees that alternative fuels are only economically viable if the price of energy is about as--at least as high as it is now for gasoline. 

 Gigot: So they actually want higher prices in order to make clean energy competitive? Otherwise, it wouldn't be--

 Henninger: They not only want--I mean, the carbon tax?--they want higher taxes, prices. They have to have higher prices. But higher energy prices absolutely kill presidencies. That has been proven. 

 Gigot: Steve, let me ask you about this question about oil subsidies the president keeps bringing up. He said that $4 billion in what he calls subsidies, tax breaks for the oil industry. Doesn't he have a point that--why should Exxon get tax breaks? 

 Moore: Well, first of all, I want to add something to what Dan just said about the incoherence of the Obama administration policy. In addition to all the things that you just said, Dan, don't forget, at the same time that the Obama administration is decrying these high prices of oil and gas, what does he want to do? Put higher taxes on oil and gas. Now, Paul, as I look at economics, if you put a tax on something, the price of it goes up. It doesn't go down. 

 Gigot: OK, Steve, yeah, but the tax subsidy point. Are you going to take that on, Steve? 

 Moore: OK, now, I'm not--

 Gigot: Why should Exxon get tax breaks? 

 Moore: Because they're not getting tax breaks. I think there are a few--there are some tax breaks that the oil and gas company get that I'm fully in favor of getting rid of. But most of the tax breaks that he's talking about, Paul, are legitimate tax expenses that every company, every manufacturer gets, and so I don't see those as giveaways to the big oil companies. What I favor--

 Gigot: Wait a minute. 

 Moore: Well, look, Paul, for example, in 2003, when we passed the expensing for manufacturing, that encourages more development and more production of oil. That's something that brings the price of oil down. It doesn't bring the price of oil up. And I just don't see the coherence of a policy that says we're going to raise these taxes when I think they're very legitimate expenses for businesses. 

 Gigot: OK, Steve. Well, how about reducing the rates on all companies and, in return for getting rid of these subsidies, or these tax breaks? 

 Moore: Yeah.

 Gigot: That's what I'd prefer to do. But we've got to go. 

 Moore: Yeah, look, I'm in favor of that.

 Gigot: I'm afraid I have to get the last word here, Steve. 

 Moore: I'm in favor of that.

 Gigot: OK. 

When we come back, Big Labor clips Boeing's wings. After 17 months and a $2 billion investment, a federal labor board tries to stop the aerospace giant from building planes in South Carolina. Who's behind the push and will it succeed? Find out, next. 

 Gigot: Well, score one for big labor. The National Labor Relations Board last week filed a complaint against Boeing, seeking to force the aerospace giant to build planes in its unionized facilities in Washington state instead of moving the work to a nonunion plant in South Carolina. In its complaint, the board claims that Boeing decided to build the second production plant for his new 787 Dreamliner in South Carolina as retaliation against union workers in Washington for their past strikes. In 2009, Boeing announced plans to build a new plant. And after negotiations with the union broke down, the company settled on South Carolina, one of 22 right-to-work states. 

We're back with Dan Henninger and Kim Strassel. And also joining us, editorial board member Mary Kissel. 

So, I think some viewers might say, "Well, why talk about this issue?" Why does it matter so much to the American economy? 

 Kissel: Because this isn't just Boeing, Paul. This is about the right of any company in America, any private company in America, to locate its facilities where it wants to, to give the highest return to its shareholders. So this isn't just an attack against Boeing. It's an attack against, as you said, the 22 right-to-work states. 

 Gigot: So is there a precedent for this kind of thing, where the Labor Relations Board says to a company, "Sorry, you cannot move because you're trying to escape strikes"?

 Kissel: No, absolutely not. 

 Gigot: You can't find any in--

 Kissel: Absolutely not. 

 Gigot: --in recent--

 Kissel: Absolutely not. 

 Gigot: Wow. 

 Kissel: And by the way--by the way, it's very unclear how they can make this charge, given that Boeing isn't firing any unionized workers. Boeing is building a second facility, hiring more than a thousand people, investing billions of dollars in South Carolina. This is something that we should be cheering and not suing the company for. 

 Gigot: So what happens, Dan, if this kind of strategy works in terms of the flow of capital with the United States? Does Boeing just say, "Well, we go back to Washington state and we gear up this second assembly line there," or will companies say, "You know what, China, India, Ireland"? 

 Henninger: Mexico, Latin America. 

 Gigot: Is that what happens?

 Henninger: I think most likely that will happen. I mean, they've got a bottom line. They've got to, you know, calculate their costs. I mean, you have to understand that what the government is doing here is citing the National Labor Relations Act, which was written in 1935, all right? And there is one clause in the act that says companies may not discourage union activity. And the argument here is because Boeing's executives said out loud that if the union kept striking--they've struck five times--

 Gigot: Right. 

 Henninger: --since 1977--they were going to move the plant out of Washington. 

 Gigot: And some of it executives did mention the union strikes as having hurt their business, and therefore they were looking for a place where we wouldn't have those disruptions. So they did put that on the record. 

 Henninger: And they're fixated on that statement as a violation of the Labor Relations Act. And you know, the left is cheering this as finally we're enforcing the law against what they call runaway companies, moving to other parts of the country. 

 Gigot: And that administrative law judge who is going to hear this if the case--if the judge decides against Boeing, then they can appeal to the full Labor Relations Board, which is now 3-2 with Democrats on the board. 

 Kissel: That's absolutely right, Paul. This is a decision that every American should be watching closely. Because again, it doesn't just impact Boeing. It's going to impact our economy more broadly. 

 Gigot: Kim, I have a question about the timing here. Because Boeing--this is not a secret that they are building this plant in South Carolina. It's been going on for 17 months, as we said. So why bring this up now? 

 Strassel: This is all politics. Look, as you said, Boeing made this decision 17 months ago to build in South Carolina. The complaint that the union filed with the Labor Relations Board is more than year old. So why are they suddenly acting now? The reality is, is that the labor agenda is on the rocks. It is dead in Congress. The Obama administration's approval ratings are falling. They need to buck up their base, and so all of the sudden, here comes out this major ideologically driven decision that is meant to sort of say to the unions, "Hey, we're still with you. We've got your back. And we're going to help you from a regulatory perspective as much as we can, even if we can't pass things like card check in Congress."

 Gigot: Well, and the trade pacts are going to move through Congress for Colombia and South Korea. The rest of the trade agenda is dead. So you're saying that labor leaders here are getting nervous, not really thrilled with the Obama administration. So this is one, they can say, "Look, we helped you on this one." And this is a very big one, as Mary said. 

But what about the politics of this for business, Mary? I mean, you have the president for two months or three months now, has been reaching out to business, saying "I have nothing against capitalism. I want to help you." Went to speak at the Chamber of Commerce, pushing the trade pacts in Congress. Isn't this at cross purposes with that goal? 

 Kissel: It absolutely is. And I tell you what, he will get push-back from the State of South Carolina. Gov. Nikki Haley had an op-ed in our paper on Friday, pushing back against this and--

 Gigot: And saying--and asking the question, why has the president not said anything about this? That's a good question. 

 Kissel: That's a great question. 

 Gigot: Do you think you have the answer to that? Why hasn't the president spoken up and said--because he has spoken up on labor issues before, particularly on state labor issues. He did--he spoke up against the collective bargaining changes in Wisconsin. Quiet here. Why do you think? 

 Kissel: Because I think the economy is hurting, and I think that he knows that he can't be seen in public endorsing a decision that will hurt the economy even further. 

 Gigot: Dan, quickly. 

 Henninger: In terms of the politics and economics, understand that since the last 20 years, Honda, Toyota, BMW, Kia, Mercedes-Benz and Hyundai have all built manufacturing plants throughout the Southern part of the United States. 

 Gigot: Who are right-to-work states, which means--which say you do not have to join unions. 

 Henninger: Creating tens of thousands of jobs in those states. So--I mean, why the president is going to bat simply for the state of Washington and one union against tens of thousands of workers in the South seems politically inept to me. 

 Gigot: And it's a very big deal. 

All right, when we come back, the NFL draft gets under way as a federal judge orders the NFL lockout lifted. Who's right and who's wrong in this $9 billion fight? There's a debate ahead. 

 Gigot: Well, the National Football League draft got under way this week under the shadow of the ongoing dispute between team owners and players over how to divide a $9 billion business. U.S. District Judge Susan Nelson on Monday ruled against the owners, ordering that the 6½-week-old lockout be lifted, citing the, quote, "irreparable harm" the players were suffering during the work stoppage. NFL owners imposed the lockout in March after the collective bargaining agreement between the two sides expired and the players disbanded their union. A group of players filed the injunction request along with a class-action antitrust lawsuit against the league. 

We're back with Dan Henninger and Steve Moore. Also joining us, Wall Street Journal editorial board member Jason Riley. 

So Steve, what do you think of the decision by the judge to order the lockout ended? 

 Moore: Well, you know, Paul, everybody's calling this the battle between the millionaires and billionaires. And it is hard to--hard to know who to favor in this thing. Let me just state from the outset, look, I think the players, relative to the salaries that other professional athletes get, I think they're pretty underpaid. This is an incredibly profitable league. It's the most profitable sports league in the history of America. So I think they have a legitimate gripe when the owners are trying to take money away from them. 

But what I highly object to here, Paul, is a federal judge intervening like this with an injunction, basically telling this league they have to get back to work. Since when can a federal judge tell a business that they have to continue operations? Usually, Paul, that only happens when the American public's health and safety is at risk. It's hard to make the case that football not being played is a jeopardy to health and safety. 

 Gigot: All right, the NFL says it will appeal this to the Eighth Circuit, and maybe it'll succeed, maybe not. But what do you think? Do you disagree with Steve?

 Riley: No, I largely do agree with Steve, and--

 Gigot: About the lockout.

 Riley: Chances are that the owners will prevail. The courts traditionally have said that--for the purposes of competing not only with other leagues but with other entertainment products, the NFL can behave as a single entity. But that doesn't mean we have to buy all that arguments that the owners are making--to buttress--

 Gigot: Roger--on that, Roger Goodell, the commissioner, had an op-ed in our paper, which described a league that he saw if the players win. And it is a league that would be very different from current NFL. Do you buy the arguments? 

 Riley: Well, the argument is that the free market cannot allocate labor in the NFL. That's essentially what the owners are saying. That would result in an uncompetitive league and hurt their bottom line. But let's keep in mind that nine of the last 10 Super Bowls have been won or lost by three of the league's 32 teams: New England, Pittsburgh and Indianapolis. Is this the competitive environment we're trying to protect here? 

 Gigot: Dan? 

 Henninger: Well, I get--I find the whole thing kind of amusing, to tell you the truth. Only baseball and football, if they have a lockout or strike, get elevated to the status of a national crisis, right? Because, look--

 Gigot: They're popular. People enjoy the pastime.

 Henninger: They're popular, but so is television, so are situation comedies on television. Remember the TV--

 Gigot: Not as popular as the NFL. 

 Henninger: Well, I don't know. "Dancing with the Stars"? "American Idol"? We could argue about that. But you remember the TV writers strike? 

 Gigot: Yeh.

 Henninger: This was basically a dispute between the producers, company owners, and the writers and the creative types, which has been going on in film and television since time immemorial. Every one of these businesses is in competition now for people's leisure time. People have other opportunities. They could be Web surfing. They could be playing videogames. And what it's about is getting the business model right. The one industry that got it wrong is the recording industry. They went south, and now both the company owners and the creative types, the songwriters and the artists, are suffering because they got it wrong. If the NFL gets this wrong, their audience could go south. 

 Gigot: And that's why I think Goodell has a point, because the business model that they have requires competition between the teams--

 Riley: Sure. 

 Gigot: --to be relatively balanced. Hold it, let me finish, because I think that what you get--the danger is you would get all of the big-money teams, the Dallases and the New York Giants and so on, just like you have the Yankees and the Boston Red Sox tending to dominate baseball. You would not have the same competitive balance. And their ability to compete--that is, football's ability to compete with other forms of entertainment--requires that competitive balance. So they're setting the rules. So it's not really a free-market problem. 

 Riley: Well, to Dan's point and the recording industry comparison, maybe the business model of the NFL has to change. Maybe we need fewer teams, with more talent on each team, which will result in similar competitiveness to what we have today. 

 Gigot: But that wouldn't help the players, because you'd have a much smaller league so only--you'd get--I mean, one of the arguments the teams make is that you have more teams--the owners make is, you have more teams and therefore you help more players. How does it help the players if you have eight teams or 10 teams? 

 Henninger: You know, the NFL is about the greatest gravy train in the history of the world. 

 Riley: It really is. 

 Henninger: Television provides nearly $9 billion in revenue. And you've got this massive audience of guys who, on Sunday, want to do nothing more than to sit in front of a television for three hours and watch God knows how many teams run at each other. It is a fantastic business model as it exists. And that's why most people cannot understand why the players and the owners cannot resolve the problem. 

 Gigot: And for that reason, I think, in fact, they will get this done. Because the pie is just too big. 

 Henninger: Right. 

 Gigot: We have to take one more break. When we come back, President Obama bursts the birther bubble in our "Hits and Misses" of the week. 

 Gigot: Time now for "Hits and Misses" of the week. Mary, first to you. 

 Kissel: Well, I"m giving a hit to President Obama this week for releasing his long-form birth certificate and squashing the so-called birther conspiracy theory that alleged that he wasn't somehow born in the United States and thus isn't fit to hold office. Now, this is a pseudo-debate that has been going on for 2½ years and it has benefited no one, except Donald Trump, and even that's arguable. Now, President Obama could have chosen to prick this bubble when it was politically convenient for him and he didn't. As the president said this week, he has better things to do. So do most Americans, including this one. 

 Gigot: OK. Jason? 

 Riley: This is a hit for Congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords of Arizona. Three months after a horrific assassination attempt, she's walking, she's talking, she's well enough to attend her astronaut husband's space flight. It's a tribute to her and to the health-care system in America. Let's just hope ObamaCare doesn't ruin that system. 

 Gigot: Amazing story. Dan? 

 Henninger: Paul, a hit to Gen. David Petraeus for resigning his commission to accept the CIA job. I think it probably has the possibility of enhancing the CIA functioning. He may do a good job there. But it's a kind of weird miss to Barack Obama because all of the commentary on the appointment suggested that he had done it for political reasons, to take Petraeus out of any possibility of running against him in 2012. It shows just how hard it has become to discern the real purpose of any action that this most politicized of American presidents takes these days. 

 Gigot: He should've--Petraeus had earned the chairman of the Joint Chiefs position, the No. 1 uniformed military position. I wish he'd have gotten that. 

 Henninger: Yeah.

 Gigot: That's it for this week's edition of "The Journal Editorial Report." Thanks to my panel and especially to you for watching. I'm Paul Gigot. We hope to see all of you right here next week. 