In bustling Lagos, Nigeria, Chima Odu represents a robust upper-middle class eager to buy new products -- a good sign for companies looking to take advantage of Nigeria's position as Africa's most populous country and its biggest consumer market. 

Mr. Odu, 32, is part of a population surge from rural Africa into the continent's many fast-growing cities. More than 60% of Africans will live in cities by 2050, according to the United Nations. 

Most Nigerians still live in poverty and lack many basic services, but with booming oil, telecommunications and retail industries, a new consumer class is emerging. 

Mr. Odu works in human resources for a foreign oil company based in Nigeria, making about $50,000 a year. Even though he has a one-year-old child and another baby on the way, he says he can't resist buying new products and clothes. 

And while older generations separated wants from needs, Mr. Odu says, younger Nigerians from middle and upper class families are more eager to have and be seen with the latest gadget or accessory. 

"Right now it's more about the aesthetics, it's the brands, it's what's in vogue," he says. "I'm a shopaholic." 

On a recent afternoon Mr. Odu traveled to one of Lagos's shopping outlets and approached a cellphone display counter. He told the salesman that he would take the cheapest phone. The salesman looked at Mr. Odu and said, "No, you're too classy for that," before bringing out a sparkling gold Samsung phone. After a brief pause, Mr. Odu bought it.

—Will Connors

There are two things that 27-year-old Tebogo Seleka likes to describe as her 'baby.' The first is her two-year-old daughter, Leago. The second is her four-wheel-drive Volkswagen Polo.



  Listen: Ms. Seleka on her income, expenses and indulgences.

Ms. Seleka is a young professional and part of a small but fast- growing consumer class in South Africa. She holds a bachelor's degree in commerce from the University of Potchefstroom and works as an audit assistant manager for accounting firm, making about $37,000 a year. She's studying to become a chartered accountant.

Four of Ms. Seleka's siblings manage or own a company; she aspires to the ranks of her brother and sisters. "I definitely see myself owning my own company one day," she says. "Something in commerce, auditing, accounting or tax." 

She dedicates portions of her salary to retirement, savings, investments and paying off student loans, but also sets aside money for clothes and accessories. Her primary concern is her daughter, who spends most of her day with a full-time nanny, while Ms. Seleka works long hours and battles the rush hour traffic between Pretoria and Johannesburg.

Walking through a busy mall in Centurion on a Saturday, flooded with Christmas shoppers, Ms. Seleka pointed out her favorite places to socialize. She goes out with her friends around two weekends a month, but not usually during the week. "During the week I come home too late," she says.

—Jackie Bischof

Justus Karegyeya is a 30-year-old Ugandan who works as an assistant registrar at Uganda's most prestigious university, Makerere. After earning a bachelor's and a master's degree, Mr. Karegyeya makes about $860 per month, or around $10,500 a year -- a sum that places him among Uganda's rising middle class.

Mr. Karegyeya has bought a piece of land and built a home. "I'm investing for the future," he said. He is also a young entrepreneur who runs a side business in translations and interpretations with a partner. In 10 years, he hopes to be able to work at the company full time. 

When he shops, he says, "I go with what's in my means. I compare what's on the market, and then I buy something that will last for some time." 

He drives a Toyota Corolla, a popular car here, and has his own Toshiba laptop. But he bought a simple Nokia mobile phone, eschewing the built-in camera and other add-ons. And he saves money by avoiding the bars and nightclubs others frequent.

Like many young people here and across the continent, Mr. Karegyeya helps to care for younger relatives whose parents have died or cannot afford to care for them themselves. Currently, he spends about $600 per year on school fees to support three of his younger cousins at school. He also cares for his parents, covering their medical bills through an insurance policy. 

Mr. Karegyeya is shopping carefully for a health care policy that makes sense for him, he said. "Everything I do is for myself and my family," he said. 

—Sarah Childress