Hollywood is cracking down hard on Netflix. Really hard. Industry bigwigs worry that Netflix is cannibalizing their sales by charging too little for DVD rentals and streaming films. Netflix cut itself a nice deal with the studios when it was still in its infancy, but now, Barron's reports, its cost of acquiring content could rise more than 120%. Craig Kornblau, president of home entertainment at Universal, recently warned that Netflix "can pay us more or we can reduce the quality of what we give them."

This is a really scary threat. Mr. Kornblau seems to be suggesting that if Netflix refuses to pony up more cash, the industry would withhold the rights to prestige films like "The King's Speech" and "Black Swan," and only let Netflix ship hideous movies like "Furry Vengeance," "Prince of Persia" and "Scott Pilgrim vs. the World." Or movies starring Jennifer Aniston or Jack Black. Movies like "Gulliver's Travels" and "Year One" and "Nacho Libre" and... well… you know… Jack Black movies. 

But there is another, more chilling possibility. What if Hollywood studios decide that the term "high-quality merchandise" actually includes movies like "Gulliver" and Jennifer Aniston's last 15 films? Or "Meet the Fockers" and the 3-D "Yogi Bear"? What if the phrase "reducing the quality of what we give them" means that even films where Nicolas Cage works on the security detail accompanying a witch to her public immolation will be deemed too good to be off-loaded?

That would mean that one day soon Netflix customers would consider themselves lucky to have access to offal like "The Wolfman" and "From Paris With Love" and "The Last Airbender." It would mean that on cold winter nights, the public would have to hunker down with moldy films starring Martin Lawrence, Joaquin Phoenix, Steven Seagal or Shannon Tweed. Or bombs directed by ex-wunderkind M. Night Shyamalan. Doesn't sound like much fun to me.

Elitists love to poke fun at Hollywood, so long as there's no downside to our sneering. But the truth is, with no video store left within five miles of my home, and my kids long gone, I am completely dependent upon Netflix for entertainment. For the past five years, this extraordinary company has sent me a steady stream of movies that I would not dream of paying full price to see and would never purchase in Blu-ray or DVD, but which I am more than willing to watch so long as I can watch them cheaply. These movies, one step above "direct-to-video," are politely referred to as "rentals." An awful lot of these movies star Vin Diesel, Amy Poehler, Harold & Kumar or Kate Beckinsale, arguably the most beautiful third-rate actress in the world. These people work in that segment of the film industry I will not pay full-price to support. I will not even pay half-price. But I will pay…something. 

This mindset conforms to an economic principle known as the Bullock Algorithm, which seeks to determine the exact price point between infinity and zero that would entice a consumer to watch a film starring Sandra Bullock. The answer is: around two bucks. If you can rent a film from Netflix for about $2 a night, any Sandra Bullock movie is worth seeing. At two bucks, everyone comes out a winner. But not at three.

If Universal is serious about withholding its finest merchandise and only dumping second-rate inventory on Netflix, this situation could get really ugly. A few years down the road, those of us who have benefited from Netflix's now-imperiled relationship with Hollywood may find ourselves looking back on the days when you could rent "Yogi Bear" 3-D and "Nacho Libre" for next to nothing as a golden age.

We'll find ourselves wishing we were back in those halcyon days when you could simply click Netflix on demand and, lo and behold, right up there on your screen would appear "MacGruber."Or "Gigli." Like I said, this thing could get really ugly. 