SANTIAGO, Chile—U.S. President Barack Obama, seeking to connect his current visit to Latin America with turmoil halfway across the globe, on Monday touted the successful transition to democracy in Chile and the rest of the region as a model for the Middle East.

In a speech to the people of Latin America, Mr. Obama laid out his vision for partnership on clean energy, trade, security and fighting drug trafficking. He proposed a new effort to increase the number of exchange students between the U.S. and Latin America, and vowed to keep pressing for a long-stalled effort to enact comprehensive immigration legislation.

And for the second day in a row, he said the experience of Latin America in reaching for democracy was instructive to the Middle East today.

"At a time when people around the world are reaching for their freedoms, Chile shows that, yes, it is possible to transition from dictatorship to democracy—and to do so peacefully," he said. "The lessons of Latin America, … can be a guide—a guide for people around the world who are beginning their own journeys toward democracy."

The ingredients of success, he said, include the "moral force" of nonviolence, protection of the right to speech and assembly, accountability for past wrongs and economic reform.

"With decades of experience, there's so much Latin America can now share," he said.

In neither Brazil nor in Santiago did Mr. Obama address directly the military invasion of Libya that began Saturday, but the conflict, and the heavy toll it is exacting, has served as a backdrop for his entire five-day Latin American visit, which includes visits to Brazil, Chile and El Salvador.

In singing the praises of democracy, Mr. Obama couldn't escape the fact that he was speaking in a region where the U.S. has often had an ambivalent role in promoting democracy in the past.

Such was the case in Chile, given the U.S. role in destabilizing the country before a 1973 military coup led by Gen. Augusto Pinochet that ousted the government of Salvador Allende, a democratically elected Marxist. The Pinochet government was ruthlessly repressive and killed more than 3,000 Chileans while forcing thousands more into exile.

Facing pressure for change both at home and abroad, Mr. Pinochet called a plebiscite on continuing his rule in 1988, which he lost. The country has had democratic rule every since.

But the U.S. was not lining up for democracy in Chile's turbulent 1960s and 1970s. Washington viewed Mr. Allende as a threat, and U.S. intelligence covertly channeled money to political parties and media that opposed him, and had contacts with groups in the military that were plotting against him, archives have shown.

On Monday, Mr. Obama decline to apologize for the U.S. role. Asked if the U.S. would consider any request made by Chile for documents in connection with ongoing Chilean judicial investigations into the events surrounding the coup, he was noncommittal.

"Any requests that made by Chile to obtain more information about the past is something that we will certainly consider," he said. "We would like to cooperate." 

"It's very important for all of us to know our history and obviously the history of relations between the U.S. and Latin America have at times been extremely rocky and have at times been difficult," he said.

"It's important for us to learn from our history and understand our history but not be trapped by it," he said.

The lessons of history could also apply to the turmoil in the Middle East today. The U.S. supported the ousted regime of Hosni Mubarak in Egypt during its 30 years in power. And it is allies with regimes in Yemen and Bahrain, where governments have killed scores of pro-democracy protesters in recent weeks.

Administration officials say the U.S. in intervening in Libya and not Bahrain or Yemen because the scale of the repression is vastly different.

"Bahrain has been a longtime ally of the United States of America and a longtime partner," National Security Adviser Tom Donilon said Sunday in response to a question about that country's crackdown on protesters. He added that Bahrain was attempting to work with the opposition and that the U.S. was pressing both sides to negotiate.

Still, Mr. Obama's broader point that democracy has been a boon to Latin America was well received. And there are some parallels between Latin America's transition to democracy roughly two decades ago and current events in the Middle East.

In Latin America, young political activists were forced into exile in the U.S. or Europe during the dictatorships, but many came back after exposure to Western democracy to help lead political transitions in their homelands. In the case of Egypt, both expatriates and exposure to the broader world through technology like television and the internet helped fuel dissatisfaction with the status quo.

"Though the processes may be very, very different, the general point that one can be optimistic about the Arab world is very well taken," said  Javier Corrales, a political scientist at Amherst College.

But some Latin American politicians noted that Latin America had experience with various degrees of democracy for a much longer span than the Middle East.

"Latin America went through its first processes of independence 200 years ago," when the region won autonomy from Spain, said  Juan Pablo Letelier, a socialist Chilean senator. "You can't compare the history of Latin America with other processes like Libya, Tunisia or Yemen, for God's sake. That's only going to get you a D- in world history."

Some analysts suggested that Arab world's limited historical experience with democracy and the weakness of its institutions put it in a less favorable position than Latin America was when it started its transition.

"The Middle East may be at the beginning of the process but the institutional fragility of most of the countries compares poorly with Latin America where, better or for worse, we have had institutions in place for some time," said  Riordan Roett, director of the Latin American Studies Program at Johns Hopkins University.