  Barry Minkow, a former Wall Street whiz kid who spent seven years in prison for stock fraud and later emerged to become a church pastor and a financial-fraud investigator, will plead guilty to insider trading and could spend up to five years in prison, according to his attorney.

  Alvin Entin of Entin & Della Fera in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., confirmed by phone Wednesday that his client, Mr. Minkow, had reached an "agreement in principle" with the U.S. Attorney's Office for the Southern District of Florida, and that his client will plead guilty to a count of trading on nonpublic information. 

He declined to characterize the nonpublic information that his client allegedly received, or to disclose its source. It isn't clear whether the insider-trading violation is or will be the only subject of any plea deal. Mr. Minkow hasn't been charged.

In January 2009, Mr. Minkow's Fraud Discovery Institute released a report and a Web video that criticized the off-balance-sheet debt accounting practices of Miami home builder  Lennar Corp.
LEN.B


-0.18
%




 The report said Lennar didn't disclose enough information about the practices to investors, and also made allegations of fraud by a Lennar executive in a personal loan. 

Around the same time, Mr. Minkow bought about $20,000 in options on Lennar stock, betting that the company's shares would fall, Mr. Entin said. 

The allegations in Mr. Minkow's report caused Lennar's stock to drop about 20% within a day, and reducing the company's market capitalization by nearly $500 million in the first two trading days after the report was released, according to the company. The Wall Street Journal, among other publications, wrote an article about the report and its impact on Lennar's stock.

Lennar in 2009 sued Mr. Minkow in along with a California real-estate developer, Nicolas Marsch, for libel and extortion, saying that Mr. Marsch, who was at the time embroiled in several lawsuits with Lennar over soured real-estate deals, hired Mr. Minkow to make up and disseminate "false and defamatory statements about Lennar." 

An attorney for Mr. Marsch confirmed that at one point Mr. Marsch did hire Mr. Minkow's firm to obtain information about wrongdoing at the company, but also said that the findings detailed in Mr. Minkow's report were protected speech covered by a litigation privilege, and that Lennar's libel suit was frivolous.

Late last year, a Florida judge ruled in favor of Lennar, saying Mr. Minkow had in the course of the suit destroyed evidence and lied to his own lawyers, and sanctioned Mr. Minkow. 

A Lennar spokesman declined to comment, as did the U.S. Attorney's office in Miami. 

Mr. Minkow couldn't be reached for comment, and his home number was disconnected as of Wednesday morning. 

The forthcoming plea deal isn't part of the Lennar libel suit, according to Mr. Minkow's attorney. Instead, he said, it is the product of an investigation by federal prosecutors in Miami that Mr. Minkow was made aware of a month ago. 

Prosecutors declined to comment, and the exact nature of the criminal probe couldn't be determined. 

"He's not pleading guilty to having made up info, he's not pleading guilty to extortion and he's not pleading guilty to having lied about Lennar," Mr. Entin said. 

Mr. Minkow was best known in the 1980s for masterminding a Ponzi scheme involving his carpet-cleaning company, ZZZZ Best, which he founded at age 16 and eventually built into a public company. In 1988, he was convicted of 57 counts of fraud and sentenced to 25 years in prison.

Since his release, Mr. Minkow founded the fraud-investigation company, which won him praise from the Federal Bureau of Investigation for uncovering frauds on the Internet, in real estate and elsewhere. He also became a pastor at Community Bible Church in San Diego.

On Tuesday, the church sent an email message to its parishioners saying that Mr. Minkow had resigned because "he is no longer qualified to be a Pastor." 

—Mark Maremont contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Robbie Whelan at robbie.whelan@wsj.com 