WASHINGTON—As early as this weekend, the U.S. is expected to start handing control of military operations in Libya to alliance partners. But even if that transfer goes smoothly, many key military tasks will remain in U.S. military hands for the foreseeable future.

In the short-term, the most important part of the mission-protecting civilians from attack by the forces of Libyan leader Col. Moammar Gadhafi—remains squarely on the shoulders of U.S. forces.

In a Pentagon briefing Friday, Vice Adm. William Gortney, the director of the U.S. Joint Staff, said the mission of protecting civilians "will remain in U.S. hands until such time as the coalition is ready to assume it," meaning that U.S. aircraft would continue to fly bombing missions against Col. Gadhafi's ground forces indefinitely.

What's more, military officials say U.S. forces are likely to remain involved in efforts to police the no-fly zone, providing the logistics backbone, surveillance tools and other specialized assets for the ongoing air campaign. And a larger question of the military's potential support for a humanitarian relief operation-which could require the presence of U.S. troops on Libyan soil remains unanswered.

From the outset, President Barack Obama laid out a limited vision of the U.S. role and pushed for control of the mission to be quickly transferred to an international force, in this case the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. NATO has already assumed the lead in enforcing an arms embargo at sea, and the alliance announced plans Thursday to assume control of no-fly zone mission in a number of days. 

Adm. Gortney said "the division of labor between the U.S. and our partners has largely evened out." He added, however, that the U.S. would "continue to do the lion's share" of specialized missions like flying aerial refueling tankers and surveillance planes. U.S. aircraft will also be involved in "electronic attack" missions, jamming Libyan air defense radars. Earlier this week, Adm. Gary Roughead, the top Navy admiral, said the U.S. was operating a new electronic attack airplane in the skies over Libya. 

A Pentagon briefing slide put the point more succinctly. The date for transferring the civilian protection mission, it said, was marked "TBD." 

Some observers have asked if air strikes would be enough to protect civilians and defeat Col. Gadhafi's ground forces. 

"There's no solution unless you put boots on the ground," said Jay Garner, a retired Army general. "That's the dilemma the president and everyone else are realizing." Mr. Obama had definitively ruled out the use of U.S. ground troops.

Mr. Garner, who was initially tapped to run Iraq's caretaker government in 2003 after the U.S. led invasion, said that humanitarian assistance might also require also require security-and potentially military support. "You can't provide humanitarian assistance until you provide security," he said.

In 1991, Mr. Garner helped organize military-led effort to aid Kurdish refugees who had fled to the mountains of northern Iraq after a failed uprising. Mr. Garner said the military had assets such as helicopters that would be essential for providing transportation and medical evacuation. 

U.S. military officials have said that U.S. Africa Command, which is currently overseeing Libya operations, is working with international partners and nongovernmental agencies on planning for humanitarian assistance in cities such as Misrata where water, electricity and medical supplies have reportedly been cut off. The command referred queries on planning to the U.S. Agency for International Development.

"Obviously, we're very concerned about the humanitarian situation there," said a USAID official. "We are looking at ways in which we respond, but because of the security situation, it's very limited as to what we can do."

James Dobbins, the director of RAND International Security and Defense Policy Center, said humanitarian operations didn't necessarily require a U.S. military presence in Libya, pointing to the example of Sudan's Darfur region. "We've supported humanitarian operations where we didn't have any boots on the ground," he said. 

But Mr. Dobbins, who served as a diplomatic troubleshooter in several crises, said that the collapse of governance in Libya might also present a challenge for policymakers. 

"We've learned over the last 15 years or so that it's not very hard to overthrow an objectionable regime," he said. "It be done in a matter of weeks with few American casualties, but it's very hard to replace it with something better."