The 1,700 evacuees filling the rooms and gymnasium of the Katsuma Grade School in Ishinomaki, northeastern Japan, didn't get much to eat Thursday. Breakfast was half a banana, lunch a gelatinous sports drink. There were no plans for dinner. 

"Most Japanese people would never say this, but this is definitely not enough," said Minoru Adachi, 66. "We are Japanese. We want rice, but how can we expect such a luxury?"

Across large parts of Japan stricken a week ago by a quake and tsunami, aid isn't getting through. Blizzards, impassible roads, worries over radiation exposure, fuel shortages and other logistical problems have stalled aid from getting to those who need it, even as officials have boosted the amount of food and other goods available to some easier-to-reach communities.

"No one has come to help," said Hatsuo Ishikawa, a 56-year-old driver from the flooded eastern city of Watanoha. 

After surviving the tsunami by escaping to a second-floor closet, Mr. Ishikawa and his wife hiked two hours to their daughter's less-damaged apartment, followed by a three-hour walk the next day to the undamaged home of another daughter. On Thursday, they trekked to their muddy home to get some money they had left behind, and food, then turned around for the trip back.

"Food is the most important," Mr. Ishikawa said as he returned to the undamaged home where their daughter lived with her husband and son. "I need it for my grandson. He's so hungry he can't sleep." 

Other than his third daughter, who has moved to an evacuation center because she has a baby, no one in Mr. Ishikawa's family has gotten any help yet, he said.

The continuing aid shortages are testing a widely held belief that Japan, one of the world's richest and most-developed economies, is capable of largely shouldering what is turning into a colossal aid effort. Although the government has accepted extensive help from U.S. military forces and some other countries, it has so far has discouraged many international aid agencies from playing a major role, saying it feared that bringing in foreign aid workers would only add to confusion on the ground.

The grumbling that is emerging now in some shelters and communities is starting to echo the anger that spread more widely following Japan's 1995 Kobe earthquake, which killed thousands and triggered deep criticism from residents who felt the government's response was inadequate. For now, most residents and international aid agencies are giving the government the benefit of the doubt, but that could change if more aid doesn't get through soon.

Japan is encountering problems that other countries haven't had to face, such as how to manage its response in a place where an unusually large share of the population is elderly. Many of Japan's older residents require specialized medical care, especially for conditions common in rich countries, such as diabetes. Some of them don't want to leave hospitals, even if their houses remain intact.

Some 1.6 million or more households don't have access to water, said the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, or OCHA, while 430,000 people remain homeless and are sheltering in evacuation centers. According to OCHA, many are now falling ill with diarrhea and other illnesses due to freezing weather and lack of clean water or sanitation. The strains of sleeping elbow to elbow with so many strangers, with minimal food, are breaking out. "People are starting to squabble," said Mr. Adachi, the man staying at Katsuma Grade School. "When I ask people not to walk in with dirty shoes, they get angry and threaten me."

Officials speaking on local television in the affected areas said some aid wasn't arriving because workers were having trouble refueling and much of the region's infrastructure was damaged. They also noted that the vast scale of the disaster meant there were many unofficial makeshift shelters that are hard to find and aren't part of official emergency plans.

Japanese relief crews delivered more than 1.7 million rations of rice balls, ramen noodles or other foods Thursday, roughly double the level of the day before, according to data provided by the prime minister's office. People without electricity dropped to 452,000 households, compared with 635,000 a day earlier, OCHA said. 

Government officials asked for patience and understanding from the international community. "It's better to look at the matter in phases because of the enormity of the destruction," said Takeshi Matsunaga, a Japanese Foreign Ministry spokesman, suggesting things will look better in a few days.

Complaints of delayed responses are common after natural disasters. But Japan's disaster combines the expected logistical challenges with fears of radiation leaks from tsunami-damaged nuclear facilities.

"Help is definitely being provided to areas that we can access," said Kristy Allen-Shirley, spokeswoman for World Vision, an international humanitarian group that is running a small team of aid workers in areas around the disaster zone. 

None of that is much comfort in places where aid isn't arriving. Up and down Japan's northeastern coast, long lines of people could be seen Thursday in front of grocery stores, drug stores, gas stations, vegetable markets and even convenience stores, hoping to get their hands on some of the scarce goods that have come in.

At the Red Cross Hospital in Ishinomaki, one of the few hospitals to survive in the coastal towns, officials said they were getting by but could use more food, water, medicine and help. 

Hospital officials said they were attempting to treat the sickest patients and keep their facilities from being overwhelmed by those seeking refuge in a place with heat, food and working plumbing. In Japan, those with colds or other less-serious illnesses often receive fluids, nutrients or antibiotics intravenously. 

"Sir, now that your IV is finished, we need you to go home because other people need this bed," one nurse said as she bowed low so the old man in the bed could hear her. 

"My house was destroyed," he answered.

Evacuation shelters are having to stretch their supplies thinner because the number of people arriving continues to increase—including some people whose houses are still standing—as food elsewhere runs out and the temperature drops below freezing, said Takako Abe, a volunteer at the Katsuma Grade School center.

"People run out of food or gas, or they can't heat their homes," she said. "Since they can't survive at home anymore, they come here."

"There is not enough food so it has to be divided" among the people in the center, she tells an elderly visitor, who is staying in the neighborhood and was asking for a handout Thursday. "Give me your address, and maybe we can send you any donations that are too small to be divided up here."

Down the street, three men were seen standing near their destroyed neighborhood. Over the years they had seen images of people scrambling as U.S. aid was delivered by helicopter, but they never thought it could happen here. The U.S. has provided significant aid, but none of it had been seen in their areas.

"Where are the American helicopters?" one of them asked, adding in English: "I am hungry."

 Write to  Eric Bellman at eric.bellman@wsj.com and Patrick Barta at patrick.barta@wsj.com 