WASHINGTON—A New Jersey businessman was indicted Wednesday on charges that he conspired to evade U.S. taxes by hiding offshore bank accounts in India. 

The indictment didn't identify the bank by name, saying only that the institution "was one of the largest international banks in the world and was headquartered in England." A person familiar with the case said the bank was  HSBC Holdings PLC.

Prosecutors alleged that  Vaibhav Dahake held undeclared bank accounts from 2001 to 2010 in India and the British Virgin Islands.

The indictment, returned in a New Jersey federal court, said Mr. Dahake's Indian accounts were maintained by the England-based bank. It alleged that bank employees conspired to help Dahake hide his undeclared funds.

One banker allegedly counseled Mr. Dahake to deposit funds into the accounts in small amounts to "stay below the radar." After the Justice Department's landmark tax-evasion settlement with  UBS AG, another HSBC banker allegedly told Mr. Dahake that he had "nothing to worry about" because the bank wouldn't be sending forms on the Indian accounts to the Internal Revenue Service, according to the indictment.

The case may open up a new front in the U.S. crackdown on tax evasion. Mr. Dahake appears to be the first defendant charged with hiding an Indian account.

"Those who attempt to hide their assets and income in offshore accounts, and those who aid them in doing so, by now should realize that no bank offering such services will be a safe haven from the IRS," U.S. Acting Assistant Attorney General  John A. DiCicco said in a statement.

  Juanita Gutierrez, an HSBC spokeswoman, said, "HSBC does not condone tax evasion and fully supports the U.S. efforts to promote appropriate payment of taxes by U.S. taxpayers."

  Lawrence S. Horn, a lawyer for Mr. Dahake, called the indictment "most regrettable" and said, "It is most important for everyone to recognize that an indictment is merely a charge and carries no proof of guilt."

Mr. Horn suggested the indictment was related to IRS plans for a second government leniency program that would encourage taxpayers to come forward and declare their offshore bank accounts.

"The timing of this indictment appears to be a clubbed invitation for American citizens with undisclosed accounts to apply for admission into the second initiative of the voluntary disclosure program," Mr. Horn said.

U.S. efforts against offshore tax-evasion have focused heavily on Swiss bank accounts.

UBS admitted in February 2009 to conspiring to defraud the U.S. government of billions in taxes by helping wealthy Americans hide assets. The bank paid $780 million in a deal to avoid prosecution and eventually released the names of more than 4,000 U.S. clients.

One HSBC client pleaded guilty last year to hiding assets in an undeclared Swiss bank account.

 Write to  Brent Kendall at brent.kendall@dowjones.com 