As their team prepares to play in the NCAA tournament's Sweet 16 for the first time, students at San Diego State, a school where sports has long taken a back seat to beach-going and beer pong, would like you to know they've made a little progress in the rah-rah department.

They managed to fill 94% of the seats at Viejas Arena for basketball games this season, after filling just over half the season before. They've even learned to chant in unison, poke fun at opponents and watch games surreptitiously on their laptops without their professors catching on. And while camping out for tickets in the winter in San Diego isn't quite the challenge it is in, say, Wisconsin, they've embraced the challenge.

"It's just like tailgating," says Christina Harrison, a senior communication and Spanish major who says students have been tailgating for years before football games—without actually attending the games. "The fact that they're good is just like, so weird." 

Nevertheless, interviews on campus this week suggest students here are still struggling a bit to get the hang of the "fan" thing. Some talked with horror about the early-morning lines for tickets, the pressure to remember the names of all 13 players on the roster and the consequences of screaming a lot during games. "I lost my voice!" says new fan Bethany Scribner. "That's never happened to me before."

Some students have been befuddled by the newfound celebrity of the players. Jamal Latin, a sophomore from San Diego, says he started hearing other students talking excitedly about a guy from Las Vegas named Billy White—but he had no idea they were talking about a basketball star. "I thought he was a popular frat guy that a lot of people knew," recalls Mr. Latin.

Many students are still working on the finer points of being a fan. When it came time to fill out NCAA brackets, many of them learned an embarrassing lesson this year. "Not many people I know have State going too deep," says Arthur Trotter, a freshman majoring in business administration. 

Sammy Tollin, a junior from Los Angeles, says she's found a novel way to root for the Aztecs: By following the entire Northern Colorado game on Facebook—just by tracking her friends' reactions. "You don't even have to be watching," she says.

Nelson Guerrero, a junior waiting on line for concert tickets with a pizza box tucked under his arm, said he was so determined to see the BYU game that he camped out for tickets. He remembers getting off to a good start eating Wheat Thins and Oreos—before somebody broke out the alcohol and he got kicked out of line. Turning to his friends, Guerrero asks, "Did anyone even make it to halftime?" 

Until recently, basketball hasn't been exceedingly popular in San Diego. One likely reason is that unlike football, baseball or surfing, it takes place indoors. Many students say they prefer the beach or the Aquaplex, an outdoor swim center on campus where students enjoy sunbathing and taking in "the scenery."



Dominic McGuire, who grew up in San Diego and now plays for the Charlotte Bobcats, says despite his enormous respect for head coach Steve Fisher, he elected to go to Cal instead because San Diego held too many distractions. "It is a great party school–I went to a lot of those parties in high school."

Turning the program around has taken a while, Fisher says, because it's hard to wrestle top recruits from teams in the more-prestigious Pac-10—especially when those teams also offer idyllic climates and close proximity to the beach. He adds that he doesn't even pursue a recruit if he senses that going to a big-name basketball powerhouse is a priority for him.

Fisher says the general attitude among fans here is still "what a great season, you don't have to get to the Final Four." But he says things have improved. He's seen SDSU evolve from a "commuter school," into a more traditional college with better academics—and that the fans have become more serious.

Since 1999, the year Fisher took over, the average SAT score of students has jumped 100 points to 1085. SDSU's six-year graduation rate has improved as well and the school received 60,000 applications for the 2011-12 school year.

Scribner, a junior with strawberry blond hair sporting hot-pink aviator shades, says the football team, which finished a surprising 9-4 this fall, helped drive a lot of the interest in basketball. "We figured if football is good, let's go to basketball," says Scribner, sipping on a smoothie. Until this year, "I think fans had kind of gotten turned off from going to any games because football was bad, too."

Not everyone has jumped on the bandwagon, of course. "I don't watch the games or anything but I'm stoked that they're doing so well," says Jocelyn Lambert, a senior from Irvine, Calif.

Some students seem more interested in using the basketball team's accomplishments to further a more important goal: sneaking into bars. Luke Carlsen, a manager at Effin's, a local sports bar, says he's had to turn away plenty of students who come in on game nights wearing masks or heavy facepaint, which makes it impossible to tell if their faces match their IDs.

"You can't come in here dressed like a lizard," he says.

 Write to  Hannah Karp at hannah.karp@dowjones.com 