Webster Hall

125 E. 11th St., (212) 353-1600

Friday-Saturday

Lucinda Williams is one of precious few figures in rock 'n' roll whose songs stand to get better with age, like a bottle of something good stowed away in the darkness with its true characteristics only just barely revealed. Except that her songs are not stowed away, of course, nor have they lacked for character at any point since she started issuing them. Ms. Williams, who recently turned 58, started making the rounds on the country and folk circuits in the 1970s. But her breakthrough came in 1998, when her rootsy, searching album "Car Wheels on a Gravel Road" found the favor of more or less everybody who heard it. Since then, Ms. Williams has continued to mine productive veins of heartbreak and hope in songs that veer away from Americana tradition just enough to provide exceptions to prove the rule. She plays here behind a new album called "Blessed." 

Roulette

20 Greene St., (212) 219-8242

Friday 

Sarah Lipstate, the Brooklyn-based mastermind of the one-woman band Noveller, is an experimental guitarist whose investigations of her instrument prove unusually comely and warm. She plays with layers of sound until, by way of loops and digital delays, she summons gentle masses that seem to come and go like the weather. Or else more forceful ones that commence and fade away like the titles of two of her records, last year's "Desert Fires" and "Glacial Glow," a follow-up to be released this spring. Here, Ms. Lipstate will play in an intriguing duo with an elder statesman of the experimental guitar arts: Lee Ranaldo. Of the two main shredders in Sonic Youth, Mr. Ranaldo usually counts as the more meditative and poetic one, but he's also known to peel out on occasion in his seasoned collaborative guise. 

Music Hall of Williamsburg

66 N. 6th St., Brooklyn

(718) 486-5400

March 14

James Blake has grown in stature to become one of the biggest musical sensations of the past year or so, a period during which his singular work started to drift out beyond inner circles of young London. His roots remain in the progressive electronic club-music style known as dubstep, but there's little in Mr. Blake's most recent songs to suggest strobe lights or refracted breakbeats. Instead, he's homed in on a promising new kind of soul music as imagined by a generation who grew up regarding Timbaland as traditional. The songs on his self-titled debut album draw much of their drama from empty space and a sense of expectancy that pays out in elegance as much as abstraction, whether through harmonies that evoke a digital barbershop quartet or swells of skittish electronic atmosphere. The results, on record, are bewitching and beautiful, and the question of how it might work on stage will be answered here as Mr. Blake makes his live American debut.



(Le) Poisson Rouge

158 Bleecker St., (212) 505-3474

March 14

Deerhoof is an eccentric rock band several times more approachable than common sense would suggest. They play with the kind of chaotic, careening abandon that powered the late herky-jerky icon (and Frank Zappa compatriot) Captain Beefheart. Their vocal duties are given over to Satomi Matsuzaki, a demure frontwoman who sometimes sounds as if she's singing a different song than the band is playing. And their lyrical purview hews closest to a realm somewhere between the inscrutable and the nonsensical. For all that, though, Deerhoof is also renowned as an outrageously fun and galvanizing live act—like a party band swiped from the stage of a strange Dada fraternity. Here, they play behind "Deerhoof vs. Evil," a new album that manages to make sense of sounds as disparate as glam rock, new wave and Brazilian folk.

Terminal 5

610 W. 56th St., (212) 582-6600

March 15-17

The judicious concertgoer could spend some time trying to think of other bands as good or better to greet the season of St. Patrick's Day, but it never takes long for that list to fizzle when the Pogues are in town. There aren't many bellies more marinated in stout than that belonging to Pogues frontman Shane MacGowan, and there aren't many teeth, well, at all. But part of what makes the rough-and-tumble Pogues special is the all artistry and refinement at play in a songbook as deep as any. Anthems like "If I Should Fall From Grace with God" have what sounds like hundreds of years of sloshy singing within them, but Mr. MacGowan, now 53, is a deceiving kind of poet too. Here, the Pogues set up for a three-night stand on what they're saying will be their final American tour.