A proposal to deregulate traditional landlines and cable television in New Jersey has run into opposition, from seniors worried about rates going up to towns concerned about losing money from franchise fees.

Verizon, which has 90% of traditional phone service in the state, argues it must be allowed to set its own rates to remain competitive in a market filled with virtual landlines and cell phones.

"The market has changed dramatically since these regulations were enacted in 1911, obviously," said  Richard Young, a Verizon spokesman.

Part of the bill would allow Verizon and two other landline companies in New Jersey to set their own rates, rather than get approvals from the state Board of Public Utilities.

Earlier this year, the bill sailed through the state Assembly with bipartisan support. But it stalled Monday in the state Senate after a lobbying campaign blossomed. The AARP warned its members the bill would cause rates to go up and hurt customer service.

"This will be a big change," AARP spokesman  Douglas Johnston said. This month, 12,000 AARP members made phone calls to their state senators, he said.

Towns, already worried about revenue, said cable companies could cut free municipal and library services and pay less in required fees.

Verizon maintains the changes are necessary to invest in new technology and level the playing field.

"Given the economic challenges in New Jersey, we firmly believe this is a solid piece of legislation that will lead to economic growth and new investment in the state,"  Dennis Bone, president of Verizon New Jersey, said in a statement. He pledged not to raise rates for two years if the bill passes. 

Consumer and progressive-policy groups pointed to Illinois and California as examples of where deregulation led to higher phone rates. Verizon said cable and wireless companies have unregulated rates and still offer good deals.

"Some of these folks think we live under communist rule," Mr. Young said. "They don't realize what competition has meant to other markets, and we believe the same benefits will happen here if the rules are changed."

The state allowed Verizon to raise its basic rate in 2008 to $16.45 a month in 2010. That comes to about $27 a month with taxes and fees. The rate had been $8.95 from 1985 through the early 2000s.

Verizon is active politically in the state, spending nearly $1 million on lobbying in 2010. Mr. Bone is the chairman of Choose New Jersey, a group of private companies Gov. Chris Christie put together to promote the state. He was also on the governor's transition team after his election. 

But asked last week about the issue, Mr. Christie remained noncommittal, saying he wanted to see the final bill.

Over the years, phone companies across the country have gone through rounds of deregulation. And in New Jersey, Verizon is subject to less specific regulation now, said  Stefanie Brand, director of the state Division of the Rate Counsel, which fights for consumers. She said Verizon enjoyed a monopoly for years and benefited from ratepayers paying for its copper wire system.

"When they broke up the telephone company there was an understanding that someone was going to need to maintain that system," Ms. Brand said. "The fact is we still need that, we still need to have somebody who maintains that system and who is still the provider of last resort."

Besides opening the door rate increases, she said the bill would eliminate protections that would give rebates for service outages.

  Bob Master, a political director for the Communications Workers of America, said The bill "eliminate[s] any remaining shred of consumer protection." The union said it fears losing jobs if the phone company isn't forced to keep up a high standard of customer service.