Can we rely on cars to anticipate and avoid crashes? Should your SUV be able to decide you've had one drink too many? How connected to your social network can you be and still drive safely?

These are just some of the questions that the nation's top auto-safety regulator,  David Strickland, and his agency are confronting at a turning point in the debate over auto safety. What the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration decide will affect the way the cars and trucks of the future look and behave.

Mr. Strickland and the NHTSA spent a good deal of last year coping with consumer complaints of sudden acceleration in  Toyota Motor Corp. vehicles. Most of these complaints, in the end, appeared linked to an old, mechanical problem: Drivers hitting the gas when they meant to hit the brakes.

Going forward, Mr. Strickland said in an interview Tuesday he wants to focus on issues presented by new technology. Specifically, the agency will be looking at technology that could make cars capable of preventing accidents and technology that tempts drivers to take their eyes off the road. "One thing we are really focused on is crash-avoidance technology," Mr. Strickland said ahead of an annual gathering this week in Washington, D.C., of regulators and auto industry safety experts. 

For nearly three decades, auto makers and regulators concentrated on how to make crashes more survivable. The result: Even low-priced compact cars have as many as 10 air bags, full complements of three-point seat belts and body structures designed to dissipate crash forces. Highway fatalities in the U.S. have fallen to the lowest level in six decades. 

Still, some 33,000 people died in highway accidents in 2009. That's why regulators and auto makers are shifting their attention to technology that can prevent accidents, such as electronic stability control, which uses the car's brakes to counter a skid. The NHTSA has mandated stability control. 

Now, Mr. Strickland says he's looking for the next crash-avoidance technology that is ready to be pushed into all cars.

Short term, that could mean more cars get technology that warns when a driver lets a vehicle drift out of its lane. A growing number of models offer such systems.

Longer term, motorists could encounter technology that allows cars to broadcast to each other where they are on the road, and warns if a collision is imminent. Auto makers are working together to develop the technical standards to make sure their collision warnings speak the same language.

  Ford Motor Co.
F


-0.51
%




 Tuesday demonstrated in an empty Washington parking lot how a prototype "talking vehicle" system could warn a driver at the back of a line of cars when the first car in the line braked suddenly, or sound an alarm when a vehicle was closing in fast from the side at a blind intersection.

The costs of such technology are just one potential obstacle. A recent proposal that effectively mandates the installation of rear-view cameras to make it easier for drivers to see children hiding behind a vehicle has prompted resistance from auto makers concerned that the hardware could add hundreds of dollars to the cost of a vehicle. 

Mr. Strickland says the accidents rear-view cameras could prevent are "cataclysmic"—specifically that of a parent backing over a child.

Debates over future auto-safety technology will go beyond economics. 

Mr. Strickland says his agency is researching new ways to attack the problem of drunk driving, in light of evidence that the relentless effort to make drinking and driving socially and legally unacceptable isn't reaching a significant share of the most dangerous drivers. 

NHTSA research shows that drivers involved in fatal accidents who were found to have blood alcohol levels above the .08 legal limit are eight times more likely to have had a prior conviction for impaired driving than drivers who had no alcohol in their bodies at the time of a wreck, Mr. Strickland says. NHTSA also concluded in a study that some 17 million people have driven under the influence at least once during the past year.

That's one reason why NHTSA is pursuing research in collaboration with auto makers to develop technology that can unobtrusively—and accurately— sense whether the driver's blood alcohol level is over the limit and prevent the car from starting. One experimental system measures the alcohol in the driver's breath, another measures alcohol using a beam of infrared light aimed at the driver's skin. "This is long-term research … a moon shot to end drunk driving," he said. 

The agency is a long way from mandating such technology. First, it has to be proven to be accurate, fast and practical to install in a car, Mr. Strickland said. Second, the technology has to win acceptance from consumers. There are "privacy issues we have to consider," he says.

The goal, he says, is to develop such technology to the point that manufacturers can start offering it as an option to discover if market forces—such as big discounts from insurers— pull the technology along.

As for distracted driving, Mr. Strickland says his agency is working to put out this year "voluntary guidelines" it wants auto makers to use when designing in-car displays or systems for integrating smart phones, music players or video in vehicles. In the past, such "voluntary" guidelines have often served as de facto standards for the industry.

Mr. Strickland said that when he visited last year's Consumer Electronics Show, there were "auto makers talking about being able to Tweet and Facebook and all these things" in the car. Now, he says, "they are saying we want to provide this service safely."

 Write to  Joseph B. White at joseph.white@wsj.com 