ISTANBUL—Turkey's central bank Tuesday raised its 2011 inflation forecast and issued a robust defense of its controversial policy to simultaneously curb hot-money growth and cool a domestic lending boom. 

Presenting the bank's quarterly inflation report in Ankara, Governor Durmus Yilmaz said the monetary policy committee had raised its 2011 inflation expectation to 5.9% from a previous estimate of 5.4%. 

Mr. Yilmaz also said the bank's policy of cutting the key interest rate while raising banks' reserve ratios is "the best choice" for Turkey, and rejected criticism that the bank hadn't communicated its strategy effectively to the market. 

"I think I gave my messages in a very clear way ... I never targeted deliberate uncertainty," he said, adding, "We have not seen overheating in our economy but we have seen signals for future overheating so we want to prevent it by taking early measures." 

The bank repeated that it stood ready to take further measures if required but stressed that the emphasis was on "tightening policy." Mr. Yilmaz conceded that the deteriorating current account deficit represented a early sign of overheating but cautioned that he was eager not to "put the brakes on too hard" to jeopardize sustainable growth. 

Turkey's rate setters Thursday surprised the market by cutting the bank's key interest rate to a record low of 6.25%, in a continuation of its policy to curb a rapid inflow of speculative investment, or so-called hot money. On Monday the bank aggressively increased lenders' lira-reserve requirement ratios in an effort to ease rampant credit growth, stressing that the policy mix is a "net tightening."

But many in the market have questioned the wisdom of the bank's strategy, saying that some investors are struggling to digest an increasingly complicated policy mix. 

"I am struggling to understand why the [central bank] felt compelled to cut rates this time around, when the 'safe' response would have been to keep rates on hold, and bide time for more data flow," said  Tim Ash, emerging markets economist at Royal Bank of Scotland Group. 

The bank also reiterated that maintaining fiscal discipline was "critical" to safeguarding financial stability, as a loosening could further aggravate the country's mushrooming current account deficit. 

Some economists say that a marked increase in government spending in December could presage a spending spree from the governing AK-party ahead of national elections due in June. 

The bank also said it expected fourth-quarter output to be more robust than expected, reaccelerating from the third-quarter slowdown. 