HONG KONG—U.K.-listed Kazakh copper miner  Kazakhmys
KAZ


2.78
%




 PLC plans to raise US$500 million to US$600 million through a listing on the Hong Kong stock exchange in the first half of this year, two people familiar with the situation said Wednesday. 

Kazakhmys would be the first Kazakhstan company to be listed in Hong Kong, according to data provider Dealogic, joining several other non-Chinese metal and mining firms that have floated shares in the city to raise their profile and further tap China's burgeoning demand for commodities. 

  Citigroup Inc.
C


0.91
%




 and China International Capital Corp Ltd. are handling the deal, the people said. 

The company declined to comment.

Kazakhmys' plan for a listing in Hong Kong was disclosed in October when Chairman  Vladimir Kim sold 11% of the company to Kazakh authorities for more than US$1.3 billion. Mr. Kim agreed not to sell any more of the company's shares for 12 months, except for a provision to make available as many as 21.41 million ordinary shares, or 4% of the firm's total share capital, for a possible secondary listing in Hong Kong in 2011. 

Kazakhmys has an annual production capacity of 350,000 metric tons of copper, Bank of America Merrill Lynch said in a research report in July last year. 

It owns 26% of  Eurasian Natural Resources Corp., a Kazakhstan producer of ferroalloys, iron ore, alumina, aluminum and energy, and a 50% stake in Ekibastuz, Kazakhstan's largest power plant. 

China is one of Kazakhmys' major markets, accounting for 28% of its 2009 revenue of US$3.68 billion, according to the company's annual report. The company's net profit in 2009 was US$554 million. 

"We would see a listing in HK as an incrementally positive move as it would allow the company to tap into the significant Asian investment community," J.P. Morgan Cazenove wrote in a research report in October. 

Last year, Hong Kong topped IPO markets globally, and six non-Chinese metal and mining companies listed on its exchange, according to Dealogic. 

Aluminum giant UC Rusal Ltd. became the first Russian company to list in Hong Kong with its US$2.2 billion float in January last year; coking-coal producer Mongolian Mining Corp. was the first Mongolia-based company to go public in the city with a US$749 million listing in October; SouthGobi Energy Resources Ltd., which mines coal in Mongolia but is headquartered in Canada, raised US$442 million in an IPO in January 2010; Russian miner IRC Ltd. raised US$241 million in October; and Midas Holdings Ltd., a Singapore-listed maker of aluminum frames for train cars raised US$177 million in September. In December, Brazilian mining giant Vale SA listed by introduction in Hong Kong. 

 Write to  Prudence Ho at prudence.ho@dowjones.com 