 West Palm Beach, Fla. 

In the cash-strapped but quality-conscious world of regional theater, a smart small-cast show about a famous personage of the past is about as close as you can get to a sure thing. It stands to reason, then, that Palm Beach Dramaworks, whose slogan is "Theatre to Think About," should have rushed to put "Freud's Last Session," Mark St. Germain's two-man play about an imaginary meeting between Sigmund Freud and C.S. Lewis, onto the tiny stage of its 84-seat theater. This show, which was originally developed in West Palm Beach, has since had highly successful runs Off Broadway, where it just reopened after a seven-week hiatus, and before that at Massachusetts' Barrington Stage Company, where it received its official premiere two summers ago. Now that I've seen the Florida version, I know why: Mr. St. Germain has written one of the most stimulating plays of its kind to come my way.

In "Freud's Last Session," Prof. Lewis (Christopher Oden), the bluff Oxford don turned Christian apologist, pays a visit to the office of Dr. Freud (Dennis Creaghan), the religion-hating inventor of psychoanalysis, who has fled to London to escape Nazi persecution. What ensues is a cross between an urbane conversation piece and a knock-down-drag-out debate over the existence of God. Such plays often lack dramatic momentum, but this one is tautened by its shrewdly calculated setting. The date is Sept. 3, 1939. Not long after Lewis arrives, Freud switches on the radio to hear Neville Chamberlain announcing that a state of war exists between England and Germany—and the air-raid sirens start to wail.

Under such dire circumstances, just about any conversation, serious or not, will acquire a sharp point of tension. This one, however, is made tenser still by the fact that Freud, who was dying of oral cancer in the fall of 1939, is in excruciating pain throughout much of the play's 70-minute running time. (The scene in which Lewis removes his suffering host's ill-fitting oral prosthesis is almost unbearably graphic.) Yet he insists on continuing to talk to his visitor. Why? Because he is puzzled by Lewis's conversion. He cannot understand how so palpably intelligent a man "could suddenly abandon truth and embrace an insidious lie," and now that Freud's own death is mere days away, he feels an irresistible compulsion to probe that paradox. Lewis, in turn, is challenged by Freud's atheism, and longs to penetrate his formidable defenses and open him up to the possibility of belief.

 Palm Beach Dramaworks  322 Banyan Blvd.  West Palm Beach, Fla.  ($47), 561-514-4042  Extended through Feb. 13 

This production, which has been lucidly staged by William Hayes, the company's artistic director, is a good example of Palm Beach Dramaworks' brainy approach. The acting is sharp, sympathetic and detailed. Mr. Creaghan has been made up to look exactly like Freud, and Michael Amico's set is a fabulously precise evocation of the Viennese doctor's cluttered consulting room, right down to the shawl on his clients' couch. Even the re-created BBC broadcasts sound believable. Yet nothing that we see or hear onstage is allowed to shift our attention from the play itself, and the fact that no one in the theater is more than a few feet from the stage makes you feel as though you're part of the conversation.

What I like most about Mr. St. Germain's pungently literate script is that neither character gets the upper hand. To be sure, both men carry a full load of intellectual gunnery, and each is given his fair share of snappy comebacks (though never so snappy as to make the dialogue sound coy or stagey). But Mr. St. Germain knows, too, that Freud and Lewis had both made up their minds about religion by 1939. Unlikely as it may sound, that's where the drama lies: A chess match between two masters that ends in a stalemate is far more exciting than one between two amateurs that ends in a clear win. What's more, the words that Mr. St. Germain puts in their mouths are worthy of their reputations, especially Freud's for brutally sardonic humor, which is so harsh that you'll wince: "I wish cancer attacked my brain instead. Then, perhaps, I could hallucinate there is a God, and seek vengeance."

This is my third visit in the past three seasons to Palm Beach Dramaworks, where I previously saw Eugène Ionesco's "The Chairs" and Michael Frayn's "Copenhagen," two demanding small-cast plays that the company performed with similar intelligence and brio in front of packed houses. Anyone who supposes that Palm Beach is the exclusive property of rich airheads with great tans would appear to be all wet.

If you can't get to West Palm Beach, you can see "Freud's Last Session" in Manhattan at the Marjorie S. Deane Little Theater on Central Park West, where it is now playing in an open-ended run. If you can't get there, either, sit tight: I have no doubt that "Freud's Last Session" will be coming to a theater reasonably near you at some point in the next season or two. A show like this is destined to make the regional rounds—as well it should.

—Mr. Teachout, the Journal's drama critic, blogs about theater and the other arts at www.terryteachout.com. Write to him at tteachout@wsj.com.