As Adecco Group North America CEO Tig Gilliam is closely watching the job market. Mr. Gilliam's company, which is part of Switzerland-based Adecco S.A., provides outsourcing services, temp workers and consulting to more than 100,000 clients worldwide. In North America; it has about 900 offices with more than 100,000 staff on assignment and about 4,850 full-time employees. 

Adecco places professionals in all kinds of positions, from mechanical engineers to administrative assistants. Since temporary hires often precede permanent hires, Adecco's business could offer a preview of what's to come in 2011's job market.

Mr. Gilliam has worked with Adecco since March 2007, and previously worked at IBM and PricewaterhouseCoopers. He recently spoke to the Journal about his own company's business and the future of the job market.

 Edited excerpts: 

 WSJ: Do you think the job market's out of the woods yet?

 Mr. Gilliam: Job creation this year won't set any records for sure but it continues to show an improving trend.

 WSJ: Have your clients started to shift from requests for temps to permanent hires?

 Mr. Gilliam: So far, our customers are continuing to engage us first on a temporary basis, but the permanent jobs are coming. Our permanent placement business increased by a third in 2010 over 2009. We expect that again in 2011. Companies are getting much more comfortable hiring permanent employees.

 WSJ: What areas are in demand?

 Mr. Gilliam: Companies in production started to need manufacturing and warehouse operations workers in 2009 and early 2010. Now, we're starting to see business grow in professional skills. Engineering has picked up dramatically. IT is seeing growth, too. Mortgage-related finance and accounting jobs have been strong too, because interest rates are so low and people are refinancing.

 WSJ: Are there certain skill sets you're having trouble finding?

 Mr. Gilliam: The greatest skill gap is in engineering and IT. Clients always need the latest technology, and candidates don't always have training in those.

 WSJ: Does that mean well-qualified candidates have been able to land better pay?

 Mr. Gilliam: Not yet. Even within engineering and IT, only 10% to 15% of jobs have such an in-demand skill set that the candidates can pressure wages higher. [Employers are] just not ready to see wage inflation this early in the recovery. 

 WSJ: What do you think is holding back employers who haven't started hiring?

 Mr. Gilliam: Our clients say, "Tell me why we can't get it done with the team we have already." They saw that they could do a lot with fewer people [during the recession]. Even when a company does want to hire, there's much more focus on [avoiding] a situation where they have to let go 25% of their workforce again. They try to hire on a temporary basis.

 WSJ: Some consultants have said they expect companies to permanently transition to a flexible workforce of temps and consultants rather than hire full-time. Is that happening now?

 Mr. Gilliam: It's easy for the hype to get ahead of reality, but there has been some shift. A consultant who works in our IT business for a year might have four different assignments with different companies. Professionals are getting used to that sort of environment. 

 Write to  Joe.Light at Joe.Light@wsj.com 