 Vienna, Va. 

Comedy is hard, which is probably one reason few contemporary opera composers attempt it. Composer John Musto and librettist Mark Campbell succeeded with the very funny "Volpone" in 2004, but their new piece, "The Inspector," which had its world premiere at The Barns at Wolf Trap last week, tips over into caricature. Dark comedy like this requires a lighter touch. If the audience is to laugh at greed and corruption, there has to be someone to root for, whether he's a likable villain or someone on the other side. "The Inspector" provides no such character.

The story, based on Gogol's "The Inspector General," has been relocated to a small town in Sicily during the rise of Mussolini. It's run by a corrupt mayor named Fazzobaldi (say it aloud to get the joke). Warned that an inspector—in disguise—is coming from Rome to clean house, the mayor jumps to the conclusion that an impoverished stranger (Tancredi) in the local hostelry is the man. He wines, dines and bribes the fellow, who, unfortunately for the mayor, turns out to be a fugitive from the new regime, not a stepping stone to greater glory and fatter pickings. Tancredi runs off with the mayor's daughter and his car; the mayor, his venal wife and his cronies are arrested by the real inspector. 

Mr. Campbell's libretto overdoes everything, and is crammed with extraneous lines that pile up details without adding depth. Near the end of Act I, Sarelda, the mayor's wife, sung by the dynamic mezzo Sarah Larsen, rhapsodizes at great length about the different kinds of shoes, hats and gowns that she looks forward to owning once she and her husband are ensconced in higher office. It's probably meant to be an Imelda Marcos moment, but it's just a catalog of descriptive words. The 75-minute first act is all set-up and simplistic character introduction—the corrupt mayor; the hungry Cosimo, Tancredi's traveling companion; the radical Beatrice, the mayor's disaffected daughter; a pair of spoonerism-spouting twins who run the post office—and the comedy doesn't build. 

Mr. Musto's music is normally witty and wry, but in "The Inspector" it seemed weighed down by all that text, unable to break free and tell us something more about the characters and situation. At Wolf Trap, the orchestra, ably led by Glen Cortese, played tunes that recalled lush Italian movie scores and jaunty American musicals, decorated with lots of ingenious touches, and the ensembles had energy. But the solo vocal lines felt like rhythmic vehicles to get all those words out, keeping the singers from soaring.

Leon Major's direction was as broad as the opera. Erhard Rom's simple but clever turntable set made for quick scene changes, and David O. Roberts's costumes evoked the period. Robert Orth brought a theatrical villainy to Fazzobaldi, Anne-Carolyn Bird was sadly drab as the Marxist Beatrice, Vale Rideout was a suitably bemused Tancredi, and William Sharp was sharp-edged as Cosimo. Angela Mannino, a big-voiced soprano, and Matt Boehler, a cavernous bass, were standouts as Agrippa, the Directress of Education Managementation, and Adolfo, the Director of Order—members of the mayor's sleazy Board of Directors. Agrippa got one of the better jokes—she boasts that she is the founder of the "Buy Your OWN Damn Books" program and other similarly antieducational manifestos—but like many of the others, it was better suited to standup than to opera. 

 Philadelphia 

"Danse Russe," given its world premiere by Center City Opera Theater at the Kimmel Center last week, also strove for comedy and faltered on its libretto. Dubbed a "vaudeville" by its creators, composer Paul Moravec and librettist Terry Teachout, who collaborated on the effective "The Letter" (2009), "Danse Russe" imagined the backstage machinations behind the creation of Stravinsky's "The Rite of Spring" by the Ballet Russes in Paris in 1913. (Mr. Teachout is also the Journal's theater critic.) But it was essentially a one-joke show: The artists—the composer Stravinsky (Christopher Lorge), the dancer and choreographer Nijinsky (Matt Maness) and the conductor Pierre Monteux (Paul Corujo)—repeatedly claim to hate the producer Diaghilev (Jason Switzer) but recognize that his genius is what makes their work shine. Diaghilev tells them that a scandal will sell more tickets, so they create a scandalous work. Voilà: the riot at the Paris premiere, and subsequent immortality.

The hour-long one-acter alternates rather mechanically between bright, up-tempo numbers, such as the lilting ensemble waltz, "Astonish me," and more contemplative, less successful back-story moments that explore Stravinsky's homesickness for Russia and Diaghilev's insecurity and vanity. The rhyming text tends toward the obvious ("I thought I was an artist / You're the bestest and the smartest"); the music quotes cleverly from Stravinsky and incorporates popular dance rhythms appropriate for vaudeville. 

The 16-piece Orchestra 2001, led by Andrew Kurtz, the company's general and artistic director, performed the music with skill and energy. Mr. Switzer was the strongest member of the adequate cast, though Mr. Maness, a tenor, gets extra credit for courageously appearing in tights (Amy Chmielewski did the costumes) and attempting some Nijinskian moves. Leland Kimball served as stage director and scenic designer for the bare-bones production in which orchestra and singers shared the stage, and only a few props, such as a piano and a ballet barre, were used to set the scene.

CCOT opened the program with performances of Stravinsky's instrumental "Ragtime" (1918) and the "burlesque" "Renard" (1916), both of which were acrobatically choreographed by Kun-Yang Lin. Stravinsky's acerbic, folk-tinged music in "Renard" was vigorously, if cryptically, embodied by the six dancers. The four singers (Messrs. Lorge, Maness and Switzer of "Danse Russe," plus bass Judd Ernster) were hard to hear and didn't put across the English translation by Rollo H. Myers. In "Danse Russe," at least, one could tell what was going on.

 Ms. Waleson writes about opera for the Journal.  