BANGALORE—A consortium that includes Nasdaq-listed  iGate Corp. and private equity firm Apax Partners agreed Monday to buy a 63% stake in Indian outsourcing firm  Patni Computer Systems Ltd. from General Atlantic LLC and three Patni founders in a deal that could be worth as much as $1.22 billion. 

The deal highlights continued interest by private equity firms in India's outsourcing sector and would be the largest technology deal in India since early 2009. Combined with iGate's operations, the company would rank among the top eight software exporting firms in India by revenue. 

It also marks the end of a longstanding effort by U.S. private equity firm General Atlantic and the Patni founders to exit the company, as the company remains exposed to the weakened global economy. 

For iGate, the deal will see the U.S.-based company further bolstering its presence in the Indian outsourcing sector. India continues to be the most preferred destination for outsourcing thanks mainly to the scale and maturity of the work force here and the cost advantage it enjoys over competitors.

Patni has lagged behind more recent entrants to the outsourcing business, such as  Infosys Technologies Ltd. Wipro Ltd. and Tata Consultancy Services Ltd. in benefiting from the boom in services since 1999 when western firms employed cheap Indian programmers to rewrite their software ahead of the new millennium. 

As part of the agreement, iGate will offer 503.50 rupees ($11.08) a share for the 45.6% stake held by the founders—Ashok, Narendra, and Gajendra Patni—and the 17.4% held by General Atlantic worth a combined $921 million. That would trigger an open offer for 20% more in the company under Indian regulations. Including the $301 million it expects to spend on acquiring about 20.6% more in Patni through the open offer if all shares are tendered, the deal value would stand at about $1.22 billion, iGate said in a statement. 

According to Indian rules, an acquirer of a 15% stake or more has to make an open offer for at least another 20% in the target company at not less than the price at which the initial sale was executed. 

  Big is Beautiful for iGate Chief  

The consortium's offer price represents an 8.5% premium to Patni's Monday's closing price of 463.85 rupees on the Bombay Stock Exchange. 

"I think the synergy of a common platform together is very positive for our customers, great for the employees and shareholders," Patni Chief Executive  Jeya Kumar said. 

Patni, which is also listed on the New York Stock Exchange, posted net profit of $134.3 million for the 12 months ended Sept. 30, on revenue of $689 million 2010. The company has 16,556 employees. IGate, which has most of its software development centers in India, reported net profit of $45.7 million on revenue of $252 million during the same period; iGate has 8,278 employees. 

"The billion dollar [in combined revenue] gives us a bit of credibility" to pitch for large deals, said iGate Chief Executive  Phaneesh Murthy. "It gives us a seat at the high table so to speak." 

Mr. Murthy, an Infosys veteran, said he prefers the combined entity to remain listed only in the U.S. 

iGate said it plans to fund the deal with a combination of cash and equity, with an option for a public offering of up to 10 million shares. Of the total deal value, about $100 million will be through internal cash and up to $700 million will be raised via debt from Jefferies & Co. Inc. and RBC Capital Markets. iGate plans to raise another $270 million through the issuance of preferred stock convertible into common stock. 

Patni board member  Arun Duggal said that though there isn't a noncompete fee involved in the deal, the three founders will need to stay out of the information-technology business for another 12 months.

The deal will likely be closed by the first half of 2011 and integration of the two companies is expected to take 18-24 months. 

Jefferies & Co., Kirkland & Ellis LLP, Khaitan & Co. and Ernst & Young advised iGate. Kotak Mahindra Capital Co. will manage the open offer. The Patni family and General Atlantic were advised by the Credit Suisse Group, Ambit Capital and Avendus Capital. Standard Chartered PLC advised Apax Partners.

 Write to  Dhanya Ann Thoppil at dhanya.thoppil@dowjones.com 