JUBA, Sudan—Sudan's President Omar al-Bashir pledged to respect the outcome of the impending referendum on whether the south should become an independent nation, raising hopes that Africa's biggest country can avoid more bloodshed even if it breaks apart. 

"If secession is the end result, we will come and congratulate and celebrate with you," Mr. Bashir said Tuesday beside the south's president, Salva Kiir. Mr. Bashir also promised technical and logistical aid to help the south make the transition to independence.

Soldiers and police blocked most of Juba's few paved roads for Mr. Bashir's arrival Tuesday morning. While the official welcome was cordial, the south also made clear its determination to secede. People lining a major road to greet the leader waved small white flags stamped with a thumbprint and the word "separation," as well as the flag of southern Sudan. 

The referendum vote, scheduled for Sunday Jan. 9, is the culmination of a peace agreement between the north and south that was forged in 2005. That agreement followed a civil war that left at least two million dead and millions more displaced. 

Under the peace pact, both sides agreed on a transitional government for five years, after which the south would vote on whether to secede. Mr. Bashir, who is wanted by the International Criminal Court for war crimes related to massacres in the Darfur region, has suggested as recently as December that his government might not recognize a vote for secession if the southern government didn't campaign for unity as well as separation. 

Now that the south's independence appears to be a fait accompli, however, Mr. Bashir has shifted course and sought to allay tensions that could lead to more unrest and disrupt oil supplies. "Imposing unity by force failed," said Mr. Bashir in his remarks. "The end result was more hatred, more division, more enmity.…We all are in dire need of peace."

Sudan is rich in oil, which comes mainly from the south through a pipeline to the north, where it is refined and sold. The two sides currently share revenue from the oil—now pumping at about 500,000 barrels a day—as part of the peace agreement. Both rely heavily on oil to fund their respective governments.

The U.S., Norway and Britain—the three Western countries that pledged to help make the peace accord work—have encouraged Mr. Bashir to support the referendum. The U.S., for example, offered to remove Sudan from its list of state sponsors of terrorism, if Mr. Bashir helped to ensure a peaceful vote. 

Sudanese Foreign Minister Ali Karti told reporters at the United Nations in New York last month that he "hoped" the U.S. incentives were sincere, "because we have had so many promises before." 

Southerners have long been wary of the north, which in the past has failed to keep promises. But on Tuesday, officials were more receptive to the remarks of President Bashir. 

"He said he would be the first to recognize an independent southern Sudan," said Barnaba Marial Benjamin, the southern government spokesman. "That has made the people of southern Sudan very happy."

—Joe Lauria at the United Nations contributed to this article.