Mike Huckabee, who holds a leading position in most Republican presidential polls, will say on Saturday whether he will become a candidate, with top aides predicting that he won't run.

Mr. Huckabee's decision, however it falls, is likely to reorder the emerging presidential field. With little effort and no campaign, the former Arkansas governor led in surveys of Republican voters in Iowa and ranked first or second in many national polls, thanks to support among social conservatives and high name recognition as a 2008 candidate and Fox News host.

Mr. Huckabee has told followers that he will announce his decision on his Fox News show Saturday night. But his own political team says he has refused to tell even them what he has decided.

That has some of his aides surmising that Mr. Huckabee will opt out of the race. "I've heard nothing, which indicates to me he's not running," said Ed Rollins, who directed his 2008 campaign and has been organizing his 2012 campaign-in-waiting.

Mr. Huckabee's decision comes as the Republican field has begun to take shape. Former House Speaker Newt Gingrich and Texas Rep. Ron Paul both announced they were running this week. Several other contenders, including Mitt Romney and Tim Pawlenty, are expected to do the same in coming weeks. Both have taken the initial step of forming exploratory committees in order to raise campaign funds. Mitch Daniels, the Indiana governor, is expected to announce soon whether he will join the contest.

Only Mr. Romney, the former Massachusetts governor, rivals Mr. Huckabee's standing in national polls.

A former pastor who has built a successful career as an author and a TV and radio personality, Mr. Huckabee remains popular in Iowa, the nation's first nominating state, where he handily won the 2008 caucuses.

Mr. Huckabee went on that year to win primaries in Alabama, Arkansas, Georgia, Kansas, Louisiana, Tennessee and West Virginia, and placed second in the key state of South Carolina, where he leads in the polls now.

If he stays out, a large evangelical contingent will be up for grabs in Iowa and beyond. Political handicappers and campaign operatives said a key beneficiary would be Mr. Pawlenty, the former Minnesota governor and a centrist conservative, who has recently made a strong push for support among social conservatives.

Woody Fraser, Mr. Huckabee's producer on Fox, said in a statement that the former governor "has not told anyone at Fox News Channel his decision." 

Several Huckabee advisers said they believed Fox would not allow a host to use his own show on the network to announce a presidential campaign. Fox, which like The Wall Street Journal is owned by News Corp., suspended its contracts with Mr. Gingrich and former Pennsylvania Sen. Rick Santorum as they moved toward joining the presidential contest.

Mr. Rollins said he and other advisers met with Mr. Huckabee as recently as a week ago to go over his chances. They had assembled a strategy that foresaw him sweeping to victory in Iowa, then focusing on South Carolina, Florida and Texas.

But two weeks ago, Mr. Rollins said, Mr. Huckabee "started backing off" amid questions about whether he could raise sufficient campaign funds and build a working campaign operation. The answers to those questions were "yes," the campaign chief added. But Mr. Rollins said he raised a flag. "I said, 'If you don't have the fire in the belly, don't go,' " Mr. Rollins said. "I can't want it more for him than he wants it for himself."

Read about the potential Republican presidential contenders.

Mr. Huckabee has about 10 close political advisers from his 2008 campaign, many of whom have held off committing to other campaigns. Some said they would quit their jobs to join him, should he decide to run. This core cadre has met with him over the last month and has strongly advised that he jump in.

"He has by far the clearest path to the nomination of all the 2012 candidates," one of the would-be Huckabee team said.

But several people close to Mr. Huckabee said Friday that they had no knowledge of what he planned to announce, and that they were dumbfounded that he would proceed with his announcement without informing them of his decision.

Factors that might keep Mr. Huckabee in private life include his Fox show, which, along with his series of books, have made him wealthy for the first time. He is building a mansion in Florida.

As Mr. Huckabee waffled on his political ambitions, other campaigns moved forward with policy platforms. 

On Friday, at an event honoring one of the founders of supply-side economics, Arthur Laffer, Mr. Gingrich proposed an economic plan that included cutting the corporate tax rate from 35% to 12.5%, eliminating all capital-gains taxes and giving people the choice between the current tax code or a flat tax rate of 15%. 

Anticipating criticism that his tax plan would favor rich investors, Mr. Gingrich said, "I want a tax code which favors savings, favors investment, favors risk-taking, favors profits and favors creating jobs. I don't want a neutral tax code."

 Write to  Neil King Jr. at neil.king@wsj.com and Jonathan Weisman at jonathan.weisman@wsj.com 