Think of the credit markets in 2010 as the midpoint of a wild party stoked with free-flowing money courtesy of Federal Reserve Chairman  Ben Bernanke. The festivities look ready to kick into full swing in the year to come and, when they peak, many of the partiers will put on trades they may well regret in the morning.

Read the complete  Year-End Review report .

Credit investors chasing yield didn't have to reach very far in the past two years because the aftermath of the credit crisis provided a bumper crop of cheap bonds. Rock-bottom interest rates drove investors out of investment-grade bonds—the 2009 market darling—and into high-yield and emerging-market debt over the past 12 months. 

Now, however, the low-hanging fruit has been picked clean. And investors stand poised to continue to ratchet up the risk-on trade in the hunt for yield, switching into the lowest rated of "junk" bonds, European debt and, paradoxically, secured loans.

"We want to add more risk to the portfolio. … We think risk outperforms this year," said  Tom O'Reilly, the co-portfolio manager of Neuberger Berman's $1 billion High Income Bond Fund. Mr. O'Reilly says he will balance out that risk with greater diversification as continued demand for the asset class pushes the average price of junk debt higher.

Supportive fundamentals will keep the bull run in corporate debt going, Mr. O'Reilly added. Credit investors expect default rates to stay in a 2% to 3% range and U.S. gross domestic product to grow between 2.5% to 3% this year as companies that cleaned up their balance sheets continue to generate cash. 

The technical underpinnings of the market also look relatively stable. In 2007, the leveraged-loan market was inflated by at least an estimated $120 billion of total return swaps, derivatives that allowed investors to take on $10 of credit risk for every $1 of collateral posted, said  Mark Okada, chief investment officer at Highland Capital. Today, it is estimated there are only $40 billion of the swaps outstanding at leverage ratios of 3 to 1.

Ravenous demand pushed the average yield on new bonds rated single-B down to 8% to 8.5% in the last quarter of 2010, compared to around 10% a year earlier and to over 12% during the worst of the credit crunch, according to Standard & Poor's Leveraged Commentary and Data. The average spread of investment-grade bonds over Treasurys compressed to 1.71% in 2010 through November, down from 2.1% in 2009 and 6.3% in 2008, according to data from Barclays Capital. 

Assuming Treasury rates stay low, bond-fund managers will be left with few options to juice performance above the annual interest rates their bonds pay. One straightforward strategy is to increase the weighting of the higher-yielding—and higher-risk—bonds in a portfolio. 

That trend began in 2010, when new bonds rated triple-C, the lowest rung of the junk-bond ladder, swelled to comprise 17% of all new deals, compared with 11.4% the previous year, according to Standard & Poor's LCD. And there is room to grow. In go-go 2007, triple-C deals made up more than one-third of the market.

Another trade is to play event risk. "We're planting a flag that housing and Europe do not become systemically risky in 2011," said  Bob Michele, J.P. Morgan Asset Management's chief investment officer for fixed income. "Following the bailout of Ireland, we bought Spanish debt and now we still believe there's value there. We don't see Spain going through a restructuring."

The next chapter in Europe's sovereign-debt saga will likely rattle markets sometime in the first half of 2011, but won't trigger a default, Mr. Michele said. He called the expected volatility a buying opportunity. 

Investors also are likely to move up the corporate capital structure in their search for risk by buying floating-rate loans. Loans typically rank senior to bonds in a bankruptcy, but they trade less liquidly and pay less interest, making them more volatile in market selloffs.

Leveraged loans pumped much of the air into the credit bubble and suffered disproportionately when it popped, returning an average negative 31% in 2008 against a 24% loss in high-yield bonds, according to financial-information provider Markit. 

As the long-term case for higher rates builds and as the yield premium built into bonds dwindles, portfolio managers are giving this asset class another look. Bank of America Merrill Lynch predicts the sale of new loans will spike over 70% to $235 billion this year, while forecasting flat new junk-bond issuance around $300 billion. 

And more leveraged loans means more leveraged buyouts. "LBOs have struggled in the last few years, but now the loan market is back," said  Paul Appleby, who heads the high-yield team at Prudential Fixed Income Management. "I can see a $10 billion deal getting done."

Debt funds allowed private-equity sponsors to crank the leverage machine back up in the fourth quarter of 2010 with a flurry of dividend deals and covenant-lite financings that harken back to the market excesses of 2006-07. 

In the month ending Dec. 16, dividend deals and LBOs made up 10% and 8% of new junk-bond sales, respectively, compared with an average of 4.7% and 5% for the year, according to S&P LCD. Nevertheless, equity contributions to new LBOs remain high by historical measures, suggesting the market hasn't returned to prebust levels.

Fund managers of all stripes started their trip down the risk spectrum last year as the growth rate of investment-grade and speculative-grade bond sales flip-flopped. 

New corporate investment-grade bond issuance amounted to $962 billion in 2010 through Dec. 8, down 33% from $1.4 trillion in 2009 and only slightly higher than the $848 billion logged in 2008, according to Dealogic. High-yield issuance, on the other hand, surged 50% in 2010 to $353 billion, compared with $235 billion in 2009 and an anemic $92 billion in 2008, according to Dealogic. 

"The policy of the Fed is to inflate asset prices and that's why we have a positive outlook on higher yielding U.S. credit," said  Hans Mikkelsen, credit strategist for Bank of America Merrill Lynch. "Conditions in credit are such that bubbles can emerge.