BRUSSELS—Lawyers for the European Union's executive arm are studying EU treaty law to determine whether it has the right to set up an EU-wide board to review strategic investments in the 27-nation bloc, according to an internal letter reviewed by the Wall Street Journal.

The European Commission is considering whether to form a board similar to the Committee on Foreign Investments in the U.S., or CIFUS, which has the power to block investments in "strategic" sectors if they are deemed a threat to national security. It is aimed especially at Chinese companies.

With more than $2 trillion in capital reserves, China is set to be the launching pad for a wave of overseas mergers and acquisitions in the next decade. It already has been more active. Chinese businesses spent a total of $853 million buying 118 businesses in the EU from 2008 through 2010, up from $43.9 million buying 18 businesses from 2003 to 2005, according to data provider Dealogic. And on Monday, Beijing's local government signed a joint venture with private-equity firm A Capital Asia to raise roughly $500 million and help Chinese businesses invest in Europe. 

Recently, bigger nibbles by Chinese businesses, especially Tianjin Xinmao S&T Investment Corp.'s failed bid this year to buy Dutch cable-wire maker Draka NV for $1.3 billion, set off a political movement in Brussels to establish a legal means of blocking such deals. 

The EU's industry commissioner,  Antonio Tajani, first proposed the board in media interviews in December, raising concerns about the Chinese state being behind some foreign investments from the country. "You need fire insurance before there's actually a fire," he said in an interview. "It's not protectionism, it's being careful."

On Feb. 9, Mr. Tajani and Michel Barnier, internal-markets commissioner, wrote a two-page letter to European Commission President José Manuel Barroso demanding the creation of the review board. Mr. Barroso's staff has said it is analyzing the proposal outlined in the letter.

The letter quotes concerns raised by European businesses that "some foreign investments in Europe have the goal not of fixing our industries, or improving their performance, but of transferring know-how back overseas."

It suggests that national review boards, as used by France, Italy and other countries, should be eliminated in favor of a continental version: "It is notably legitimate for the Commission, as guardian of the treaty and general public welfare in Europe, to ask itself if the fragmentation of [review boards] might hamper the single market and the competitiveness of our industries."

The letter also cites a provision of EU law allowing countries to block investments in their defense and energy sectors. The latter is known as the "Gazprom clause," because it was created to allow countries to block investments by the Russia's energy company. Finally, the letter says, the Lisbon Treaty that took effect last year "has given the EU new powers to negotiate treaties on foreign investment."

The issue has become a hot topic in Brussels, with multinational companies retaining lobbyists to block it. Mr. Barroso, who has a reputation of being pro-business, is likely to have objections, analysts say.

Messers. Tajani and Barnier specify that their goal isn't protectionism. "The economy of the EU is the most open on the planet and that is a good thing," they write. "But this openness cannot be naive and must belong, we believe, on a 'level playing field', with a principle of reciprocity."

Mr. Barroso will decide how to react to the proposal around the beginning of April, EU officials say.

 Write to  John W. Miller at john.miller@dowjones.com 