WASHINGTON—The State Department put into place an evacuation plan that includes emergency flights out of Egypt for U.S. citizens, while warning Americans there to remain in their residences or hotels.

The country's intensifying political unrest has prompted governments to step up travel warnings, including urging their citizens to leave, while airlines and tourism companies are canceling trips.

"U.S. citizens currently in Egypt should consider leaving as soon as they can safely do so," the U.S. State Department said Sunday in a travel warning.

"While demonstrations have not been directed toward Westerners, U.S. citizens are urged to remain alert to local security developments and to be vigilant regarding their personal security."

Violence in Cairo, Alexandria and other parts of the country has disrupted road travel between cities and airports, and while the Cairo airport is open, flights might be disrupted due to the protests, the department noted. 

The U.K. and German governments, among others, advised against all but essential travel to Egypt's main cities, and recommended that their citizens leave if it is safe to do so. The Greek Foreign Ministry said Sunday that it has formulated contingency plans to evacuate Greeks from Egypt. 

Swiss, Turkish and Dutch governments also issued advisories encouraging nationals in the country to leave and telling those who planned trips to Egypt to reconsider. A growing number of governments—including China, France, Germany, Belgium, Sweden, Finland, Russia and Poland—issued their own travel warnings for most, if not all, of Egypt.

A spokesman for Unilever PLC, the London-based consumer-products giant that makes Lipton tea, Ben & Jerry's ice cream and Hellmann's mayonnaise, said Sunday that the company's operation in Egypt had been closed since Thursday. He said Unilever would be looking to remove two expatriates and the12 consultants working for the company there at the first available opportunity.

Secretary of State Hillary Clinton Sunday said the U.S. State Department is working "triple time" to ensure Americans' safety in Egypt. 

"We're working closely with the Egyptian government to ensure the safety of American citizens," Mrs. Clinton said on NBC's "Meet the Press." "We have authorized a voluntary departure. We are reaching out to American citizens."

She said there were no reports of American citizens killed or injured, and "we want to keep it that way."

Travel companies are also halting tours to Egypt, at least temporarily. Uniworld Boutique River Cruise Collection, a California.-based company that offers travelers Nile River cruises, on Saturday canceled its tours in Egypt through Feb. 12. 

"We will continually assess the forward situation and make announcements as appropriate," it said in its advisory. "Clients who remain in Egypt are of course being looked after by our representatives and continuing with their itineraries as appropriate to the situation. Guests choosing to return home are also being accommodated according to flight availability." 

Meanwhile, Augustana College in Sioux Falls, S.D., provided regular updates on 90 band members and faculty who had been in Cairo since early January on a five-concert tour. Their Saturday flight home from Cairo was canceled, leaving college officials to scramble for new travel arrangements.

According to updates on the college's website, the students moved to a hotel further from the Cairo protests. By Sunday afternoon, 46 students made it out of Egypt on a KLM flight and were in Amsterdam. The remaining students are set to leave Cairo for Amsterdam on Monday.

 Write to  Maya Jackson Randall at Maya.Jackson-Randall@dowjones.com 