  (See Corrections & Amplifications item below.)  

Los Angeles named a new schools chief Tuesday, selecting a longtime educator known for his aggressive efforts to overhaul teachers' evaluations and link their pay to student achievement.

John Deasy, 50 years old and a former official at the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, will succeed Ramon C. Cortines, 78, who has headed the nation's second-largest school system for two years and said he planned to step down this year.

Mr. Deasy's appointment was widely expected after he was hired as deputy superintendent last August. 

Board members of the Los Angeles Unified School District approved a three-year contract with Mr. Deasy in a 6-0 vote, with board member Steve Zimmer abstaining.

"Having had the opportunity to observe Dr. Deasy at work these past few months left me with no doubt in his ability to lead this district despite the uncertainty of the state's fiscal situation and the challenges that lay before us," school board Vice President Richard Vladovic said in a statement.

Mr. Deasy's appointment brought praise from U.S. Secretary of Education Arne Duncan, who said Mr. Deasy is "a really smart, strategic thinker who can push a strong reform agenda in a collaborative way."

But the appointment also brought criticism from the head of the local teachers' union, who complained that their voices were left out of the selection process. The district didn't launch a national search or allow for formal public input.

"This was a closed process and that does not lead to a collaborative kind of environment going forward," said A.J. Duffy, president of the United Teachers Los Angeles, which represents more than 40,000 teachers. He declined to comment on whether Mr. Deasy was a good choice.

Mr. Deasy, who takes up his post in April, faces a daunting challenge. The Los Angeles school district, the country's biggest after New York City, has suffered declining enrollment and a 33% dropout rate. Though students have posted modest gains on some national-achievement exams in recent years, their scores are lower than national averages and those posted by other big cities.

The district, which has more than 670,000 students, also faces a $142 million deficit that could grow to $482 million by the end of the fiscal year if California voters don't approve a budget proposal to increase sales, income and vehicle taxes.

Some 5,000 district employees have already been laid off, and federal stimulus funds that saved 2,000 jobs are due to run out this year. The teachers' union has agreed to a shortened school year for a second straight year, cutting their annual pay, and will be asked for more, Mr. Cortines has said.

The district also has come in for criticism for opening the lavish $578 million Robert F. Kennedy Community Schools, a K-12 campus serving about 4,000 district students. 

Meanwhile, a burgeoning charter-school movement has pitted advocates of the schools against teachers, and parents against parents, as charters—public schools run by independent groups—have pleaded for more district resources.

During his short time in Los Angeles, Mr. Deasy has worked with the mayor's office, union leaders and charter-school operators, helping to push through some controversial policies, including a school board proposal that seeks to change state law and allow California districts to link teacher evaluations to student achievement. The district is negotiating with teachers union officials to include student achievement in formal evaluations

Before coming to Los Angeles, Mr. Deasy was deputy director of education for effective teaching at the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, overseeing grants to school districts that adopted comprehensive plans for teacher recruitment, evaluation and compensation.

Before that, Mr. Deasy was superintendent of several school districts, including Prince George's County in Maryland, where he was credited with increasing test scores and closing the gap between the performance of low-income and minority students and their peers. He also launched a pilot program there that rewarded teachers for boosting student achievement.

 Write to  Tamara Audi at tammy.audi@wsj.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications:  The board of the Los Angeles Unified School District has voted to negotiate with the teachers' union to tie student achievement results to teacher evaluations. An earlier version of this article incorrectly said it had voted to link student achievement to teacher evaluations. 