 Q: I have a Florida vacation home that I've never rented out before, but I could use the money right now. I live many miles away, so have been thinking about using a property management firm. But I have heard horror stories about them, and am wondering if this isn't something that I can do myself. What do you think?

 --Harrisonburg, Pa. 

 A: A property manager could be helpful, but is by no means necessary. Depending on your skills and inclination, you might well be able to manage this yourself. Indeed, though it's time-consuming and often a hassle, I manage my own rental condo in South Florida from my home near Washington, D.C., some 1,100 miles away. However, I do employ a house-watching service that handles both housekeeping and on-site emergencies that I can't deal with myself, like overflowing toilets and lock outs.

Just about every other function of a landlord can either be handled from afar or contracted out to a professional property manager. Among the duties you'll need to cover are: advertising; interviewing and screening tenants; collecting rents and dunning for late payments; negotiating complaints; keeping track of expenses; maintaining the unit and repairing damage; getting rid of pests and vermin; and if necessary, handling evictions.

But these services are not cheap. Though costs vary greatly—and some firms charge a flat monthly fee—typically you can expect to pay around 10% of the gross monthly rental fee as well as a charge of up to one month's rent to get a new tenant into the property. Firms may also ask you to keep a certain sum, such as $1,000, in an escrow account to cover any emergency repairs, like a leaky washing machine.

Those hits to your bottom line may well spell the difference between positive and negative cash flow. If that's the case, see if you can negotiate a cheaper rate by taking on at least some of the tasks yourself that can be handled more easily from afar, like advertising and bookkeeping, and let the property manager deal with on-site issues like maintenance and screening tenants.

Also, before you commit to a property manager, call references and check local complaint agencies. While most property management firms are scrupulous, some do take advantage of absentee owners. 

In one scam, property managers work with dishonest contractors who perform a service for a certain amount, but submit a bill for a bigger one; the property manager pockets the difference. It can be difficult to detect this rip off, but you can protect yourself to some extent by calling around for competing estimates should you be faced with a large expense, like replacing an air conditioning system. Don't authorize your property management firm to make the replacement unless the cost they quote you is in line with these estimates.

In another scam, the manager leases out the property without telling the landlord, and keeps the rent. This trick is especially common in resort areas where rental periods are short and the property manager's risk of being caught is low. To make sure you're not a victim, I suggest that you keep close tabs on changes in your utility bills and make impromptu visits to your property during periods when it's not supposed to be rented. If you see evidence like dirty dishes and unmade beds that it's been used when it's supposed to be vacant, take date-stamped pictures, talk to neighbors about recent activity, and contact the police.

 Write to  June Fletcher at fletcher.june@gmail.com 