SINGAPORE—Myanmar halted rice exports to keep local prices in check, a senior industry official said Thursday, as the country grapples with a bruising new round of inflation.

The halt wasn't expected to create major dislocations in the market for Asia's most-important food, in large part because Myanmar isn't a main exporter of the crop. Still, it underscored that governments remain jittery about the cost of food, which helped to trigger the unrest in the Middle East.

Economists are particularly wary of the possible proliferation of agricultural export bans, for fear they could propel prices even higher on international markets. The steps are popular with some governments when food costs are rising, as they are now, because they help ensure an adequate local supply, keeping domestic prices lower. But they also often lead to higher costs elsewhere as buyers are forced to find new sources.

A round of export bans in 2008 helped to contribute to a dramatic spike in food prices that year, while a Russia ban on wheat exports last summer likewise helped to send prices of that crop climbing.

According to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, world food prices in February were up 2.2% from January—the eighth monthly rise in a row—to the highest level in real and nominal terms since the agency started monitoring prices in 1990. And volatility in oil prices, the FAO warned, could push its index even higher. Global cereal supplies are also expected to tighten sharply this year due to low stock levels.

Myanmar remains a relatively small player in the global rice trade, exporting up to a million tons a year in a global export market of about 30 million tons. Rice prices have stayed relatively low compared with other grains this year, and traders don't currently expect the crop's export powerhouses, including Thailand and Vietnam, to announce major limits on their exports.

Global rice supply is ample because of large crops in Vietnam and Thailand, said  Chookiat Ophaswongse, managing director of leading Thai exporter Huaychuan Rice Co. Mr. Chookiat said Thailand is expecting a record secondary rice crop of two million tons next month, after producing a larger primary crop in December, while Vietnam's rice production is likely to be a record 25 million tons this year. The two countries together account for close to 50% of the global rice trade.

Myanmar's move nevertheless reflects stresses in that poor nation of 50 million people, whose military-backed government is accused of widespread human-rights violations and which has long been afraid of the risk of popular revolts. Higher consumer prices helped to trigger massive monk-led protests there in 2007, which the military brutally suppressed.

Traders said Myanmar's ban came after local prices of some rice grades there rose by around 15% last month, partly due to an increase in fuel prices. Higher fuel and transportation costs, with diesel prices rising by more than 40% in the past three weeks, have pushed up the price of grain, said a Yangon-based commodities trader.

The ban on Myanmar exports took effect Feb. 25 and will continue till at least the end of April, said a member of the Myanmar Rice Industry Association's executive committee.

It wasn't possible to reach anyone with the Myanmar government, which rarely speaks to foreign journalists.

The ban means that this month's planned shipment of close to 90,000 metric tons of rice to Bangladesh and African countries will be delayed until Myanmar decides to resume exports, traders said. Its grain is among the cheapest in the world, with the popular 25% broken grade last offered around $400 to $410 per ton. The country shipped close to 200,000 tons of rice from the current crop before the export ban took effect.

One trader said even shipments under licenses that were issued earlier are uncertain and exporters may have to declare a force majeure on some of the shipments. Such a declaration offers legal protection to suppliers in case they can't guarantee deliveries.

The ban isn't expected to have much impact on global prices, however, as buyers in Africa and Bangladesh can get rice from other sources at only slightly higher prices. Vietnam's 25% broken rice is currently offered at around $420 a ton, while the same grade of Thai rice is offered at close to $470 a ton.

The export ban has already had an impact on domestic prices, though. The cost of a 20-kilo bag of lower-quality grain has declined by 1,000 Myanmar kyat ($153) to 12,600 kyat since last week, though prices of medium and high-quality grades continue to remain high, traders said.

Myanmar's rice exports in 2010 were down by nearly half from 2009, to 500,000 tons from 900,000 tons, according to estimates by the International Grains Council.

Myanmar temporarily halted rice exports in January 2010 and the pace of issuing licenses was slow even after shipments resumed.

—Caroline Henshaw contributed to this article.

 Write to  Sameer Mohindru at sameer.mohindru@dowjones.com and Celine Fernandez at Celine.Fernandez@wsj.com 