 Intel will use a new breed of three-dimensional transistors in its next generation of chips in what it calls a radical shift in semiconductor technology.  

 Samsonite is accelerating plans to list in Hong Kong, while Yuanda China cut the size of an offering in a sign that conditions for IPOs may be weakening.  

 Portugal's $115.5 billion bailout package imposes new austerity measures on the debt-burdened country but offers gentler terms than earlier financial rescues for Greece and Ireland.  

 Applied Materials agreed to acquire Varian Semiconductor Equipment for $4.9 billion in cash, betting that demand for gadgets will help drive growth.  

 Seoul is mulling investing part of its foreign-exchange reserves in yuan-denominated Chinese securities to diversify its portfolio.  

 ZTE stepped up a legal battle with Chinese telecom rival Huawei, filing motions to invalidate a Huawei trademark and various Huawei patents.  

 BNP Paribas reported a 15% increase in first-quarter net profit, aided by a sharp decline in provisions for bad loans.  

 BMW's first-quarter profit more than tripled amid booming demand in China and a recovery of the U.S. luxury-car market.  

 Westpac Banking's net rose to a record, but the lender said growth in lending is likely to be "moderate."  

 U.S. stocks fell as news on the economy and corporate earnings discouraged investors. Weaker commodity prices hurt stocks both in the U.S. and Asia.  

 Gary Locke warned that China is backtracking on pledges of more openness to foreign companies, some of the harshest criticism yet from the U.S. commerce secretary who is tapped to be the next ambassador to China.  

 China announced a potentially powerful new agency to supervise the Internet, underscoring the country's evolving regulatory environment just as investors' interest in Chinese Web companies is soaring.  

Palestinian leaders formally ended a four-year rift between the secular Fatah and Islamist Hamas groups at a ceremony in Egypt, a reconciliation they see as crucial for their drive for an independent state.

 Workers toiling to fix the stricken Fukushima Daiichi nuclear-power plant have something to look forward to—fresh meals and more showers.  

 North Korea confirmed that it has detained two Japanese men since March and will charge them with drug-trafficking violations.  

 The EU opened the door to possibly allowing countries to reintroduce national border controls, in response to concerns about an influx of North African migrants.  