To an experienced reader of Western science fiction, Vladimir Sorokin's "Ice Trilogy" (New York Review Books, 694 pages, $19.95) will seem very 1940s, very L. Ron Hubbard in its epoch-spanning, world-encompassing storytelling. Except that the 55-year-old Mr. Sorokin, who relishes a bad-boy notoriety in his native Russia, brings an often grotesque sensibility to his tales.

Long ago, we're told, there was the Primordial Light, 23,000 rays of it, and the rays began working together to create worlds. But as the Light created the water-world called Earth, its rays became trapped in the flesh of man and forgot their own nature. There they remained until the Tunguska meteorite— the one that flattened a wide swath of Siberia in 1908—brought regenerating Ice to the Earth's surface. Contact with the Ice will awaken the sleeping hearts of the humans where the rays reside. All 23,000 of these hearts can be stirred if the first to wake find the others. Making the search easier: The people being sought are all blue-eyed blonds.

The way to wake one of the hearts is to smash its owner on the breastbone with an Ice hammer. But what if the heart is just that of an ordinary person, one of the "empties" or "meat machines," as the members of the emerging Brothers and Sisters of the Light charmingly call us? Since many of the hammer-wielders belong to the Soviet secret police, or even the Nazi SS, disposal of the empties is not a problem. In an American novel, someone would find out about these remorseless killers and there would be a resistance, a conflict-plot. Mr. Sorokin just has his murderous Ice-people keep finding one another.

Such methodical progression does not make a plot. What hooks the reader: the author's evocation of his characters' stories. In "Bro"—the first book in this single-volume trilogy—we're in "Zhivago"-land, moving from a lavish czarist-era estate to World War I, the Russian Revolution and an expedition to find the meteorite. The second section, "Ice," is set in the modern Russia of hard-currency whores and thug-businessmen, with a strong backstory about a woman who was taken from her village as a girl 70 years ago and forced into slave labor in Germany. The trilogy's final book, "23,000," carries the tale through to the Great Transformation, a kind of "rapture," which fortunately leaves us "empties" on our own.

Where "The Ice Trilogy" updates 1940s-style science fiction, the concept of the Sorokin novel "Day of the Oprichnik" (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 191 pages, $23) calls to mind Alexander Solzhenitsyn's "One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich," but inverted. Denisovich's day was in the hellish real-life past; Andrei Komiaga's is in a dystopian imagined future. Where Denisovich was at the bottom of the heap, Komiaga is close to the top. Russia has gone back to rule by a czar, who has revived the ancient traditions: vodka and kvass and birch juice, tile ovens, Orthodox churches. The Great Russian Wall keeps out the liberal Europeans and the even worse Americans. It's all paid for by gas pipelines and tolls on the great Guangzhou-Paris highway. 

His Majesty is surrounded by schemers: nobles, the Kremlin Regiment, Special Forces guards and the privileged sniffers-out of revolution, known as the oprichniki. Andrei Komiaga is an oprichnik. His day starts with the condemnation of a noble: He is hanged with a greased rope, his wife gang-raped on her own tile oven, their house set on fire, their children sent by His Majesty's mercy to an orphanage. The day ends with an oprichniki orgy and a game that involves shoving power drills under a table where everyone is sitting, to see who gets hit and who squeals first. 

In between, there is—again—no plot to speak of. The tension in the book (like "The Ice Trilogy," translated by Jamey Gambrell) comes from Mr. Sorokin's own anxiety: a horror of Russia's possible future tempered by a pleasure in recalling Mother Russia's old ways. With Germany's 1941 invasion, Stalin rallied his people by appealing to the traditions of the feudal Russia that defeated Napoleon. Mr. Sorokin seems to ask: What could Putin get away with by following suit?