The parent company of Ford Models Inc. is about to hop into the gallery business.

On Jan. 19, fordPROJECT, a venture backed by Altpoint Capital Partners, a New York-based private-equity firm that owns the modeling company, will begin presenting shows organized by a rotating cast of curators in a duplex penthouse on West 57th Street. 

The gallery is part of an effort to diversify the modeling company's brand, Guerman Aliev, Altpoint's chairman and chief executive, said in an interview. "Because it's coming from the fashion world, [Ford] needs to capitalize with something that's exclusive," Mr. Aliev said. "I could go around and brand gas stations, but that would cheapen the brand."

But at the same time, because it is intent on achieving art-world credibility, Mr. Aliev acknowledged, the gallery is challenged with developing a reputation independent from Ford, well known since the late 1940s for its models. "I think the biggest hurdle I have to overcome is that people affiliate this with a modeling agency."

To help it stand on its own, Mr. Aliev has recruited creative director Tim Goossens, a former MoMA PS1 assistant curator, and managing director Rachel Vancelette, former director of both Barbara Gladstone and Yvon Lambert galleries.

Mr. Goossens said he has no intention of programming fashion- or model-related art. "I always stress that it's always important to stay away from fashion for now. It's what people expect, and it's not really a passion of mine," he said.

The inaugural exhibition, "When the Fairy Tale Never Ends," will be curated by Lara Pan and feature works by Henry Darger and Kenny Scharf, among others. The following show, organized by Neville Wakefield, a co-curator of MoMA PS1's 2010 "Greater New York," will open in March.

Coming from the nonprofit world, Mr. Goossens was apprehensive about transitioning to a commercial endeavor. But he said MoMa PS1 Director Klaus Biesenbach advised him that it would not prevent his return to the museum world, pointing to examples of those who have made similar moves, such as longtime dealer Jeffrey Deitch, now director of the Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles, as well as Richard Flood, a New Museum curator who previously worked as a Gladstone gallery director.

If the endeavor is successful, Mr. Aliev may consider launching Ford-branded galleries in other countries. "It's too early to tell," he said. "I don't rule out other markets, but I'd like to see how the U.S. concept plays out."

 Write to  Erica Orden at erica.orden@wsj.com 