Edie Falco could be the poster-woman for the emergence of drama on cable television. As mafia first-lady Carmela Soprano on HBO's "The Sopranos," the actress earned widespread critical praise, as well as three Emmy Awards and two Golden Globes. Her current role as a drug-addicted nurse on Showtime's "Nurse Jackie" is another tour-de-force of writing and performing, and garnered her another Emmy. 

Still, Ms. Falco, who lives in Manhattan with her two children, occasionally finds time to take roles in films. Her latest, "3 Backyards," opening Friday at the IFC Center, reunites her with SUNY-Purchase classmate Eric Mendelsohn, who directed her in 1999's "Judy Berlin" and, more than a decade later, offered her a chance to return to her native Long Island for filming. The drama follows a day in the lives of three suburbanites, including Ms. Falco's Peggy, a fawning fan who drives a movie-star neighbor (played by Embeth Davidtz) on an errand. The Journal caught up with the 47-year-old actress. 

 Have you ever been stuck with an overeager fan like the one you play in '3 Backyards'?  

It happens with great frequency, I'm afraid. You get used to it and it's sort of charming because on some level I'm looking at myself. I've been the one on the other side of it most of my life. It's only in the last bunch of years that all of the sudden I'm being treated differently. I know exactly the feeling of being impressed by someone you saw on television and now they're in person and it feels sort of magical. 

  Speakeasy: Media, Entertainment, Celebrity, and the Arts 

 This film was shot on Long Island. What do you remember about growing up there? 

The person who I am was formed at the malls, on the Jericho Turnpike, in the parks. I spent a good portion of my childhood on the South Shore of Long Island. It's a little bit tougher. We moved to Northport for high school. It's where the movie was shot. It's a spectacularly beautiful town. It's by the water. I thought I had landed in Oz, basically.

 As an artsy suburban kid, were you desperate to get to New York City? 

The city had magic. It was where, on some level, I was always headed. I would come in as often as I could. My father also had that feeling; he was a huge fan of jazz. And my mom liked to see shows. I was always intimidated by city kids when I was a kid, and now I have two of them in my house. 

 Did working on "The Sopranos" raise the bar in terms of how you choose projects?  

Yeah. In terms of the writing, but there were so many aspects of it that were fun and challenging to me. That's the only bar there is: How exciting will it be for me? I'm afraid I'm pretty selfish in that regard. 

 This is your second film with Eric Mendelsohn. How is it different working with a veteran director as opposed to newbie?  

Something you find is that first-time directors are so nervous. They've worked so hard to get the project going and now here it is, so they tend to over-direct. You work with a director who's done a million things, what they keep saying is, "I don't know. We'll figure it out." But you will not find that with a first-time director; they don't have the confidence. I don't know if I would put myself in that situation. I'm trying to reduce the tension in my life. 

 You were involved in an organization advocating for health-care reform. What do you think of President Obama's healthcare plan and the opposition to it? 

I'm reluctant to get too deep into this because my knowledge is minimal. It seems absolutely preposterous to me that people who need healthcare can't get it because of finances. As far as how to make it happen, God almighty, I would never want to be a politician. It seems like the smartest thing in the world [to provide health care] and the hoops that have to be jumped through. 

 Did you have health coverage as a young actor?  

I couldn't pay my rent, let alone have healthcare. If you're sick you stay sick and hope your body fixes it. And when you're young, that tends to happen. Healthcare was like owning your own jet.