New evidence has emerged to bolster Pima County Sheriff Clarence Dupnik's theory implicating Rush Limbaugh in the attempted assassination of Rep. Gabrielle Giffords. Or so the Associated Press's Judy Lin seems to think.

Some would say that Limbaugh should keep his day job. But not Leland Yee, a California state senator, who would like Limbaugh silenced. According to Lin's report:

So a man who has lived in America since he was 3 feels like "a second-class citizen" because Limbaugh is mocking Hu, who is not a citizen at all but a foreign potentate? Yee seems to be suffering from some confusion about his own identity.

What, you may wonder, does this have to do with the Giffords shooting? Allow the AP's Lin to explain:

So he fears for his safety because a crank-caller urged him to resign from office? How does that not make him a cry-baby?

The connection to the Arizona shooting, however, is just bizarre. Lin has gone beyond guilt by association and entered the realm of guilt by free association: China, Chinese-American, lawmaker, shooting, Arizona. It's as if she's doing one of those connect-the-dots puzzles for kids, but she doesn't know how to count, so she's connecting the dots completely at random. That's how they do journalism at the 21st-century AP.

 James Taranto on the AP's free-association journalism. 

Meanwhile, the Jerusalem Post reports that Richard Falk, a scholar of international law who serves as the U.N.'s "special rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Palestinian territories," is rejecting calls that he resign. At issue is a Jan. 11 blog post in which, according to the Geneva-based organization U.N. Watch, Falk "endorsed the conspiracy theory that the 9/11 terrorist attacks were orchestrated by the US government and not by al-Qaida terrorists."

Even the U.N.'s top bureaucrat sides with Falk's critics:

But a defiant Falk blames Zionists:

Falk adds: "I am an academic. I believe in freedom of expression, and the freedom to openly debate even the most difficult issues."

But a look at the original post, actually a disjointed commentary on the Arizona shootings, reveals that Falk is less than firm in his commitment to free expression:

Again, this was written on Jan. 11, by which time it had already been established that suspect Jared Loughner had nothing to do with "Tea Party ultra-conservatives." But maybe Falk got his information from the yellow press, the New York Times.

Note, however, the false equivalence he draws: "On one side" are those conducting a witch hunt against their political opponents, on the other are those who seek to "reaffirm their rights of free speech." By the Falk standard, even if U.N. Watch were conducting a witch hunt against Falk, its point of view would be as valid as his defense of "free expression."

Falk begins his rambling reflection with a long reminiscence about the 1986 assassination of Olof Palme, Sweden's prime minister (whose first name Falk misspells "Olaf"). A drunken bum was convicted of the murder, "but many doubts persisted." A few years later, Falk spent a year in Sweden after being appointed Olof Palme Professor, "a rotating academic post given each year to a foreign scholar."

"In the course of my year traveling around Sweden," Falk writes, "I often asked those whom I met what was their view of the assassination, and what I discovered was that the responses told me more about them than it did about the public event." Some blamed "a dissident faction in the Swedish security forces," some the CIA, some "criminals in the pay of business tycoons" who wanted lower taxes. Falk continues:

If only Judy Lin had been at the AP in 1986, she'd have fingered the real culprit: Zee Svedeesh Cheff from "The Muppet Show."

  We Get Results   On Friday we noted that a theater company in Montana had inserted into its production of Gilbert and Sullivan's "The Mikado" a lyric calling for the beheading of Sarah Palin. By the close of business that same day, Michael McGill, executive director of MCT Inc., had announced remedial action:

And Homer nods: McGill's letter states that this was a production of MCT Community Theater, not the Missoula Children's Theater as we stated Friday (since corrected). Our source was the local newspaper, the Missoulan. Apparently MCT Community Theater and the Missoula Children's Theater are separate divisions of MCT Inc.

In the same item, we noted that comedian Tracy Morgan, a former member of the Now Ready for Prime Time Players (they had a prime-time special in 2008), had referred to Palin in a Turner Network Television basketball broadcast as "great masturbation material." The Toronto Sun reports that TNT officials have apologized:

At least TNT recognizes some standard of decency. That is more than can be said for the New York Times, which has offered no apology for its multiple lies to the effect that "violent" and "eliminationist" conservative rhetoric was to blame for the shooting of Rep. Gabrielle Giffords. Times ombudsman Arthur Brisbane, however, this weekend produced yet another omphaloskepsic column about the paper's website having picked up erroneous reports of Giffords's death. One imagines the corrections section of Soviet-era Pravda looked something like Brisbane's column.

Speaking of eliminationist rhetoric, reader Marc Segan sends along this report on the wonderful world of New York theater:

It is a troubling question, and it's worth noting that the delusive claims of conservative or Tea Party violence and racism are the product of this same left-liberal imagination. The psychological term for this is "projection," and it applies equally well if the medium is print or stage as screen.

 Two Papers in One! 

  Is the Human Rights Campaign Un-American?   The Ground Zero mosque has a new imam. Faisal Abdul Rauf quietly resigned a couple of weeks ago, though he remains on the board of the enterprise. The New York Post reports on the views of his successor, Abdallah Adhami:

Will the New York Times's Nicholas Kristof pen a weepy column repudiating the Human Rights Campaign's "Islamophobia"? Will Mayor Michael Bloomberg denounce Fred Sainz as "un-American"? Will Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (don't you love how that sounds?) demand an investigation into HRC's finances?

Don't hold your breath.

  Bushism of the Day   "You know, we have three branches of government. We have a House. We have a Senate. We have a president."--Sen. Chuck Schumer (D., N.Y.), Jan. 30

 Metaphor Alert 

 Out on a Limb 

  Do as I Say, Not as I Do   "Obama: Future Egypt Gov't Must Respect the Will of the People"--headline, Ha'aretz (Israel), Jan. 30

  MSNBC: Lean Forward   "Fox 'May Have Been Prehistoric Man's Best Friend' "--headline, Daily Mail (London), Jan. 28

  'I'm Coming to Join You in 2013!'   "Vice President Says Unemployed Should 'Hang In There' "--headline, Yahoo! News, Jan. 28

  Somebody Alert M5   "2012 Republican Presidential Candidates All Have Flaws"--headline, Washington Post, Jan. 31

  The Lonely Lives of Scientists   "South Carolina Scientist Works to Grow Meat in Lab"--headline, Reuters, Jan. 30

 Why Don't They Just Have a Burger at Five Guys? 

  Kept by Thy Care So Awesome, Heidi the Cross-Eyed Opossum   "Diet Could Cure Cross-Eyed Opossum"--headline, New York Post, Jan. 31

  'But It'll Cost You an Arm and a Leg,' Said the Knife Store Clerk   "Bill Seeks to Let One-Armed People Use Switchblades"--headline, Sun Journal (Lewiston, Maine), Jan. 31

  Hey, Kids! What Time Is It?   "Syria Strongman: Time for 'Reform' "--headline, The Wall Street Journal, Jan. 31

  Questions Nobody Is Asking   "Will Crab Soup Again Win Hunterdon Rotary Clubs' Cook-Off?"--headline, Hunterdon County Democrat (Flemington, N.J.), Jan. 29

  Dog Wags Tea Party--Now That Would Be News   "The Tea Party Wags the Dog"--headline, New York Times, Jan. 30

  It's Always in the Last Place You Look   "Scientists Find the Tiny 24-Hour Clock in Every Living Thing"--headline, FoxNews.com, Jan. 29

  Too Much Information   "Julian Assange Says He Likes to Make Banks 'Squirm' "--headline, WSJ.com, Jan. 31

  Everything Seemingly Is Spinning Out of Control   "Dallas Strip Clubs Worried About Stripper Shortage for Super Bowl Weekend"--headline, DailyCaller.com, Jan. 28

  News of the Tautological   "Dietary Guidelines Call for More Exercise, Less Food"--headline, WSJ.com, Jan. 31

  Breaking News From 1971   "Judge Interrupts Lawyer in Kerry Winter Case"--headline, Gulf News (Dubai), Jan. 31

  Breaking News From 1990, 1996, 2002, 2008   "Understrength Kerry Retain Title With Ease"--headline, Irish Times, Jan. 31

  News You Can Use   "FDA: Toxic Waste Nuclear Sludge Is Not Safe to Eat"--headline, KKCO-TV website (Grand Junction, Colo.), Jan. 28

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  Bloomberg vs. New York   "The Egyptian National Museum is safe, and cultural artifacts damaged by vandals who broke into the building during anti-government protests can be restored, the head of the country's Supreme Council of Antiquities said," Bloomberg reports:

Actually, there was a major blackout in New York City in August 2003. Where we lived, on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, the lights were out for about 24 hours. The New York Times reported at the time that incidents of looting "remained light" and was "concentrated largely in central Brooklyn."

Hawass's put-down of New York goes uncorrected in the report, even though it is bunk--and you'd expect editors at Bloomberg, of all places, to recognize it as bunk.

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Mike Cazayoux, T. Young, Monty Krieger, Daniel Mullen, John McGee, Michele Schiesser, Pat Rowe, Aaron Solomon, Zack Russ, Rod Pennington, Ed Thompson, David Hallstrom, Bill Schweber, Cheryl Sturm, Brian Warner, Chris Harrington, Mark Finkelstein, Frank Free, Sean Fitzpatrick, Bob Rayner, Hillel Markowitz, Bruce Goldman, John Sanders, Kyle Kyllan, Bryan Fischer, Hugh Phelps, Steven Aucella, Peter Iorio, Peter Huntsman, David Carrad, Marion Dreyfus, Ed Ginberg and James Morrison. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)