ISLAMABAD—Pakistan's spy chief offered to resign amid criticism over the U.S. raid that killed Osama bin Laden, late on a day on which a pair of suicide bombers killed at least 80 people in a strike on a government paramilitary training center. 

The Pakistan Taliban said it carried out the strike to avenge the al Qaeda leader's death.

Lt. Gen. Shuja Ahmed Pasha, chief of Pakistan's main intelligence agency, submitted his resignation after he and other military leaders faced a hostile session of parliament, where they were criticized for failing to find bin Laden and to stop the American operation to kill him on Pakistani soil, said several lawmakers who were present.

There was no immediate word on whether Prime Minister Yousuf Raza Gilani accepted Gen. Pasha's offer. His spy agency, the Directorate of Inter-Services Intelligence, known as the ISI, and the prime minister's office didn't respond to requests for comment after his resignation offer.

The parliamentary session, which extended late into the night Friday, represented an unprecedented questioning of the military's authority in Pakistan. 

Generals have ruled the country for almost half its 64-year history as an independent nation. They still wield tremendous power, often dictating foreign and national-security policy to the country's elected leaders and rarely facing public scrutiny. 

The chief of the military, Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, was likely to play a large role in the decision over whether to accept Gen. Pasha's offer to resign. The ISI is particularly feared and revered here. If the agency's chief is forced out by public anger, it would be a dramatic reversal. 

The U.S. raid, launched without Islamabad's knowledge, was seen here as a humiliating violation of Pakistani sovereignty by an ally whose fight against al Qaeda and the Taliban has left Pakistan exposed and vulnerable.

Gen. Pasha's resignation would also be a blow to the U.S. He won his job in part through U.S. backing, though his relations with his American counterparts—in particular, Central Intelligence Agency director Leon Panetta—have soured recently.

Any successor to the spy chief could turn out to be far more hostile to American interests, affecting a U.S. campaign of drone strikes against militants sheltering in Pakistan. U.S. officials have said the drone strikes, which often rely on Pakistani intelligence, are their most effective tool against militant leaders, but they have provoked widespread anger among Pakistanis. 

On Friday, a U.S. drone fired missiles at a vehicle in North Waziristan, on the Afghan border, killing five militants, Pakistani security officials said. Friday's suicide attack was likely to deepen anti-American anger in Pakistan over the bin Laden raid.

The bombers, wearing explosive vests packed with nails and ball bearings, launched their attack as recruits from the Frontier Constabulary—a poorly equipped and trained force that has often been targeted by militants—were leaving a training center at the Shabqadar Fort in the town of Charsadda. 

Television images broadcast from the scene showed a gruesome aftermath; streets and walls splattered with blood and littered with broken glass, the twisted wreckage of cars and vans and other charred debris. 

Witnesses and survivors said many of the recruits were piling into vans to head home for their break when the bombers struck.

Authorities in Peshawar, northwestern Pakistan's main city, put the death toll at 80, most of them Frontier Constabulary recruits, and said the number could rise.

A spokesman for the Pakistan Taliban, Ahsanullah Ahsan, was quoted by the Associated Press as saying the attack was intended to "avenge" the raid that killed bin Laden.

"Also, the Pakistani army has failed to protect its land," Mr. Ahsan said, according to the Associated Press, playing to the other source of popular anger in Pakistan—the military's failure detect the American raiding party.

Thousands of Pakistanis have died in terror attacks in recent years at the hands of the Pakistan Taliban, an al Qaeda-linked offshoot of the Afghan Taliban. 

Adding to the pressure on Pakistan are efforts by U.S. officials to use Islamabad's failure to get bin Laden as a tool to pressure Pakistan to take action against Afghanistan-focused militant groups operating from its territory.

—Tom Wright contributed to this article.

 Write to  Matthew Rosenberg at matthew.rosenberg@wsj.com 