NEW DELHI – Auto parts vendors to  Tata Motors Ltd. have been told that the company may start exporting its Nano minicar to Indonesia, Thailand, Sri Lanka and Africa by December, executives at two component suppliers said. 

The move will likely help the Mumbai-based auto maker further boost sales of the world's cheapest car and reduce its sole dependence on the home market, where demand for the car is rebounding after touching a record low in November. 

"Tata Motors may begin exports of the Nano as early as December and will likely export 1,000 units initially," an executive at one of the suppliers, who asked not to be named, said recently. "These markets are quite similar to India and have similar requirements as in India, and Tata Motors wouldn't need to make major changes to the existing Nano." 

The company is yet to finalize the countries where it will export the Nano but "Indonesia, Sri Lanka, Thailand and some countries in Africa have been identified as possible locations where the car could be sold first," said the second executive, who also didn't wish to be named. 

Tata Motors seeks to gain from rising demand for India-made cars and motorcycles in developing markets of southeast Asia and Africa, due to their lower price tags and higher fuel-efficiency. 

Exporting the Nano will also enable India's biggest auto maker by revenue to achieve faster break-even on the project, where it has invested 20 billion rupees ($442 million) alone for building a new factory. 

Margins on vehicles sold in overseas markets are traditionally more than for those sold in India, which is critical for Tata Motors due to the razor-thin margins on the Nano. The oval-shaped Nano, which is powered by a 624-cubic centimeter gasoline engine, costs 137,555 rupees ($3,043) for the base model at showrooms in New Delhi. 

  Debasis Ray, a spokesman for Tata Motors, said the company continues to explore relevant markets and business opportunities for the Nano. 

"Tata Motors has all along been conscious that the  Tata Nano, as launched in India, too will be appropriate for other countries as well," Mr. Ray said. 

He declined to give a timeframe for exporting the car. 

The possible exports to the developing markets could also be a test for Tata Motors before it proceeds to market the Nano in Europe where safety and emission standards are more stringent. 

At the recent Geneva motor show, Tata Motors unveiled the Pixel, a new city car concept for Europe, based on the Nano. The Pixel could be fitted either with a 1.2-liter, turbo-charged diesel engine, or an electric one similar to that used in its Indica Vista EV hatchback. 

Tata Motors had said it could start selling the Pixel in Europe in two or three years but it is yet to decide on a date. 

Sales of the Nano in India fell to 509 units in November, after touching a high of 9,000 in July due to some incidents of the car catching fire that were featured prominently in local newspapers and on television. 

Sales recovered to 8,262 units in February after the company offered enhanced safety features for the Nano free of cost and increased the warranty on the Nano to four years from the previous 18 months. 

Tata Motors, whose product portfolio ranges from the Nano to Jaguar XJ luxury sedan, exports its trucks and buses to more than 30 countries worldwide, while selling its cars and sport-utility vehicles to 16 countries. 

Tata Motors' total exports surged 73% during the April 2010-February 2011 period to 52,112 vehicles. 

 Write to  Nikhil Gulati at nikhil.gulati@dowjones.com 