  (See Corrections and Amplifications item below.)  

Ivanka Trump had me, if not quite at hello, then at some of the cutting-edge features in the men's locker room. For weeks her people had been trying to get me to experience the gemstone spa treatments— or was it the Turkish Hammam?—at the Trump SoHo. I resisted, fancying myself more an aging Jimmy Olsen type than some hack who sips herbal tea while getting worked over with a loofah.

I finally relented, agreeing to the spa if Ms. Trump joined me. She politely declined. I would have, too. But if I'd known about the comfort facilities I wouldn't have been so difficult. For the record, I'm not some hick from the sticks who's never before come across a toilet that doubles as a bidet. Just last spring I encountered one in a converted monastery where I was staying in Portugal. 

But, oh!, the options on the Trump version. Not only could you control the water temperature, but also the angle of the spray, as well as making it oscillate or pulse. I could have sat there all day.

And, frankly, I was tempted to. Ms. Trump had already given me a tour of the spa, which seems very much her baby. Speaking of babies, I was lucky my wife or daughter (can't remember which) had informed me the previous evening that Ivanka was pregnant. She's due in July, but not yet showing, that glowing skin possibly the result of facials at the skilled hands of Kate Somerville, facialist to the stars, whom Ms. Trump recruited for her spa.

"I went to her for years in L.A.," she told me. "She's a results-oriented facialist."

The idea for the Hammam treatment was also Ms. Trump's. "I've been spending a lot of time in Istanbul," she explained. She added that the Trump Organization and its partners this spring will be opening matching 40-story office and residential towers on the Bosporus. 

Apparently between appointments, Ms. Trump was receiving, or experiencing, or being transfigured by Hammam, whatever Hammam is. I was too chicken to ask, afraid to reveal that I was unworthy, that I'd never had a facial, let alone a hot stone massage or been anointed with gemstones. 

She led the way along corridors lined with dark woods and burbling water features, designed to pamper the flesh and purify the soul. And to think I can remember when SoHo was a bunch of tumbledown loft buildings and starving artists. How far you've come New York! How far America!

"At the end of the day there isn't a tremendous amount of loyalty to where you get your massage," admitted the 29-year-old businesswoman who seems to have inherited her dad's unsentimental genius. "If you want to bring in the community," she added, you must create, "a destination for the community."

The spa, in addition to everything I've already mentioned, boasts an outdoor pool, private cabanas (à la the Beverly Hills Hotel,) a bocce court, and relaxation and recovery rooms with their own private terraces. I probably wasn't seeing it at the best time, the weather in the single digits and the gossamer shades drawn. But I could easily visualize a day in the not altogether future when the weather warms up, the trees blossom, and the lion lies with the lamb—or at least downtown types with upscale tourists and a smattering of movie stars and hip-hop moguls at the Spa At Trump.

Ms. Trump now showed the way to the Hammam, a silver tile-lined room with twinkling lights in its domed ceiling and a white polished marble slab that captured all the charm and none of the chaos of that city at the crossroads of East and West, of colorful spice bazaars and the Hagia Sophia. She said she first experienced Hammam when her Turkish business partners put her up at the Hotel les Ottomans, a small boutique hotel on the Bosporus.

But experience what? "They exfoliate you when you lie down on this marble slab," she explained before heading off to work to spread the gospel of the Trump global luxury brand. Ms. Trump is also moving back uptown with her husband, publisher Jared Kushner. "It was fun to be downtown for a couple of years," she said, "but I miss the conveniences of uptown."

I retreated to the aforementioned men's locker room with its manly finishes, changed into disposable, spa-supplied, black boxers (I thought they said "Trump" on the leg but on closer inspection they said "Toss") and was escorted to the Hammam. There esthetician Serena Licastro began the treatment by telling me to take a deep breath while she doused me in tepid water from nickel-plated chalices while calming music played.

The saturation continued with bowls of water big and small, though by now I was lying on the heated marble slab and couldn't tell what was going on behind me, each serving of water coming as a surprise and soaking my back, my arms, my legs, my head. 

Then Ms. Licastro got to work on me with a rough bamboo and cotton kese mitt, a Middle Eastern member of the loofah family. I'd be lying if I said exfoliating is fun. But if being rubbed raw makes me look half as healthy as Ms. Trump, keep on rubbing.

Next came anointment with castile soap suds. The effect is accomplished by mixing soap and water in a special pillow case—though it's called a turba, according to Ms. Licastro—then wringing it out onto the body. It felt otherworldly, something you'd expect to find at the Trump on Pandora—except for my back where decades of dead skin cells had been dispatched and the skin was now stinging.

Ms. Licastro asked me to turn over where the entire treatment, which costs an eminently reasonable $100, was repeated on my front. Finally, I was commanded to sit up, and I was rinsed off in more water, some of it quite brisk, and then sprayed with rose water. 

My only reservation about the treatment involved the exfoliating and my still rebelling back. "Some people want even more," my esthetician told me. "Some people believe the more you exfoliate, the cleaner you are."

I felt plenty clean. And if a couple of Tylenol is the price of beauty, I say bring it on. "You're all rashy," my daughter told me when I asked her to inspect my back that evening. "But you're soft."

— ralph.gardner@wsj.com 

 Corrections and Amplifications 

In a previous version of this column, facialist Kate Somerville was misidentified as Kate Summerville.