KABUL—Afghan President Hamid Karzai cut short a trip to Russia to meet with all 249 newly elected lawmakers on Saturday, after members of the incoming legislature rebelled against his decision to delay their inauguration, Afghan officials and diplomats said.

Mr. Karzai is returning to Kabul to face strong international criticism of his move. Lawmakers plan to convene the parliament on Sunday, in defiance of Mr. Karzai's order for a one-month delay, leaving little time for a political compromise.

The U.N. mission to Afghanistan issued a statement Friday night that expressed "deep concern and surprise" at Mr. Karzai's order, called on the Afghan parliament to "convene as soon as possible," and backed "clear respect for the separation of powers."

The statement followed two days of consultations among key Western ambassadors; the call for convening the parliament was shared by the U.S., European nations and Canada. "It's a signal to Karzai that we are serious in standing behind democratic principles and institutions," said a Western official involved in the document's drafting.

Mr. Karzai has repeatedly expressed his displeasure with the results of the Sept. 18 parliamentary elections, saying they don't reflect the Afghans' true wishes because the country's largest ethnic group, the Pashtuns, is underrepresented. He created a special court to investigate allegations of fraud, and earlier this week ordered the inauguration's delay to give more time for the court's inquiries.

Western officials, Afghan election authorities and most Afghan lawmakers rejected the special court as unconstitutional.

An article of the Afghan constitution specifies that inaugurating the parliament is one of the president's "authorities and duties." While some lawmakers argued that means it is Mr. Karzai's duty to preside over the inauguration on Sunday, the president's supporters said the article means that, without Mr. Karzai's blessing, the new legislature would be illegitimate.

Mr. Karzai's spokesman, Hamed Elmi, reiterated that the president has already announced a one-month delay of the inauguration.

Mr. Karzai's minister for parliament affairs, Humayun Azizi, Friday met with incoming lawmakers to try to work out a compromise that would avert a possibly violent confrontation on Sunday. 

"Everyone needs to be patient," said Shukria Barakzai, a lawmaker from Kabul who has been trying to mediate in the standoff. "Otherwise, we'll have an illegal decision by the president, then an illegal decision by the parliament, and this would cause a huge crisis in the country."

Leading lawmakers met Friday with Mr. Karzai's two vice presidents, Mohammed Qassim Fahim, an ethnic Tajik, and Karim Khalili, an ethnic Hazara. The vice presidents, a prominent parliamentarian said, have indicated their support for the parliament's inauguration on Sunday, and promised to use their influence with Mr. Karzai. 

Lawmakers have been pressing the two vice presidents to consider inaugurating them if the president refuses.

Parliamentary leaders say they will have well above the 175 lawmakers needed for a quorum on Sunday. "There's a big push from the vice presidents, and hopefully they'll push Karzai to inaugurate the opening," a key lawmaker involved in the discussions said.

 Write to  Yaroslav Trofimov at yaroslav.trofimov@wsj.com 