 (Please see Corrections and Amplifications below.) 

Elliott Sharp stands in the middle of the room, looking like a man from another time. The black fedora he favors crowns a shaved head, complementing a prominent nose that has helped make the guitarist and composer an instantly recognizable presence on the city's creative-music scene.

"I'm like the Nosferatu of the East Village," Mr. Sharp said, laughing, alluding to a passing resemblance to the German actor Max Schreck, star of F.W. Murnau's 1922 horror film. Others might say Telly Savalas. The musician has been a fixture of the neighborhood since the late 1970s, cultivating a multifaceted career that has taken him from postage-stamp performance spaces to European concert halls. 

The full range of that work will be celebrated this weekend as Mr. Sharp marks his 60th birthday with a pair of all-star concert events hosted by Brooklyn's Issue Project Room. 

"I do a lot of composing when I'm walking," Mr. Sharp said, taking a seat on a recent afternoon in the venue's new downtown Brooklyn space at 110 Livingston St., where he was about to rehearse two string quartets. "We live down by the FDR highway, and if I have time I'll walk along the river up to Seventh Street. That gives me time to dig on the river. I don't sleep a whole lot. I'll go to bed around 1 a.m. or so and wake up around 3 a.m., and lay in bed and think about stuff and it turns into music in one way or the other, good or bad."

Though he is embraced as a guitar hero by fans of experimental fretwork, Mr. Sharp also records traditional blues (with the band Terraplane), writes for chamber groups and brassy big bands (Orchestra Carbon), throws in with electronic ensembles (such as the collaborative Bootstrappers), leads a 13-member guitar army (the All-Guitar SyndaKit) and joins creative sidekicks in hybrid projects that employ music, text and images. The violinist Hilary Hahn, not exactly a habitué of industrial loft performance spaces, called him not long ago to commission a new piece.

It's a lot to consider all at once, but Mr. Sharp's body of work has been accumulating for close to 40 years. "I like to observe decades," said the Cleveland native, whose Friday performance will serve as a benefit for Issue Project Room and its campaign to raise more than $2.5 million needed to renovate the 110 Livingston space. That evening—which will feature Mr. Sharp alongside such guests as actor Steve Buscemi and his director-filmmaker wife, Jo Andres, as well as poet Tracie Morris and cyberpunk novelist Jack Womack—will be staged in the extremely resonant acoustics of the Beaux Arts-style ground floor, designed in 1926. On Saturday, the performances will move to the venue's current space, in the Old American Can Factory off Third Avenue near the Gowanus Canal. 

"It's very grave," Mr. Sharp said with a mock-dramatic flourish of his birthday. "Goodbye!" But the guitarist is far from ready to write his swan song. Apart from the art he's yet to create, he is the father of 5-year-old twins with his companion, video artist Janene Higgins. "It's like beginning again. You see the world differently. I don't feel 60 physically or mentally. I'm still like a geeky teenager with an electric guitar." 

Mr. Sharp met Mr. Buscemi in 1981, when both worked on a performance called the Bowery Project. They bonded over their mutual love of canines with the actor Mark Boone Jr. "[Mr. Boone] lived next door to my now-studio on Seventh Street, had a half-dog/half-wolf named Hank who was king of the neighborhood," Mr. Sharp recalled. "And I had a dog named Buffy that was an old, old hound, and Steve had a dog. Steve and Mark performed as a duo called the Dog Boys—this post-Beckett, post-'Three Stooges' theater. We'd all see each other with the dogs hanging out in the East Village. It was a small world. Later, I saw Jo [Andres] at P.S. 122. She had heard some of my stuff and we got together."

  At Issue, a New Leader in the Room  

As Ms. Andres remembers it, the musician's approach to guitar was something completely new to her. "He had this fractal mathematical formula that was thrilling to me." Many years later, Mr. Sharp became one of the first performers to appear at the Issue Project Room, the first iteration of which was launched by the late Suzanne Fiol in the East Village in 2003, within literal shouting distance of Mr. Sharp's studio. 

"The first benefit Elliott played, we took our son, Lucian, who was 10," Mr. Buscemi said. "He was blown away by Elliott. That's what's really cool about Issue, is Suzanne was supporting people like Elliott and his peers because they need venues."

Issue's new space is still very much as it was when the nonprofit arts organization won a 20-year lease on the site, which requires extensive acoustic treatments to buffer its acoustics. Mr. Sharp took those into account when writing the piece "Occam's Razor" for the New York-based ensembles the JACK Quartet and the Sirius Quartet, as well as for his own solo guitar piece, which will be played acoustically. But it turns out that the raw, boomy space is ideal for vibrating strings and sonic phenomena. There's something about it that is inexplicably stirring.

"A lot of action for the listener happens in between the quartets," Mr. Sharp said. "You'll hear melodic fragments and things coalescing into solid pitches, and over-drones that exist vertically above the action—a lot of sounds that aren't just there in the notes the musicians are playing. They're the acoustic byproducts in the room with the resonance and reverberation."

As Mr. Sharp (who uses the musical notation E# for shorthand) got ready to organize the musicians, the challenges of conquering the space seemed less daunting than the seven-plus hours of playing set for Saturday. "That's the marathon that either cures me or kills me," he said. "I don't dwell on nostalgia. I try to keep myself interested. There's a fine line between self-parody and style. I'm sticking with style."

 Corrections and Amplifications 

The son of actor Steve Buscemi and artist Jo Andres is named Lucian. An earlier version of this article incorrectly identified him as Theo. 