Police believe gang violence was behind the slayings of two young men in Manhattan early Sunday who were killed in unrelated incidents, authorities said. 

In the first incident, a 16-year-old boy was stabbed to death by an unknown assailant following a confrontation that started at the party for a female friend who was turning 18, police said.  Adonis Santana was an invited guest at the party in a Washington Heights apartment where a group of men, described by a law-enforcement official as members of a gang called the Trinatarios, attempted to enter but were asked to leave, the official said. 

One of the men in the uninvited group responded by throwing a drink in the face of the teenager whose birthday it was, prompting Mr. Santana and others to chase them out the apartment building and onto Audubon Avenue, the official said. Once outside, the confrontation turned violent and Mr. Santana was found stabbed three times to the right side of his body near the corner of West 186th Street and St. Nicholas Avenue at about 12:45 a.m., the official said. He was taken to Columbia Presbyterian Hospital but couldn't be saved, police said. 

No arrests have been made and police are trying to identify the suspect or suspects who stabbed him, the official said. 

The official said about 30 people were at the party before it was broken up by the violence. 

Two neighbors described Mr. Santana as "well mannered." "He didn't seem like a kid who was caught up in any trouble," said  Dana Crum, a 39-year-old neighbor. "He didn't seem like a kid who was giving his parents any trouble."

Friends said the victim attended the High School of Graphic Communication Arts in Midtown. "He liked to have fun," said  Arialis Ortiz, 14. "He was always making people laugh. He was funny." 

About three hours later, an 18-year-old man was shot as he walked a female friend to a Harlem subway station, police said. It is believed his death was related to his involvement in the Bloods gang, the law-enforcement official said. 

The victim,  Jonathan Bells, was walking with his companion on Lenox Avenue towards the 135th Street subway station when he was passed by two men walking in the opposite direction who said "40th ain't got nothing on us," the official said. The statement was an apparent reference to a gang that hails from 140th Street, the official said. Upon hearing that, Mr. Bells apparently ran south on Lenox Avenue and was shot by the unknown assailant and collapsed in the cross walk near West 136th Street, the official said. 

He was taken to Harlem Hospital, which is one block from the shooting scene, where he died at about 3:20 a.m., police said. His female companion was uninjured, police said. 

No arrests have been made in the case, police said. The law enforcement official said Mr. Bell was a known member of the Bloods and had previously been shot in the stomach in October of 2009 and survived. Details of that shooting were not immediately available. 