Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner has announced that he will take "extraordinary measures," such as borrowing from trust funds, to keep the government operational and below the legal borrowing limit for an extra month or so.

He told Congress that he believes these steps will mean the U.S. won't hit the hard-stop debt limit until Aug. 2. Late last month the Treasury Department technically surpassed the debt ceiling limit of $14.3 trillion. Some in Congress and elsewhere have inquired how the administration can continue to borrow above the limit. The answer, as former Bush administration Treasury official Jim Carter tells me, is that tens of billions of dollars of federal debt "does not technically count against the Congressionally authorized debt limit," though it is borrowing nonetheless.

Still, this only temporarily postpones what some are calling "debt doomsday," and a resolution to the debt bill stand-off is nowhere in sight. Republicans, behind Speaker John Boehner, believe that folding here is not an option if they are to have any success at limiting deficit spending. Congress is expected to borrow an all-time high of $1.6 trillion this year.

Where does the debate head from here? There is chatter on Capitol Hill that Congress may pass only a $1 trillion debt hike, not the $2 trillion to $3 trillion that the White House is seeking. But Mr. Boehner may be souring on that strategy because it would require many vulnerable GOP House freshmen to vote twice before the 2012 elections on raising the debt ceiling at a time when polls show great opposition to a debt extension.

Republicans in the House and Senate are still rallying around Tennessee Sen. Bob Corker's Cap Act as the price to raise the debt ceiling. The Cap Act would automatically ratchet federal spending down to 20.6% of GDP in 10 years from nearly 25% today. Other Republicans want entitlement cuts and a deal to pare back or repeal key provisions of ObamaCare.

Another possibility is to pass a "clean" debt bill with no strings attached but with Democrats supplying almost all of the votes needed. As one House leadership aide tells me, "Democrats and Obama created this debt [and] they are the ones who should have to vote to raise the ceiling, not us." This would mean that Democrats would take the political blame for raising the borrowing ceiling, and it's probably the least likely scenario. It would be highly unusual for the minority party in the House to supply nearly all the votes for a debt bill. Senate Democrats up for re-election next year are also terrified of this option and would prefer to cut a bipartisan deal.

It's all still clear as mud, but for now Republicans feel they have the upper hand. With 70% of Americans opposed to an increase in the debt, Mr. Boehner and company are probably right.

To read more stories like this one, please subscribe to Political Diary.