A board shake-up at the St. Joe Co., a large Florida real-estate developer, has put former chairman Hugh M. Durden at the helm of the company as acting chief executive, while investor Bruce R. Berkowitz has assumed the position of chairman of the board, according to a filing late Friday.

Mr. Durden's position will be "very interim," serving for up to 60 days while the board completes a search for a new CEO, according to a person close to the company. Mr. Berkowitz plans to stay on as chairman permanently. The changes were first reported by CNBC.

The Securities and Exchange Commission filing also said that St. Joe's board terminated a shareholder rights plan, or "poison pill." The plan was enacted by the board on Feb. 15 to fend off potential takeover attempt after Mr. Berkowitz and his mutual fund company, the Fairholme Funds Inc., asked shareholders to replace the board.

At the time, the company was led by Britt Greene, who served as president, CEO and a director of the company. Mr. Greene stepped down as a director on Monday and relinquished his executive positions on March 3. The board met in Jacksonville Thursday to approve Mr. Berkowitz's and Mr. Durden's appointments.

The tumult at St. Joe's board comes after a pitched, two month-long control battle that pitted Mr. Greene against Mr. Berkowitz. Fairholme has argued that St. Joe's board was wasting money and not pursuing an effective business plan. "We cannot continue on this course for long or there will be no Joe. Starting today, we will not continue down this road," Mr. Berkowitz wrote in a statement to St. Joe employees on Friday. "I know change is painful, but the seeds of greatness are planted during tough times."

On Monday, it became clear that Fairholme had won the battle after Mr. Greene resigned as a director and agreed to step down as CEO later in the week. He left with an exit package that could be worth nearly $8 million in cash, benefits and profits from stock sales. Three other board members also stepped down with him, and were replaced by three Berkowitz allies: Charles M. Fernandez, an executive at Fairholme, former Florida Gov. Charlie Crist, and Carnival Corp. chief operating officer Howard S. Frank. 

Mr. Greene and Mr. Durden could not be reached for comment. 

 Write to Robbie Whelan at Robbie.Whelan@wsj.com