With playoff matchups set, fans should take nearly everything in this final week of the season with a grain of salt. This is a time of starters who rest on the bench and others who simply relax while playing. But on Tuesday night at the Garden, it was clear that at least one team was playing for whatever was left to win.

The Bulls beat the Knicks 103-90 on Tuesday behind 26 points from point guard Derrick Rose and 23 from Luol Deng in a game the Knicks mostly glided through. Carmelo Anthony, despite his 21 points, played just three minutes in the fourth quarter. Point guard Chauncey Billups, who scored 10 points, played three fourth quarter minutes as well.

In the fourth quarter, the Knicks cut a 21-point deficit to six before succumbing to Rose, the MVP candidate who put on an all-around impressive showing. He had the highlight of the night when he picked off a Billups pass near half court and threw in a reverse over-the-head dunk that coaxed a collective "Oh!" from the Garden crowd.

The Knicks' star forward Amar'e Stoudemire sat out his third straight game with a sore ankle he suffered last week against the Philadelphia 76ers. He would have played if this was a meaningful game, Knicks coach Mike D'Antoni said, and his status for Wednesday night's finale against the Boston Celtics is unknown. To complicate matters, the Knicks play those same Celtics in the playoffs starting this weekend.

The Knicks held a 55-52 lead at the half, helped by Anthony's 15 and Billups' 10 points and seven assists. From there, things unraveled. Rose scored 13 points in the third quarter while the Bulls went on a 26-2 run to seize a lead they wouldn't come particularly close to losing.

The Bulls, first in the Eastern Conference, were playing for the top overall seed in the NBA, which would mean home court advantage in the Finals if they played Western top seed the Spurs, who entered the night with a one-game lead on Chicago. The Knicks were playing for little more than confidence. Unlike many games over the past week, there wasn't much auditioning for playoff minutes for Knicks bench players. Forward Derrick Brown played just six minutes, and center Shelden Williams played four. 

—Kevin Clark