SEOUL—North Korea, angry that four of its citizens decided to stay in South Korea after drifting there last month in an unpowered boat, on Friday sent no one to the inter-Korean border to accept the return of 27 others from the same boat.

The action surprised South Korean government officials and experts on North Korean human rights issues in Seoul, who said they'd never seen the North snub the repatriation of its citizens.

See details on recent skirmishes between North Korea and South Korea and other important events in their relations.

Inter-Korean relations, strained by the South's refusal since 2008 to provide unfettered economic aid to the North, turned far more tense last year when the North attacked the South twice in a disputed maritime border area. Against that backdrop, the decision by four North Koreans to defect to the South has suddenly emerged as another source of friction.

North Korea's state media on Thursday and Friday issued statements demanding the return of all 31 of its citizens and accusing the South of keeping them hostage.

In announcing preparations for the transfer, South Korea on Thursday said that four of the 31 people, including the boat's captain, had asked to stay in the South. The requests emerged a day earlier during individual meetings with the 31, the South said.

On Friday morning, South Korean officials took the 27 who wanted to return to the border crossing where such passage normally occurs. In the late evening, they returned to a facility in a Seoul suburb where they've spent most of their time since arriving Feb. 4.

A spokeswoman at the Unification Ministry, which handles affairs with the North, said officials would attempt to talk to North Korea about the matter on Monday. The South received a phone call from the North on Friday that acknowledged the situation but gave no direction.

Only twice out of approximately 30 incidents of people drifting south of the maritime border since 2004 have North Koreans asked to stay in the South, according to Unification Ministry data. Such incidents typically involve a fishing boat with a small crew that has lost power or track of its location.

But the current episode has been unusual from the start. The 31 people were in a fishing boat that was too small for that many people. And it arrived at night on Yeonpyeong Island, the island in the Yellow Sea that North Korea attacked with an artillery barrage in November, killing four South Koreans.

After the 31 were initially questioned, South Korean authorities said they didn't appear to try to be defecting and expressed as a group a desire to return. North Korea, which usually says nothing about such incidents, in this case began publicly urging South Korea to return the 31 people immediately.

South Korea typically detains for several weeks North Koreans who arrive under unusual circumstances. It said it would stick that to practice in this case. South Korean authorities use the time to interview North Koreans for intelligence purposes and to offer to let them stay in the South.

The North initially said nothing about South Korea's announcement on Thursday that four had chosen to stay. But late Thursday night, the North's state news agency issued a heated statement on the matter. It said South Korea "refused to send them back not because of any 'investigation' or 'confirmation of their will' but sought an aim to use them as hostages for hatching sinister plots."

On Friday, a spokesman at the Unification Ministry said the four "wished to stay on our side according to their free will and, therefore, are not returning."

Tim Peters, who leads a defector assistance group called Helping Hands Korea, said the North's apparent refusal to accept the 27 people who wanted to return home was "uncharted territory" for those involved in such work in Seoul. 

—Jaeyeon Woo contributed to this article.

 Write to  Evan Ramstad at evan.ramstad@wsj.com 