KABUL, Afghanistan—U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert Gates arrived in Afghanistan Monday to meet with U.S. troops and Afghan leaders, as the Obama administration looks for signs that its strategy there is starting to pay security dividends. 

The visit comes amid continued friction between U.S. forces and the Afghan government over civilian casualties from coalition operations. Most recently, nine teenage boys were mistakenly killed in a coalition attack in eastern Kunar province. 

In a news conference Monday evening in Kabul, Mr. Gates took the unusual step of making a personal apology to Afghan President Hamid Karzai over the incident. 

"This breaks our heart," he said. "Not only is their loss a tragedy for their families, it is a setback for our relationship with the Afghan people." 

Mr. Karzai, who a day earlier rejected a similar overture from U.S. Gen. David Petraeus, thanked Mr. Gates, and added, "I trust him fully when he says he's sorry." But he said the issue of civilian casualties was "at the heart of some of the tensions in an otherwise very healthy relationship between the two countries."

In a meeting with troops at Bagram Airfield, a large U.S. base north of Kabul, Mr. Gates said U.S. forces needed to be prepared for difficult days ahead as Afghanistan's traditional fighting season resumes in the spring. 

"You've had a tough winter, it's going to be a tougher spring and summer, but you've made a lot of headway," he said. 

The Obama administration launched a troop surge in Afghanistan in December 2009 with the aim of bolstering the country's precarious security, particularly in the east and south. Operations are also focused on expanding the security zone around the capital, Kabul, which has seen a number of dramatic insurgent attacks. Mr. Gates said troops in eastern Afghanistan were "expanding the Kabul security bubble."

Pentagon spokesman Geoff Morrell told reporters accompanying the defense secretary that the visit—Mr. Gates's 13th trip to the country as defense secretary—wasn't tied directly to any key decision points for U.S. policy, but added that it would inform decisions about the pace and scope of a gradual U.S. troop drawdown that is slated to begin in midsummer. 

"These frequent and regular visits provide him a good measuring stick to gauge how quickly progress is being made," he said.

The U.S. military has bolstered its uniformed presence here to roughly 100,000, a commitment that is projected to cost more than $100 billion in fiscal 2011.

Maj. Gen. John Campbell, the commander of forces in Regional Command East, said his forces were focused on "expanding [the] security zone in the highways leading into the capital" ahead of the spring fighting. He said a recent increase in the number of improvised explosive device, or IED, attacks, suggested fighting was off to an earlier start. 

"In the last two weeks, the number of IEDs, the number of attacks has risen," he said. "I think that the enemy is trying to get an early start of what they call their spring campaign."

In his visit to Bagram, Mr. Gates took questions from troops about the future of the U.S. presence in Afghanistan, and said Washington and Kabul had recently begun negotiations about a long-term security agreement. At the news conference with Mr. Karzai, he said a U.S. team would arrive in Afghanistan next week to begin negotiating a strategic partnership.

Asked by one of the troops about what kept him up at night, Mr. Gates said the welfare of troops was on his mind, but he also took a swipe at Congress, which has yet to pass a full-year appropriations bill for the current fiscal year.

"You all keep me up at night," he said, adding: "That, and Congress."