 Portugal passed a key test by successfully luring foreign investors to a pair of government-bond auctions, but the high interest rates marked on the new debt failed to quell concerns that the Iberian country could be next in line for a bailout. 

Portuguese officials said the auction, in which Portugal sold €1.25 billion ($1.62 billion) worth of three-year and nine-year government bonds, the maximum planned, was a sign that investors are confident in its ability to improve its financial health.

The auction came just a few days after Portugal sold €1.1 billion ($1.43 billion) to China in a private placement, a person familiar with the matter said.

The European Union put its weight behind expanding the euro area's emergency lending facility. The European Commission, the EU's executive arm, stressed the need for the size of the €440 billion ($571 billion) European Financial Stability Facility to be reinforced and for its application to be expanded. 

The European Central Bank's governing council will welcome one new friend and confront two old enemies when it meets for the first time this year Thursday. Sadly for Bank of Estonia Governor Andres Lipstok, his debut is certain to be overshadowed by the twin problems of Europe's debt crisis, and, for the first time in more than two years, inflation. 

The euro zone's industrial output rose more quickly than expected in November, continuing a strong run and auguring well for economic growth in the final three months of the year.

The U.K. recorded its largest-ever goods trade deficit in November as both exports and imports surged to the highest levels since comparable records began in 1980, official data showed. 

U.K. Prime Minister David Cameron said the government's planned cull of independent public agencies known as quangos—quasi-autonomous nongovernment organizations—will save billions of pounds, upping its estimate following criticism of the process. 

 Germany's economy in 2010 grew at its strongest rate since the country's reunification, propelled by buoyant exports and rising investment, the Federal Statistics Office said. German gross domestic product increased 3.6% last year in price-adjusted terms, after slumping 4.7% in 2009. 

 The German government resolved to start withdrawing troops from Afghanistan by the end of this year and tempered expectations for the conditions it will leave behind, saying its involvement in a war that has been deeply unpopular domestically will now be guided by "very realistic goals" to ensure the country does not slip into chaos. 

 The World Economic Forum introduced a quota for female executives from major sponsors at its Davos summit, following criticism that not enough women attend the gathering of global business leaders. 

The Dutch government has warned prostitutes who advertise their wares in the famed windows of Amsterdam's red-light district to expect a business-only visit from the tax man. The country legalized prostitution in 2000, but authorities are only now demanding prostitutes pay income tax.

Few prostitution advocates are protesting, though many are skeptical tax law can be enforced in an all-cash industry.

Belgium's budget deficit could fall below 4% of gross domestic product this year after decreasing to a lower-than-expected 4.6% in 2010, the government said in an effort to restore market confidence after worries about its financial stability spread amid a political vacuum. 

 Russia cast full blame on the Poles for the crash that killed their president and 95 others last year, saying the country's air force commander entered the cockpit of the Polish plane and, apparently under the influence of alcohol, pressured the crew to land in heavy fog. Polish officials objected to what they called one-sided conclusions by Russian investigators. 

 The year 2010 has tied 2005 as the warmest year on record globally, according to an assessment by U.S. government scientists. Researchers at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration said that global land and ocean annual surface temperature for 2010 was 1.12 degrees Fahrenheit (0.62 degrees Centigrade) above the 20th century average. 

 Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner said China is a source of both economic opportunity and concern for the U.S., highlighting tensions that will be the centerpiece of Chinese President Hu Jintao's visit to Washington next week.  

 U.S. import prices extended their recent climb in December, staging their biggest three-month gain in over a year on the back of resurgent energy prices. 

 The U.S. House of Representatives paid tribute to one of its own with a resolution honoring Democratic Rep. Gabrielle Giffords and 19 other people shot Saturday in Arizona. 

 Former vice-presidential candidate Sarah Palin released a video statement defending her campaign rhetoric and calling it "irresponsible'' and a "blood libel'' to link political language to the shooting rampage in Arizona. 

In Brazil, torrential summer rains tore through Rio de Janeiro state's mountains, killing at least 99 people in 24 hours, officials said. 

The chairman of one of Japan's most powerful business lobbies lambasted the government for lacking a long-term fiscal approach in dealing with the country's demographic time bomb, saying country's consumption tax has to be tripled to 17% within six years to solve the problem. 

Japan's current account surplus shrank for the first time in three months in November as persistent strength in iron ore and natural gas prices pushed up import costs and the strong yen hobbled export growth. 

Meanwhile, separate data from the Bank of Japan showed that bank lending, excluding credit unions, fell 2.1% on year in December, marking the 13th straight month of declines in a continued sign of the nation's deflating economy. 

 U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates headed for Tokyo, where he is expected to push for Japan's more active involvement in regional defense to ease the tension on the Korean peninsula and to counterbalance the rapid buildup of China's military capability, highlighted by China's bold move to test fly its new stealth fighter during his visit. 

 China's commercial center, Shanghai, will make it easier for foreigners to invest in the private-equity sector, a move that could give the nascent homegrown industry a boost even as it further opens a potentially lucrative market to outsiders. 

In Afghanistan, the Taliban took aim at the country's intelligence services, killing six people and wounding more than 30 in two attacks, while roadside bombs claimed the lives of four NATO service members.

 Lebanon's year-old unity government collapsed after Hezbollah ministers and their allies resigned over tensions stemming from a United Nations-backed tribunal investigating the 2005 assassination of former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri. 

 Qatar's winning bid to hold soccer's 2022 World Cup was marked by a spending spree that included investments in the home countries of several executives who were tasked with choosing the host city, according to internal documents from the emirate's bidding committee. 

A Dubai court has given a three-year jail sentence to a self-professed African wizard who claimed he could make millions of dollars rain from the sky in exchange for a modest payment to genies.

 Tunisia's president fired his interior minister and set up a special commission to investigate the police response to nearly monthlong antigovernment protests that have destabilized this largely authoritarian country. 

The capital of Tunis was under curfew Wednesday night and soldiers were deployed across the center of the city after violence flared there for the first time during unrest that has left at least 23 people dead, officials said. 

 The government's handling of devastating floods across Queensland, which have displaced thousands of people and killed more than 20, came under greater scrutiny as the Brisbane River's muddy waters began swamping the nation's third-largest city.  