For an author who was brought up in a town in Bihar, India, and who now lives in Denmark, setting a novel in Victorian London may not seem the obvious choice. 

But that's exactly what Tabish Khair did in "The Thing About Thugs," one of five titles short-listed for the Man Asian Literary Prize. Awarded annually for a novel by an Asian author, the prize will be announced in Hong Kong on March 16. 

In his narrative, Mr. Khair takes the reader between a grandfather's library in modern-day Bihar and the back alleys of 19th-century England. Above all, Mr. Khair's novel is about thugs, Indian thugs. 

They are the ones who belonged to the Thuggee cult, whose tales of callous murders and robberies reached the empire's mother city of London. At least this was the picture of thugs painted in British literature of the time. 

In his mocking and provocative take on the genre, Mr. Khair's thug finds himself in the London of opium dens, sewers and fog, from where he writes letters in Persian to his loved one back home. 

Born and raised in a Muslim household in Gaya, a town in Bihar, Mr. Khair spent several years in New Delhi before moving to Denmark. A poet, novelist and essayist, Mr. Khair said that while his background is important, he opposes attempts to pigeonhole his work. 

Mr. Khair spoke to The Wall Street Journal about himself, his novel and his favorite moments in literature. 

 I always knew my book would beabout thugs, but from the other side, and I knew it would be about deception, truth and narratives. I had been reading about thugs, like Meadows's book on thugs (Philip Meadows Taylor's 1839 "Confessions of a Thug"). We mainly hear the simplified version of who thugs were. It's not that I don't believe this group existed but I wanted to show them not as a cult but as Indians with ordinary backgrounds who varied from area to area and from person to person. I also wanted to write about London but I didn't want it to be another multicultural London novel—I feel there are too many of them. So I had to look at the past, and the early Victorian period coincided with the suppression of Thuggee in India. 



 I found out I had been short-listedfor the Man Asian Literary Prize when a friend from Delhi posted it on my Facebook. And there were at least two or three other messages about it from my contacts before I actually checked and found out.

  Khair: Don't Call Me NRI  



 Being an author wasthe only thing I ever wanted to be, except perhaps a painter but I cannot paint. I started writing poems when I was 7 or 8. Childish stuff. But mainly all I knew is that I wanted to read, I wanted to read as much as possible. I had no clear idea what it was to become a writer. I come from a professional middle-class family where all studied medicine, engineering and, these days, IT. Of course, it took years before I realized that I had to write "professionally," not just dabble in it, and then it took years before I could gather up my courage. 



 I decided to leave Biharat the age of 24 or so. I had a very comfortable middle-class lifestyle in Gaya, I had a nice house and a library I could read in. That's what I did, I read a lot. Then I wrote a couple of articles on Islamic fundamentalism which upset some Muslim fundamentalists and I received some threats. This was around the time the death fatwa was issued against Salman Rushdie. I realized I could not keep on writing from Gaya, that I could not say what I wanted to say if I stayed there, so I left for Delhi. There I started working as a staff writer for the Times of India. Then I met a Danish girl. 

One of the first things I asked myself when I first moved to Denmark was: Where were all the people? The streets were so bloody empty. I still get surprised at times. And then they complain about immigrants! 



I have many favorite moments in literature. Manto's Toba Tek Singh stuck in no-man's land; Brontë's Heathcliff wrenching open the window and soliciting Cathy's ghost to enter; King Lear running mad in the storm; a lesbian relationship seen as a quilt changing shapes by a young girl in Ismat Chughtai's "Lihaf;" moments of complex jealousy in Proust; the moment in Henry James's "Turn of the Screw" where the boy is seen standing out in the garden at night and many others. 

There is one particular episode in "Heart of Darkness" where Marlow is bringing back Kurtz on a steamboat through the forest and African tribesmen gather on the shore. The Europeans in the boat aren't really threatened by the tribesmen because they are not within reach of their spears. Marlow blows the whistle to frighten them away but that doesn't satisfy other Europeans. "And then that imbecile crowd down on the deck started their little fun, and I could see nothing more for smoke," writes Conrad. 

It's a beautiful and provocative scene. What is actually taking place is a massacre. What is being lost in smoke is this massacre. I find the use of language here fascinating. Marlow the narrator and Conrad the author can only say so many things. 

There is a story beneath the story that remains untold. That is what I try to do as well.