MANAMA, Bahrain—Military troops and security forces opened a large-scale assault Wednesday against hundreds of anti-government protesters occupying a landmark square in Bahrain's capital, the Associated Press reported.

The assault came a day after Bahrain declared a three-month state of emergency and handed wide powers to the armed forces, as it moved to quell weeks of demonstrations by mainly Shiite protesters a day after the arrival of Saudi troops. It was unclear whether the Saudi troops were involved in the assault, the AP reported.

Police and military units fired tear gas as they pushed into Pearl Square, the center of the uprising against Bahrain's rulers since it began more than a month ago. Shooting was heard as the attack was launched shortly after daybreak, but there was no immediate word on casualties. Black smoke was seen rising from the square and helicopters flew overhead as protesters fled to side streets.

Tuesday, Bahrain temporarily withdrew its ambassador from Tehran, after Iran described the arrival of the foreign troops as an "occupation." Meanwhile, Saudi Arabia denied a report that a protester shot and killed one of its soldiers. 

Bahrain television reported a member of the security forces had died after being run over by a protester. The government said the state of emergency gives Bahrain's army and security forces a mandate "to take the measures and procedures necessary to preserve the safety of the nation and its people." Bahrain has seen clashes over the past few days between security forces, antigovernment demonstrators and pro-regime loyalists, marking an escalation of tensions in the strategic Arab Gulf state, where a swelling number of protesters have taken control of the key financial district and are calling for the downfall of the monarchy. 

Track events day by day.

On Tuesday, members of opposition groups reported clashes in Sitra and Shiite and Sunni villages near the capital between pro-government and antigovernment parties. 

"There have been attacks in six villages," said Abdul Khalil, a senior member of the moderate Al Wefaq party. "They [pro-government mobs] attacked the Shia and Sunni villages. They had guns and security forces had to use tear gas. This is a terrible and complicated situation." 

Underlining growing U.S. concerns about deteriorating security in Bahrain, the Pentagon said Tuesday it authorized the departure, on a voluntary basis, of nonemergency civilian personnel and service members' families. 

Bahrain's six formal opposition parties and secular groups issued a statement late Tuesday condemning emergency law and the widespread attacks on mainly Shiite communities outside of the capital. "The political opposition parties and the Federation of Trade Unions denounce the state of emergency declared by the regime and the escalation of the security situation and the use of the military to resolve a political crisis caused by the regime itself," said a translation of the statement.

It also denounced the "military and civil militias that brutally attack unarmed civilians in their homes and villages," which it said reinforced its call to the international community to "protect the Bahraini people from the brutality of the security forces and domestic and international armies." 

Members of Bahrain's opposition Monday had appealed to United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon for help, amid a growing crisis in the country. 

Khalil Almarzooq, a leading member of Al Wefaq, the major Shiite opposition bloc, which was one of the signatories of the statement, also said he was strongly opposed to martial law. "We don't need emergency law, this is political situation," he said, adding it should be resolved by political means. 

Meanwhile, opposition members said hopes for dialogue were fading. "We can't start dialogue with violence everywhere in the country," said Mr. Khalil, the senior member of Al Wefaq. "We don't need more guns. Security forces from Gulf countries will put oil on the fire." 

"I don't think there is room for dialogue," said Abdul AlSingace, a senior figure in the hard-line Haq movement. Foreign troops in Bahrain will provoke the protesters, who have taken control of Manama's financial district, into further acts of "civil disobedience," he said, but stopped short of saying it would make protesters more violent. "If they attack the people they have every right to defend themselves," he said. 

Protesters marching on the Saudi Embassy Tuesday said the king's decision to impose emergency law on the streets of Bahrain could provide a platform for a harsh crackdown by security forces on protesters, who have on the whole marched unarmed and peacefully. "If a curfew is in place [the security forces] have a reason to attack because they will say it's law that you can't be on streets," said 21-year-old antigovernment demonstrator Yousef, who works in finance in Manama but declined to give his last name. 

In the Shiite town of Sitra, pro-government vigilantes armed with knives, swords and batons went on a rampage through the village, one witness said. Police had mobilized outside the local health center by late afternoon, said Mustafa Altooq, 38 years old, who went to visit his wounded brother. He described a chaotic scene of bodies being brought to the health center in the back of cars. 

Ali Ibrahim, a consultant at the capital's Salmaniya hospital, said a Sitra man in his 20s died of a serious skull injury, and about an additional 60 people were being treated at the hospital from wounds inflicted by bird shot and rubber bullets. He said casualties were arriving from clashes in villages near Manama. 

The White House on Tuesday called for "calm and restraint" on all sides, warning that the use of force and sectarian violence by either the Saudis or Shiite opposition groups "will only worsen the situation." 

On Monday, Gulf Cooperation Council states responded to a request from Bahrain's ruling al-Khalifa family to dispatch the first deployment of Arab troops across national borders since a revolt in Tunisia in December sparked unrest across the Arab world.

Saudi Arabia said that 1,000 of its soldiers took part, and the United Arab Emirates said that 500 of its police officers had arrived at Bahrain's request. On Tuesday, police helicopters circled overhead as tens of thousands of antigovernment demonstrators marched through the capital to protest the presence of Gulf troops in Bahrain and to call for the downfall of the monarchy. 

They marched peacefully to the Saudi Arabian Embassy in the heart of Manama's financial district.

"If we don't win, then we will die," said Muntadar Jaffa, a 20-year-old engineering student who lives on the outskirts of Manama. "People will not leave the streets or go home."

The U.S. is deeply concerned about hard-liners within the Shiite community, who have longstanding ties to Iran and Hezbollah and could try to provoke a military response from the Saudis, risking a wider conflict, officials said.

The U.S. hopes to avoid further escalation. At a news conference in Cairo, U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton expressed concern about the violence in Bahrain, adding that "all sides must take steps now to negotiate toward a political solution." She said she had expressed similar concerns in a telephone conversation Tuesday with Saudi Foreign Minister Saud al-Faisal. 

"I told him that security challenges cannot be a substitute for political resolution," Mrs. Clinton said.

The State Department dispatched Jeffrey Feltman, acting assistant secretary of state for Near Eastern Affairs, to Bahrain, where he is "working the issue aggressively on the ground as we speak," said White House spokesman Tommy Vietor.

State Department spokesman Mark Toner said that Mr. Feltman's "message is that there is no military solution to the problems in Bahrain. A political solution is necessary and all sides must now work to produce a dialogue that addresses the needs of all of Bahrain's citizens."

The U.S. had tried, unsuccessfully, to persuade its Saudi allies to keep their forces out of the fray.

Tensions between President Barack Obama and the Saudi king flared in February over Mr. Obama's push for the immediate exit of President Hosni Mubarak in Egypt, rather than the graceful exit supported by the Saudis.

Officials and diplomats said the Saudis now appeared to be charting a largely independent course in response to unrest in Bahrain. 

—Keith Johnson in Cairo contributed to this article.

 Write to  Summer Said at summer.said@dowjones.com 