There is little variety in the chants at Madison Square Garden. There's "M-V-P!" for Amar'e Stoudemire, "Melo" for Carmelo Anthony and few new ones work their way into the rotation.

So it was surprising when, with 11 minutes to go in the fourth quarter on Thursday night, "Toney Douglas!" was screamed through the Garden.

In the Knicks' 120-99 win over the Memphis Grizzlies on Thursday, Douglas tied the Knicks' franchise record with nine 3-pointers, previously held by Latrell Sprewell and John Starks. Douglas did it with only 12 attempts—he finished with 29 points while coming off the bench and playing 31 minutes. 

The 20 3-pointers the Knicks made were a team record. Anthony made three of his seven 3-point attempts, while Chauncey Billups, Landry Fields and Roger Mason all went 2-4. The team took 36 3-pointers. 

Douglas was limping when he came out of the game with midway through the fourth, and he did not return until two minutes remained. He said he was informed by someone at the scorer's table that he only needed one more to tie the franchise personal record. With 17 seconds left he drained the 3-pointer and pumped his fists in celebration.

Stoudemire had little impact on the game—Anthony had 15 points by the time Stoudemire had his first basket, with 9:40 to go in the second quarter. He finished with 16 points.

Anthony, meanwhile, scored 28 on the night. Eight days prior, he had picked this same Grizzlies team apart in Memphis and scored the game-winning shot over Tony Allen in a thrilling game. There was no such drama on Thursday—the Grizzlies couldn't get within single digits in the fourth quarter.

Billups had 18 points, but the most interesting development was his solid play with Douglas while the two played on the court at the same time. The idea of playing Billups at point guard and Douglas at shooting guard had been toyed with since Billups was acquired last month, but Thursday was the first time the idea seemed like a no-brainer.

 Write to  Kevin Clark at kevin.clark@wsj.com 