MADRID—Spain's first-quarter unemployment rate soared to 21.3%, with the economy losing more jobs in the three-month period than in the whole of 2010, as the country's government said talks for much-needed labor market reform may soon result in a deal. 

Spain's unemployment rate, the highest in the industrialized world, rose from 20.3% in the fourth quarter as the economy lost jobs across all sectors, data released Friday by the country's statistics institute INE shows. The rate is now the highest since unemployment rose to 21.3% in the first quarter of 1997. 

INE said in a separate report that April inflation likely rose to 3.5% from 3.3% in March, while retail sales fell 8.6% from a year earlier, compared with a 4.3% decline in February. The data suggest Spain's economy, which has only posted minimal growth rates in recent quarters, remains hampered by austerity measures and high inflation pressures after a three-year-long crisis. 

"All the three major figures...were really bad," said  Dominique Barbet, an economist at BNP Paribas, noting that both unemployment and retail sales data were worse than pessimistic expectations. 

INE said in a statement that the largest increase in unemployment occurred in the manufacturing and construction sectors. Overall, 256,500 jobs were lost in the quarter, a sign that Spain's economy remains mired in a painful deleveraging process since the property boom ended in 2008. 

"The survey confirms that the Spanish labor market remains very subdued, although the unemployment rate may be close to a peak," said  Tullia Bucco, an economist at Unicredit. 

Spain's labor market has been hit by mass layoffs in the construction sector and a contraction of domestic spending, which has hurt the service sector. A bounce in the export sector, which employs only a small fraction of the labor force, hasn't been enough to offset job losses elsewhere. 

Spain's government launched minor reforms of Spain's labor laws—among the most rigid in Europe—last year, making it easier for companies to fire and hire workers, but follow-up talks between trade unions and business representatives have failed to make headway so far this year. 

Trade unions have expressed strong opposition to plans to link wages closer to productivity, rather than inflation as it is now often the case. Companies complain that the system is eroding their competitiveness as they are forced to match up higher-than-average inflation with wage rises. Euro-zone inflation was at 2.8% in April. 

After several weeks of talks that have run past previous government deadlines, a deal between unions and business representatives should be announced in coming days, Deputy Finance Minister  José Manuel Campa said Friday. 

In addition, economists and the government say unemployment is unlikely to rise much further, at least in the mid-term, as the Spanish economy may add some jobs for the busy summer tourist season. 

Labor Minister  Valeriano Gomez said Thursday the number of Spanish unemployed is unlikely to top five million this year. Just over 4.9 million people were unemployed in the first quarter, up from 4.7 million in the previous quarter. 

INE data shows unemployment remains fairly variable within the country, with a sizeable gap between the wealthier northern and the poorer southern regions—unemployment stood at 11.6% in the Basque Country, and 29.7% in Andalusia.