It is an annual spring rite as familiar as the prickling of buds along tree branches: For allergy sufferers, the misery of previous years recedes in the face of immediate agony. As eyes start to itch, throats clench and minds cloud, a declaration inevitably circulates across New York: Worst. Allergy. Season. Ever.

Only this time, experts say, it might actually be true—at least in recent memory.

  Dr. Boyan Hadjiev, who's dubbed himself "Dr. Sneeze," called it "the worst season" he's seen since he opened his Manhattan practice seven years ago. 

"We always say this is the worst season we've seen," Dr. Hadjiev admitted. Still, he insisted, "this one tops it." 

Allergists across the city reported a doubling and tripling of patients, exceeding previous records.  Clifford Bassett, who practices in Brooklyn and Manhattan, said he'd hired two additional phone operators and another nurse to handle an influx of patients. 

"If we tabulated our phone records and compared quantitatively to the previous eight or nine years, we're seeing a volume of at least three to four times greater a day," said Dr. Bassett, who's also a spokesman for the American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology.

"The allergy misery index is rising," Dr. Bassett said. "It seems to be the perfect storm."

But the recent lack of storms is the problem, experts said.

"They talk about what great weather we're having, but that's actually the reason we're having such terrible allergies," said  Guy Robinson, who manages the pollen tracking station at Lincoln Center, which is associated with Fordham University. "Trees will keep producing pollen and nothing will wash it away."

New York has experienced only 2.06 inches of rain the past 20 days after a winter that set records for snow, which funneled water to tree roots. In the previous four years, the city averaged 3.86 inches over the same 20-day span, according to data from the National Weather Service.

On April 29, Lincoln Center recorded the highest daily pollen level for New York since it started tracking in 2009: 5,093 particles per cubic meter (1,500 is considered uncomfortable). Its other monitoring site, in Armonk, N.Y., recorded a 6,719 level Sunday, the fifth-highest mark in 12 years, Mr. Robinson said.

"We definitely can't say worst ever," Mr. Robinson said. Still, he said, "It is the worst time of year, that's for sure."

Paul Asaro made his first-ever visit to an allergist on Tuesday. 

"I usually just grin and bear it," said Mr. Asaro, who said he has mild symptoms every year. But this year, he said, he accrued scars under his eyes from vigorous scratching. "Definitely my eyes are worse this year," said Mr. Asaro, who lives on Long Island and works in Midtown. 

At the allergist, he received 48 separate pricks to test for allergies; several swelled bumps on his arm indicated he is allergic to trees. He has scheduled an appointment for shots next week. "I'm only 33. With luck, I have another 50 years on this planet," he said. "One year of shots and not having any more allergies seems like a good cost-benefit analysis."

The pollen should taper by the end of the month, experts said. In the meantime, they offered advice. 

Dr. Hadjiev cautioned against jogging in the mornings, when pollen dispersal is highest. Hair gel, Dr. Bassett said, is "a pollen magnet." If all else fails, New Yorkers can engage in another favorite ritual: blaming New Jersey. Pollen particles are "so small, even if you're not sitting under a tree or anything, you're going to get large amounts of pollen that could be blown from miles away," Mr. Robinson said. "A lot of it is probably coming from New Jersey."