JOHANNESBURG—The challenge of governance and leadership in Africa is "particularly acute" and had undermined the continent's improved economic performance over the past decade, the World Bank said Thursday. 

Tackling this issue was the foundation for the World Bank's new strategy plan for sub-Saharan Africa, aimed at increasing the competitiveness and strength of its economies, and making them more attractive to investment. 

"All of the better performance over the period of a decade has not been sufficient to tackle deep development problems that challenge the continent," said Obiageli Ezekwesili, the World Bank's Vice President for Africa. 

She was speaking to reporters at the launch of the World Bank's new 10-year strategy for the world's poorest continent, which grew by an average of 5% over the past decade. 

The strategy will be financed by half of a $49 billion package agreed in December by the International Development Association, the World Bank's lending arm for poor countries. 

Two thirds of the 30 countries in the world which the World Bank classifies as "fragile and conflict affected" are in Africa. The Bank says this is worsened by the fact that public-sector capacity in those countries is exceptionally weak. 

"A clear message from our consultations for this strategy ... was that governance and leadership were the most important factors driving Africa's future development," the World Bank said in its strategy report. Ms. Ezekwesili said that employment was central to the plan, with between 7 million-10 million Africans joining the "unemployment queue" every year. 

"What is key is to ensure that you have an environment where skills are properly priced," Ms. Ezekwesili said. Regulation of labor and land often constrained business and undermined competitiveness, the Bank's report said. 

Labor rules are seen by many as one of the biggest impediments to investment in South Africa, the continent's biggest economy. The government is considering introducing new regulations which would create even bigger barriers. 

Lack of infrastructure was also a big obstacle to investment and policy measures were needed to address the inefficiencies which drained $17 billion of infrastructure resources a year, the World Bank said. 

"Everything we do to address Africa's infrastructure will help to enable its competitiveness," Ms. Ezekwesili said. "Businesses want to set up here with the hurdles to their activities eliminated as much as possible." 

The World Bank would intervene through partnerships, knowledge and technical assistance as well as support expertise and financing, she added. However, the Bank didn't address any of the shortcomings of its previous strategy, the Africa Action Plan. 