Naomi Pomeroy describes her style as "refined French grandmother." She admits, however, that the demi-glaces, confits and garnishes she relies on are out of most grandmothers' leagues. 

At Beast, diners are served dishes that seem familiar but taste uncommonly good. "The food at the restaurant is mysteriously complex," she said. "We hide our labor because my intention is not to be super complicated." Foams do not make their way onto plates. Instead, the six-course dinners consist of creamy soups, foie gras bon bons and mesquite grilled lamb chops topped with a sauce of olives, Sherry, five-hour-roasted tomatoes, anchovies and loads of finely chopped herbs.

 Her restaurant: Beast in Portland, Ore.

 What she's known for: Six-course prix-fixe dinners that change weekly.

Ms. Pomeroy's cooking toes the line between approachable and luxurious. For her final Slow Food Fast contribution, she shares a simple chicken dish enhanced by a cheese and herb stuffing that's balanced with a torn bread and arugula salad. 

"Chicken is sort of a vehicle," she said. "It's generally exciting because of what you do with it." Here, she rolls chicken thighs with fontina cheese, sage and garlic. Then she serves the bundles, browned and juicy, with an assertive salad. Dressed with red wine vinegar, lemon juice and pan drippings, the salad both lightens the dish and complements its homey qualities. 

Chicken with cheese is a combination Ms. Pomeroy pined for as a child. Today, she said, she happily serves this meal at home to her 10-year-old daughter. Though chicken isn't served at Beast and cheese is used sparingly (the menu features a cheese course), stuffing and rolling meat appeals to Ms. Pomeroy. At Beast, she said, pigeon breast would stand in for chicken and the stuffing would consist of herbs, breadcrumbs and demi-glace.

For this recipe, Ms. Pomeroy recommends using good fontina cheese. Plus, she adds, any "cheesy bits" that ooze out and crisp up while roasting are delicious tossed into the salad. As for the chicken, thighs have a flavor that breasts simply do not provide, she said.

This is Ms. Pomeroy's version of chicken supper—a meal both familiar and special. Serving it with arugula and warm crouton salad, while simple enough, reveals much about Ms. Pomeroy's ability to create composed dishes "that people just want to eat." It's a dish, she said, that screams: "Eat me." 

—Kitty Greenwald

 Hands-on time: 20 minutes  Total time: 35 minutes  Serves: 4

5 tablespoons olive oil  3 cloves garlic, peeled and smashed  24 sage leaves  8 boneless chicken thighs, about 1½ pounds total  4 ounces fontina cheese, cut into 2-inch cubes  4 slices rustic bread, cut ½-inch thick  2 tablespoons lemon juice  1 teaspoon red-wine vinegar  2 cups arugula leaves 

 What to do: 

 1. Heat oven to 500 degrees. 

 2. Set a large sauté pan over medium heat. Swirl in 4 tablespoons olive oil and, once hot, add garlic and sage. Fry until leaves are crisped and garlic is lightly golden, about 2 minutes. Using a slotted spoon, transfer garlic and sage to a plate. Turn off heat. Keep pan on stove. 

 3. Finely chop cooked garlic. Lay chicken thighs on a work surface, skin side down. Pound thin, if thighs are too thick to roll. Lightly season meat with salt and pepper and distribute sage leaves, garlic and fontina evenly among thighs. Roll thighs into tight bundles and secure each with toothpicks. 

 4. Season outsides of chicken rolls with salt. 

 5. Reheat oil over medium-high heat. Lay chicken thighs into the pan and brown all sides, about 1-2 minutes per side. 

 6. Tear bread into rustic croutons. 

 7. Transfer sauté pan to the oven and bake for 4 minutes. Remove pan from oven. Push chicken to one side of the pan and add croutons to the empty side. Toss croutons to coat with pan juices. 

 8. Continue roasting chicken and croutons 6 minutes or until bread is toasted and chicken is cooked through. Remove from oven and let chicken rest 5 minutes. Transfer croutons and cheese bits to a separate plate. 

 9. Meanwhile, In a medium bowl, collect pan juices and accumulated juice from resting chicken. Add lemon juice, red wine vinegar and remaining tablespoon of olive oil. Season with salt and pepper. Toss in arugula, croutons and cheese bits. Season with salt and pepper to taste.

 10. Remove toothpicks from chicken. Serve with arugula-bread salad.