The great wine cities are readily nameable: New York, London, Hong Kong and San Francisco. They're home to some of the best restaurants, retailers, auction houses and wine collectors in the world. But unlike my current favorite wine city, Montclair, N.J., none have a near-universal policy of BYOB.

Thanks to antiquated New Jersey liquor laws that first capped the number of new licenses several decades ago, Montclair currently is entitled to a mere 13 licenses, spread out among 70 or so restaurants in the town. It's a number based on population; New Jersey law dictates that there may be one licensed establishment per 3,000 residents—though no one at the N.J. Liquor Control Board could seem to explain the equation to me. 

But what's good news for wine collectors and cheapskates is bad news for many of the state's restaurateurs. A bring-your-own-bottle restaurant may have a profit margin as narrow as 10%, thanks to combined food and labor costs, according to  Anthony DePersio, who owns Fascino, a BYO restaurant in Montclair, and Bar Cara, a restaurant with a liquor license in neighboring Bloomfield. A restaurant with a bar will have a much larger profit margin since bartenders are paid very little (minimum wage and tips) but generate a large portion of the establishment's revenue.

Mr. DePersio said he was unable to acquire a license in Montclair because "It's really hard to get a liquor license in an affluent town." In less desirable ZIP Codes, it's more easily done. 

Mr. DePersio paid $120,000 for his Bloomfield liquor license and a mere $70,000 for another one in West Orange (he has yet to open a restaurant there and may eventually re-sell the license—called a 'pocket license' in state liquor terms). 

In fact, Mr. DePersio's West Orange license cost less than a tenth of the last liquor license sold in Montclair, purchased by the Wellmont Theatre in 2009 for a staggering $750,000. 

Of course, most BYO patrons likely don't dwell on such matters. The only figures they're likely to have in their heads are the number of bottles they'll be bringing along. 

I usually take two bottles with me—a red and a white—to a restaurant although a Montclair-based attorney friend of mine brings three, even when he's just dining with his wife. "Just in case," he says. (I assume that he means just in case a bottle is corked—not that he and his wife plan to get crocked.)

The objective is never maximum alcohol consumption but the opportunity to pair the perfect wine, course by course. And BYO allows my collector friends and me to vie with one another to find just the right bottle to match with every part of our meal. 

We have auditioned dozens of restaurants in the process but have returned again and again to the following three for the quality of their food and service—and the quality and quantity of their glassware, of course. 

 33 Walnut St.  

Every Montclair resident I know considers CulinAriane to be the best restaurant in town. It's certainly the toughest reservation to obtain. 

Aspiring diners are asked to leave their reservation requests on the restaurant's answering machine and will only receive word if there's actually a table. I scored one out of four times, though my friends have had better luck.

In each case, Chef Ariane's "modern American cuisine" proved to be worth the wait. The food is carefully composed but not fussy—with an emphasis on locally sourced ingredients. Star dishes include appetizers such as crab papaya potato napoleon with pickled habanero cilantro cream and cornmeal crusted oysters with horseradish cream and microgreens. ("Even if you hate horseradish you'll love this dish," our waiter promised. And yes, we did.) 

Notable main courses included bacon-wrapped trout with baby Brussels sprouts, butternut squash and fingerling potatoes and the Earl Grey Tea Brined Hudson Valley Duck Breast with Sweet Potato Savory and Cabbage Hash. (No entrée is less than two lines long.) And our waitress, who brought fresh wine glasses for every bottle, seemed pleasantly nonplussed by our table's four-bottle-to-four-diner ratio.



 77 Walnut St. 

Chef  Mike Carrino's credo, "Know Farmers, Know Food/No Farmers No Food," on the front of the menu makes it clear how he feels about locavore dining. Several main courses come with citations of origin: the chicken is from Goffle Farms, the pork from Pittenger Farms (both in New Jersey) though the skate, the cod and the short ribs are apparently from unnamable sources.

But monikered or otherwise, the food is terrific—notably the seven spiced rub duck breast with scallion pancakes and the cider marinated roast pork with a maple lacquer while the Jersey corn bisque accompanied by puzzle parts of tempura fried crab and little crab frites is pure genius. 

If only the art on the walls—housed in cheap black frames—were as attractive as the food on the plate, I'd love this place even more than I do. 

 331 Bloomfield Ave. 

The homemade pastas are the biggest draw at this Italian mainstay in the middle of town, where the wait staff is so gracious about providing the right glassware—in multiple sets for tastings—it's easy to forget the restaurant isn't making a dime on the wine. 

The selection from Chef Ryan DePersio is delicious but solid, not flashy. Best bets include the fried zucchini blossoms and cornmeal crusted calamari to start and just about any of the pastas. The caramelized cauliflower orecchiette and the ricotta gnocchi with sweet sausage are particularly good. 

 30 Church St. 

A great BYO wine city needs a great wine shop and the stylish A Manti Vino is truly first-rate. The wine selection is relatively small but carefully curated, with a mix of famous (Harlan Estate) and obscure (Oliver Morin) names and the staff is passionate about...everything. 

The store offers delivery to restaurants although its BYO clients are just as likely to show up in person, especially on Sunday mornings, according to Jason Albaum, the store's spirits buyer. 

"At noon on Sunday we have people lined up at the door waiting to buy Prosecco for their morning brunch," he says.