JAKARTA—Inflation in Indonesia unexpectedly fell in February due to easing food prices, but some analysts expect the central bank to raise its policy rate nevertheless during its rate review Friday. 

Price pressures have become a focal point for investors in emerging markets such as Indonesia, where the inflation rate is above the central bank's target range. Fitch Ratings on Friday cited inflation as one of the constraints holding back the country's debt from attaining investment grade. 

Annual inflation eased to 6.84% in February from January's 7.02%, the official Central Statistics Agency said Tuesday. The February reading was lower than the 7.15% median forecast of 10 regional economists polled by Dow Jones Newswires. 

Bank Indonesia has an inflation target range of between 4% and 6% this year. 

Compared with the previous month, the consumer price index rose 0.13% in February, also tamer than the 0.4% increase forecast in the Dow Jones poll. In January, the index rose 0.89% on month. 

However, annual core inflation—which excludes volatile food prices and costs controlled by the government—accelerated to 4.36% from January's 4.18%.

The chairman of the Central Statistics Agency, Rusman Heriawan, attributed the easing to a downward trend in prices of foodstuffs that he said is likely to continue in coming months. 

Inflationary pressures may continue to ease on the food front, with the statistics agency saying that the country's rice production will likely rise slightly to 67.3 million metric tons this year from an estimated 66.4 million tons last year. Rice is the staple food for the majority of Indonesia's 235 million people. 

"For Indonesia, the worst of food inflation is probably behind us, and the upcoming harvest months should provide further relief. Yet, the strong momentum in domestic demand is likely to keep inflationary expectations elevated," OCBC economist  Gundy Cahyadi said. 

"Even at 6.8%, the underlying trend for inflation remains tilted toward the upside, and we continue to see risks that inflation may inch higher above 7.5% in the second quarter...another 25 basis points rate hike should follow this Friday. Any U-turn on this front may mean that we are going to see the rupiah surrendering some of its recent gains," the economist added. 

Bank Indonesia raised its benchmark policy rate in February to 6.75%, its first rate move since it brought the rate to 6.5% in August 2009. 

Separately, Bank Indonesia's Darmin Nasution said in a seminar that the central bank needs to observe the impact on wages of higher inflation expectations and persistent food-price increases to pre-empt any spiralling-up effect. 

Those concerns over high inflation may prompt the government to delay implementing a plan to limit the consumption of subsidized fuels for private cars in the greater Jakarta area. Bank Indonesia forecast the plan could add around 0.7 percentage point to headline inflation this year. 

The plan is supposed to take effect from April 1 in the greater Jakarta area before being extended to areas in Java and Bali in July, Sumatra in January 2012, Kalimantan in July 2012 and Sulawesi in 2013. But some government officials have recently indicated they may need to revise the schedule. 

Any delay to the fuel rationing plan would lower inflationary pressures and provide some leeway for the central bank to stand pat this Friday. 

"Delaying the fuel subsidy plan will shift the inflation spike to the third quarter from the second quarter. … We are changing our call given the lower inflation reading and [possible] delays in the fuel subsidy plan to July. We expect Bank Indonesia to stay on hold at the Friday 4 March policy meeting," said Bank of America Merrill Lynch economist  Chua Hak Bin. 

 Write to  Farida Husna at farida.husna@dowjones.com 