Only one day after the new GOP-controlled House was sworn in among calls by some of its members to pare back federal funding of National Public Radio, the network moved to contain its political vulnerability.

Yesterday, NPR's board of directors issued a report on the sacking of commentator Juan Williams last October, in which it concluded that the firing was botched and necessitated new procedures for personnel decisions.

Ellen Weiss, the senior vice president for news who initiated the firing over comments that Mr. Williams made on Fox News, resigned under pressure. The NPR board also recommended that CEO Vivian Schiller forego her bonus for 2010 because of "concern over her role in the termination." Ms. Schiller famously said that Mr. Williams should see a psychiatrist after he said that he sometimes felt anxious seeing people dressed as Muslims boarding airplanes. He said such stereotyping was wrong, but that its existence needed to be acknowledged.

Mr. Williams is pleased with the departure of Ms. Weiss. "It's good news for NPR if they can get someone who is the keeper of the flame of liberal orthodoxy out of NPR," he told Fox News. "She represented a very ingrown, incestuous culture in that institution that's not open to different ways of thinking."

NPR clearly feels under pressure to present a less "incestuous" face to the outside world. After its firing of Mr. Williams led to a national outcry, an NPR bigwig called former GOP congressman Vin Weber of Minnesota in a desperate attempt to get him to intervene with his fellow Republicans. Mr. Weber was a consultant to NPR in the 1990s and later joined their board, where he served until 2003.

Mr. Weber told me he had no interest in bailing NPR out of trouble. "During my time on the board, I concluded they lived in a bubble," he said. "They were hopelessly biased on at least two issues -- their coverage of the economy and Israel's role in the Middle East. They humored my objections but would never make any substantive changes."

It wouldn't be politically prudent for Republicans in Congress to target NPR for massive budget cuts, given the outcry NPR's allies in the mainstream media would launch. But hearings to determine just how much federal funding flows to the network and its affiliates are in order. They could set the stage for an evaluation of just why NPR needs federal funding. It already has strong backing from foundations, and we now live in a media universe where there are hundreds of competing voices that don't receive any government largesse.