WASHINGTON—President Barack Obama on Thursday proposed to extend by two years the term of Federal Bureau of Investigation Director Robert Mueller, seeking continuity on his national-security team amid changes at the Pentagon and the Central Intelligence Agency.

The move came as a surprise because the White House had begun a search for a successor to the 66-year-old Mr. Mueller, whose 10-year term is set to expire in early September. 

In recent weeks, administration officials circulated lists of several candidates being considered. Mr. Mueller, an appointee of President George W. Bush, took office a week before the Sept. 11, 2001, terror attacks.

Mr. Obama said in a statement: "In his ten years at the FBI, Bob Mueller has set the gold standard for leading the bureau. Given the ongoing threats facing the United States, as well as the leadership transitions at other agencies like the Defense Department and Central Intelligence Agency, I believe continuity and stability at the FBI is critical at this time."

The job Mr. Mueller took on in 2001 has undergone major change since the 9/11 attacks, with national security now the FBI's top focus. The White House was considering several candidates, but officials had concerns about finding someone who could pass Senate confirmation and who possessed law-enforcement and national-security credentials. 

The president's proposal also helps postpone what could be another politically sensitive fight in Congress over national-security policy. Confirmation hearings for a new FBI director could give the political left and right another opportunity to clash over Bush-era policies such as the use of harsh interrogations.

Several of those identified by U.S. officials as candidates to succeed Mr. Mueller were associated with the Bush years. James Comey was a former deputy attorney general under Mr. Bush, while Kenneth Wainstein was a former FBI general counsel and served as Mr. Bush's homeland-security adviser.

Other candidates included Patrick Fitzgerald, the U.S. attorney in Chicago, who earned the enmity of conservatives in his prosecution of I. Lewis "Scooter" Libby, aide to former Vice President Dick Cheney. Another candidate, Merrick Garland, is a federal appellate judge in Washington, D.C., and was as interviewed by Mr. Obama for the Supreme Court vacancy in 2010 that was filled by Elena Kagan. 

Messrs. Garland and Fitzgerald had advised administration officials that they didn't want to be considered for the job, according to U.S. officials. 

The proposed two-year extension would require approval from both the House and Senate. Under the president's proposal, the extension would apply only in this instance, and existing law limiting FBI directors to one term of 10 years would remain in place.

While the FBI has weathered several controversies, Mr. Mueller, a former Marine who earned combat medals in Vietnam, has emerged from the last decade with admirers in both parties, owing in part to his low-key style and aversion for publicity.

Sen. Patrick Leahy, chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, which has oversight of the FBI, said he supported the extension. "I was delighted when President Obama informed me that he has asked Director Mueller to stay on at the Bureau for an additional two years," Mr. Leahy said.

The ranking Republican on the Judiciary Committee, Sen. Chuck Grassley of Iowa, was more cautious, saying the extension could set a "risky precedent." In the 1970s, Congress passed restrictions on the job after revelations of abuses during the decades-long tenure of J. Edgar Hoover, the FBI's first director, who died in office in 1972.

Mr. Grassley said he was open to the idea because Mr. Mueller "has proven his ability to run the FBI," but the senator said he didn't want a "more permanent extension that would undermine the purposes of the term limit."

Other Republicans signaled the president's proposal would win swift approval. Texas Rep. Lamar Smith, chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, and Michigan Rep. Mike Rogers, chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, said they supported the idea. 

"I am happy to support this extension in light of the leadership changes that are set to occur later this year at CIA and the Department of Defense," Mr. Rogers said.

Defense Secretary Robert Gates is leaving his post. CIA Director Leon Panetta has been nominated to succeed Mr. Gates, while Gen. David Petraeus was nominated for the CIA post.

 Write to  Evan Perez at evan.perez@wsj.com 