Nintendo's 3DS, the first games console to offer video games in 3D without glasses, will be available in Europe on March 25, the Japanese company has announced.

European retailers will receive the device two days ahead of the U.S., where it will retail for $249.99. It will be released in Japan on Feb. 26 at ¥25,000. No European price was given, though it is expected to sell for around €250 to €300. U.K. high-street retailer HMV has the device for pre-order on its website at £229.99.

Nintendo signed a partnership with Eurosport and Sky to deliver clips of 3D sport, such as Premier League football highlights. The team behind Wallace and Gromit, Aardman Animations, will provide a series of original one-minute 3D "Shaun the Sheep" films.

Like the existing DS console, the 3DS has two screens. The bottom 3-inch, 320×240 pixel resolution touch-screen is used by players to control the game, while the top 3.53-inch screen renders two 800×240 images, to give a combined 400×240 3D image. Users can control the depth of 3D rendering. In addition there is a front-facing camera and two rear-facing cameras to snap 3D shots. Like many smartphones it also includes an accelerometer-based motion detector.

Some 25 titles will be available between launch and June, Nintendo's European president,  Satoru Shibata, said at a press conference in Amsterdam. A full list was not released, but Ubisoft announced it will be launching eight titles, including such classics as "Rayman" and "Splinter Cell." The console will be backwards-compatible with older DS and DSi machines.

Two developments were announced. SpotPass allows the 3DS to connect to existing Wi-Fi networks and download additional content. The second was a rather puzzling game mode called StreetPass, which allows the 3DS to exchange player data with other 3DS machines as they pass, for example in a street.

The company previously warned that the 3D should be avoided for children younger than 7 years old because "the muscles of the eye are not fully formed."

The console, the most expensive handheld console ever, is expected to succeed the Nintendo DS, which has sold some 130 million copies world-wide since its 2004 launch and which dominates the handheld gaming market in front of Sony's PlayStation Portable.