 (Le) Poisson Rouge  158 Bleecker St., (212) 505-3474  Thursday 

While classified as a minimalist composer in the New York downtown tradition, Peter Gordon has made it into a maximalist designation. He's not only collaborated with the likes of Suzanne Vega, the Flying Lizards, and former New York Doll David Johansen, but also had his music crop up on episodes of "Desperate Housewives." Having rubbed elbows with the likes of Philip Glass and Steve Reich, Mr. Gordon has never been one to shy from other strains of music, and his Love of Life Orchestra best showcases that flexibility. In its late-70s prime, the LoLO embraced hedonistic disco, bubbly pop, barbed free jazz, and elegant minimalism, blending them into a celebratory and raucous whole. A rare single caught the ear of DFA head honcho/LCD Soundsystem frontman James Murphy, and late last year his label reissued Mr. Gordon's work on CD. On Thursday, Mr. Gordon reconvenes LoLO to re-create that raucous time.

 Bowery Ballroom  6 Delancey St., (212) 533-2111  Friday 

Throughout the 1970s, North Carolina's Lee Fields was better known as "Little JB," owing to his considerable debt to James Brown's indomitable presence both onstage and on record. Sporting a similar coif and husky singing voice as Mr. Dynamite (as well as some of his fancy footwork), Mr. Fields failed to make much of a dent outside of the South, cutting one album in the 1970s and bouncing around through the next two decades. But with the soul revival at the end of the 20th century (see his tourmate, Sharon Jones), Mr. Fields has stepped outside the shadows of obscurity. On such albums as "Let's Get a Groove On" and 2009's "My World," he reveals himself as having quite the range: handling drum-fueled soul cries, tender ballads and slinky funk expertly. He's even lent his gritty pipes to the sleek contours of French house music, proving that old soul can feel new. 

 Highline Ballroom  431 W. 16th St., (212) 414-5994  Sunday 

Despite the strongest of efforts from VH1's 2004 program "Bands Reunited," the Beat (known stateside as the English Beat) remain sundered. In its original incarnation, the English Beat melded the imported rhythms of Jamaican ska and rocksteady to the sprightly new-wave of its homeland with an eye toward the political, garnering world-wide acclaim and touring with the likes of the Police and Talking Heads. The English Beat then splintered into General Public and Fine Young Cannibals for separate 1980s pop-chart success. And while the original group failed to reconvene on VH1, the notion stuck. Sort of. There now exist two variants: The U.K. version features original toaster Ranking Roger and drummer Everett Morton, while the U.S. incarnation is fronted by original guitarist-vocalist Dave Wakeling, the lone original member. Regardless, politically astute and spring-heeled ska-pop still emanates from Mr. Wakeling and cohorts.

 B.B. King's Blues Club & Grill  237 W. 42 St., (212) 997-4144  Tuesday 

At the ripe old age of 15, Beaumont, Texas's Johnny Winter cut his first record, aptly titled "School Day Blues." Despite being the palest of bluesmen (both Johnny and his younger brother Edgar have albinism), Mr. Winter rode bombastic, amplified takes on Muddy Waters and B.B. King to rock stardom in the late '60s, even appearing at the original Woodstock Festival. Ranked no. 74 on Rolling Stone's "100 Greatest Guitarists of All-Time," Mr. Winter has since abandoned those classic-rock staples to focus on his first love. As the title of his 2004 album states: "I'm a Bluesman," and he is part of that proud Texas lineage running from T-Bone Walker to Stevie Ray Vaughn, even co-opting members from the latter's Double Trouble in his current band. Expect an homage to SRV and the venue's namesake rather than a blast of "Rock 'n' Roll Hootchie Koo."

 The Bunker @ Public Assembly  70 N. 6th St., Brooklyn, (718) 384-4586  Friday 

In 2007, when Lower East Side music institution Tonic closed, the electronic-music party known as the Bunker (which was held in Tonic's tiny basement) was forced to Brooklyn. But like the re-potting of any hardy plant, it has flourished. No matter how obscure the European DJ it invites to the concrete confines of Public Assembly, the Bunker has only grown. On Friday, it celebrates its eighth year with an eight-hour set from Scottish DJ duo Optimo, who know a thing or two about throwing epic parties. For more than 12 years, JD Twitch and JG Wilkes held a weekly bacchanal that electronic-music Web site Resident Advisor deemed "the greatest club night in the world." Known to veer from soul to industrial, psychedelic rock to disco, techno to cumbia, Optimo will no doubt throw a few more genres into its dancefloor mix.