When I got a tip last fall about bedbugs at a downtown store, I decided to pass it along to a colleague rather than pursue it myself. I never realized what a big deal nemesis bedbugs would become: Soviet-style bogeymen at the height of the Cold War, the  Osama bin Ladens of our bedrooms and pillow cases.

Boy, did I drop the ball on that one. But as my mother, or somebody, always told me: It's never too late to admit you made a mistake. So I'm admitting it here. I'm also eager to make amends to readers who may have been scratching their heads and wondering how could I find time for topics such as lint and chocolate when people were getting bitten up all over town.

I decided the best way to make things right, or to at least try, was to contact an exterminator with one of those bedbug dogs, and to see whether they'd allow me to go on assignment with them. They wouldn't.  James Skinner, president of  A&C ExterminatingCorp., told me flatly that it would be impossible to hang out with him and one of his celebrated bedbug-sniffing canines. 

He said that customers, whether commercial or residential, are terrified that their reputations could be ruined if it was discovered they had bedbugs. For that very reason, Mr. Skinner added, his employees wear civilian khakis and golf shirts rather than uniforms; travel in undermarked vans; and bring their bug-sniffing dogs into stores and hotels in the dead of night and in those innocuous-looking soft-sided carrying cases that Park Avenue matrons use to take their toy poodles named Fifi to Paris for the weekend.

"One customer said to me, 'Were you followed?'" Mr. Skinner recalled.

"'Followed by who?'" the exterminator asked. 

"By the press."

"I said no. And he said, 'How do you know?'"

I was disappointed that I wouldn't be able to pal around with one of his three bedbug-dedicated canines—Scout, Hunter or Ace—trailing them into, say,  Saks or the St. Regis. Not that I have any reason to believe—I repeat, no reason; nada, nyet, zilch—that any of these diabolical insects has ever heard of, let alone shopped at, Saks, or taken advantage of the St. Regis's five-star hospitality.



But I nonetheless felt obligated to observe a hound firsthand.  Brian Taggart, A&C's general manager, told me each cost $11,500 and comes from a special canine academy in Florida. So to my wife's and daughter's, and probably most of all to my geriatric mutt Mimi's, chagrin, I invited one of the exterminator's workers and his high-priced associate over to our apartment.

Neither Mr. Skinner nor Mr. Taggart could make it because they were in bedbug meetings—specifically, the National Pest Management Association's Eastern Conference in Atlantic City this week; followed by the New York State Pest Management Association's winter conference; and then down to D.C. next Tuesday and Wednesday for the Environmental Protection Agency's second national bedbug summit.

However, they dispatched  Tyrone Miller, one of their handlers, together with Scout, their bedbug-hunting beagle, and several bedbugs. You read that right. "Before every search we have to put the hide out to know if the dog is working," Mr. Miller explained. The hide, as in hide and seek, refers to a tiny vial filled with the bloodthirsty critters.

Mr. Miller hides the container and then lets Scout, an extremely well-behaved 2-year-old male, out of his carrying case. Once the dog picks up the insects' scent, he starts to scratch furiously in that vicinity, for which he's awarded food.

I was curious about what circumstances might cause Scout to have an off day. "It's a dog," Mr. Miller explained. "Maybe he had diarrhea or threw up."

Fortunately, Scout couldn't have been healthier, or more on task. It took him less than a minute to locate the bedbugs in Gracie's room. (My daughter wasn't thrilled when she got home from school and discovered her bedroom had been used as ground zero.) Mr. Miller assured me the vial was escape-proof, though he confessed to the time he dropped one down several flights of stairs in a client's apartment building. (Think nitroglycerin, or small pox or anti-matter that causes the earth to get sucked into a giant black hole.)

"It fell three flights," Mr. Miller stated, recalling the "tink, tink, tink" of the glass container on the way down. Fortunately, it remained intact. "I said, 'Thank you, God!'"

I'm pleased to report that when the actual hunt began, Scout found no bedbugs in our apartment. If he had, I'd probably have had to take a bank loan to pay for the treatment. Mr. Taggart, after conferring with Mr. Miller, told me their "Thermal Remediation" process would have cost between $5,000 and $7,000 for our modest two-bedroom apartment. Industrial-strength heaters are brought in for four to six hours and cranked up to 135 degrees, killing any and all your bedbugs in a single treatment. You'd have to relocate your pets temporarily, as well as unplug any appliances and remove things like aerosols and candles. But the process is "green," using no insecticides whatsoever. 

"You go to work and by the time you get home everything's dead," Mr. Taggart stated cheerfully. "And you sleep with confidence that night."

"We believe in discretion," he reiterated, for those who might be tempted to weigh the agony of bedbugs against the ignominy of being known among one's co-op or condo neighbors as a bedbug host. "We're not going to walk in with hazmet suits and respirators. We're not parking in front of anybody's house with a giant roach or bedbug on the truck."

Needless to say, business is booming with the bedbugs on the march. Theories about the infestation include increased international travel and insecticide-resistant bugs. "There are more bedbugs, without question," said Mr. Taggart, who has been in the business for five years. "We're at least doubling the amount of calls every year, doubling the amount of jobs we're doing." 

Mr. Miller confided that earning his living off bedbugs hasn't made them any more endearing. "They're horrible little creatures," he said, reporting that once they get pregnant they're pregnant for life, and that they can live a year without food. "Give me mice, rats, roaches, whatever, compared to bedbugs," he said. "That's how much I hate them. At my home I do the dog check regularly and I strip at the door."

— ralph.gardner@wsj.com 