Home values posted their largest decline since late 2008, down 3% in the first quarter from the fourth. Foreclosed properties selling at a discount are forcing other sellers to lower their prices. Real estate website Zillow.com, which points to profound oversupply after the expiration of last summer's home buyer's tax credit, now says prices won't hit bottom before next year and expects them to fall by another 7% to 9%. Meanwhile, the economy in one state slammed by the real estate bust, California, is kicking into higher gear, with unexpectedly strong job growth propelled by technology hiring.

Inflation alert: Wages in China will increase 80% over the next five years, the head of manufacturing outsourcing firm Li & Fung predicted as Chinese and U.S. leaders held their annual economic talks. 

Treating HIV patients with AIDS drugs makes them strikingly less infectious, researchers announced, in a landmark finding that scientists say could help stem the global AIDS pandemic. 

A growing number of House Republicans are questioning the need to raise the federal debt ceiling by Aug. 2. Treasury Secretary Geithner has said if Congress doesn't increase the $14.294 trillion limit by then, the government won't be able to pay all its bills, with a "catastrophic economic impact." Many conservatives note that he has already postponed the deadline and say he is exaggerating the danger.

Obama is preparing to reach out anew to Muslims in the Middle East and beyond with a wide-ranging speech, senior officials say. The president is expected to say the Islamic world is at a crossroads and make the case that bin Laden represented a failed approach of the past while populist movements brewing in the Middle East and North Africa represent the future.

Former House Speaker Gingrich said he would seek the Republican presidential nomination, posting an Internet video that made overtures to the tea-party movement. Rival Romney, in a speech at a cardiac-care facility at the University of Michigan, sought to put behind him what has become his biggest impediment to gaining the Republican nomination—the health-care plan he helped shepherd into law as governor of Massachusetts. Conservatives liken it to the federal law they disparage as "ObamaCare." 

Women seeking abortions in Texas will be required to have a sonogram and hear a description of the fetus, including whether it has developed fingers, toes or internal organs, if Republican Gov. Perry signs the measure into law, as expected.

The U.S. raid that killed bin Laden drew support from some unlikely quarters. Somalia said it would welcome a U.S. special-forces attack on al Qaeda-affiliated militants on its soil. Afghan officials said some Taliban leaders are offering intelligence about al Qaeda to prove they are serious about peace talks with Kabul. At the same time, U.S.-Pakistani relations continued to sour in the wake of the unilateral raid, as Pakistani news media aired the name of a man they said is the CIA's station chief and Pakistan continued to assert its role in peace talks between the Afghan government and insurgents. U.S. military officers have drawn up proposals for troop drawdowns in Afghanistan, even as the security situation remains dangerous. Taliban raids brought Kandahar, the main southern city, to its knees. 

NATO forces stepped up airstrikes against Libyan leader Gadhafi. The assault accompanied military and diplomatic advances by rebels, who sent leaders to Washington to press the U.S. for more financial aid. A humanitarian crisis escalated as a boat carrying mostly African migrants sank in Tripoli's harbor, amid international claims that Libyan authorities are tolerating, and profiting from, the exodus of workers on overcrowded vessels bound for Italy and elsewhere in Europe. 

Cubic feet per second of water that flowed past Memphis at the Mississippi River's crest, according to estimates of maximum flow by the National Weather Service. That's 14.9 million gallons—62,000 tons of water—per second. One second of water flow would fill a football field 44 feet deep. It's a lot of water.

Friday the 13th to worry about this year, and now it's over. Same deal last year. That was a relief after 2009, which was riddled with the greatest possible number of Friday the 13ths: three. But then, three's a charm.

Increase in foreign banks' lending to China in 2010.

The world's banks are betting China is the place to put their money. That could complicate Chinese officials' efforts to cool down the country's economy and real-estate market. 

 During 2010, banks that report their holdings to the Bank for International Settlements plowed an exchange-rate-adjusted $77 billion into the country, increasing their total exposure to China by 86% from 2009 and bringing the country's share of global cross-border lending to its highest level on records going back to 1977. The shift represents a vote of confidence in China, as banks pull out of financially troubled European countries such as Greece, Portugal and Ireland. 

 But China's efforts to curb inflation by ratcheting back credit are prompting Chinese borrowers to look abroad for capital. Meanwhile, lenders are attracted to China by relatively high interest rates and a currency that, if anything, is likely to appreciate. The danger for Beijing: inflation. 

 —Mark Whitehouse 

 Sources: National Weather Service, Operation Watershed (flooding); National Geographic (Friday). 

Syria intensified its effort to stamp out internal opposition. Security forces conducted a wave of detentions across at least six cities that activists said appeared to focus not only on opposition activists but also on intellectuals and professionals. 

A popular reformist leader in Egypt's Muslim Brotherhood said he would run for president, raising the possibility that Islamist politicians could dominate both Egypt's presidency and its parliament. 

German Chancellor Merkel endorsed Mario Draghi for the presidency of the European Central Bank, likely handing stewardship of one of the world's most powerful financial institutions to the Italian central banker. He is expected to pair a tough anti-inflation stance with flexibility in dealing with Europe's debt crisis. 

A German court found John Demjanjuk guilty of helping murder nearly 30,000 people as a Nazi death-camp guard in Poland during World War II and sentenced the 91-year-old retired U.S. auto worker to five years in prison, bringing an end to an 18-month trial likely to be the last of its kind. Demjanjuk will appeal.

Toyota Motor saw its share of the global auto market slip to third place and reported a 77% decline in earnings for the quarter ended March 31 on a big loss in its Japanese operations. This year was supposed to be the start of a big comeback after high-profile recalls. But the March 11 earthquake hobbled Toyota's plants in Japan, and the strong yen, now at about 81 to the dollar, is slashing the margins Toyota normally makes on its exports. "As CFO, I have to wonder about sticking to production in Japan," finance chief Satoshi Ozawa said. 

Microsoft agreed to pay $8.5 billion to buy Skype, a recognized brand name on the Internet, as it struggles for more traction in the consumer market—the biggest acquisition in Microsoft's 36-year history. Microsoft's ambitious goal is to integrate Skype into everything from its Xbox videogame console to its Office software suite for businesses. Microsoft also hopes Skype can jump-start its efforts in the mobile-phone market, where it has lagged behind Apple and Google.

Google is close to settling a U.S. criminal investigation into allegations it made hundreds of millions of dollars by accepting ads from online pharmacies that break U.S. laws, according to people familiar with the matter. Separately, the company launched new services that will enable people to rent movies and listen to music over the Internet, in its widening battle with Apple et al.

The median compensation for chief executives at the 350 biggest U.S. companies surged 11% to $9.3 million last year, as boards rewarded them for strong profit and share-price growth with bigger bonuses and stock grants, following a year in which CEO pay at these companies was flat. Viacom CEO  Dauman topped the list, with salary, bonus and long-term incentive awards valued at $84.3 million. 

A federal trial judge acquitted a former GlaxoSmithKline lawyer in a high-profile corporate misconduct case, dealing a blow to the government's efforts to target individuals in probes of the pharmaceutical industry. Prosecutors had alleged that the lawyer obstructed an FDA investigation into whether Glaxo had improperly promoted the antidepressant Wellbutrin for weight loss. The off-label marketing of drugs is also at issue in Johnson & Johnson's marketing of the antipsychotic drug Risperdal. Now, federal prosecutors are seeking roughly $1 billion to resolve a long-running probe into J&J's actions, according to people familiar with the matter.

  Rajaratnam was convicted on every count lodged against him in the biggest insider-trading case in history. It was a sweeping victory for prosecutors and a devastating defeat for the billionaire hedge-fund founder, who built his firm and his fortune using a network of carefully cultivated contacts. The defense team, which will appeal, couldn't overcome the dozens of secret recordings played at trial. The wiretaps captured Rajaratnam collecting inside information and discussing strategies for profiting from it, all the while manipulating and deriding associates. One juror said that the panel was unimpressed with the defense strategy and that Rajaratnam's lawyers "kept saying the same thing. It wasn't meaty." It was the first insider-trading prosecution to use methods that had been mainly reserved for organized-crime, drug and terrorism cases, and vindicated the government's use of wiretap evidence, suggesting more taps and tapes may be used in future prosecutions. 

Debt problems threatened European finances anew, as Greece's credit rating was downgraded by Standard and Poor's. The ratings firm cited the risk that Greece will push bondholders to accept delayed payments. Investors are increasingly shunning Greek debt, and other euro-zone countries are facing the prospect of financing the stricken nation for years to come. The ratings downgrade triggered a selloff in bonds of other highly indebted euro-zone countries, including Ireland, Italy, Portugal and Spain.

Insurer American International Group and the Treasury greatly reduced the amount they hope to fetch in a stock offering later this month, to about $9 billion from what some had estimated could have been as much as $25 billion. Recent weakness in the stock price had lowered expectations of what the sale might reap. The smaller offering means it will likely take longer to repay the government's $47.5 billion cash investment in AIG. 

Stocks fell for a second week in a row as euro-zone debt fears resurfaced, pulling the euro lower and boosting the dollar. The Dow industrials sank 0.3% to 12595.75. For the week, silver lost 0.8% to end at $35.01 an ounce after hitting almost $50 last month while crude oil rose 2.5% to $99.65 a barrel. Fears of refinery disruptions due to Mississippi River flooding over the weekend kept gasoline futures in check, rising just 1.05 cents Friday to $3.0744 a gallon.

Picard settled with liquidators of the Fairfield Greenwich funds,the biggest feeders of money into the Madoff Ponzi scheme.