Yet again, the Bank of England delayed the inevitable, holding interest rates steady at the latest monthly meeting of its Monetary Policy Committee. So far, the MPC has managed to keep the market on its side, despite interest rates at historic lows and still-climbing inflation. But bond investors' willingness to accept negative real yields is likely to be wearing thin.

Governor  Mervyn King points to restrained wage growth, moderate longer-term inflation expectations and a well-behaved market for U.K. government debt as evidence of faith in the Bank's willingness and ability to deliver price stability over the medium term.

Mr. King and the other MPC doves, who are still a majority of the nine-member committee, feel that they tell a convincing story about how inflation is a temporary phenomenon, driven higher by factors largely outside of the Bank's control. These are sterling's 25% devaluation during 2007 and 2008, the large recent jump in commodity prices and the government's 2.5 percentage point increase in consumption taxes imposed in January.

Without these factors, the doves say, inflation would be considerably below target. And unless commodity prices, particularly oil, continue to go up at the same pace they have been, inflation should fall back sharply early in 2012.

But the doves' confidence in the market's willingness to keep faith may be misplaced.

In a recent speech, Deputy Governor  Charlie Bean admitted inflation "may prove a little more persistent next year than presently embodied in [Bank] projections." In other words, that it will keep overshooting the MPC's target.

The Bank has so consistently underestimated inflation during the past five years—sometimes by a very large margin over a very short time horizon—that its forecasts have largely lost credibility among independent economists.

Never mind, say the MPC's doves. The Bank could, if it wanted to, quickly bring inflation back into alignment. But to do so would come at a cost of weaker growth and higher unemployment, with the additional risk that inflation would undershoot its target two years down the line. 

The Bank has political support for its implied preference for too much rather than too little inflation, particularly with the coalition government coming under ever more pressure to relax its austerity program in order to avoid the risk of a double dip recession. 

But support in the market may not last much longer.

  Ben Broadbent, a Goldman Sachs economist who will replace arch-hawk  Andrew Sentance as an MPC external member—i.e., one who does not work for the bank—from June, has questioned the MPC's commitment to its inflation target. It was possible, he argued earlier this year, that the committee was running a "de facto nominal GDP target," in other words, that it was intentionally allowing a high rate of inflation during a period of low real economic growth in order to maintain a certain level of gross domestic product growth in nominal, or money, terms. It's argued this tends to maintain more stable economic growth than inflation targeting does.

Although this approach to monetary policy has support among economists, the risk is that by being seen to be abandoning its target, the MPC will lose its inflation-fighting credibility before it gets the economy on a stable footing, Mr. Broadbent warned. Such a credibility loss would result in higher interest rates.

Investors in U.K. government bonds have been extraordinarily understanding. Consumer price inflation has averaged 3.1% since the start of 2008, while 10-year gilt yields are 3.6%, well below inflation, which is running at 4%. Investors are leaving themselves little margin if the MPC performs as badly in controlling inflation over the coming years as it has over the past few.

In large part, this complacency seems to be because gilts have been tracking international developments rather than domestic ones. Correlation between 10-year gilts and U.S. Treasury bond yields during the past five years is around 90%. Correlation between 10-year gilt yields and consumer price index fluctuations over the same period have been negligible, though it was at almost 80% over the second half of the 1990s.

That's because gilts have been protected by forced buyers, says  Marc Ostwald, a strategist at Monument Securities. Regulators have pressured pension funds into holding gilts as part of an effort to better align assets and liabilities, while banks are being made to build up their holdings to boost their liquid reserves.

Foreigners, who have bought a net £100 billion of gilts since the start of 2009, aren't so pliable. They turned net sellers in January. And they could keep selling.

Gilt investors face an uncomfortable confluence of circumstances. Not only is inflation still rising, but the spike in oil is almost certain to shred the Bank's projection of a 4.5% peak in consumer prices. If the European Central Bank raises rates next month, sterling could come under downward pressure. And this would squeeze inflation higher still. It looks a safe bet the CPI will come in above 5% by the end of the summer.

But at the same time, the economy looks likely to weaken under the double onslaught of rising oil prices and government austerity. The government will find it hard to resist relenting on its belt-tightening program.

The combination of high inflation, loose monetary policy and loosening fiscal policy are dreadful for existing bondholders, argued  Richard Jeffrey, chief investment officer at Cazenove Capital Management. 

Europe's bond markets are broadly divided into three groups. There are the untouchables, like Greece, Portugal and Ireland. There are the high-quality issuers, like Germany, France and the U.K. And there's an intermediate purgatory, in which Italy and Spain sit, where yields are painfully high but still serviceable.

It's unlikely to take much to push the U.K. into a purgatory of 5% to 6% yields on 10-year debt, Mr. Jeffrey says. That may not be much above inflation, but it would be enough to inflict serious pain on an economy as heavily indebted as the U.K.'s. And serious pain for the U.K.'s bond holders as they watch the value of their assets fall.

 Write to  Alen Mattich at alen.mattich@dowjones.com 