PARIS—Income inequality is increasing in most industrialized countries as a result of globalization and technological progress that requires greater skills from workers, according to an OECD paper released Tuesday.

The gap between rich and poor is widening in countries that traditionally have a high level of inequality, such as the U.S. It also is rising in countries that have been more equal, such as Denmark, Germany and Sweden, said the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, a Paris-based think tank. The paper was a preview of a larger report set to appear later this year. 

The report comes as globalization and its effects face a backlash in some countries, due to a perception that some kinds of jobs in industrialized countries are being lost to emerging countries. In addition, governments world-wide are trying to rein in budget deficits, making it harder for them to redistribute wealth through benefits, the most direct way to reduce inequality.

The average income of the richest 10% of the population of the 34 OECD member countries is currently about nine times that of the poorest 10%, the paper said. The ratio is lower than that in Nordic and many other Continental European countries. It is around 14 to 1 in Israel and the U.S., and 27 to 1 in Chile and Mexico. 

The report compared the changes between the mid-1980s and late 2000s in the Gini coefficient, a measure of income inequality that ranges from zero, when everybody earns the same amount, to one, when all income goes to only one person. The coefficient rose to an average of 0.31 in the OECD in the late 2000s, up from 0.28 in the mid-1980s.

The biggest increases came in Israel and the U.S., which have relatively high Gini coefficients, and in Finland, Germany and Sweden, whose coefficients are relatively low. France, Greece and Belgium were among five countries recording small decreases in inequality. 

The main reason for the greater inequality was that the salaries of higher earners rose faster than those of lower earners over the two decades, in all the OECD countries, even those where inequality declined. Incomes for the top 10% of the population rose at an annual average of 2.0% during the period, whereas as incomes for the bottom 10% went up just 1.4% a year. That trend was linked to changes in working hours: While average annual hours worked fell a little on average, those for lower-paid workers declined far more than those for the higher-paid.

Another key cause of rising income inequality was that the rise in free trade and global financial markets "has generated a relative shift in labor demand in favor of high-skilled workers at the expense of low-skilled labor," the OECD said. Greater demand for skilled labor has also resulted from technical progress, the paper said.

Governments have typically tried to reduce inequality through redistribution. However, said the report, "the stabilizing effect of taxes and benefits on household income inequality has mostly declined." Moreover, "redistribution strategies based on government transfers and taxes alone would be neither effective nor financially sustainable."

The OECD said the solution to the growing inequality was training and education for the low-skilled. "Policies that invest in human capital of the work force are needed," it concluded.