  Nokia Corp.
NOK


-0.22
%




, the world's largest cellphone maker, reported a shrunken fourth-quarter profit, warned of weak results in the current quarter, and hinted at big changes ahead as it struggles to reinvent itself.

The Finland-based company said profit for the three months ended Dec. 31 was €745 million ($1.02 billion), down 21% from €948 million a year earlier. Overall quarterly sales rose, but the company lost market share in the lucrative smartphone market.

In only his second public address to investors since being tapped to revive Nokia's fortunes, Chief Executive  Stephen Elop acknowledged the mobile-phone industry has changed and that Nokia must work faster to improve its products.

"We have a fundamental competitiveness problem overall," Mr. Elop said in a conference call.

For the first time since joining the Finnish company, Mr. Elop hinted that Nokia was considering taking on another operating system in addition to its current Symbian platform, something some investors have pushed the company to consider.

Mr. Elop said that consumers were choosing smartphones not just based on hardware, but also software and services and that Nokia needed to raise the bar.

"The game has changed from a battle of devices to a war of eco-systems and competitive eco-systems are gaining momentum and share....We must build, catalyze or join a competitive eco-system," Mr. Elop said in a call to investors.

But Mr. Elop declined to say explicitly whether Nokia would take on a new operating system such as  Google Inc.'s Android, pointing investors to a scheduled Feb. 11 briefing, when the company is due to talk in more detail about its turnaround strategy.

Nokia said sales of devices and services, the company's mainstay, would be between €6.8 billion and €7.3 billion in the first quarter, only slightly better than the €6.7 billion in sales it eked a year ago. Nokia also said the operating margin of its devices-and-services business, a key driver of its profitability, would fall to between 7% and 10% from 12.1% in the first quarter of last year.

Nokia's American depositary shares were down 16 cents, or 1.5%, to $10.57 on the New York Stock Exchange in morning trading Thursday.

The weak guidance for the first quarter is just one sign that Mr. Elop, who joined Nokia as CEO in September, has a tough job in transforming the company. It has struggled to create smartphones that can compete with Apple Inc.'s iPhone, or ones that run Google's Android operating system.

Nokia said its estimated handset market share fell to 31% in the fourth quarter, down from 35% a year earlier. The company reported a 4% increase in device and services sales in the fourth quarter to €8.5 billion, thanks to higher average selling prices, but also said mobile phone volumes fell 3% in the period to 124 million from a year earlier.

The company's overall sales for the fourth quarter rose to €12.65 billion from €11.99 billion. Nokia Siemens Networks, the company's telecom-equipment joint venture with German engineering group  Siemens AG, posted a 9% sales increase to €4 billion, and a €1 million operating profit, down from €17 million a year earlier.

—Gustav Sandstrom contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Christopher Lawton at christopher.lawton@wsj.com 