BEIJING—Yuan appreciation won't resolve the U.S.'s trade imbalance with China, as the yuan's exchange rate has little effect on the major cause of China's trade surplus with the U.S.—processing trade—Chinese Vice Commerce Minister Jiang Yaoping said Wednesday. 

The remarks come as Chinese President Hu Jintao prepares for a state visit to the U.S. due to begin Jan. 19, and after U.S. National Security Adviser Tom Donilon on Tuesday told Chinese Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi in a meeting that the two countries should work together to reduce trade imbalances. U.S. President Barack Obama also joined the meeting.



China's trade surplus with the U.S. has led to calls from U.S. officials for China to allow faster appreciation of the yuan. China's trade surplus with the U.S. in the January-November period was $167.3 billion, according to China's General Administration of Customs. The figure was $16.7 billion in November. 

The yuan has risen 3.2% against the dollar since June 19, when China pledged to increase the flexibility of its currency's exchange rate, effectively ending a two-year-long peg to the dollar. 

China's trade surplus is a result of globalization, not global economic imbalances, and global companies in industries such as electronics that conduct processing trade in China benefit from the trade surplus, Mr. Jiang said at a forum. Processing trade refers to the importation of duty-free materials that are strictly for re-export in finished goods. 

Separately, a Ministry of Commerce official who declined to be named said Wednesday that China's 2010 trade surplus will be slightly above $190 billion, and its December trade surplus will be higher than November's due to the holiday season. 

In the January-November period, China's trade surplus fell 3.9% from a year earlier to $170 billion, according to the customs bureau. China's trade surplus in 2009 was $196.07 billion. 

Of four economists polled by Dow Jones Newswires, three expect the trade surplus to decline in December from November. The median forecast of the four economists was for a December surplus of $20.5 billion, compared with $22.9 billion in November. The customs bureau is due to release the data early next week. 

The China Daily last month cited Commerce Minister Chen Deming as saying China's 2010 trade surplus would likely fall slightly to $190 billion. 

 --Yajun Zhang and Aaron Back 