  Yahoo Inc.
YHOO


-0.97
%




 added a feature for its Web search service that is meant to reverse long-term losses in market share and keep up with recent upgrades by  Google Inc. and  Microsoft Corp.
MSFT


0.53
%






Yahoo, which years ago was a dominant player in Web search before being overtaken by Google, said its new "direct search" technology tries to provide specific answers to queries above traditional links to websites that all search engines display. 

The company is selling ads specifically for the new feature, which is a large box that opens near the top of its search-results pages.  Shashi Seth, a Yahoo search executive, said it is unclear whether Yahoo will share that revenue with Microsoft, which last year began to power search results for Yahoo sites under a 10-year "alliance." Yahoo still controls how the search results appear, and the new feature is separate from the Microsoft agreement.

Yahoo's new offering appears to combine two aspects of Google's search engine: "universal" search, which displays more-substantive information to queries for things such as weather and sports teams, and "instant," which brings up information even before a user finishes typing a query, based on what the system believes the user is looking for. 

"We want answers, not links," said Mr. Seth. For example, a search on Yahoo for Los Angeles Lakers basketball player  Kobe Bryant brings up a photo and current-season statistics.

Mr. Seth said the company rolled out the feature for 15 categories of queries, including sports, shopping and news but will expand to hundreds of categories. The feature is available on Yahoo's search site in the U.S. and will soon be available on the popular Yahoo.com home page. Non-U.S. users will be able to access the feature later this year.

The direct-search feature also will provide new opportunities for advertisers, Yahoo executives said at a demonstration in San Francisco. Executives showed how a search for "Gap" yielded a result that was a video advertisement, though such ads are just being tested and aren't yet publicly available.

Yahoo's search service needs a lift. Revenue from ads that appear next to its regular search results has been falling, hurting Yahoo's overall business even as its graphical-ad business has seen steady growth. Yahoo's share of search queries in the U.S. has declined to 16.1% in February from 16.9% nearly a year ago, according to research firm comScore Inc.

Yahoo Chief Executive  Carol Bartz said in January that Yahoo would be able to increase its share of the overall Web-search market this year.

"Search is incredibly important to us," said  Blake Irving, Yahoo's chief product officer, at Wednesday's event. 

Among Yahoo's biggest worries: the amount of time U.S. Internet users spend on its websites is falling. The total minutes users spent last month dropped by 15% from the same period last year as Facebook Inc., the social network, continues to claim a larger share of Internet users' time, comScore data show.

"We need to do a better job of circling people around to our properties," which include Yahoo's sports, news and entertainment sites, Mr. Irving said. "We have to" increase the time users spend on Yahoo, "and that's exactly what we're focused on," he said.

Profits have risen at Yahoo, but revenue growth has been stagnant. Much of the investor interest in the company stems from its valuable stakes in  Yahoo Japan,
4689


1.65
%




 a separate company, and China's Alibaba Group Holding, an e-commerce giant.

 Write to  Amir Efrati at amir.efrati@wsj.com 