AMMAN, Jordan—Police fired water cannon to disperse clashing crowds of antigovernment protesters and pro-regime loyalists in the Jordanian capital.

The police intervened after about 200 government loyalists started hurling stones at the thousands of protesters camped in a central square of the capital, injuring a number of them. Some protesters threw stones at the loyalists, before police used water cannon and sticks to break up the melee. 

Before the clashes, the protesters had raised placards and shouted slogans calling for constitutional reform, the dissolution of the Jordanian parliament and early elections. They also called for resignation of Jordan's Prime Minister Maruf al-Bakhit.

Elsewhere in the capital, some 200 people from the Islamic Action Front, the political arm of the Muslim Brotherhood, were joined by leftist trade unions in a protest near a mosque after Friday prayers. They chanted anti-government slogans and called on Jordan's ruler King Abdullah II to take charge of the political reforms himself. 

Jordan's opposition is demanding electoral changes that would see the prime minister directly elected and devolve more powers to parliament. 

The anti-government protests here have been largely peaceful and on a smaller scale than others in the region. They have also focused on political and economic overhauls, rather than seeking the downfall of the monarchy.

Mr. Bakhit blamed Friday's riots on the powerful Islamist opposition. "I tell them stop playing with fire," he said in a statement carried by the official Petra news agency.

Security forces chief Gen. Hussein Majali said over 110 people were injured, including 62 protesters from both camps and over 50 security forces who were hit with stones.

Gen. Majali said eight people had been arrested, including six loyalists. Interior Minister Saad al-Hyil said protesters had provoked the public by demonstrating at a key junction and causing traffic jams.

There were similar clashes on Thursday night, when around 50 loyalists attacked the youth demonstration. The protest was organized through the social networking site Facebook. 

Mr. Bakhit said the government would no longer allow gatherings that block streets and cause traffic jams. "We will not allow any group to violate our people's freedom and cause harm to them." 

Mr. Bakhit's government has formed a national dialogue committee to speed up reforms, but the panel is facing problems after Islamist groups and other opposition parties refused to take part. The Islamists want King Abdullah to lead the reform process.

"We aren't going to take part in the committee until the Jordanian people's demands are met," said Sheikh Hamza Mansour, secretary general of the Islamic Action Front.

Mr. Hyil, the interior minister, said any pullout wouldn't effect the work of the committee. "I think the committee will come out with good results," he said Friiday.

Following several mass protests inspired by the ouster of the governments of Tunisia and Egypt earlier this year, King Abdullah dissolved the government of former Prime Minister Samir Rafai in February and appointed Mr. Bakhit with orders to carry out political reforms.

In a letter to King Abdullah on Thursday, Mr. Bakhit pledged that his government would take "swift" steps to implement the monarch's earlier instructions to come up with "real political and economic reforms."