TAIPEI—Taiwan's government will open an additional 42 sectors to Chinese investors, including the strategically important panel and chip industries, as cross-strait economic ties continue to deepen, the island's Ministry of Economic Affairs said Wednesday. 

Tension between the countries has eased after pro-China Ma Ying-jeou became Taiwan's president in May 2008, and Taiwan has opened around 200 sectors to Chinese investors since June 2009. The 42 newly added sectors include manufacturing, service and public infrastructure, the ministry said, adding the new rules will take effect Monday. 

The ministry said Chinese companies will be allowed to acquire stakes of as much as 10% in the island's existing semiconductor and panel makers. If Chinese and Taiwanese companies want to set up a new joint venture, Chinese ownership will be limited to less than 50%, it said. 

Although the relaxation is a cause for concern for some who fear the country will be "bought up" by China, it will ultimately be a boon to Taiwan's economy, said National Taiwan University's vice president, Tang Ming-je. 

"What is more important than the investment flows we will likely see is the cooperation that will come from the investments," he said.

"For instance, if a mainland company wants to make cellphone chips, they can invest in a Taiwanese company and make use of its ability to make the chip. The Taiwan company can in turn take advantage of the massive market it gains access to." 

Taiwan's chip and panel manufacturing sector is far more advanced than China's, and the island's government has been cautious about allowing Chinese investments in what it considers a strategic industry. 

However, the island's panel makers badly need fresh funding as falling global panel prices have hurt their earnings, and analysts say deep-pocketed Chinese investors are the logical choice. China can also close the technology gap in the industry, they say. 

"Taiwan's panel makers will benefit from having Chinese shareholders, because we will be given immediate and long-term access to the huge market in China," Minister of Economic Affairs Shih Yen-shiang said at a news conference. 

Under the new rules, Chinese companies will also be allowed to acquire as much as 20% of Taiwan's machinery-equipment makers and fertilizer makers and up to 50% of any port operators, while there is no limit on investing in battery makers, the ministry said. 

However, Taiwan's revised investment rules raised concerns about a possible migration of major Taiwanese industries to China. 

"By nature of the size of the country, many of China's companies have a much larger scale than Taiwan's, and they can use that to compete against or buy up Taiwan companies. I don't see this as good for the long-term economy, I see this bringing more unemployment," said Lo Chih-ming, chairman of Taiwan Thinktank. 

As of the end of February, Chinese investments in Taiwan were $139 million, according to the ministry. 