CAIRO—Egypt's interior minister accused an al Qaeda-linked Palestinian militant group in the Gaza Strip of killing at least 21 Christian Egyptians when it bombed a church in the northern port city of Alexandria on New Year's Day.

Habib al Adly said he had "conclusive evidence" that the Army of Islam planned the attacks and may have recruited Egyptians to execute the bombing, which also injured about 100 Christians. The Army of Islam denied responsibility for the bombing on its website.

In a statement emailed to reporters Sunday night, the ministry of the interior said Ahmed Lotfi Ibrahim Mohammed, who it said was born in 1984 in Alexandria, had confessed to helping organize the attack. According to the ministry's statement, Mr. Mohammed first visited the Gaza Strip in 2008 to seek out radical groups affiliated with al Qaeda. Last October, it said, he proposed two churches and a synagogue as possible targets, one of which, the Church of Two Saints, was ultimately attacked on New Year's Day.

If the accusations are true, they could validate concerns that the unresolved conflict between residents of the Palestinian coastal enclave and Israel is spilling over into neighboring countries.

Still, some analysts said that by blaming Gaza-based militants, the Egyptian government may hope to vindicate its cooperation with Israel, whose efforts to isolate Hamas, an Islamist group that has governed the Gaza Strip for nearly four years, have been widely criticized in Egypt.

"I'm not sure if this group did this operation or not because for me, when we accuse Gaza, it's as usual for a political reason," said Amr el Shobaki, a political analyst at the government-funded Al Ahram Center for Political and Strategic Studies in Cairo. "I don't have any doubt that this time it was al Qaeda, but I'm not sure if the Islamic Army in Gaza did this operation or not."

He noted that al Qaeda elements in Iraq have threatened Egyptian churches in the past. Last summer, more than 50 people were killed when an al Qaeda-linked group calling itself the Islamic State of Iraq laid siege to a church in Baghdad. In a statement during the attack, the ISI encouraged all Muslim faithful to attack Christians and Christian institutions, calling them "legitimate targets."

Egyptian authorities have long viewed the Gaza Strip with suspicion. Hamas, which has governed the Gaza Strip since it seized power in 2007, has historical connections to the Muslim Brotherhood, Egypt's largest opposition political movement.

A former leader of Army of Islam, Mohammad Namnam, was killed in a targeted Israeli missile attack last fall. Time magazine, citing "security sources in the region," reported that Egyptian intelligence had tipped off Israeli security that the Army of Islam had been planning attacks on American targets in Egypt's Sinai Peninsula.