Like any new parent, I started with high-minded ideals: I'd only feed my children organic food. They'd be in bed by a reasonable hour every night. And the iPhone would be strictly off limits. 

My no-phone policy was only partially based on fears of radiating my kids' brains or prolonged use making them antisocial. (I grew up glued to my Apple II, and I'm convinced that my Speak & Spell—the closest thing to an iPad when I was a kid—made me the writer I am today.) 

Rather, the decision was preemptive. I'm hopelessly addicted to my iPhone. I can't tear myself away from it, no matter how much wonder surrounds me. If I don't have the willpower to resist swiping at flying fruit for hours on end, what chance would my kids have against this sorcery? It's not a fair fight.

Of course, the realities of raising children have since set in. Even discounting long-haul flights and the need to avert meltdowns in crowded restaurants, I had to acknowledge the iPhone's usefulness. It would be absurd not to, given how often my kids see me staring at the device. And so I relented. I don't give the phone to my 1-year-old, who's only interested in it as a teething toy, but my 3-year-old is allowed to use it—sparingly. 

To make up for the deep-seated shame and regret I experience every time I hand over the phone, I try to at least be thoughtful about how we, as a family, use the iPhone.

Swiss writer Max Frisch defined technology as "a knack of so arranging the world that we don't have to experience it." The description applies to a swath of kids apps that simulate basic activities which, when you think about it, really don't need to be virtual.

These include jigsaw puzzles apps, variations on the card game concentration, apps where the task is to drag one shape onto a similar shape (the equivalent of putting the square block into the square hole) and any of the drawing apps (no matter how many New Yorker covers have been created with them). An eight-pack of Crayola crayons is inexpensive, easy to carry around and consistently a big hit. I don't need an app for that.

Even the popular offerings by Montessorium—which makes some of the most elegantly designed kids apps—leave me feeling, well, flat. "Intro to Math" includes iPhone adaptations of toys used in Montessori classrooms, where learning through the senses is emphasized. In real life, children would trace sandpaper numbers with their fingers. It's a tactile experience. In the app, they trace the smooth glass screen. The most fundamental element is missing. 

I also pass on read-along children's books. They make me feel like I'm shirking my duty—and missing out on one the joys of being a parent. Even with standard children's e-books, I find that the pacing of the story gets thrown off when pages are swiped rather than turned. 

The best way to use an iPhone with my kids, I've decided, is socially. Viewing photos of friends and family is our top iPhone activity. There are no prints to bend or get fingerprints on. And using the basic "Photos" app lets kids master those gestures of the future: pinch and swipe. 

My daughter also enjoys taking photos from that charmingly close-to-the-ground vantage point, and the iPhone is one of the easiest cameras for a child to handle. It is thin, light and has a relatively large display. The "ProCamera" app lets you tap anywhere to snap a picture—perfect for young photographers. A friend's son recently photographed "things he'd been thinking a lot about." It reads like a visual diary of sorts. 

 "Voice Memos" is another of our favorite standard-issue apps. When my daughter is in the right mood, nothing delights her more than recording herself and playing it back. Another fun activity: recording audio snapshots of your favorite places (10 seconds of ambient sound at the playground, near a stream or at the grocery store). Play them back and see if you can remember where the recording was made.

The included "FaceTime" app brings joy to grandchildren and their grandparents alike. (I'm pretty sure that is the app's primary use for a certain demographic.) The iPhone's portability makes connecting less stilted than gathering around a computer.

There's also the category of apps that I've put in a folder labeled "String" on my iPhone. These apps are the equivalent of giving yarn to a cat. Pointless yet fascinating. 

Our favorite is "Bloom," Brian Eno's generative-music app. Tapping the screen produces a bell-like tone accompanied by an expanding colorful circle, similar to dropping pebbles into a still lake. The tones loop to create the dreamy soundscapes that Mr. Eno is famous for—and that, with the right tools, even a toddler can make.

For quiet diversions, we often turn to "Gravilux." The screen starts with a Cartesian grid of dots that are attracted or repelled by your touch. It makes you feel like there's magic in your fingers. 

Do I worry that my draconian iPhone rationing will put my kids at a disadvantage in the touch-screen world of the future? Not after watching my daughter zip through the home screen to her favorite apps. Children seem to have the same knack for learning an interface as they do for acquiring language at this age. I have friends whose kids keep figuring out their passcode lock. No Child Left Behind is not a concern. 

And so far, it turns out my fears of bleary-eyed, iPhone-addicted children are unfounded. After what seemed like a reasonable amount of time toying with "Gravilux" the other day, my daughter had a different request: "Can we have a puppet show?" She meant the kind where I make her stuffed animals talk, not the app.