NEW DELHI—India wants the U.S. to attach tougher conditions to the aid it provides Pakistan and to minimize Pakistan's role in the future of Afghanistan as the U.S. winds down its presence there, an Indian official said Tuesday, in the wake of the discovery that Osama bin Laden was living in a Pakistani garrison town when he was killed.

India believes that the location of bin Laden's compound, the city of Abbottabad, backs up its case that Pakistan is harboring terrorists, including those that spearheaded the Mumbai terrorist attack in November 2008, the official said.

"The epicenter—the source of all this terrorism is one country," the official said. "Pakistan certainly has a lot of explaining to do."

The official said it is "extremely implausible" that Pakistan was unaware of bin Laden's location and said links between Pakistan's government and terrorist outfits are now "too strong to ignore."

On Tuesday, Pakistan's foreign office said the country has been "extending full and proper cooperation on all counterterrorism efforts including exchange of information and intelligence" with friendly countries and noted it had arrested several high-profile terrorists. President Asif Ali Zardari also denied in an op-ed article in the Washington Post that Pakistan harbored bin Laden. 

The U.S. State Department had no immediate comment. U.S. officials have said Pakistan aided intelligence efforts that helped locate bin Laden, but have also said they are investigating how bin Laden was able to avoid detection deep inside Pakistan.

India's biggest fear in the aftermath of bin Laden's death, the Indian official said, is that the U.S. will accelerate its exit from Afghanistan—an outcome New Delhi believes would increase Pakistan's influence in the region and ease pressure on militant groups that target India.

"If this is used as a peg (for the U.S.) to withdraw, it will be disastrous," the official said. "The job isn't finished. There may be some closure for the families of 9/11 victims, but the menace of terrorism is very much alive."

The only reason for the U.S. to give Pakistan a major role in Afghanistan going forward would be if the U.S. needs to quickly "cut and run" from the war, the Indian official said. India would prefer that the U.S. bolster its sometimes-testy partnership with Afghan President Hamid Karzai and leave Pakistan out of the picture. "There should be no appeasement of what Pakistan wants in the process," the official said.

New Delhi has protested in recent years that Washington's large amounts of aid to Pakistan—about $11 billion in military aid since 2001 and billions more in economic aid—don't have enough strings attached to make sure Islamabad is honoring its commitments to crack down on terrorists on its soil. 

In 2009, the U.S. Congress passed a five-year, $7.5 billion aid package for Pakistan that requires the White House to certify annually that Islamabad isn't supporting militant groups or engaging in nuclear proliferation. But the official said India believes the bill's wording is too weak to be a credible threat that Washington will cut off funding. Some members of the U.S. Congress, including Senate Homeland Security Committee Chairman Joe Lieberman (I., Conn.), are now ratcheting up pressure on Pakistan to show it didn't knowingly play host to bin Laden and his associates.

In public statements since bin Laden's death, Indian officials have sought to emphasize their view that Pakistan is a terrorist haven, but haven't directly accused Pakistan of protecting the al Qaeda leader or helping to conceal his whereabouts. 

The fact bin Laden was found in Abbottabad "underlines our concern that terrorists belonging to different organizations find sanctuary in Pakistan," Home Minister P. Chidambaram said Monday. "We believe that the perpetrators of the Mumbai terror attack, including the controllers and handlers of the terrorists who actually carried out the attack, continue to be sheltered in Pakistan." 

The Indian official expressed frustration that the U.S. and other Western nations have drawn stark distinctions between al Qaeda and other terrorist networks in Pakistan and Afghanistan, including the Haqqani network, Pakistani Taliban, and the militant groups that have targeted India such as Lashkar-e-Taiba and Jaish-e-Mohammed. Lashkar-e-Taiba was behind the 2008 terrorist attacks on Mumbai that killed more than 160 people.

The official pointed to the fact that Hafiz Saeed, whom India believes masterminded the Mumbai attacks for Lashkar-e-Taiba, led a funeral prayer for bin Laden in Lahore on Monday. Mr. Saeed told followers: "Allah accept the sacrifice of bin Laden and give him a place in heaven," the Press Trust of India reported.

"We don't see a difference between these groups the way the West does," the official said. "These groups are ideologically fused and operationally working together.…These distinctions being made are dangerous."

 Write to  Amol Sharma at amol.sharma@wsj.com and Paul Beckett at paul.beckett@wsj.com 