TOKYO -- Tokyo Electric Power Co.'s hard-fought battle to get its troubled Daiichi nuclear power plant in Fukushima Prefecture under control may have turned a corner Sunday with cooling functions of two reactors apparently working again. 

The beleaguered Japanese utility said that the cooling systems for spent-fuel storage pools have gotten back up and running again at its No.6 reactor, enabling the company to operate pumps that will supply seawater to the pools. 

Late Saturday Tepco also said that the temperature of the waste storage pool in No. 5 reactor dropped 5 degrees to 63.8 degrees Celsius after its cooling system started working. The company added it is now trying to bring down the temperature of the spent fuel pool at the reactor to about 30 degrees. 

While the No. 5 and No. 6 reactors are the least problematic of all of the reactors that were slammed by a tsunami after a magnitude 9.0 quake rocked northeastern Japan on March 11, the fact that Tepco has managed to make progress in keeping their temperatures down is a major step forward in helping to contain the threat of overheating and the possibility of further radiation leakage. 

Efforts to cool down other reactors by spraying them with water also appear to be paying off. The Tokyo Fire Department said that radiation levels at the most troubled No. 3 reactor dropped shortly after it started spraying water on the reactor's fuel pool, Kyodo News reported. 

Meanwhile, an official of the government's Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency said that Japan's Self-Defense Forces will begin discharging water to the No. 4 reactor of Fukushima Daiichi power plant at 2100 GMT Sunday, the Nikkei reported separately. 

The power cables to Reactors No. 1 and 2 are now connected and the plan is to restore power supply sometime Sunday, said a Tepco spokesman. The cables for Reactors No. 3-6 are not connected yet, he added. 

Power for reactors No.1 and No.2 were initially expected to be restored Saturday afternoon, but moved back the timing as workers had to shield many pieces of equipment from the water spraying operations. 

Another Tepco spokesman said on Saturday that in order to supply power to all of the reactors all of the cables need to be connected and checked along with other equipment. 

Even if cables and other equipment function properly, to operate the reactor's cooling system the company will first have to check that all the equipment used in the system still works, the spokesman said. 

The United Nations' nuclear watchdog expressed the view that the worst may be over for the Daiichi plant as the nuclear accident Japan hasn't widened in the past three days and that the risk of a worst-case-scenario meltdown is now reducing day by day. 

The situation, however, remains very serious, said Graham Andrew, special advisor to the International Atomic Energy Agency's director general, at a press briefing in Vienna. 

"I prefer not to speculate about the future, but as days go by, the risk of a total meltdown is reducing," Andrew said. 

"The situation has been improving in some areas," he said, referring in particular to restoring power at two of the plant's six reactors. 

But, he said, "there are still risks that it could get worse."