MELBOURNE—Tata Steel Ltd. of India raised its stake in  Riversdale Mining Ltd., giving the largest shareholder in the Africa-focused coal company an even stronger say in  Rio Tinto's
RIO


-0.07
%




 proposed 3.9 billion Australian dollar (US$3.95 billion) takeover offer.

In a letter to Riversdale, released to the Australian securities exchange Wednesday, Tata said it had raised its stake in the coal company by 2.9 percentage points to 27.1%.

 The creeping investment suggests a slow take-up for Rio Tinto's offer. The Anglo-Australian mining company has twice extended the deadline for its bid, last week moving it to March 18. 

Tata and the next-largest investor, Brazilian steelmaker Cia.  Siderurgica Nacional,
SID


-1.33
%




 now own a combined 47% of Riversdale voting shares. CSN raised its stake in the Australian company to 19.9% in February from 16.29%.

People familiar with the offer said it is likely that Tata and CSN are ensuring they play a key role in the takeover talks and might even be pushing for an improvement on the A$16 a share offered by Rio Tinto. Riversdale shares fell 3.4% Wednesday to close at A$14.97 in Sydney. 

On Tuesday, Rio Tinto said its interest in Riversdale and acceptances for its offer had risen to 16.9% from 15.9% in mid-February. 

Rio Tinto has said its bid is subject to it securing more than 50% of Riversdale's shares.

Riversdale has said its directors have all recommended Rio Tinto's offer "in the absence of a superior proposal." Riversdale director and Tata executive  N.K. Misra had given his approval for the tie-up only as a nominee director of Riversdale, and not as head of mergers and acquisitions at Tata. 

Tata last week said it hadn't made a decision regarding its stake in Riversdale, and a spokesman Wednesday declined to comment other than to say the steel company considers the holding to be strategic. A spokesman for Riversdale declined to comment, and spokesmen for Rio Tinto in Melbourne didn't return phone calls. 

The interest shown in Riversdale, which has a coal mine in South Africa and is developing two major coal projects in neighboring Mozambique, highlights global appetite for the fuel. Tata has a 35% stake in Riversdale's Benga project, ensuring coal supplies for its steel operations, and  Wuhan Iron & Steel Co.
600005


-9.96
%




 last year agreed to buy a 40% interest in its Zambeze project for a similar percentage of coking coal produced. 

Tata and CSN are now forbidden by Australian listing rules from raising their stakes further for six months without launching a formal offer.

—David Fickling in Sydney contributed to this article. 