In the story "Heist," from E.L. Doctorow's collection "All the Time in the World" (Random House, 277 pages, $26), there is a fine analogy for the challenges and joys of reading short fiction. After a troubling incident in a Bowery slum church, the pastor there reminds himself that the state of belief is never constant but always requires regeneration: "If God is to live, the words of faith must be renewed. The words must be reborn."

And so it is for short-story collections, where every 20 or so pages the faith of readers is freshly tested as they leave behind the characters they've come to believe in—or not, if the story is unsuccessful—and start from scratch with new ones. Collections don't offer the comfortable momentum of novels, but readers are compensated, at least when they are in the hands of a master practitioner, with the magic of repeatedly falling under the spell of an invented world.

The new and previously published stories in "All the Time in the World" are a reminder that, for decades, Mr. Doctorow has been a first-rate artist in the short form, able to coax forth readerly empathy for almost all his creations. The faith-and-fiction connection takes on a second facet in Mr. Doctorow's work: Although he is best known for "Ragtime" (1975), a historical pinwheel of a novel, his favorite subjects are people who are monk-like in their rectitude and self-imposed isolation.

That is certainly how the middle-aged businessman Howard Wakefield thinks of himself in "Wakefield." Returning to his wife and kids one night, he simply opts not to go into his house and instead hides in the unused attic space above his garage. For well over a year, unknown to his family, he occupies that hidey-hole and wanders the suburban neighborhood foraging food. "I embraced my dereliction as a religious discipline," he says, abjuring the soulless routines of his daily commute and unhappy marriage. In the remarkable story "Walter John Harmon," the narrator, Jim, is a doubt-ridden member of a cult. But when the cult's leader runs away with Jim's wife, Jim finds solace by redoub ling his faith in the cult's teachings, managing to interpret the betrayal as a fulfillment of the leader's prophecy.

A sort of cloistered devotion is what links these stories, whether it is that of a battered woman who claims her independence in "a studio apartment that is sacred to her" ("Jolene: A Life") or of a mass murderer who has no one but his mother with whom to share his secrets ("A House on the Plains"). Mr. Doctorow is now 80, and as the assessments of his long career commence, it is clear that he has been, like his characters, a man apart from his contemporaries. The stories of "All the Time in the World" do not seem to belong to any school or style but to emanate from his own solitary visions.

Some of the fun of Jim Shepard's collection "You Think That's Bad" (Alfred A. Knopf, 225 pages, $24.95) derives simply from the subjects of his stories. Mr. Shepard writes about, among other things, a Dutch water-management engineer during a climate-change crisis, the Japanese special-effects genius who designed "Godzilla" and Polish Himalayan mountaineers. The usual stuff.

Mr. Shepard acts first as something of a compositor, assembling facts and background in a rapid-fire first-person voice. "Your Fate Hurtles Down at You," for instance, is narrated by a Swiss avalanche researcher who tells us at length about snow crystals. Here and elsewhere, though, the old short-story magic is present: Mr. Shepard makes you forget his copious research as you're pulled into his exotic imagination.

Disasters—natural and military— appear in most of these stories, often serving as backdrops for dysfunctional relationships. In this realm Mr. Shepard has far less range. Most of the main characters are emotionally balked men who hide from their exasperated, shrewish wives by throwing themselves into their work and who are given to (as in one story) "building tall towers of self-pity and then watching them sway."

It is best, then, to pick and choose these Shepard stories over time. Despite its varied subject matter, "You Think That's Bad," when read all at once, feels oddly uniform.

The stories in Siobhan Fallon's "You Know When the Men Are Gone" (Amy Einhorn Books, 226 pages, $23.95) are about spouses separated by the Iraq war and the anxious vigils they keep for one another. Ms. Fallon was herself an Army wife at Fort Hood in Texas, where these stories largely take place, and she sensitively renders the qualities of that fretful waiting.

The time can seem monstrously empty, "a long, gray nothingness between departure and return," as Meg, the wife in the title story, tells it. The expanse is often spiked by unbearable fright and longing. And, as in Ms. Fallon's most gripping stories, the gossip and insecurity that fill the time can plant the terrible suspicion of infidelity.

In "Leave," Chief Warrant Officer Nick Cash worries about his wife's faithfulness, and so he slips home from Iraq unannounced and launches a surveillance mission in his own house, hiding in the basement for a week. "It was difficult to determine if someone was one-hundred-percent guilty," he muses, "but nearly impossible to find someone one-hundred-percent innocent." In the story "Inside the Break," an Army wife, Kailana, finds an incriminating email from a female private to her husband, an infantryman in Baghdad. Kailana must decide whether to punish her husband or to live with the damning knowledge just as she has learned to live with the chance of his death.

Some couples bear the strains better than others, of course, and Ms. Fallon is less deft in writing about the happier reunions—three different stories end with people hugging. But even in those cases, "You Know When the Men Are Gone" poignantly reminds us that the sacrifices made by members of the military hardly begin on the battlefield.