The photographer Francesca Woodman has received far more attention from critics and collectors since her death in 1981 than ever came her way when she was alive. Indeed, before she threw herself from a New York roof at age 22, she was unknown as an artist. She had never had a major exhibition and her only book, "Some Disordered Interior Geometries," was published the month she died. 

The cultural machinery that produces judgments about an artist's lifetime of effort has less material to process when that artist dies young. The wheels grind faster and on thinner stuff. And when that young artist (or writer or actor) is a suicide, the quality of the material is often overlooked because it is immediately more valuable. The lurching randomness of existence suddenly has a steady meaning. Everything done or said by the deceased seems to be a clue that will explain why someone would choose to die rather than live. The last act suddenly becomes the most important act. 

Call it the Sylvia Plath Effect or the Diane Arbus Syndrome. 

The documentary "The Woodmans" is an example of this teleology operating on the legacy of Francesca Woodman. 

 Film Forum, New York  Through Feb. 1

The film's director, C. Scott Willis, tries to keep the story centered on Woodman's family. The main speaking characters are her aging parents. Both are artists who raised their daughter to understand the seriousness of such a calling. Betty Woodman is one of America's most acclaimed ceramicists; George Woodman is an accomplished painter; their son, Charles, is a video artist. 

But the star of the film—which opens Wednesday for two weeks at the Film Forum in New York and then travels for limited runs in February and March to Providence, R.I.; Nashville, Tenn.; Chicago and Seattle—is the one family member who is no longer there. Francesca Woodman is heard briefly in a couple of archival video pieces, but her absence haunts everything seen or said. She is the reason we are being asked to watch. 

The documentary is a wrenching portrait of a husband and wife coping with the bewilderment and grief of missing their child and trying to find solace in the disciplined routine of making art. The film's website calls their devotion to their own work "inspiring." Others may beg to differ as they watch George Woodman photographing nude young women in imitation of his daughter's own provocative style, or see close-ups of Betty Woodman's stoic face. Almost 30 years after their daughter's suicide they seem nowhere close to being healed.

"The Woodmans" also stokes the furnace of myth surrounding Francesca Woodman. Various interviewees (none authorities on contemporary art) describe her as "incredibly original" and "one of the great photographers of the 20th century." But evidence for these statements is less than convincing. 

There is no disputing her talent, drive, fearlessness, self-absorption or precocity. She was making photographs by the age of 13 and didn't stop until a few months before her death. The intensity of her commitment frightened some of her high-school teachers in Boulder, Colo., and thrilled her fellow art students at the Rhode Island School of Design. Not many teenagers choose to express themselves through nude self-portraiture, and that seductively goading mode soon became her signature.

But the notion that she was Mozart or Keats with a camera is hard to accept. Like many artists who discover art at an early age, she fell hard for surrealism. Unlike many others, she did not live long enough to grow out of her crush. Much of her work seems derivative of canonical photographic surrealists, such as Clarence John Laughlin, Frederick Sommer, Duane Michels, Ralph Gibson, Jerry Uelsmann and Douglas D. Prince. The performative aspects of her self-portraiture also indicate she was looking at feminist artists from the 1970s, such as Hanne Wilke, Eleanor Antin and Carolee Schneemann. 

This amalgam isn't surprising, as she was barely out of her teens, still furiously testing and discarding ideas and influences. Her book combines photos and journal entries that, in keeping with the "process art" of the period, avoid any fixed set of meanings. 

The gothic union of sex and death was a constant theme. Many of her photographs express a duality between Woodman's aggressive presentation of her naked body and simultaneous urge to hide, erase herself, merge with her surroundings, be a ghost. 

This tension was sometimes resolved memorably. In one image from her 1977-78 series "Angel," she photographed her spread bare legs mirroring a pair of leg-like troughs that she had chiseled out of the floor. The double "V" here is both a sexual message and an academic study in solids and voids. In another series done in 1980 at the MacDowell Colony, she photographed her body fusing with a stand of birches, as though re-enacting the myth of Daphne, who was changed into a tree by her mother to escape the clutches of Apollo. 

Interpreting these images, however, we can't escape. The bony finger of death points at all the photographs, videos and anguished journal entries, forcing us to see them as foreshadowing the end. The troughs in the cement become shallow graves; the birchbark on her wrists in one of the Daphne images is a bracelet and also a bandage. Several of her friends in the film describe her as fun to be around. More apparent is her emotional fragility.

The film never asks why the New York art world took no notice of Woodman's work when she was alive and then embraced it posthumously. What happened in the five years between her death and a 1986 exhibition at the Hunter College Art Gallery? Suddenly, the art historians Rosalind Krauss and Abigail Solomon-Godeau were putting their formidable reputations behind Woodman. Benjamin Buchloh of Columbia University added his name to the revival. Fewer than 10 years after her death, Woodman had become enmeshed in a web of feminist, psychoanalytic and Marxist theory. 

As this impressive critical apparatus went up around the work, art dealers in New York grew interested. There was a show at the Pace-MacGill Gallery in 1994, and her estate found a home with the esteemed Marian Goodman Gallery. In November of this year, Woodman will be the subject of a retrospective at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art. 

One can't fault the Woodmans for doing their best to promote their daughter. From all the testimony, she hungered for recognition. It is entirely possible that her body of pictures will sustain historical scrutiny. Respect for the poems of Sylvia Plath and the photographs of Diane Arbus has only grown over the past 50 years. 

By comparison, though, both women had complete lives. Their styles had time to evolve over more than a decade. Plath worked until she was 30, Arbus until she was 48. Each became the mother of two children. Neither artist died at 22.

 Mr. Woodward is an arts critic in New York. 