BENGHAZI, Libya—The leader of the rebel government in eastern Libya earned his reputation as a foe of the regime from an unlikely post: as Col. Moammar Gadhafi's minister of justice.

Mustafa Abdel Jalil, a former judge who served in Col. Gadhafi's cabinet from 2007 until he resigned last month to protest violence against demonstrators, now heads the Libyan National Council, whose lineup seats former government insiders alongside hardened dissidents who spent years in prison.

The list of 10 names made public so far from the 31-member council suggests an effort by rebel leaders to be inclusive, to win over strategically important constituencies. Those include powerful tribes in western Libya, traditional elites in the east, and regime officials wavering over which way to throw their support. 

The selections also appear to have been chosen with an eye to Western opinion; some of the officials are known in Washington and European capitals as secular, pro-Western and pro-business.

In naming the council, local councils in regions held by the opposition chose who would represent each city—though the entire process wasn't particularly transparent.

Islamists among the rebels have been largely kept out of the public spotlight, though they are believed to have support in eastern Libya and have assumed key functions in the rebel efforts to unseat Col. Gadhafi.

In the east Libyan city of Darna, for example, the man charged with heading the city's defenses is a former Islamist militant who fought in Afghanistan before being jailed by Col. Gadhafi. In neighboring Tobruq, defenses are lead by a secular ex-general who helped prosecute a campaign against Islamists during the 1990s.

The National Libyan Council, the rebels' Benghazi-based administration, has announced ten members so far. The rest of the body, which is supposed to have 31-members, hasn't been named because of security reasons or because some regions are still under Col. Moammar Gadhafi's control. The leadership is joined by some key appointees.

—Charles Levinson

"They appear to be bringing in the Islamic opposition but in a more covert way, so they don't alarm the U.S.," said a Libyan-American businessman in Benghazi.

Rebel officials said the inclusion of senior ex-regime officials gives them leaders who understand the inner workings of the regime and encourages other regime officials to defect by showing them that the rebels are willing to welcome the former officials into their ranks. 

Mr. Jalil, 58 years old, the head of the rebel council, comes from the eastern coastal city of Baida, the historic seat of the Senussi dynasty, which ruled Libya as a religious order and later a monarchy, before Col. Gadhafi seized power in 1969. 

In his years as a judge, Mr. Jalil was known for ruling consistently against the regime. He was among a handful of officials who were brought into the regime in the early-to-mid 2000s as part of an effort by Col. Gadhafi's son, Saif al-Islam Gadhafi, to cast himself and the regime in a more reform-minded light.

After becoming justice minister in 2007, Mr. Jalil publicly defied the regime, which was unheard of for a minister serving Col. Gadhafi.

"It's as if he just wouldn't lie," said Heba Morayef, a Human Rights Watch official who twice visited Libya and met with Mr. Jalil both times. "I have never seen an Arab minister of justice who will publicly criticize the most powerful security agencies in the country."

In January 2010, Mr. Jalil appeared on national television, in front of Col. Gadhafi and hundreds of regime officials at an annual government conference, and declared his intent to resign over the government's refusal to release political detainees. His resignation was rejected.

Col. Gadhafi dispatched Mr. Jalil to Benghazi when protests first erupted on Feb. 15. When Mr. Jalil arrived to the east and saw the violence being used against protesters, he promptly resigned, the first senior official to do so. 

Days later, he was asked if he would be willing to be public face of the rebellion to show Libyans and the outside world that there was a viable alternative to Col. Gadhafi. Mr. Jalil accepted. 

On Wednesday, Libyan state television announced the central government was offering a bounty of 500,000 Libyan dinars ($400,000) to anyone who captured and handed Mr. Jalil over to the central government.

"We are the same as people in other countries, and are looking for the same things," Mr. Jalil said in an interview before he was formally tapped to lead the rebel government.

"We want a democratic government, a fair constitution, and we don't want to be isolated from the world anymore."

He appealed to the West for help and reassured them that "the international companies in Libya, the oil companies, all of them are safe."



The two men tapped to serve as the rebels' top diplomats abroad, Ali al-Issawi and Mahmoud Jabril, are also former regime officials with reputations as being reform-oriented and pro-business. 

Mr. Issawi, a career diplomat and former trade minister, resigned his post as ambassador to India in protest against the crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators. He has in the past been feted by international companies interested in landing investments in Libya. 

Mr. Jabril was wooed back to Libya from decades in exile by Saif Gadhafi to head the Economic Development Board, which was founded in the mid-2000s to encourage investment and economic growth in Libya. Mr. Jabril stepped down last year, amid disagreements with regime hard-liners over the slow pace of reform. 

"By putting Jabril and Issawi on the list, they're sending a message to foreign companies that the future Libyan government is interested in foreign investment and privatization," said  Jason Pack, a Libya scholar at Oxford University who has advised multinational companies on the business climate in Libya. 

Other rebel officials have had more bitter dealings with the regime. Ahmed Zubeir Sherif is the lone descendant of Libya's last king, Idriss Senussi, among the rebel leadership so far. 

Mr. Gadhafi kept him in prison for 31 years on conspiracy charges, making him the country's longest-serving prisoner. 

The rebels' defense minister, Omar Hariri, was one of Mr. Gadhafi's fellow revolutionaries in 1969, but was imprisoned for 15 years after being implicated in a coup attempt in 1975. 

The rebels' defense minister, Omar Hariri, was one of Mr. Gadhafi's fellow revolutionaries in 1969, but was imprisoned for 15 years after being implicated in a coup attempt in 1975. 

Mr. Hariri is from the Farjan tribe, a western-based tribe with a strong presence in and around Mr. Gadhafi's stronghold city of Sirte, one of several appointments that appear aimed at wooing influential tribes.