President Barack Obama is hearing from a growing set of critics, many of them Republican leaders, who complain he is taking a hands-off approach to the spending debate in Congress and keeping a low profile on the turmoil in Libya and Bahrain.

That impression may be bolstered when Mr. Obama steps off a plane in Brazil this weekend for a five-day swing through countries far from the front-page headlines.

"The public has begun to see that there really is lacking a sense of leadership, and that's resulted in a lack of confidence that people have in the president and this country," said House Majority Leader Eric Cantor (R., Va.) in an interview.

Others questioned the choices Mr. Obama has made this week in speaking to the public, including a newspaper opinion article he wrote on gun control and his appearance on ESPN Wednesday, in a taped segment, to reveal his picks in the NCAA tournament.

But the president's aides say Mr. Obama is doing what Americans want him to do. Mr. Obama is following a deliberate White House strategy likely to play out over the next two years: He will be more measured in his public comments than he was in 2009 and 2010, when he commented on a wide range of public issues and was criticized for overexposure in the media.

Behind the scenes, the president's aides say Mr. Obama is receiving updates throughout the day on the situation in the Middle East and Japan. In addition to his daily economic briefing, he is having regular discussions with his budget director, Jacob Lew, and his aides are reaching out to members of Congress on the budget.

They say the president will not be thrown from his own plans, which lately have included travel away from Washington to argue against GOP-sponsored cuts to education. Mr. Obama's trip to Brazil and two other nations is aimed partly at increasing U.S. exports, and therefore at boosting U.S. jobs, they say.

"If you look at any public opinion research, people's No. 1 focus is the economy, and we can't forget that—ever—even as we are being pulled in several directions by very important and consequential events that are beyond our controls," said Dan Pfeiffer, the White House communications director.

"The American people wouldn't want us to seem like we're oblivious to what was happening in Japan and Libya, but they also don't want us to seem like we're obsessed with it," he said. "They want us to be on top of it, but also on top of the economy and other issues that are affecting their daily lives."

Mr. Obama has drawn criticism for this strategy, as well as for the White House decision not to become directly involved in negotiations on this year's federal budget, or on sensitive talks under way in Congress on a broad plan to cut the deficit. Engaging now on a long-range deficit plan, White House officials say, would not help the process.

Mr. Obama's stance prompted sharp criticism from Democratic Sen. Joe Manchin of West Virginia, who said last week the president had "failed to lead." Many senior Republicans make broader complaints.

Mr. Cantor said that Mr. Obama's current leadership posture has fostered a lack of understanding abroad about where the White House stands on key issues, and a diminished public confidence in his presidency at home.

"What is lacking is a firm direction of leadership on the part of this president, and it really is time for him to get engaged on behalf of the American people," he said.

Gov. Haley Barbour of Mississippi said Tuesday that Mr. Obama had been "absolutely AWOL'' in the budget debate. ``He understands vividly what has to be done, and he has chosen not to lead,'' Mr. Barbour, a potential GOP presidential candidate, said on a trip to the early-nominating state of Iowa.

Mr. Obama's lower profile on some issues appears to jibe with public opinion that he had been drawn into too many issues in his first two years that were not directly related to the No. 1 concern, jobs, said Andrew Kohut, president of the nonpartisan Pew Research Center.

"I think that in his first two years the public saw the president taking on a lot of issues and going off in a variety of different directions, many of them defined as too far," Mr. Kohut said. "Many people thought to themselves, 'Why isn't he devoting more attention to the economy and jobs, which is really my principal concern.' "

In the early months of Barack Obama's presidency, he weighed in on a range of matters, such as Americans' personal finances and the arrest of an African American Harvard scholar by a local police force. The battles over the stimulus, health care and other issues put the president constantly in the media on partisan issues, after he'd promised to bridge the divide in Washington.

Mr. Obama's approach on the budget may be paying dividends with the public, Mr. Kohut said. A Pew poll released Wednesday shows Americans have lost confidence with both parties on the budget but the drop in confidence in the Republicans was much bigger.

The Obama White House has, at times to its political peril, preferred not to respond to events on outsiders' time frames. "You schedule things long in advance, and if every day we were to wake up and rip up our schedule based on what was happening in the world, you would never do anything," Mr. Pfeiffer said.

The NCAA bracket, he said, has become a tradition since Mr. Obama took office. "You could cancel it…to prove a point," Mr. Pfeiffer said, adding that the ESPN interview took 10 minutes. "But what he chose to do is use the opportunity to encourage Americans to contribute to charities that will help the people of Japan."

—Douglas A. Blackmon  and Danny Yadron  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Laura Meckler at laura.meckler@wsj.com 