The Syrian government sternly warned the public Sunday against more demonstrations and blamed foreign elements for stoking sectarian divisions after a dozen people were killed and hundreds injured during an antigovernment protest on Saturday.

At the same time, an adviser to President Bashar Assad told Arab media the government has decided to lift the emergency law in place since 1963, a key demand of the opposition. There was no time frame or detail on when and how the repeal of the law—which allows the government to make preemptive arrests of dissidents and bans demonstrations—would go into effect.

After a weekend of more turmoil in a nation where minority Shiite Alawites rule over majority Sunnis, Syria's leadership is facing a crisis on how to proceed with the unrest gripping the country.

Track day-by-day events in the countries facing unrest in North Africa and the Middle East.

The ambiguity of the government's last-minute reform pledges, as well as reports that gunmen loyal to the regime opened fire on protesters on Saturday in the coastal city of Latakia, have raised suspicion among many Syrians and observers of a rift among the regime's ruling class.

Analysts say that some members of the ruling circle, particularly his brother Maher, heading the Republic Guards, favor a harsh crackdown and view giving in as a sign of weakness for the regime.

"We know that there are serious differences and policy disputes within the inner circle. There is a faction of liberals," says Joshua Landis, expert on Syria and author of the Syria Comment blog at the University of Oklahoma. "Basher [Assad] is at the center playing all the sides, he has a delicate balancing act."

Mr. Assad also faces the daunting task of restoring his reputation and credibility among Syrians after a weekend of the worst violence the country has seen in decades.

On Saturday antigovernment protests erupted across the country, from the southern city of Deraa, to the coastal city of Latakia and eventhe capital Damascus. The wall of fear that had kept Syria immune until now to the wave of pro-democracy uprisings in the Middle East appeared to have cracked.

Protesters marched, chanting for freedom, reform and justice. In some places they called for the fall of the regime. In Latakia, a strong base for Mr. Assad's Alawite clan, mayhem broke out as snipers shot into the crowd, killing 12 and injuring 200, according to media reports.

What happened in Latakia has become a source of major contention between the government and the opposition, with each offering a drastically different version of the event.

Witness accounts posted on blogs and Facebook painted a harrowing scene where protesters marching peacefully and chanting "peaceful, peaceful" and "freedom" were first provoked by a group of government supporters singing praise Mr. Assad. Then, as the two sides clashed, witnesses said, snipers taking position on rooftops shot into the crowd, prompting panic and havoc as people ran for cover. Some opposition members claim the snipers were Alawite "thugs" loyal to Mr. Assad's brother Maher. 

The government, however, blamed the violence on "unknown armed elements" who wanted to terrorize people and stoke sectarian tensions. The government said security forces were among the dead.

"It is obvious Syria is the target of a project to sow sectarian strife to compromise Syria and the unique co-existence model that distinguishes it," adviser Buthaina Shaaban was quoted as saying by SANA, the official news agency.

Syria's army deployed troops into Latakia on Saturday night and the government closed the country's border with Jordan, near the restive city of Deraa, where the protests started.

The U.S. has condemned the excessive use of violence against protesters in Syria but Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said on Sunday that U.S. had no plans to interfere in Syria's internal affairs and that Syria differed from Libya.

"What's been happening there the last few weeks is deeply concerning, but there's a difference between calling out aircraft and indiscriminately strafing and bombing your own cities," Mrs. Clinton said on CBS's "Face the Nation" on Sunday. 

 Write to  Farnaz Fassihi at farnaz.fassihi@wsj.com 