The Knicks' ideal defensive possession begins with backup point guard Toney Douglas, 94 feet from the basket, crouched down with feet wide and arms outstretched, ready to be the first line of a peculiar kind of defense.

He will hassle the point guard as soon as he receives the in-bounds pass—sometimes Mr. Douglas succeeds, like last month when he pressured Heat guard Mario Chalmers into throwing the ball under LeBron James' legs. Sometimes he fails, like last week when he didn't intercept a pass and Rockets guard Kyle Lowry spun around and found a teammate for a wide-open 3-pointer.

 But he must do everything he can to fluster and level the playing field because for the offensive-minded Knicks, defense can never be quite normal.

They play 98 offensive possessions a game on average, tied for most in the NBA coming into this week's games. That means, of course, that they also play defense more than anyone else.

They have surrendered 106.3 points per game, the fourth-most in the NBA and the most in the Eastern Conference, and are the only team among the bottom seven defensive teams with a winning record.

 Conventional wisdom says they don't play defense. Opponents, however, disagree. They describe the Knicks as the NBA's go-for-broke defenders, aggressive, perhaps, to a fault. Knicks assistant Dan D'Antoni calls it "organized chaos." 

"They gamble a lot," said Chuck Hayes, the Rockets forward. "It's a high-risk, high-reward kind of deal. They try to pick up the tempo. They go for steals and get you in this helter-skelter, frantic mode.''

Those tactics have paid dividends. The Knicks have forced 276 "bad pass" turnovers, sixth most in the NBA, and have forced 139 "lost ball" turnovers, where a defender loses the ball while dribbling. That's the ninth-most in the league. 

Though it's a high-wire act, the defensive pressure is all by design. The goal is to bait the other team into playing the same up-tempo style as the Knicks.

Only Mr. Douglas and reserve forward Shawne Williams typically have the green light to apply all-out defensive pressure on every possession because they don't play as many minutes as starting pojnt guard Raymond Felton and the other starters.

 Make no mistake, offense is still the engine that drives this Knicks team. As forward Wilson Chandler said, "Our game plan is just to get stops so we can get out to transition [offense]." The Knicks score 106.7 points per game, second most in the NBA.

"Basically, the philosophy is, we're trying to keep them from scoring on every darn possession," said Dan D'Antoni, the assistant coach in charge of defense. "There's going to be a lot more possessions. You can't set your goal for keeping them in the 80-point range. That ain't going to happen. The idea is, create enough possessions to beat them, get more stops than they do." 

Dan D'Antoni said instead of playing "soft and safe and then closing, we're more of trying to take things away from teams. Some teams let you have it and then defend it, stay solid. We're more of a deny this, don't let you have that." 

The most important defensive battleground for the Knicks is on the interior. Opponents have taken 1,964 shots in the lane against the Knicks and 1,753 from within seven feet, the most in the NBA in both categories by at least 100 attempts.

Knicks coach Mike D'Antoni said that is not the negative statistic it may appear to be. When teams see Amar'e Stoudemire, who at 6-foot-10 is undersized for a center, and Mr. Chandler, who at 6-foot-8 is undersized for a power forward, they tend to attack those perceived weaknesses.

The surprise comes in the fact that the Knicks have the league's seventh-best defense inside seven feet, holding opponents to 54.7% field goal shooting (The Miami Heat have the best close-range defense, holding opponents to 52%). 

Their approach on the interior is simple: They take chances there, too. The Knicks lead the NBA in blocks with 6.64 a game, though they have allowed 154 dunks, eighth most in the NBA.

 Mr. Chandler said he uses a technique called "digging," in which, without leaving the man he is guarding, he reaches into the player with the ball in an attempt to wreak havoc in the post.

 Mr. Stoudemire (2.27), Mr. Chandler (1.43) and Ronny Turiaf (1.28) are the Knicks' shot-blocking leaders. Occasionally, Mike D'Antoni will start Mr. Turiaf at center to give the Knicks' their best statistical defensive lineup, though need for more offense usually wins out, as it did last week when Mr. Turiaf started for just one game, against the Spurs, before returning to the bench. 

Chase Budinger, a guard for the Houston Rockets, said that the up-tempo defense leads to "backdoor cuts and breakdowns a little bit in one-on-one [match-ups]. I think it's a little tough for them to get in help position one-on-one. That creates a little easier offense for us. In return, though, they get the ball out and run."

Mr. Budinger said the Knicks are particularly adept at "back-tapping," the subtle pokes at the basketball as an offensive player spins or turns. Mr. Douglas said that back-tapping is the Knicks' tactic when they get beat on a dribble. 

Spurs forward Richard Jefferson said this Knicks defense is similar to the Suns' defense when Mike D'Antoni was coaching in Phoenix. That defense was full of long, athletic defenders like Shawn Marion and pressuring guards like Boris Diaw.

 Like in Phoenix, the thorn in the side of Mike D'Antoni is the notion that his teams don't play defense. "It kind of started in Phoenix,'' he said. "They said we were awful and, well, we were in the top 15, so we weren't awful. But they used terms to grab people's attention, that 'it's a joke' or 'they [play it] as an afterthought' or 'we 'don't even try.' Very honestly, I get disgusted with it. A couple announcers who make those remarks have no clue what they are talking about.''

 Mike D'Antoni said the actual guarding aspect of defense has been fine, but the problems stem from the 12.5 offensive rebounds that the Knicks' smaller frontline has allowed per game, second most in the NBA.

 Some Knicks disagree that they are the NBA's foremost gamblers on defense. Dan D'Antoni said that the high number of switches the Knicks do in a given possession gives the appearance that they are more vulnerable to an easy open shot than they actually are.

Mike D'Antoni said that he's talked to his team about gambling less, though he said aggressiveness is a necessary evil when the defense is as small as the Knicks'. He also dismisses the notion that such gambling is exhausting, something backed up by his players, none of whom admit it's tiring to play up-tempo on both sides of the court.

"We know to win a championship we have to play good defense because it's obvious,'' Mike D'Antoni said. "If you're one of the best offensive teams, so why aren't you winning every game? Well, obviously, our defense. So that's why we put all the effort into it.''

 Write to  Kevin Clark at kevin.clark@wsj.com 