The Army on Wednesday filed 22 new charges, including "aiding the enemy," against the private accused of providing hundreds of thousands of classified documents to the WikiLeaks website.

The aiding-the-enemy charge against Pfc. Bradley Manning is a capital offense, but military officials said they wouldn't seek the death penalty.

Defense Department officials have said that by providing the documents to WikiLeaks, particularly on-the-ground unredacted reports from the war in Afghanistan, Pfc. Manning endangered the lives of people who have aided U.S. efforts.

Pfc. Manning's attorney,  David Coombs, hasn't publicly denied the charges. On Wednesday afternoon he posted a brief statement on his website acknowledging the new charges and noting it would be up to an investigating officer to determine which charges Pfc. Manning could face in a court martial. 

"Over the past few weeks, the defense has been preparing for the possibility of additional charges in this case," the statement said.

Privately, officials have said for months that they have concrete evidence that Pfc. Manning provided secret State Department cables and war logs from Iraq and Afghanistan to WikiLeaks. But until Wednesday, Pfc. Manning had been charged only in connection with two earlier leaks to the website, including a video that showed a U.S. attack helicopter firing on unarmed Iraqis. 

Among the new charges, the government accused Pfc. Manning of theft of public records, wrongfully transmitting defense information, fraud and other offenses related to WikiLeaks' publication of the documents.

In a news release, the military said if the charges are referred to a court martial and if Pfc. Manning is convicted, he will face a maximum punishment of life in prison, a reduction in rank and a dishonorable discharge.

According to the military, trial proceedings have been delayed at the request of Pfc. Manning's legal team, which has requested an inquiry into their client's "mental capacity."

If that review finds Pfc. Manning competent, the military would begin an "Article 32" hearing into the charges. The investigating officer in that hearing would decide whether to refer the charges announced Wednesday to a court martial.

Pentagon officials also have been pushing for charges to be brought against Julian Assange, the WikiLeaks founder. Mr. Assange has repeatedly said the U.S. wants to send him to the prison in Guantanamo Bay.

In recent weeks officials at the Defense and Justice departments have said they have found little evidence of direct contacts between Messrs. Assange and Manning, making it more difficult to bring charges against the WikiLeaks founder. 

Pfc. Manning is being held in a Marine Corps brig in Quantico, Va ., where he was notified of the additional charges on Wednesday, the military said.

Mr. Coombs, Pfc. Manning's lawyer, has complained about the conditions in which his client is being held at Quantico. Brig officials restrict his reading material, his exercise and the amount of time he can spend out of his cell, according to Mr. Coombs and military officials. 