The Internet surged with conversation about the death of Osama bin Laden, cementing social-media sites' growing roles as disseminators of breaking news and as public squares where people discuss it.



Photos from around the world.

 "Justice has been done" and more.

A look at Monday's front pages of U.S. newspapers on the news of Osama bin Laden's death. 

On the ground

Diagram from the U.S. government

Photos inside and out

On Monday, the number of postings about bin Laden on social-media sites including Twitter, Facebook and others eclipsed those on the Japan earthquake and the royal wedding of Price William in the U.K., according to NetBase Solutions Inc., a social-media analytics company.

On Monday evening, a Twitter user named BlueseBlonde tweeted, "Kate and William became old news fast." 

Across the English-speaking Internet, people posted some 1.2 million conversations on all social-media sites about bin Laden on Sunday and the first half of Monday, NetBase said.

The buzz initially took off some 45 minutes before President Barack Obama made his speech announcing U.S. special forces killed bin Laden in a raid on a walled compound in Abbottabad, Pakistan.

About half of the conversations were happening on Twitter, where the hours surrounding Mr. Obama's announcement of bin Laden's death broke a record for the highest sustained rate of messages ever posted on the site. From 10:45 p.m. to 2:20 a.m. Eastern there were an average of 3,000 messages per second on the micro-blogging service, which has 200 million registered accounts.

Facebook declined to share data on its more than 600 million users.

"People are going to Twitter to see the news break and then going to the news outlets to verify and get some perspective," said Susan Etlinger, an analyst at Altimeter Group, a social media advisory firm. 

Many people online noted that they learned of bin Laden's death via Twitter and Facebook. Facebook asked journalists where they first heard bin Laden had been killed. Hundreds replied—most saying they heard from Twitter, Facebook or email alerts.

Reports of bin Laden's death from people in the U.S. emerged on Twitter hours before Mr. Obama's announcement. Many on Monday credited Keith Urbahn, a staffer for former Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, with breaking the news in the U.S. "So I'm told by a reputable person they have killed Osama Bin Laden," Mr. Urbahn tweeted around 7:30 p.m. Eastern Sunday. "Hot damn."

On Monday morning, Mr. Urbahn said his information was unrelated to his position working for Mr. Rumsfeld. He had heard it from a "connected TV producer," he said. 

"As much as I believe in rise of "citizen journalism," blogs, twitter etc supplanting traditional media, my tweet isn't great evidence of it," he wrote.

Several people connected to the city where bin Laden was killed became famous on Twitter Monday after others discovered they had begun delivering information about an incident there, long before most people in the U.S. became aware of it. 

Those people conceded they had no idea what they were writing about at the time, instead describing vague details of a helicopter crash that had been reported on the local news.

Mohcin Shah, a 26-year-old unemployed telecom engineer in Rawalpindi, around 70 miles from Abbottabad, his home town, said he first heard of the blast on Twitter. He said he immediately called an aunt and uncle in Abbottabad who told him they had heard three blasts in a row that sounded as if they were close to a military academy in town. 

Mr. Shah reported the news soon after on Twitter and engaged in an online conversation with Sohaib Athar, an information-technology consultant who was delivering information from a taxi driver and others. Mr. Shah woke up the next day to find his inbox full of messages and that he had gotten hundreds of new followers on Twitter. 

"Interesting rumors in the otherwise uneventful Abbottabad air today," Mr. Athar tweeted on Sunday. 

By Monday morning, Mr. Athar had become the sixth most influential person on Twitter (following the Chicago Bulls), according to Twitalyzer, an analytics service made by Web Analytics Demystified Inc. Mr. Athar also saw his websites targeted for a virus attack.

 Write to  Geoffrey A. Fowler at geoffrey.fowler@wsj.com and Alexandra Berzon at alexandra.berzon@wsj.com 

