Detroit auto makers spent most of 2010 promoting electric cars, hybrids and cute mini-cars like the Fiat 500. But what really pumped up profits was the rebound in sales of pickup trucks and sport utility vehicles.

Now, with gas prices rising again, Detroit auto makers' strategy for keeping some of their best-selling sport utility vehicles relevant could be tested. 

 A fleet of Detroit-brand SUVs have morphed into more efficient, more car-like vehicles—following a strategy pioneered by Japanese and European auto makers during the past decade. The new  Ford
F


1.16
%




 Explorer was reborn in 2010 as a car-like crossover wagon after nearly two decades riding on a pickup truck frame.  General Motors Co.
GM


0.28
%




's new lineup of crossovers, which includes the Chevrolet Traverse, has already established a solid position in the market.

To appreciate what auto makers are doing, consider the transformation of the 2011 Dodge Durango. 

The original Dodge Durango, launched in 1998, was one of the roughest beasts in the SUV jungle. The front end had prominent fenders that copped the look of the mean-looking Dodge Ram pickup. The boxy body was bolted to a pickup truck's steel ladder frame, with 10 "rubber isolators" to mitigate the vibration on the highway. 

Mileage? The best available was 14 miles per gallon in the city, 19 on the highway in a six-cylinder version, or the two-wheel drive version of the truck equipped with a 4.7 liter V-8. Most V-8 powered, four-wheel drive versions of the Durango were rated at 13 city, 18 highway.

The Durango sold respectably—though it never achieved the success of the king of the SUV-era, the Ford Explorer. But in late 2008, when the combination of $4-a-gallon gasoline and economic chaos dried up demand for old-school Detroit SUVs, Chrysler shut down Durango production.

Fast forward to 2010. Chrysler, and its new controlling partner, Fiat S.p.A, launched a new generation of the company's iconic Jeep Grand Cherokee at the company's Jefferson North Plant in Detroit. The new Grand Cherokee is more luxurious and more car-like, borrowing some key design elements from former owner Daimler AG's Mercedes-Benz crossovers. And a few months later, Chrysler unveiled a new Dodge Durango designed to ride on the same basic mechanical underpinnings as the redesigned Jeep.

  Ralph Gilles, head of Chrysler design and the company's Dodge Car brand, says the company never intended to abandon the SUV market. But it did invest in a significant rethinking of what customers who liked Dodge Durangos really valued. In focus groups, customers told Chrysler engineers and designers they liked their SUVs to be big enough to hold seven people. But they also wanted the vehicles to deliver better fuel economy and they wanted them to handle more like cars.

"People would say, 'When it turns a corner, it seems to fall over on itself,' " Mr. Gilles said. 

The 2011 Durango looks like an SUV, but it isn't a truck the way the old Durango was a truck. The Durango doesn't ride on a rigid ladder frame. It has a "unitized" body like most cars. That means the new Durango rides about four inches lower to the ground, and can't tow an 8,700-lb. trailer, the way certain versions of the old model could.

But the new Durango can do things the old SUV couldn't. Perhaps the most critical feature of the new Durango is its mileage. Equipped with a 3.6 liter V-6 and a five-speed automatic, the red rear-wheel drive 2011 Durango I took for a brief test drive was rated at 16 miles per gallon in the city, 23 on the highway. That's a better than 20% improvement in highway mileage over the old truck. 

Average that out over 10,000 miles of highway travel, and the potential gas savings amount to about 100 gallons, or about $300.

The new Durango can also execute what I call a "DC 180"—a U turn across three or four lanes of traffic common on Washington, D.C.,'s confusing streets—with crisp agility thanks to a turning circle that's 3 feet shorter than the old model. That means the Durango can maneuver more easily in packed suburban parking lots or narrow city streets. 

The old solid rear axle—durable for rough off-roading—has been replaced with a new rear suspension that allows wheels to respond independently. That makes the truck much more civilized on pavement.

Gone is the old Durango's blocky styling. The new Durango is sleek and aerodynamic. The vehicle's interior design and on-board technology are also more car-like—there's even a push-to-start button. 

My test model had a sticker price of $41,460. At those prices, Chrysler/Fiat would have to sell a flock of Fiat 500s to equal the profit potential of one Durango.

But with gas prices now coasting above $3 a gallon—high for the winter season—Detroit's new formula for SUV profits could get challenged sooner than many industry executives would have liked.

 Write to  Joseph B. White at joseph.white@wsj.com 