TRIPOLI, Libya—In a rare appearance, the spokesman for the Libyan armed forces told foreign journalists in the capital on Sunday that the government's forces have routed rebels from areas as far east as the coastal town of Brega and predicted swift victory in the city of Benghazi.

"The areas have been cleansed," said Col. Milad Hussein.

"These people are rats and mice; they do not deserve this massive assault," he added later referring to the rebels.

Col. Hussein said the regime had full control of the town of Zawiya, about 30 miles west of Tripoli and the eastern strategic oil facilities towns of Ras Lanuf and Brega.

Track events day by day.

See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

A look at the economic and political status of selected countries facing unrest in North Africa and the Middle East.

The small towns of Al-Uqaylah and Bishr located on the coastal road between Ras Lanuf and Brega, were also under government control, Col. Hussein said. 

He avoided a question about control of Misrata, Libya's third-largest city after Tripoli and Benghazi, suggesting it remained in the hands of opposition forces. 

He said the government's armed forces were eager to give rebels a chance to surrender their weapons in order to avert a fight.

"We do not want to shed one drop of blood," he said, but the spokesman conceded in passing that the government had waged "massive assaults" on the refinery town of Zawiya and Bin Jawad near Ras Lanuf, suggesting high casualties had occurred there.

In the fight to oust rebels from the center of Zawiya, the government's forces sealed all entrances to the town, cut off cellular phone service and detained several journalists who tried to enter on their own. 

Reiterating earlier statements by Libyan leader Col. Moammar Gadhafi, Col. Hussein portrayed rebels as a group of naïve youth misled by Libyan members of Al-Qaeda who returned to the country from Iraq and Afghanistan or detention at Guantanamo Bay. He called them "gangs" and "terrorists."

He said Libyan authorities have evidence that rebels were armed by foreign countries, without being more specific.

Col. Hussein and Deputy Foreign Minister Khalid Kaim, who was at the same press briefing, read out the names of some alleged Libyan Al-Qaeda members taking part in the fight against the regime showing their photographs and biographies.

One man was the alleged head of the Muslim Brotherhood in Mauritania, according to Mr. Kaim. 

It was not possible to verify the assertions made by Libyan officials because of a ban on foreign reporters from traveling outside Tripoli unaccompanied by government minders.

Meanwhile, state-owned television channel Al-Libiya broadcast what it said was live footage from the town of Bishr on the approaches of Brega. Dozens of people were shown dancing and chanting in what the channel said were celebrations of the army's recapture of the town from rebels. Some people held up makeshift placards bearing the names of their tribes. 

The government has not shied from spreading false information and propaganda in its battle against its opponents.

The same channel also aired an audio appeal to the people of Ajdabiya, a city about 75 miles west of the opposition stronghold of Benghazi, to shun rebels based there.

"Do not respond to incitement and the resulting discord," it said.