CAIRO—In a sign of the increasing confidence of Egypt's Islamists, the Muslim Brotherhood said it will compete for 45% to 50% of seats in this fall's parliamentary elections, according to a statement released by the group on Saturday.

The Brotherhood had previously said that its new political party "Freedom and Justice" would field candidates in about one-third of parliamentary districts in elections scheduled for September. 

The Brotherhood, the country's most powerful Islamist group, is holding to its decision not to participate in presidential elections that are supposed to take place before the end of November.

The decision to field more candidates in parliamentary elections may be a sign of the group's increasing confidence that the Egyptian public will embrace political Islam after generations of largely secular, one-party rule.

The Brotherhood has stood at the forefront of Egypt's political opposition to successive autocratic regimes for most of its 83 year history. 

Despite being formally outlawed in the 1950s, forcing its candidates to run as independents, its members still managed to win a fifth of the seats in parliament in the 2005 elections. 

But some analysts and even some Brotherhood members say that even in free and fair elections, the group is unlikely to win much more than 20% of the seats in Egypt's People's Assembly. "I think it's a false ambition," said  Diaa Rashwan, a political analyst at the government-funded Al Ahram Center for Political and Strategic Studies. 

"There is no real indicator in actual Egypt—the Egypt after the revolution —confirming that the Muslim Brotherhood will have the percentage that they're thinking about now."

The Islamist group's announcement follows recent decisions by Egypt's government that have troubled policy makers in the U.S., Israel and Europe. 

In March, Egypt's new foreign minister,  Nabil Al Araby, announced that Egypt was making diplomatic overtures to Iran in a bid to normalize relations between the two diplomatically estranged nations. 

On Wednesday the Egyptian government brokered a deal between the two leading Palestinian factions—Hamas in the Gaza Strip and the Western-backed Palestinian Authority in the West Bank—provoking scathing criticism from Israel. 

On Thursday, Mr. Al Araby told the Arab satellite station Al Jazeera that Egypt was planning to relax its participation in a blockade of the Gaza Strip, the coastal enclave governed by Hamas.

In its statement on Saturday, the Brotherhood praised the decision to open the border, as well as the government's efforts to reconcile Hamas and the Palestinian Authority.

Mr. Rashwan said the Brotherhood was among several religious and secular political parties that had been considering participating in a joint list of parliamentary candidates ahead of the elections. Such a list would divide the field of competition among various parties, decreasing the possibility that like-minded parties would compete against each other.

But if the Brotherhood competes for nearly half the seats in parliament, it could scuttle any plans for the joint list, said Mr. Rashwan. 

"We are risking destroying all the efforts to form one list and one national front in the next election," Mr. Rashwan said. "The Brothers are part of these elections. Why didn't they wait to negotiate with their partners?"