Republicans in the House will press efforts to overturn the health-care overhaul this week in a vote that is largely symbolic but could kick-start substantive changes to provisions at the law's core.

Republicans in Congress have been picking up Democratic allies interested in swapping out parts of the law, including taxes levied on insurers, the creation of a long-term care insurance program and penalties for Americans who don't carry insurance. 

But the White House has backed only such modest changes to the law as eliminating a tax-reporting requirement that irks small businesses.



A series of court challenges to the mandate that most people carry insurance puts further pressure on Congress to rework the law. As a result, the health overhaul, a signature policy of the Obama administration, will likely look different by the time Congress lets out at the end of this year, according to congressional aides and health-industry officials. How different is unclear.

The new Republican majority in the House is expected to pass its repeal measure Wednesday. It may pick up a small number of Democratic votes but will likely go no further. The Senate isn't expected to take up the legislation. President Barack Obama's veto pen would await any unexpected twist.

On Thursday, a day after the repeal vote, the House will pass a measure directing committees to craft new legislation. House committees will begin "the exploration of better policy alternatives designed to lower costs, improve access, protect the doctor-patient relationship and get lawyers out of operating rooms," said  John Murray, deputy chief of staff for Majority Leader Eric Cantor. "We hope our Democrat colleagues will join us."

The White House sees many of the law's pieces as intertwined. 

"You can't do reform piecemeal, and I think people will find that as they start trying to take away certain provisions," an administration official said. The White House will likely change such core elements as the insurance mandate only after significant advances by court challenges.

Some former White House officials say smaller changes aren't out of the question, in part because many aides who helped create the law are no longer there to fight for their provisions.

Among those seeking to change the law is Sen.  Ron Wyden (D., Ore), who is devising a plan to redistribute nearly $60 billion in taxes on insurers so that companies maintaining lower premiums would pay less. Under the current law, that tax is divided based on market share.

Mr. Wyden also has sponsored legislation with Sen.  Scott Brown (R., Mass.) that would allow states to win exemption from requiring residents to carry insurance if they prove they can achieve similar insurance coverage using their own methods.

Lawmakers from both parties are calling for Congress to look into replacing the so-called individual mandate, which requires most Americans to carry insurance or pay a penalty. Already one federal judge has ruled it violates the Constitution. 

At least two Senate Democrats who voted for the overhaul law—Nebraska Sen.  Ben Nelson and Missouri Sen. Claire McCaskill—say they're looking at alternatives to potentially replace the individual mandate if lawmakers could find a different mechanism that nudges healthy people into the insurance pool.

Insurers worry such a chage would make premiums skyrocket because they'd be stuck covering those with pre-existing health conditions without the anticipated influx of healthy customers.

Health industry officials say one alternative would be to make insurance more expensive for those who wait before buying it—an incentive to get coverage early. Medicare for the elderly uses a similar mechanism.

Another target: the law's long-term care insurance program, which collects premiums out of paychecks with the promise of care should a worker become unable to manage basic needs. Fiscally conservative Democrats worry its costs could balloon. "I have real concerns with its financial soundness," said Rep.  Jim Matheson (D., Utah), head of the Blue Dog Coalition. He voted against the health law but doesn't plan to vote for repealing it. "I would like to see that change." 

Supporters of the program, known as the CLASS Act, note it contains a mechanism that shuts the fund down if it no longer can pay for itself.

 Instead of repealing the health care law, they should work on it so as to reduce costs. This is a real opportunity with the House in the hands of the GOP and Senate in the Dems. If they come together they can find good ways to bring efficiency. 

—Rian Davis

Republican governors are trying to tap the brakes on the law's addition of 16 million Americans to the Medicaid insurance program for the poor, starting in 2014. They also want to axe a piece of the law that makes it more difficult for states to cut Medicaid enrollees to patch budget shortfalls.

"The health care legislation is really bearing down on the states," said Republican Texas Gov.  Rick Perry. "The mandates that are in that legislation will most likely cripple health care delivery, with a price tag that will absolutely bust the budgets."

The touchy politics of health care and federal spending suggest an uphill battle to make changes, even with broad support. 

Both parties and the president have promised to nix a requirement that businesses file a 1099 tax form when they pay a vendor more than $600 in a year.

The proposed fix hasn't reached the president's desk because both sides failed to agree how, and if, they should replace that lost revenue, estimated at $19 billion. Congressional leaders expect this will be one of the first changes to the law.

—--Naftali Bendavid and Janet Hook contributed to this article.

 Write to  Janet Adamy at janet.adamy@wsj.com 