NEW DELHI -- India's merchandise exports in November rose 26.5% from a year earlier to $18.9 billion, strengthening expectations that Asia's third-largest economy is on track to overshoot its full year export target.

India aims to achieve $200 billion in merchandise exports in the current financial year through March.

Exports during the April-November period are up 26.7% from a year earlier at $140.3 billion, the government said in a statement Monday.

Imports grew at a slower pace, clocking an 11.2% rise to $27.8 billion in November, and helped cut the trade deficit. The trade deficit narrowed to $8.9 billion in November from $10.06 billion.

Imports were up 24.0% at $222 billion during the April-November period. Non-oil imports in November increased 15% to $20.1 billion, while oil imports grew 2.31% to $7.7 billion, the government said. It didn't give any other details.

Barclays Capital said the pressure on the merchandise trade account isn't likely to ease in the near term.

"Demand for Indian exports is likely to stay subdued reflecting weak global growth and the largely discretionary nature of a sizeable part of Indian exports," it said in a research note.

Also, commodity prices, including those of crude oil, are expected to remain high while India's non-oil imports will rise due to robust economic growth. "In sum, we don't expect the pressure on India's current account to ease quickly," it added.

The weak global economic conditions and a strengthening rupee cast doubts if India would be able to achieve its export aim. The rupee gained 4% against the dollar in 2010, driven by heavy capital inflows.

But healthy demand for India's textiles, gems and jewellery and pharmaceutical products, among others, have instilled confidence that the country's exports are on course to possibly exceeding its target.

In December, federal Trade Secretary Rahul Khullar said full-year exports could be between $210 billion and $215 billion in the current financial year.

India's export growth slowed for the first time in nine months in July after expanding more than 30% each month between November 2009 and June 2010, largely because of weaker base-year levels at the time of the global economic crisis. Since then it has stabilized above 20%.

Separate data in the day showed India's manufacturing sector growth eased a bit in December but output is still growing strongly as order books swell.

The seasonally adjusted HSBC Purchasing Managers' Index fell to 56.7 in December from 58.4 in the previous month. A figure above 50 indicates expansion.

The strong growth momentum is adding to inflation pressures and input prices rose substantially again, accelerating for the seventh consecutive month and at the fastest pace since April.

"The PMI numbers show that the economy remains in high gear, but that this is becoming increasingly difficult to reconcile with a comfortable level of inflation," HSBC said.

It added that the Reserve Bank of India's "hawkish tones in the latest policy statement were well-founded and will materialize in rate hikes sooner rather than later."

 Write to  Anant Vijay Kala at anant.kala@dowjones.com and Mukesh Jagota at mukesh.jagota@dowjones.com 