CANBERRA—Australian Prime Minister Julia Gillard expects to discuss China's growing might and the situation in Afghanistan with President Barack Obama next week during a U.S. visit as she battles perceptions of foreign-policy weakness at home.

In an interview Thursday, Ms. Gillard said she will push for greater defense cooperation between the two longtime allies, in her first visit to the U.S. since she became prime minister last year.

"We have a strong and enduring defense partnership, so I do anticipate that a major feature of my discussions with President Obama will be our shared mission in Afghanistan, as well as our defense cooperation in the modern age," she said. 

The unfolding political turmoil in the Middle East, where Australia has pledged its support to United Nations sanctions against Libya's regime and to any further international response, is expected to be a major issue. Dealing with the growing economic and military power of China will also be on the agenda, she said.

"China's rise obviously is something the world is responding to. Obviously China's rise does also cause discussion of its rise as a military power, and those discussions will continue," Ms. Gillard said. 

Ms. Gillard is set to meet with Mr. Obama on Monday on the nine-day visit, which begins Saturday. She is also scheduled to meet with U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner and Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke. She is also expected to hold meetings with Wall Street banking and financial executives. 

Among other topics, she will lobby for Australia to win one of the U.N. Security Council's rotating, nonpermanent seats. 

Ms. Gillard, who effectively deposed predecessor Kevin Rudd before narrowly forming a coalition government in September, will be under pressure to perform. Australians are seeking a greater say overseas as the country's mining boom continues to feed China's appetite for coal and iron ore. But unlike Mr. Rudd, a former diplomat who serves now as foreign minister, Ms. Gillard has spent her political career campaigning on domestic issues. 

During a summit in Brussels in October, she was quoted in local media as saying, "If I had a choice, I'd probably be more [comfortable] in a school watching kids learn to read in Australia than here in Brussels at international meetings." In a more minor incident that has also been cited in local media, a set of dolls representing world leaders at the November Group of 20 nations summit in Seoul included one of Ms. Gillard dressed in the native garb of Austria.

Ms. Gillard has solidified her popularity at home with her handling of a series of devastating weather events over the past four months. But foreign policy weakness could be a liability in a country that is accustomed to an outsize international role compared with its small population. Australia is a staunch military ally of the U.S., particularly in Afghanistan, where it has about 1,500 troops. Australian prime ministers have also played central roles in striking trade agreements with the U.S. and regional allies. 

"Prime ministers come from different walks of life," Ms. Gillard said Thursday. "You bring with you those experiences and your values and outlooks. Kevin Rudd came into politics after a long career as a diplomat, so he brought that experience with him." 

Discussions on Afghanistan will likely center on whether progress is being made in the assault on the Taliban. Australian defense officials have said this year is a pivotal one, and Ms. Gillard said last year she doesn't expect a drawdown of Australian troops until 2014. 

China complicates Australia's international policy. China's factories depend on the coal and iron ore from Australia's mines, and that demand is fueling the Pacific nation's growth. At the same time, China has ramped up military spending and become more assertive in the Asia-Pacific region, where it claims jurisdiction over large parts of the South China Sea. In response, Australia plans to spend as much as 275 billion Australian dollars (US$276 billion) over the next 20 years on updating its military with equipment including submarines, naval frigates and ships called air warfare destroyers, as well as the latest F-35 joint strike fighters. 

Australia also disagrees with China on exchange rates, with Canberra backing the U.S. position that the yuan is undervalued at the cost of the world's economy. 

"We are looking at these currency wars question," said Ms. Gillard. "The G20 needed to deal with this at the last meeting. We believe it's important that currencies do move to floating regimes. We understand that that takes time, but in order for us to have sustained and balanced growth in the world economy we do need to deal with currency questions." 

Reaching and sustaining a consensus on this issue won't be easy, Ms. Gillard said. "There is a lot of work to do and a lot of discussions to be had between nations as we build the strength of the global economy and balance sustained growth," she said.

 Corrections & Amplifications 

Julia Gillard is making her first visit to the U.S. as Australia's prime minister. An earlier version of this article incorrectly described Ms. Gillard's visit as a state visit, but Queen Elizabeth is Australia's head of state.

 Write to  Enda Curran at enda.curran@dowjones.com 