MUMBAI -- Warburg Pincus India Pvt. Ltd. has bought a stake in Diligent Power Pvt. Ltd. to enable the Dainik Bhaskar group company to accelerate its plans to construct power plants, the company said in a statement. 

Diligent Power didn't disclose the investment amount or the stake sold. The power company in the process of setting up power projects with a capacity to generate 6,400 megawatts. These power projects include a 1,200 MW coal-based thermal power plant in the central Indian state of Chhattisgarh and a 1,320 MW thermal power plant in the central Indian state of Madhya Pradesh.

"Diligent Power has planned significant long-term initiatives to capitalize on the huge potential presented by the sector," R K Gupta, chief executive of Diligent Power said in the statement. 

Avendus Capital advised Diligent Power. Amarchand and Mangaldas and Suresh A. Shroff were the legal advisers to Diligent Power and AZB and Partners were legal advisers to Warburg Pincus. KPMG India Pvt. Ltd. conducted the financial due diligence.

DB Power, in which Diligent Power has a majority stake, has signed accords with Chhattisgarh to build two thermal power plants of 1,200MW and 1,320MW capacity. State Bank of India and IDBI Bank Ltd are the lenders for the Chhattisgarh projects. DB Power also has signed a agreement in 2008 with Madhya Pradesh to build a power plant in that state.

"The company has placed orders to Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd and Larsen and Toubro Ltd for the 1,200MW power plant in Chhattisgarh and is in the process of placing orders for the second power plant," said Prason Pande, head of investor relations at Diligent Power. DB Power is also in the process of achieving financial closure, or commitments for funding, for its 1,320 MW thermal power plant in Madhya Pradesh, he said.

Private equity investors including 3i and New Silk Route have invested $75 million this year in Indian utility and energy companies including Ind-Barath Energy (Utkal) Ltd. and Kiran Energy Solar Power Pvt. Ltd, according to data from Dealogic, a data provider. Last year, private equity funds invested more than $787 million in companies including Avantha Power and Infrastructure Ltd., GVK Energy Ltd. and GMR Energy Ltd. 