Driving around in a new Chevrolet Volt, General Motors Co. Chief Executive  Daniel Akerson delighted in the dashboard's iPod-like display. It showed he had driven 461 miles with the mostly electric car and used only 1.2 gallons of gas. Back home, he plugged the car into an outlet to recharge its battery. But when asked where the gasoline engine on GM's hottest new vehicle was, he couldn't say.

See the General Motors vehicle that defined each decade.

Mr. Akerson isn't a "car guy." Call him GM's accidental CEO. The job "is not something I expected or sought," the former telecom executive says. "I'm not that special, but someone had to stand up."

The board of the fallen American industrial icon, faced in August with the departure of its CEO just before a filing for an initial public offering, had to pick a boss practically on the spot. After passing up internal candidates, directors turned to the one board colleague they felt capable of running a company scarred by financial trauma and majority-owned by the government.

GM's new CEO will be in the spotlight as the Detroit auto show opens Monday. Longer term, his performance will be a test of a breed of CEO the financial crisis spawned: the fresh-eyed outsider brought in to guide a federally bailed-out business. This hasn't always panned out so well. Outsiders hastily hired to run American International Group Inc. and Freddie Mac were gone in less than a year.

"It's an asset that I'm not a car guy," says Mr. Akerson, 62, a veteran of Nextel and MCI and most recently of buyout firm Carlyle Group. He points to the advantages of a newcomer perspective for an auto maker long criticized for hidebound ways. As for not knowing details of the Volt's new technology, he notes that "GM has a lot of smart people who do." 

Mr. Akerson brings to GM a focus on financial discipline and executive accountability, a skepticism of traditional procedures and a strong emphasis on marketing. He is trained in engineering, but not smitten with it. At a recent meeting with his executive team, he interrupted a technical discussion on a future vehicle. 

"See this can?" Mr. Akerson said, picking up his Diet Coke. "It's a consumer product. GM has to start acting like a consumer-driven, not engineering-driven, company. We sell a consumer product—our can just costs $30,000." 

His approach makes Mr. Akerson "exactly the CEO this company needs at this time," says Stephen Girsky, a vice chairman who represents a trust for United Auto Workers retirees on the board.

Others say the greater need is making cars the public wants. "Perfect marketing won't fix a bad car," cautions Robert Lutz, who as GM's product-development chief until May was behind almost all of its cars coming out now.

Mr. Akerson's moves so far suggest where he is taking the company. He killed a vehicle nearing production whose exterior didn't excite focus groups, even though they loved its interior. "It's like a pretty girl. If you don't like the outside, you won't get to know the inside," he says.

Mr. Akerson wants GM to go all-out to exploit products that give it a chance for marketing firepower—to "bet the company," as he puts it. That's what he once did at Nextel, when he made a big bet on a cellphone feature called "push to talk." 

He is emphasizing not just the Volt but also an older technology, the OnStar service for drivers in distress. He envisions making it an interactive network by which drivers could update their Facebook status or take requests from family members to run an errand. A methodical manager known for his low-key persona, Mr. Akerson avoids using the private elevator to his 39th-floor office, calling it "imperialistic." 

His path to GM began about two years ago. A former Naval Academy engineering student and ship officer (he ran the ship's power plant), he was at Carlyle in 2009 leading the global buyout unit. But he had followed GM's troubles closely, and, hoping to get on its board, spoke to a colleague who knew the Treasury Department's GM point person, Ron Bloom.

The colleague, David Marchick, described Mr. Akerson to the Treasury man as a "tough-as-nails, no-B.S. conservative Republican." To his surprise, Mr. Bloom responded: "He's perfect."

On the board, Mr. Akerson had a hand in ousting CEO Frederick "Fritz" Henderson in 2009 and in canceling a plan to sell GM's European division. 

He also made a remark that seemed to suggest he was out of touch with regular drivers. At a 2009 board meeting, as an executive pitched commercials describing GM vehicles' fuel efficiency, Mr. Akerson said, "Nobody cares about fuel economy. When it's empty, you fill it, period. Why are we advertising something that nobody cares about?"

Asked about this today, Mr. Akerson says drivers know the fuel economy of whatever car they choose, and his focus is to herald quality improvements.

In early August, as GM prepared for its post-bankruptcy IPO, the board sought a multiyear commitment from its then-CEO and chairman, Edward E. Whitacre Jr. Instead, Mr. Whitacre, who had chafed at government control of GM, said he would step down. 

The board wasn't ready to elevate any of its executives. An outside search could take months. Mr. Akerson "was the only logical choice given the time frame and approaching IPO," says a fellow director, David Bonderman, adding: "We had seen enough from Dan to know that he wouldn't stand for GM's bureaucracy."

Leaving Carlyle would mean forfeiting at least $100 million in future pay, says an executive there. Mr. Akerson's sister, Sue Burgess, says she told him, "Why take a harder job for less money?"

Part of the answer was that he considers GM critical to the U.S. economy. He describes the job as a "service for my country."

Treasury officials at first found his understated presence unimpressive. But they liked his passion and discipline. He told them that when he runs a company, he memorizes the business plan—including all the figures on profit, loss, margin, risk—so executives can't slide things by him or obscure problems.

Mr. Akerson tries to make sure that for every business risk faced, there's one person responsible for monitoring it. At a recent Monday executive-committee meeting at GM, he asked a manager who was listing risks to say who "owned" each one. 

His first test as CEO, the November IPO, was a success, oversubscribed. The government's stake is now 26.5%, down from 61%. The Treasury's Mr. Bloom says, "I never get the impression that he is trying to rush us out the door, but that he will facilitate us exiting as soon as we want to."

Mr. Akerson's heavy stress on marketing has caused differences with his division heads. One Saturday, he emailed them to say he was creating a chief marketing officer position and intended to fill it with GM North America's marketing manager.

In a meeting the next Monday, Mr. Akerson noted that the head of GM North America, Mark Reuss, hadn't answered the email, and asked for his response. "You are taking one of my best," Mr. Reuss said, "and I don't have the depth to fill his role." 

Later, Mr. Akerson asked Mr. Reuss, the 47-year-old son of a former GM president, for his thoughts on an ad campaign. Said Mr. Reuss: "It's great, but now we've got to get back to launching cars." 

Despite their different approaches, the two get along well. Mr. Akerson calls Mr. Reuss "the heart of GM." Mr. Reuss says he has "Dan moments" when his new boss "helps me on how to align the company to the customer." 

In December, Mr. Akerson led a review of GM's product portfolio and was unhappy there was such a focus on what works in North America. 

"One of three people on this planet lives in China or India—we need cars for them," he said. He ordered a cheaper car for China's rural provinces.

When he saw that several promising vehicles wouldn't be ready until 2014, he said, "During World War II, GM produced tanks and equipment within four years. Why should it take four years to put a car out?"

The CEO liked some new Corvette styling but noted that it wouldn't be available until 2014. "If you make this happen by 2013, I will make you a vice president," he told a design director. Reviewing engine plans, Mr. Akerson stopped managers in mid-presentation. "Why do we have 18 types of engines? We have only four brands," he said.

"Let me help you understand," replied Tom Stephens, the global product chief, who described GM's tradition of making a variety of engines, including one the 62-year-old Mr. Stephens himself designed in his 42 years at the company.

"We have to break out of the old way of thinking around here," Mr. Akerson said. He asked executives to use an "outside benchmark"—Toyota's number of engines—and "take out complexity and save money" by reducing the number of engines. Mr. Stephens recently said GM will offer only a dozen by next year.

The new CEO can be persuaded. A couple of months ago, he considered canceling plans for a plug-in-hybrid Cadillac. Others urged him to visit the design studio, and he later agreed to continue production.

With the Volt, he wants "more, faster," because "it's a place where Dan believes we have a lead," says Mr. Girsky.

In one meeting, when Mr. Akerson asked executives how many more of the $41,000 Volts they could sell, the answer he got from the heads of U.S. sales and Chevy sales was that a lower price would help. Mr. Akerson turned to the engineers and asked, "How fast can you take $10,000 out of the cost?"

He asked for some possible answers and added he didn't want to wait for a "slick presentation." Days later, executives gathered in an office and taped up charts describing options to cut the cost.

Mr. Akerson's style—earnest and often telling stories from his days in the Navy—contrasts with that of the chief financial officer,  Chris Liddell, a onetime New Zealand rugby star with a debonair manner.

Mr. Liddell came to GM from Microsoft Corp. a year ago, partly for a shot at the CEO spot, which he was considered for but didn't get. Though some executives say they detect tension between the two, Messrs. Akerson and Liddell say they have a good working relationship despite their different styles. 

Mr. Akerson acknowledges facing a steep learning curve: "It's like studying for finals every night."

In a December speech praising the Volt, he called Toyota's unusually styled Prius hybrid a "geek-mobile" that "I wouldn't be caught dead in." The remark drew sharp criticism from bloggers, which Mr. Akerson says took him by surprise.

At a plant tour in Toledo, Ohio, last month, he rejected a staged review and spent four hours on the factory floor, where workers taught him the fine points of making transmissions. They had him put in a part the wrong way, causing a warning to flash. Mr. Akerson threw up his hands.

Facing labor negotiations this year, Mr. Akerson is trying to improve union relations. He invited UAW President  Bob King to join GM officials at the New York Stock Exchange the day of the IPO. 

Mr. Akerson is even acting a little like a car salesman. When General Electric Co. expressed interest in Volts for a "greener" fleet, he sent one for GE Chief Executive Jeffrey Immelt to try; GE later placed an order for 12,000 Volts over three years. 

In coming months, he is expected to take steps to improve car quality and shake up money-losing European operations. His goals include "turning this company into a customer-driven organization." GM is working to rebuild a vehicle lineup neglected when money was lacking.

In doing that, "because Dan doesn't have 40 years in the car business, he needs to form a valuable link with the car guys," say Mr. Lutz, the longtime product expert. He adds that this has some advantages: "Because he hasn't been at GM for 40 years, he hasn't picked up all its bad habits and baggage." 

 Write to  Monica Langley at monica.langley@wsj.com and Sharon Terlep at sharon.terlep@wsj.com 