World leaders cheered the U.S. announcement that terrorist leader Osama bin Laden had been killed as a victory for the global effort against terrorism, even as they took steps to prepare for possible retaliatory strikes.

  Related article  |  Live updates  




‘We will be relentless in defense of our citizens and our friends and allies. We will be true to the values that make us who we are. And on nights like this one, we can say to those families who have lost loved ones to al Qaeda's terror: Justice has been done.’



‘I hope that the death of Osama bin Laden will mean the end of terrorism.’



‘We continue to face a complex and evolving terrorist threat, and it is important that we remain vigilant in our efforts to confront and defeat the terrorist enemy and protect the American people. ’



‘This momentous achievement marks a victory for America, for people who seek peace around the world, and for all those who lost loved ones on September 11, 2001.’



‘I congratulate the president, the national security team and the members of our armed forces on bringing Osama bin Laden to justice after more than a decade of murderous al-Qaeda attacks." ’



‘As we approach the 10th anniversary of the 9/11 attacks, I hope that today's action provides some comfort to the 9/11 families who lost loved ones in the devastating attacks on our shores.’



‘As we remember those who were killed on that dark day in September and their families, we also reaffirm our resolve to defeat the terrorist forces that killed them and thousands of others across the globe. ’



‘His death makes the world a safer place and shows that such crimes do not remain unpunished’



‘Personally, I am very much relieved by the news that justice has been done to such a mastermind of international terrorism.’



‘I know that nothing can make up for the loss of the victims or fill the voids they left, but I hope their families can now find some comfort in the fact that justice has been served.’



‘Osama bin Laden was one of the most brutal terrorists in the world. He had the lives of thousands of innocent people on his conscience.’



‘We can only rejoice about what happened last night.’



‘This is a resounding victory for justice, for freedom, and for the shared values of all democratic countries fighting shoulder to shoulder with determination against terror.’



‘It is a great success that he has been found and will no longer be able to pursue his campaign of global terror. This is a time to remember all those murdered by Osama Bin Laden, and all those who lost loved ones.’



‘The world must continue to consistently and courageously raise its collective voice against religious hatred, political intolerance, and terrorism of all kinds. We continue to take all relevant precautions and steps to ensure the safety of our people.’



‘The death of Osama bin Laden is not the end of al Qaeda. That is why here in Australia we will continue to do what we need to do to keep the nation as safe as we can from threats of terrorism.’
