BANGALORE – Hindustan Unilever Monday reported a 2.1% drop in fourth-quarter net profit but far exceeded market expectations thanks to one-time gains, pushing its shares higher. 

The  Unilever PLC unit maintained strong sales volume growth at its local consumer goods business. However, its bottom line didn't benefit much from the robust demand as high raw material costs ate into its operating margin and the comparable quarter last year included a bigger one-time gain. 

Increased competition is leading most Indian consumer goods makers to chase volume growth at the cost of profitability even though input costs have risen sharply. And analysts say companies such as Hindustan Unilever don't have much space to raise product prices due to stiff competition. 

"We'll ensure that our brands remain competitive in the market place and are cost competitive as well," the company's chief executive Nitin Paranjpe said at a news conference, referring to commodity cost volatility and the intense competition the company is facing. 

Profit for the quarter through March fell to 5.69 billion rupees ($127.2 million) from 5.81 billion rupees a year earlier, India's largest consumer goods maker by sales said in a statement. That beat the 4.64 billion rupees average of estimates in a poll of 11 analysts. 

Sales grew 14% to 48.99 billion rupees from 43.16 billion rupees, it said. 

Shares of Hindustan Unilever jumped as much as 4.8% before closing 3.6% higher at 284.45 rupees in a flat Mumbai market. 

The company said it recorded one-time gains--including profit on sale of properties--of 836.0 million rupees during the fourth quarter, compared with 1.43 billion rupees a year earlier. 

It posted a 14% expansion in sales volume at its local consumer goods business, signaling that the company has been able to sustain demand for its products such as soap bars and detergent packs despite an inflationary environment. In the year-earlier quarter, it had reported an 11% expansion in sales volume at its local consumer goods business. 

Hindustan Unilever raised prices of some products in the quarter, but that wasn't enough to fully offset the increase in raw material costs. 

The company said its margin on profit before interest and tax in the fourth quarter shrank 0.60 percentage point from a year earlier to 13.0% on account of higher input costs. 

The company is vulnerable to commodity cost fluctuations and had to contend with high prices of soda ash and palm oil--key raw materials used in its core categories of soaps, detergents and shampoos. 

The cost of goods sold went up by 2.9 percentage points as input cost inflation remained high and volatile driven by crude and palm oil prices, the company said. 

Total costs rose 14% to 43.76 billion rupees from 38.35 billion rupees, while raw material costs increased 19% to 21.05 billion rupees.

"In a scenario of increasing commodity inflation, Hindustan Unilever has been able to continue with a competitive pricing policy that has helped it regain market share and grow its sales volume," said Himani Singh, consumer goods analyst at Mumbai-based brokerage Elara Capital. 

Hindustan Unilever, which spends heavily on advertising to ensure top-of-the-mind recall for its brands, said advertising and promotion expenses in the quarter were 6.23 billion rupees, or about 13% of sales. 

The company also said that it's going to separate its consumer goods export business, including specific export-related manufacturing units, into a wholly owned subsidiary called Unilever India Exports Ltd. The unit is being set up to fully exploit export opportunities and to provide necessary focus, flexibility and speed to the business, the company said in a statement to the stock exchanges. 

Elara's Ms. Singh said the separation of the export business is a positive move as the operating margin of the business was lower than overall margins. 

Exports account for about 5%-6% of Hindustan Unilever's consolidated sales, said Srini Srinivasan, vice president of treasury, mergers and acquisitions and investor relations. 

 Write to  Rumman Ahmed at rumman.ahmed@dowjones.com 