BERLIN—Fears of a nuclear disaster in Japan have revived Germans' angst about atomic energy two weeks ahead of important regional elections, prompting Chancellor Angela Merkel to suspend her contested plan to extend the life of Germany's nuclear reactors. 

Ms. Merkel said Monday her government would hold a three-month safety review of Germany's 17 nuclear reactors while weighing options for drawing more energy from alternative sources. 

The retreat is a setback for Ms. Merkel, whose conservative-led government pushed through the extension of nuclear power last fall against furious resistance from the left-leaning opposition. The extension overturned previous German administrations' pledge to phase out nuclear power by 2021, a promise that reflected widespread popular concerns in Germany, Europe's biggest economy, about the safety of nuclear energy. 

"It's important to know that the nuclear plants in Germany are safe," Ms. Merkel said. But Ms. Merkel added that the review doesn't mean her government will shorten the plants' lives. 

Analysts and the political opposition said Ms. Merkel was mainly trying to neutralize a divisive issue ahead of elections in crucial German states this month. 

The accidents at Japan's Fukushima plant are now prompting words of caution by governments around the world. In the U.S., Sen. Joe Lieberman (I., Conn.) and Rep. Ed Markey (D., Mass.) were among those calling for a moratorium on any new nuclear-power projects. Switzerland on Monday suspended the approval process for three nuclear-power stations so standards could be reviewed and the lessons of the Japan crisis absorbed. And the European Union called for a meeting on Tuesday of nuclear safety officials and plant operators to assess Europe's preparedness in case of an emergency.

The incident in Japan has emboldened Germans who have argued that the technology is unacceptably dangerous. "The risks of atomic energy are indefensible, and we need to drop it as soon as possible," Sigmar Gabriel, leader of the opposition Social Democrats, told magazine Der Spiegel at the weekend. 

Even Ms. Merkel doesn't want to keep nuclear power for good. The agreement her government struck with German energy utilities last fall allows them to keep their nuclear reactors running for an average of 12 years longer than the earlier phase-out plan envisaged. 

Ms. Merkel argues Germany needs nuclear power until the day it can develop more alternative energy sources. "It's also crucial that we don't discontinue the peaceful use of nuclear power as a bridge technology," she reiterated on Monday. 

Ms. Merkel said the scale of the nuclear crisis even in a developed nation like Japan obliged Germany to review its own nuclear industry, even though Germany is unlikely ever to suffer an earthquake as big as the one that hit Japan on Friday. 

Shares of Germany's largest energy companies dropped off sharply after Ms. Merkel's statement, with E.ON AG trading down 5.5% at €45.39 and RWE AG down 6.5% at €21.57. The government's plan to extend the life of nuclear reactors was a boon to Germany's big energy companies, and its suspension creates doubts about a lucrative revenue stream. 



German Environment Minister Norbert Röttgen said Monday that the three-month suspension would likely lead to the temporary shutdown of one nuclear plant operated by German utility EnBW AG. Should the suspension continue, analysts said it could force another reactor owned by RWE offline this year, at least temporarily. 

Japan's nuclear crisis comes at a politically inopportune moment for Ms. Merkel, whose center-right coalition faces three close elections this month in states that could tilt the balance of national power. Germany's 16 states are represented in its upper house of parliament. 

The most important election is on March 27 in Baden-Württemberg, an affluent southwestern state that boasts the headquarters of industrial giants such as Daimler AG, four nuclear reactors, and more than five decades of conservative rule. 

That reign is under threat. A poll released March 11 by the Forsa public-opinion institute showed support in Baden-Wurttemberg (umlaut over the u) for the chancellor's center-right coalition at 45%, one point behind its center-left rivals.

Japan's crisis has put nuclear energy center-stage in the German region's election campaign. Some 60,000 people took part in anti-nuclear-power demonstrations around the state on Saturday. Germany is home to some of Europe's most active environmentalists, including supporters of a resurgent Green Party, the country's staunchest opponent of nuclear power. 

But giving up nuclear power also poses a challenge for Germany's high environmental ambitions, which include some of the world's toughest targets for reducing greenhouse-gas emissions. Nuclear reactors provide nearly a quarter of Germany's electricity, and analysts say its loss would oblige the country to buy more natural gas from Russia — or to import more electricity from neighbors such as France, which rely on nuclear power. "Abandoning German nuclear plants and buying atomic energy from other countries can and will not be our response," Ms. Merkel said. 

—Jan Hromadko and Vanessa Fuhrmans contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Patrick McGroarty at patrick.mcgroarty@dowjones.com 