TUNIS, Tunisia—Thousands of jubilant supporters of Tunisia's leading Islamic party, Ennahdha, packed the capital's airport on Sunday to welcome their leader back to the country after two decades in exile. 



The raucous welcome for Rachid Ghannouchi worried some Tunisians, who fear the newly resurgent party could take advantage of the fragile political situation to strengthen its hand in coming elections and push back against the country's secular laws.

A spokesman for Ennahdha had said Mr. Ghannouchi's return to Tunisia wouldn't be "triumphalist," but at Tunis airport, an ecstatic crowd of supporters chanted slogans, waved flags and sang the national anthem in their first show of strength since the start of the demonstrations that ousted autocratic former President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali.

"There is no god but God! We're a Muslim people and we won't surrender!" they cried as Mr. Ghannouchi emerged in the arrivals hall. 

Ennahdha, or "the renaissance" in Arabic, was once considered Tunisia's mightiest opposition force, but years of persecution by the regime destroyed its organization and pushed its members underground. 

A succession of rallies and demonstrations, in Egypt, Jordan, Yemen and Algeria have been inspired directly by the popular outpouring of anger that toppled Tunisian President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali. See how these uprising progressed.

During the street protests that brought an end to Mr. Ben Ali's 23-year rule, the Ennahdha party and its supporters were largely absent. But now they appear determined to re-emerge as a political force and compete in promised elections.

With the country's political elite still deadlocked in disagreement between the interim government and opposition parties, Ennahdha is demanding seats on a committee that will decide how and when elections take place.

Some liberal Tunisians worry that the party's big showing at the airport is evidence the Islamic movement is gaining strength, and that allowing it a say on political reform will bolster its chances at the ballot box. However, the main secular opposition groups, including the country's powerful union movement, have agreed to work with Ennahdha in preparing for the coming poll.

"The political reform committee has the power to draw the political map of Tunisia for tomorrow," said Hamadi Jebali, a senior Ennahdha official, in an interview. "The composition of these committees is even more important than the composition of the cabinet."

While the political disagreements continue, normal life has returned to much of the country. However, small groups of hard-core demonstrators continue to protest the presence of former ruling party members in the interim government.

On Friday their sit-in outside the prime minister's office was attacked by police, raising fears among some human-rights workers that the security forces who enforced Mr. Ben Ali's rule were returning to the violent tactics of the past.

On Saturday, Tunisia's new central bank governor criticized ratings agencies for lowering the nation's credit rating as newly appointed government leaders race to stabilize the nation after its uprising. 

"They downgraded in a rush. This is not acceptable," Mustapha Kamel Nabli told an audience at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, on Saturday. "Were they sleeping when corruption was endemic?"

On Wednesday, Moody's Investors Service Inc. downgraded Tunisia's sovereign rating by one notch and changed the country's outlook to negative from stable, citing political instability caused by the toppling of the government.

Mr. Nabli and two other new ministers made an appearance at the forum to ask world leaders to give the nation some time. 

"The fact that I'm here today should be an indication to you that this is under control on the economic side," said Mr. Nabli, a World Bank official from Washington who has been in his new job less than ten days. 

He appealed to governments and institutions to do no harm. "Don't disrupt trade and investment flows. The country is back to work," he said. 

Diplomats and analysts paint Ennahdha leader Mr. Ghannouchi as a moderate figure who would rather pursue the religious-inspired electoral politics of Turkey's ruling AK Party than the direct action of Egypt's Muslim Brotherhood.

Mr. Ghannouchi insists he won't run for office himself, but will instead back younger members of his party to stand for seats in parliament. 

However, supporters of rival opposition groups say they fear his avowed commitment to democracy and statements in support of women's rights mask a more extreme agenda secretly held by his party's rank and file.

They point to the party's reluctance to engage in debate on specific policies about the role of Islamic law or the teaching of religion in schools.

Ennahdha spokesmen commonly talk about the right to sport religious-style beards or wear headscarves in government offices, and the need to end current restrictions on mosque opening times. But they haven't yet engaged on more substantive questions about the role of Islam in politics, leaving people unsure whether they simply want a more religious tone in public debate or are really seeking more radical changes such as basing the constitution on the Quran.

"Ennahdha must respect other parties and not try to steal the people's revolution," said Abdulrazzak Kilani, head of a lawyers' syndicate that played a lead role in the uprising.

But a group of young women in headscarves, who were near the front of the crush to greet Mr. Ghannouchi, said they didn't seek to force Tunisians to wear different clothes or obey religious laws.

Rahma Ajmi, a 23-year-old engineering student, said she started supporting the movement four years ago against the wishes of her family because she felt Ennahdha gave her an opportunity to express her identity as a Muslim woman.

Standing next to her was Jawhara Ettiss, a 25-year-old university English teacher who had been barred from wearing a headscarf at work until the revolution. "Ennahdha has nothing against what women in Tunisia have achieved," she said. "We just want the right to express our religion."

—Tracy Corrigan contributed to this article.