These are good times for people in the market for cars and trucks for $30,000 or less. But for people who like expensive, European luxury models, things aren't quite as rosy.

That's one of the main messages from the 2011 Consumer Reports Annual Auto Issue released this week.

In mainstream segments, such as family sedans, consumers "safe" choices are no longer limited to Honda Motor Co. or Toyota Motor Corp. In fact, a dozen of what Consumer Reports calls family sedans—cars priced at around $30,000—scored well enough in the magazine's surveys to earn recommendations. Best among them in reliability: The Ford Fusion. 

Throw in "entry level" family sedans—cars that start at about $20,000—and you'd have 20 "recommended" cars to choose from in this bread-and-butter segment.

Another sign of healthy competition: Eight manufacturers landed cars among the magazine's "top picks" in 10 different vehicle categories, including Hyundai, Volkswagen, Nissan, Kia, Ford, Toyota, Infiniti and Chevrolet. In 2006, there were just five manufacturers in that group.

Some of the new midsize cars are so fuel efficient, they beat some smaller cars. The midsize Hyundai Sonata, rated at 27 miles per gallon in the magazine's testing, gets better fuel economy than the compact Chevrolet Cruze. Hyundai grabbed the top pick in the small-car class, beating out longtime benchmarks the Honda Civic and Toyota Corolla. 

For luxury car buyers, however, the picture is murkier.

"The Europeans aren't doing too well," says  David Champion, head of automotive testing for Consumer Reports. Mercedes-Benz and BMW placed 10th and 11th in the magazine's ranking of 13 major auto makers.

Where European brands are falling down is reliability, Mr. Champion says. Many of the problems have to do with electronics and controls drivers find difficult to operate easily.

"When was the last time you bought consumer electronics made in Germany?" he says.

Consumer Reports released its top picks for 2011, by category:

 Budget car: Honda Fit ($16,020 to $16,730)

 Small car: Hundai Elantra ($18,445) 

 Family sedan: Nissan Altima ($23,970 to $30,335)

 Green car: Toyota Prius ($26,750) 

 Small SUV: Toyota RAV4 ($25,405 to $31,435)

 Family SUV: Kia Sorento ($26,590 to $32,390) 

 Sporty car: Ford Mustang ($28,880 to $43,880) 

 Family hauler: Toyota Sienna ($35,810 to $38,201) Sports sedan: Infiniti G37 ($37,225) 

 Pickup truck: Chevrolet Avalanche ($47,435)

Luxury sport utility vehicles are a big Achilles' heel for European makes. Of 23 luxury SUVs the magazine rated, only nine earned recommendations. The only European model to get a recommended rating was the Mercedes ML350, which starts at about $49,000. (Other recommended models came from Lexus, Acura, Buick, Lincoln and Infiniti.)

European luxury car makers say they take these complaints seriously—even though sales during the past year have been strong enough to indicate that luxury car buyers aren't too concerned. 

"We endeavor on an ongoing basis to make our vehicles as reliable as possible," says BMW spokesman  Dave Buchko. "I don't think our engineers take it lightly."

Mercedes spokeswoman  Donna Boland says Mercedes engineers contacted Consumer Reports last year to discuss the magazine's findings because they seemed at odds with the manufacturer's own data and customer feedback.

"We are in the top 10 of every major syndicated study that looks at quality and customer satisfaction," she said. "We haven't seen the Consumer Reports data. We'd have to do a deep dive to understand why it's not tracking with mainstream research."

The best European sedans are remarkable machines with a combination of power and safety features that a mass-market car like a Hyundai Sonata still can't match. Still, developing a reputation for nagging maintenance problems is bad for business with so many upstarts gunning for a piece of the action. As if to drive that message home, Consumer Reports declared the new Hyundai Genesis, which starts at about $44,000, the "best value luxury sedan," and recommended it, while withholding recommendations from better established luxury names such as the BMW 750, Audi A6, Jaguar XF and Cadillac CTS.

Consumer Reports, with seven million print and online subscribers, remains an influential source of information for new-car buyers. To create its rankings, professional testers evaluate 2011 models, and their findings are combined with data sifted from 1.3 million vehicle histories submitted by the magazine's readers.

 Write to  Joseph B. White at joseph.white@wsj.com 