By this late date in the era of Ali G and "Punk'd," you would think that public figures would be smart enough to avoid saying things on tape that are going to come back to haunt them. Especially when dining with visitors presenting themselves as well-heeled affiliates of the Muslim Brotherhood. 

But no, Ron Schiller, president of the National Public Radio Foundation, got caught on tape saying that Tea Party types were a bunch of xenophobic racists and NPR would be better off without federal funding. As soon as the tape aired, he resigned. NPR chief executive Vivian Schiller—no relation to Ron—soon followed. 

If you think that's the end of it, think again. Last week, tricked by a crew from "The Daily Show" into believing that a group of visitors was from the Finnish philanthropic group the Daughters of Helsinki, Glenn Beck admitted that he adores Bill Moyers and thinks that "All Things Considered" makes his own show sound like "some rinky-dink college radio station from Paducah."

"I'm only telling you this because you're Finnish philanthropists," said Mr. Beck, "but the high point of my day is when 'Fresh Air' comes on. Terry Gross is so good she makes me weep. I can only dream of having those kinds of chops."

Meanwhile, Major League Baseball Commissioner Bud Selig stirred up a hornet's nest during an interview with three young-looking coeds masquerading as blind Girl Scouts when he seemed a bit hazy on the sport's organization. "Are you sure there's a baseball team in Kansas City?" he said on tape. "Absolutely sure? I know there's one in Milwaukee, but Kansas City? Kansas City? What next? San Diego?" Asked to explain the infield-fly rule, Mr. Selig replied: "No idea. Haven't a clue. Probably some stupid thing Steinbrenner dreamed up."

Mr. Selig's gaffe comes on the heels of National Hockey League Commissioner Gary Bettman's admission, caught on tape, that ice hockey sucks.

"It's all brawls and concussions, and the fans are morons, and the refs are out-of-shape slobs, and the arenas stink, and the TV ratings are nonexistent, and the uniforms look like pajamas, and I wish I'd never left my job with the NBA," said Mr. Bettman. "Where did you guys say you were from? Albanian talk radio?"

Other stunning revelations are pouring in all the time. Two Garth Brooks fans posing as Amish hip-hop aficionados got Eminem to admit on tape that he loves opera. "I crank up 'I Vespri Siciliani' and the prelude to Act I of 'Tristan and Isolde' anytime the ladies let me," Mr. Eminem reports. "Let me give a shout out to my dawg Giuseppe Verdi; bro', you trippin'."

Want more? Rachel Maddow caught on tape fuming that she wasn't offered Paula Abdul's job on "American Idol." Newt Gingrich admitting that his presidential aspirations would have been helped if he'd changed his name to "something kewl and happening like Trent or DeSean." Bono disclosing that "Spider-Man: Turn Off the Dark" will probably open "sometime late in the spring of 2024. As soon as the kid playing Peter Parker gets back from Lourdes." Yet another videotape captures Venezuelan petro-tyrant Hugo Chavez admitting that he has downsized his security unit from a fleet of jet-black SUVs to a fleet of electric cars. 

"I like the Volt," says Mr. Chavez. "It's easier to get around Caracas in a Volt than a Range Rover. It would help if we had electricity in this country."

The last and most stunning videotape of all was put on YouTube by a conservative activist posing as a left-leaning caddy at Martha's Vineyard last summer. It captures President Barack Obama, a huge fan of the Chicago White Sox and their working-class fan base, dissing fans of the Chicago Cubs.

"I hate those North Side Yuppies," Mr. Obama, clad in shorts, a Shoeless Joe Jackson T-shirt and black socks, gripes to companions. "I hate their lovable loser image, I hate their stadium, I hate their girly-man uniforms and I hate the word 'Cubbie.' I hope they lose for the next 400 years. By that time we'll have tackled Medicare."