In 2010, a growing number of companies offering actively managed mutual funds finally began to get creative in their efforts to halt the erosion of their business caused by low-cost, index-tracking exchange-traded funds.

Read the complete  Quarterly Investing in Funds report .

Their blueprint: "alternative strategy" funds that try to do more with the armies of managers and analysts working for the traditional fund companies.

The alternative funds are actively managed, too, but they aim to invest and perform differently from funds that hold standard investments like stocks or bonds or cash. Alternative funds may hold uncommon assets or use particular strategies that historically haven't moved in lock step with plain-vanilla investments. For instance, many of the alternative stock funds buy some shares in hopes they will rise, while also placing bets that other shares will fall in price.

There are now 208 funds in Morningstar's broad grouping of alternative funds, up from 169 at the end of 2009. 

Investors seem to like the idea. The funds have taken in more than $22 billion in the past year, Morningstar says.

One big reason the fund companies like alternative funds: They can charge much higher fees than they do for traditional funds because of the more complicated strategies, which can include sophisticated derivatives. The average management fee on alternative stock funds is 1.04%, compared with 0.62% on actively managed funds holding big-company U.S. stocks, according to Morningstar.

While it's easy to be cynical about motivations, some of these funds hold the promise of providing portfolio diversification in a way that isn't easily obtained elsewhere for small investors.

One example is the new  Loomis Sayles Absolute Strategies, a go-anywhere bond fund that offers investors potential profits even if interest rates rise.

Loomis Sayles brings to the table veteran bond-fund managers, perhaps the best known being Dan Fuss, manager on  Loomis Sayles Bond. Mr. Fuss isn't involved in managing the new fund, but one of his co-managers, Matthew Eagan, is.

Mr. Eagan says the competitive dynamic in the fund industry played a role in Loomis rolling out the new fund. "Times have changed," Mr. Eagan says. "For firms to stay competitive and earn their fees, they have to provide performance that can't easily be replicated."

But mainly, he says, Loomis Sayles had an eye to the dynamics in the bond market. "When you look back over the last 20 or 30 years, interest rates have been heading down and fixed-income investors could do well by just sticking their money…in a core bond fund."

Now, with short-term interest rates essentially at zero, "we think it's going to be very challenging to generate returns" in a traditional bond fund.

To provide investors with profits when interest rates rise—no easy feat in the bond market—the new Loomis Sayles fund is using different kinds of derivatives. Mr. Eagan says the firm has spent three years building up a team that can monitor the handling of bond derivatives. The fund can also make bets on the currency markets.

"It's an all-weather fund," Mr. Eagan says.

Of course, funds like the new Loomis Sayles fund will bring with them new risks that may not be immediately obvious. But if the payoff is helping investors build better investment strategies, it's a direction worth pursuing.

—Send questions and comments to Mr. Lauricella at tom.lauricella@wsj.com.