MIAMI—Two weeks after space shuttle Endeavour's launch was postponed due to electrical problems, the orbiter appears ready to blast off on Monday morning, with Rep. Gabrielle Giffords once again expected to watch.

The Arizona congresswoman, who is recovering from an assassination attempt in January, will return to the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, staff members say, though they wouldn't disclose her exact travel plans. Her husband, Mark Kelly, is commanding Endeavour's mission.

Ms. Giffords flew to the space center for the previously scheduled liftoff on Apr. 29—an event that drew intense interest because of her attendance and that of President Barack Obama and his family.

Yet the mission—the next-to-last for the shuttle program—was scrubbed hours before takeoff, prompting Ms. Giffords to return to Houston for rehabilitation. On that trip, Ms. Giffords traveled with two nurses and climbed the stairs to the plane without assistance, according to Mark Kimble, a spokesman for her congressional office.

Once she was back in Houston, she and Mr. Kelly dined at an Italian restaurant owned by friends.

"She very much enjoyed the trip, and she is looking forward to doing it again," said Mr. Kimble.

Her ability to make a second journey so soon is the latest sign that she is continuing to recover at a pace that her doctors have called remarkable.

Ms. Giffords plans to watch the launch in private, out of view of media and the public.

Endeavour's previously scheduled launch was canceled because of a short circuit in a switch box in the shuttle's engine compartment. Technicians at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration were unable to nail down the exact cause of the problem. But they replaced the switch box and wiring, and so far, the equipment is functioning properly, NASA says.

At a press briefing on Friday, NASA weather officer Kathy Winters said there was a 70% chance of favorable weather at launch time, which is set for 8:56 a.m. Monday. Her main concern was the potential for gusty cross-winds and low clouds.

As part of Endeavour's planned 16-day mission to the International Space Station, the six-man crew will deliver a $2 billion particle physics detector and conduct four space walks—the final ones of the shuttle program.

In what would be a first, a Russian Soyuz capsule is scheduled to depart the space station for Earth while the shuttle is docked there.

Though the previous launch attempt was expected to draw as many as 700,000 spectators, the crowds may only be half as large this time, said Rob Varley, executive director of the Space Coast Office of Tourism. One reason he cited: the last blastoff time was on a Friday afternoon, which is far more appealing than a Monday morning.

In addition, "it was a bigger deal when the president was coming," said Laurilee Thompson, co-owner of Dixie Crossroads restaurant in Titusville, a popular seafood spot for locals and tourists.

She doesn't expect to get nearly as much traffic on launch day this time. "There is definitely less buzz," she said, "but it's still a big deal."

—Daniel Gilbert contributed to this article

 Write to  Arian Campo-Flores at arian.campo-flores@dowjones.com 