  (See Corrections & Amplifications item below.)  

  Robert Stempel was chairman of General Motors Corp. during the big auto maker's dark days in the early 1990s, when the company hemorrhaged billions of dollars, closed plants and gave up market share to imports.

Mr. Stempel, who died Saturday at age 77, was originally an automotive engineer, a rare "car guy" in a boardroom populated by experts in finance and management. His appointment as chairman in 1990 was greeted with optimism by GM's rank and file, eager to be led by someone who understood cars instead of balance sheets. But his leadership coincided with a deep recession that hurt sales, and Mr. Stempel was slow to make changes in production and staffing. He was ousted in a rancorous boardroom coup after two years in which GM racked up nearly $7 billion in losses.

As a young engineer, Mr. Stempel helped oversee GM's pioneering front-wheel-drive car, the Toronado. Later, he led the development of the antipollution catalytic converter, which GM installed across its entire fleet in 1975, beating the rest of the car industry to comply with an environmental mandate.

Roger Smith, GM's chairman in the 1980s, made Mr. Stempel his chief lieutenant. As president of GM, Mr. Stempel oversaw development of electronic ignition systems and the Sunraycer, an innovative solar-powered car that won the first World Solar Challenge race, in 1987 in Australia. After he became chairman, Mr. Stempel backed an early version of the electric car and experiments with alternative fuels.

Yet his forward-looking projects couldn't counteract GM's image as a stodgy manufacturer of what Money magazine once called "fuel-thirsty luxobarges." Nor did they stanch GM's loss of market share, to 35% of the domestic automobile market in 1992, down from 47% in the early 1980s.

A native of Trenton, N.J., and the son of a banker, Mr. Stempel fixed cars in a Bloomfield, N.J., garage as a teenager and collected an armload of drag-racing trophies. He studied engineering at Worcester Polytechnic Institute and worked briefly for the Army Corps of Engineers before landing at Oldsmobile, a GM division, in 1958. His first job was designing wheels.

His success with the Toronado and the catalytic converter launched Mr. Stempel as an executive. Later, he was credited with turning around GM's European Opel unit and oversaw the construction of new plants in low-wage Spain. He then was put in charge of GM's Chevrolet.

While climbing the corporate ladder, Mr. Stempel acquired a reputation as a nice guy who put engineering first. He looked every inch the engineer, stuffing his gangly frame into off-the-rack suits and sporting a haircut that looked home-brewed. He earned an M.B.A. in night school.

GM executives liked his engineer's knowledge and his swagger—he once gave a detailed presentation about 17 GM car models without consulting notes. He liked high-powered motorcycles, had a collection of old cars he repaired himself, and hung out with race driver A.J. Foyt. Even the United Auto Workers union leaders said nice things about him.

As chairman, Mr. Stempel couldn't satisfy GM's board, which demanded layoffs, plant closings, management shake-ups and new car designs. He counseled patience until the recession ended. In the end, he resigned as relations with the board deteriorated.

After leaving GM, Mr. Stempel teamed with ex-Chrysler Chairman Lee Iaccoca to work on prototypes for electric cars, as well as electric bicycles and scooters.

Mr. Stempel came to national notice in 1975 when his 13-year-old son, Timothy, was kidnapped at gunpoint while skateboarding outside the family's home in a Detroit suburb. He was returned unharmed after payment of $150,000 ransom. Two men pleaded guilty and were sent to prison in the crime, which Mr. Stempel told the Associated Press at the time was "strictly random" and unrelated to his position as a GM executive.

 Write to  Stephen Miller at stephen.miller@wsj.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications:  In the photo accompanying this story, GM Chairman Robert Stempel appears with a 1992 Cadillac Seville prototype. An earlier version of this article incorrectly paired that caption with a photo of Mr. Stempel with a Chevrolet Camaro Z28. Also, Mr. Stempel was chief executive in addition to chairman of General Motors Corp. This column fails to mention the chief executive post.