TOKYO—While most of Japan Inc. is focused on expanding its reach in China, cash-rich Japanese banks are now actively scouring opportunities in two of the region's fastest-growing economies: Indonesia and Malaysia.

Despite the fact that it's still in the shadow of China, Southeast Asia is increasingly becoming an investment target for Japanese lenders, given its burgeoning population, natural resources and growing infrastructure developments. Others have seen the region's appeal: Moody's Investors Service on Monday raised its rating on Indonesia by one notch, citing its resilient economy and improving debt.

As a result, Japanese banks are forming tie-up with local lenders and expanding their own operations to strike loan deals in those two countries, as we as others in the region. Japan's  Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group, Japan's second-largest bank by market capitalization, said its banking unit plans to increase its staffing in Malaysia to about 100 employees from 30 last spring. It also hopes to add to its employees in Indonesia, currently at about 200. 

The lenders see opportunities in project financing and syndicated loans. The amount of syndicated loans—a type of loan often used for such big projects—in Indonesia and Malaysia last year totaled $7.7 billion, up 15% from the previous year, according to Thomson Reuters, when financial institutions had been reluctant to lend due to the global credit crunch. 

Japanese firms are looking to the new markets partly to allocate risk more broadly in Asia. Though China is still a prized market, regulatory hurdles and the presence of strong local lenders have made it difficult for foreign financial institutions to ramp up their business there. 

"Chinese regulation is tough on foreign financial institutions and, although we're trying, we haven't found the right answer [on how to expand our business there]," a Japanese bank executive said.

Japanese industrial companies are beefing up infrastructure investments in the region, actively lobbying to build billion-dollar power plants and high-speed rail lines. Japanese lenders see this as a prime opportunity to issue syndicated loans and become involved in lucrative project financing.

Struggling with low profitability amid weak lending demand and economic stagnation, Japan's top three banks— Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group,
MTU


-0.83
%




 or MUFG; Mizuho Financial Group; and SMFG—have all accelerated the expansion of their overseas business in the region.

In Malaysia, the government last year issued commercial banking licenses to five foreign banks, including arms of Mizuho and SMFG. SMFG and Mizuho aim to start a local unit this spring, joining MUFG's Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ, which has already obtained a banking license. 

Business tie-ups are also seen as attractive. Mizuho last year formed a business alliance with Indonesia Eximbank and  Malayan Banking
MAYBANK


0.00
%




 Bhd., also known as Maybank, in businesses such as trade finance and infrastructure-related project finance. SMFG strengthened its ties with Malaysia's RHB Capital Bhd. in December. It formed an alliance with Indonesia's PT Bank Central Asia in 2009.

MUFG, Japan's largest bank, has an alliance with Malaysian CIMB Group Holdings Bhd.in 2006 and formed a tie-up with Indonesia's CIMB Niaga, a unit of CIMB Group, the following year. 

MUFG, which advanced into Indonesian market ahead of other Japanese banks and is among top foreign lenders in the country, also said financing for resource-related business is increasing.

Winning won't be easy. Entrenched lenders such as HSBC and Standard Chartered already have a strong retail presence in the region, built up over decades. "It may be true that China is not [Japanese banks'] top priority anymore," Keisuke Moriyama, analyst at Fitch Ratings, citing regulatory hurdles and political risk. "Business expansion in Southeast Asia would make sense, but at the same time, everyone thinks the same thing [about expansion in the area], which will lead to a tough competition." 

Mr. Moriyama said Japanese banks need to strengthen their syndicated loan and project finance divisions to compete with their rivals, and beef up their presence with more talented workers.

 Write to  Atsuko Fukase at atsuko.fukase@dowjones.com 