St. John's waited nine years, and then on Sunday night they waited some more.

The Red Storm (21-11) was among the last teams to learn its NCAA Tournament fate. As announcers finally revealed the team's No. 6 seed, St. John's players leapt to their feet—and an entire region lifted with them. 

The Red Storm will lead a New York-area renaissance that includes five representatives from Brooklyn, Queens, Connecticut and New Jersey. 

But as bracket after bracket was announced without the Red Storm's name being called, players started wondering if there had been some kind of mistake.

"Extremely nervous," said St. John's senior Justin Burrell, describing the mood inside the New York City steakhouse where players were watching the results. The Red Storm will face No. 11 Gonzaga in Denver on Thursday. It is St. John's first tournament bid since 2002. "To finally see our names, we were really excited, man. Guys that have been here for so long—we were kind of in shock."

Jersey City's St. Peter's, which defeated Iona to claim the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference championship, snagged a No. 14 seed and will face No. 3 Purdue in Chicago. Brooklyn's Long Island University received a No. 15 seed and will be playing No. 2 North Carolina in Charlotte, N.C. 

"I'm peeved, to be quite honest," said LIU head coach Jim Ferry. "I felt like our body of work deserved better."

Meanwhile, Princeton earned its first tournament bid since 2004 after slipping past Harvard in a one-game playoff Saturday on a last-second shot by Douglas Davis. The Tigers (25-6) received a No. 13 seed and will play fourth-seeded Kentucky in Tampa, Fla.

Powered by Bronx-born Kemba Walker, Connecticut won the Big East championship on Saturday night and claimed a No. 3 seed. The Huskies (26-9) will play No. 14 Bucknell in Washington, D.C. UConn and St. John's were among 11 bids from the Big East conference. 

For St. John's, the bid was bittersweet, as one senior will be sidelined for the tournament. D.J. Kennedy, the team's third-leading scorer and top rebounder, tore the anterior cruciate ligament in his right knee in St. John's loss to Syracuse on Thursday. 

He will travel with the team as an assistant coach and perhaps wear a T-shirt made by his roommate, senior Sean Evans, that says "Do it for D.J." On the back, Evans printed "I am my brother's keeper."

"This year through my hard times, he's always stuck with me," said Evans, who will need to increase his production to compensate for the loss. 

The local entrants vowed to make the most of their chances; for many, it was their first tournament bid in more than a decade. 

We're "not going into this tournament just happy to be there," said LIU's Ferry, whose team earned its first spot since 1997.

He cited a series of statistics to bolster the claim that the Blackbirds deserved a higher seed: LIU (27-5) is ranked fourth in the country in scoring (82.6 points per game), third in the country in rebounding (41.8 rebounds per game) and has won its past 13 games. Ferry also noted the additional disadvantage of facing North Carolina in North Carolina.

"Let's go play them in Cleveland," he said. Still, the Blackbirds will "play like we always do, prepare like we always do, limit mistakes," he said. "We're going to try to take this game."

St. Peter's (20-13) earned its first bid since 1994-95. The Peacocks won on the strength of their defense, which is ranked second in the country in defensive field goal percentage (37.4%).

Coach John Dunne said before the selection that he was hoping to emerge with "at least a 14th seed" to avoid the top-seeded behemoths. That's exactly what he got.

"If we can limit our turnovers and make a couple of shots then we can be dangerous," he said.

But New Yorkers' hopes will rest on a resurgent St. John's to not be satisfied with reaching their early-season goal of making the tournament. In quintessential city fashion, after reaching their dreams, they must now push for more.

 Write to  Sophia Hollander at Sophia.Hollander@wsj.com 