For the new Congress, the must-have accessory isn't an iPad or a Kindle. It's a 3.25-by-6.25-inch pocket copy of the U.S. Constitution.

A growing number of lawmakers are carrying the tiny copies in suit jackets and in their cars, a response in part to tea-party complaints that Congress has lost sight of the country's founding document.

Standing outside the House speaker's lobby, Rep. Billy Long (R., Mo.) reached into his back pocket and pulled out a worn-looking maroon edition with folded corners. "Like a horse, it's rode hard and put away wet," quipped Mr. Long, a freshman who boasts of never having previously held elected office.

At a Sarah Palin book signing in Springfield during the campaign, a man approached Mr. Long and asked whether he carried a copy. Mr. Long walked back to his truck and produced one. "I needed his vote," he said.

The 224-year-old government road map has become a potent political symbol akin to the flag pin, and one that's hard to reject, even for lawmakers who don't necessarily sign on to tea-party ideas.

The document's public prominence was spurred in part by voters who say Democrats overreached in their legislative agenda. At the center of that debate is the health care overhaul, which faces a series of court challenges on constitutional grounds. Democrats say that law and their other achievements fall within the scope of their constitutional powers.

On Thursday, House Republicans will celebrate their first week back in power by reading the Constitution, amendments and all, on the House floor. Some parts will go unread, including the passage that counts slaves as three-fifths of free persons. Multiple Republicans will step forward to read segments. It's not clear whether any Democrats will take part.

 Credit for the reading idea goes to Virginia Rep. Bob Goodlatte, who keeps a mini Constitution in multiple blazers so he'll never be caught short. For good measure, House GOP leaders tucked the little books into initiation packages distributed to freshmen after the election.

Democrats say they were Constitution carriers long before the tea party made it cool (by Washington standards, anyway). The late Democratic senator Robert Byrd of West Virginia, elected to the Senate in 1958, was known for wielding his copy on the Senate floor. Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid keeps one at his side every day, an aide said, including a copy that bears the late senator's signature.

Sen. Mary Landrieu, a Louisiana Democrat, doesn't carry a copy. She called moments like Republicans' planned reading "gimmicks and stage theater" that won't tackle real problems, such as fixing the economy. You'll find her copy of the Constitution in a drawer in her kitchen, she said.

Tennessee Republican Sen. Bob Corker figured out the document's symbolic significance the hard way. At a November speech in Nashville, an attendee marched up to the stage to hand him a copy because, the attendee said according to a video of the event, "after looking at your voting record, I kind of doubt you've read the Constitution."

"I have a copy with me at all times," Mr. Corker shot back. He added, "I read the Constitution last Thursday morning." In fact, his copy was tucked inside the black notebook where he usually keeps it, and out of reach. A spokeswoman said he was in the habit of keeping a copy in his coat pocket.

Rep. Joe Wilson, the South Carolina Republican notorious for shouting "You lie!" during President Barack Obama's health-care speech before Congress, tried to give students in the Beaufort County school district pocket-size Constitutions with the stamp "Compliments of Joe Wilson." The district rejected the offer on the grounds that it was overtly political. Instead, it bought 5,000 unlabeled versions from the Government Printing Office and distributed them to every senior.

House Republicans say the constitutional revival is rooted in substance, not just symbolism. Rep. Scott Garrett (R., N.J.), founder of the Congressional Constitution Caucus, last month introduced a measure that would require congressional staff members to complete annual training in the Constitution. At least 25 lawmakers have signed on. 

Others say the nation's founding document transcends Washington's partisan divide. Striding up the stairs inside the Capitol Wednesday, Rep. Dennis Kucinich (D., Ohio) pulled from his left blazer pocket a copy emblazoned with his picture, an edition printed for his presidential campaign. "I always carry a Constitution with me," Rep. Kucinich said. "This Constitution belongs to all Americans, and it's a good thing that it be celebrated."



 Write to  Janet Adamy at janet.adamy@wsj.com 