The Weasel's Dictionary is an essential aid to speech writers and journalists alike. How would societies with long-term traditions of open discussion but an immediate need for consensus get by without the constructive ambiguity created by applying subjective judgments to the meanings of certain words? 

"Terrorist" and "liberal" are the two classic examples of the genre, but the Weasel's Dictionary is fast expanding, thanks to the euro zone's policy makers. First came the addition of "Sustainable (adj.): a level of debt that no reasonable person thinks can be serviced but which is too frightening to admit to." Then came "Competitiveness (n.): the art of preventing one's neighbors from having lower tax rates than oneself." I'll skip over "Restructure," "Stress Test" and "Transmission Mechanism" and proceed straight to "Normal (adj.), see also normalize (vb.), normalization (n.)." 

The lexicographic jury is still out on this one, but I would take a guess that the final definition will be something like "to find every excuse to raise interest rates as fast as possible before the commodities rally brings growth to a shuddering halt; See also 'to normalize liquidity'—to keep ATMs in Greece and Ireland stocked without giving a free ride to the rest of the region's banks and governments."

The "normalization" of monetary conditions is going to mean a lot of different things to different people. But the European Central Bank's road back to normality is a long and winding one. Remember that its policy is divided into two separate moving parts: interest rates on the one hand, and "non-standard" measures, such as unlimited lending, bond purchases and loose collateral regulations, on the other. 

The problems of the periphery are making the unwinding of the nonstandard measures a particularly long process. True, the bond purchases have effectively stopped, but the ECB and euro-zone governments appear no nearer to finding a solution for the banks of Ireland, Greece and Portugal. And the ECB's plan for pushing dubious asset-backed securities out of its collateral pool and back into the market (by forcing banks to disclose how every loan underlying the securities is performing) may not come into full effect before the middle of next year. "Normality" in the sense of "a world without non-standard measures" is still a long way off.

Returning interest rates to a "normal" level of, say, 2.75% (1.25% for medium-term potential growth and 2% for inflation, less 0.50% to take account of the lingering uncertainties in the outlook) is probably the easier part, and the recent comments of the governing council have stressed a need to "normalize" the policy stance as soon as possible. 

You can see why. Consumer and producer price inflation are running at their highest rates since before the crisis broke, and April's surveys have shown evidence of it spreading beyond the initial culprits of energy and food. Growth looks strong for the moment, and the Fukushima accident has not (yet) developed into the cataclysmic disruption of the world economy that was still possible at last month's governing council meeting. 

Unemployment has turned a corner in "core" countries that account for two-thirds of euro-zone output—tentatively in France, emphatically in Germany. Even in Ireland, according to a purchasing managers' index compiled by stockbrokers NCB, output and employment indicators are well in positive territory. The ECB's April bank lending survey has shown credit demand strengthening across most of the region, and March's M3 data registered the largest monthly increase in mortgage lending in well over a year. 

None of that suggests the official rate of interest needs to be in negative territory, especially since the recovery is now almost two years old. Hawks will be pressing their case for a speedy rate "normalization" particularly hard this month, in the knowledge that the inevitable commodities-driven slowdown will make it a harder sell in the second half of the year. 

There are other indicators that all is not right. House prices have started to rise markedly in parts of France and Germany. And for the second week in a row, the ECB failed to drain all the liquidity it wanted at its weekly deposit auction, suggesting the cash-rich French and German banks that use the facility have better things to do with their money—like lend it out. Equally, demand for the ECB's unlimited credit at its weekly refinancing operations appears to have bottomed, and the 326 banks that bid at this week's operation is more than double the number four weeks ago. That suggests the banks asking the ECB for money aren't just the familiar cast of zombies trying to keep themselves upright, but also healthy institutions with the intention of creating real credit to the real economy. The central bank's fear that a long period of ultra-low interest rates could lead to a new round of careless risk-taking won't be eased by such a scenario. 

The situation is certainly not dramatic enough to warrant a second rate increase in successive meetings. For one thing, this year's round of wage negotiations has gone by without workers regaining significant bargaining power to protect themselves against higher global food and oil prices. But it seems likely ECB President  Jean-Claude Trichet will revert to his call for "strong vigilance," which, according to his own convention, would signal another 25 basis points on the refinancing rate in June. 

 Write to  Geoffrey T. Smith at geoffrey.smith@dowjones.com 