Mood Media Corp., a Toronto-based provider of in-store audio and video services, has agreed to acquire Muzak Holdings LLC, best known for providing piped music in elevators, for $305 million in cash.

Fort Mill, S.C.-based Muzak emerged from Chapter 11 bankruptcy last year after reducing its debt by more than half to around $230 million. When it filed for bankruptcy in 2009, Muzak was owned by private-equity firm Abry Partners. Muzak's creditors swapped debt for equity under the reorganization plan.

"It's an incredibly complementary acquisition, minute one," Mood Media Chief Executive  Lorne Abony said in an interview. The deal will help Mood, which is dual-listed in Toronto and London, build its presence in the U.S., he said.

Founded in 2004, Mood has a market capitalization of about $380 million. It has a large presence in Europe, where it provides background music and digital signage services to around 117,000 locations, from Nike to Hermes stores.

Muzak provides background music to about 300,000 U.S. locations, such as restaurants, malls and hotels. It makes most of its money through multi-year contracts and reported 2010 revenue of $195 million. The company traces its roots back to the 1930s when it distributed recorded music to theaters and stores. Today, it also provides on-hold messaging and video programming, although piped music is its forte.

Mood hopes to use Muzak's U.S. footprint to introduce more digital services, such as screens that allow customers to check merchandise in stores, Mr. Abony said.

In addition to the up-front cash, the purchase price includes a $30 million earn-out and $10 million in warrants and convertible debentures, for a total of $345 million. Muzak will retire its existing debt as part of the deal.

In 2007, Muzak and a rival, DMX Inc., sought regulatory approval to merge so that they could sell the combined business to another party - a move driven by the need to reduce their debt load. But the company was not able to find a buyer amid the worsening global economy, and sought the Chapter 11 route instead.

 Write to  Anupreeta Das at anupreeta.das@wsj.com 