KAMPALA, Uganda—Hundreds of Ugandan lawyers gathered around court premises across the country Wednesday to protest against the government's crackdown on demonstrations that have engulfed the country in the past three weeks. 

The lawyers have vowed to boycott all court proceedings across the country until the end of the week, protesting what they see as the government's decision to deny demonstrators their constitutional rights, Ugandan Law Society President Bruce Kyerere said. 

"We have resolved to keep away from court as we mourn the death of the rule of law in our country," Mr. Kyerere said in a petition to the Chief Justice. Mr. Kyerere was accompanied by around 300 lawyers as he presented the petition. 

According to Mr. Kyerere, the government continues to defy a 2008 constitutional court ruling which annulled powers of the police to grant permission for demonstrations and processions. 

Ugandan security forces have mounted a violent crackdown on protests in the past three weeks, in which at least ten people have died and hundreds injured. The protests originally were meant to express dissatisfaction with the rising cost of fuel and food in Uganda, but quickly turned into larger, anti-government demonstrations.

Uganda's veteran opposition leader Kizza Besigye, President Yoweri Museveni's main challenger during the disputed Feb. 18 polls, has been beaten, tear-gassed and pepper-sprayed on several occasions during the protests. Mr. Besigye has maintained the results of the February poll were falsified, and that both he and Mr. Museveni got just under 50 percent of the vote.

Mr. Besigye is currently in a hospital in Kenya following his violent arrest last week. 

"We condemn the indiscriminate beating of protesters, including some senior and respectable members of society, the indiscriminate shooting of peaceful protesters and the firing of tear gas in schools and hospitals," Mr. Kyerere said, adding that the crackdown in the past three weeks amounts to "crimes against humanity." 

The lawyers want judicial officials, such as magistrates who have denied protesters bail without a legal basis or remanded protesters without any charge, to be punished. More than 1,000 people have been arrested since the protests broke out. Most are still languishing in various prisons after being denied bail. 

Police deployed heavily at the court premises as the lawyers presented the petition. 

-Write to Nicholas Bariyo at bariyonic@yahoo.co.uk 