Some judges are skeptical of claims by lenders that they have substantially improved their foreclosure procedures since controversy over the practices exploded last fall.

  F. Dana Winslow, a N.Y. State Supreme Court Justice in Long Island's Nassau County, said there has been only "a marginal improvement in what is being submitted to the court."

For example, financial institutions are "showing a better chain of title" about who owns the debt, he said. "But I'm not seeing any additional clarity on who has control over the actual mortgage note signed by the borrower and lender and where the note is."

Since the mess erupted, court officials and judges across the U.S. have toughened scrutiny of lenders trying to seize homes from borrowers.

In March, Mercer County, New Jersey General Equity Judge  Mary C. Jacobson appointed a special master to make sure that foreclosure proceedings initiated by six large mortgage servicers comply with state law. Another New Jersey state judge is reviewing filings by two dozen smaller companies.

In New York, foreclosure filings have declined sharply since New York State Chief Judge  Jonathan Lippman issued an order in October requiring lawyers to sign an affidavit affirming that foreclosure paperwork was properly reviewed and to their knowledge is accurate.

"There's almost a presumption that there may be something wrong with the documentation," said  O. Max Gardner III, a lawyer in Shelby, N.C., who represents borrowers in bankruptcy cases. 

U.S. regulators have ordered banks to take steps to "ensure the accuracy of all documents" used in the foreclosure process.

At  J.P. Morgan Chase
JPM


-0.01
%




 & Co., many legal documents are now prepared twice by different employees—and then compared to spot any differences.

  Wells Fargo
WFC


1.03
%




 & Co. and  Bank of America Corp.
BAC


3.42
%




 have created standardized foreclosure affidavit forms that also consider local requirements. Wells Fargo now uses a uniform checklist for affidavit signers and specific affidavit procedures that must be followed in every state.

 Write to  Ruth Simon at ruth.simon@wsj.com 