Ralph Lauren is having breakfast at Ralph's, the walnut-paneled, swimming-in-Englishness restaurant on the first floor of the Ralph Lauren flagship store on Boulevard Saint Germain here in Paris. The billionaire clothing magnate is dressed in black trousers, black polo shirt with a popped collar under a black V-neck sweater and black blazer. His only sartorial concessions to the rest of the visible spectrum are white cotton socks and Asics cross trainers.

Bacon burnt. Eggs scrambled. Cappuccino. The fine china has "Ralph's" printed on it. The wait staff has been holding its collective breath for about a half-hour.

Mr. Lauren, 71, and his wife, Ricky, are in Paris for the opening of "L'Art de l'Automobile: Chefs-d'Oeuvre de la Collection Ralph Lauren" at the Louvre's celestial Musée des Arts Décoratif, where 17 of the designer's classic cars will reside through August. The previous night, the museum honored Mr. Lauren at a reception and dinner attended by some very big names, in and out of the car world: Formula 1 bigwig Jean Todt and his wife, Michelle Yeoh; the actors Ziyi Zhang and Jean Reno; fellow car connoisseur Arturo Keller and Sir Jackie Stewart. In brief remarks in the gilded Salon des Boiseries, Mr. Lauren said, charmingly, "All the cars are talking to each other and are excited to be here."

Mr. Lauren likes Paris and Paris likes him back. In 2010, French President Nicolas Sarkozy decorated Mr. Lauren as a Chevalier de la Légion d'honneur. 

Everybody knows that Ralph Lauren has a lot of amazing cars, 60-some and counting residing in his new super-garage in New York's Westchester County. Just how amazing is perhaps hard to appreciate outside of the auto-enthusiast community. Though he disdains the term "collector"—"Cars are an emotional love for me; I buy cars because they are romantic and beautiful"—Mr. Lauren's garage is home to some of the most historically important cars in the world: A Scaglietti-bodied Ferrari 250 Testa Rossa (1958); a Touring-bodied Alfa Romeo 8C 2900B spider (1938); a rare alloy-bodied Mercedes-Benz 300SL Gullwing (1955) and alloy-bodied Jaguar XKSS (1957). These things are the North American P-51 Mustangs of the road—desperately fast, wildly expensive and divinely lovely, supreme endowments to the built world.

At the center of Mr. Lauren's collection, and taking star position in Paris, is his Bugatti Type 57SC Atlantic, one of only two in the world (the other resides in the Mullin Automotive Museum in Oxnard, Calif., having sold last year for in excess of $30 million, a new record). The Atlantic is generally regarded as the greatest car in the world, much in the same way "Citizen Kane" is regarded as the greatest film, by consensus but without clear criteria. Yet it's hard to argue when one stands in its presence: The car's obsidian aluminum body (Mr. Lauren changed the color from blue) seems to leap over itself in a cavort of harmonies and symmetries, the fenders and arched roofline like black dolphins breeching and leaping.

Though it's not his favorite car to drive, "the Atlantic is my favorite just because of its pure amazingness," says Mr. Lauren. His Atlantic and his "Count Trossi" Mercedes-Benz SSK have won best in show at the Pebble Beach Concours d'Elegance, the world's most prestigious classic-car show. 

Mr. Lauren also likes fast cars. And I can tell you, having spent time with the world's exotic-car makers, that when the phone rings and it's Ralph Lauren, there's a lot of comically frenzied saluting and heel clicking. Yes, sir, Mr. Lauren! His car-buying imprimatur means a lot. 

At our breakfast, I ask him if this epic collection of automobiles might be seen as merely part of the larger Ralph Lauren brand's image machine. Why? Well, because the exhibit's catalogue (in French only) is on sale in Ralph Lauren boutiques, for one thing. Because I'd overheard a lot of rag-trade business being discussed at the gala, and not so much about cars. And because not infrequently Mr. Lauren's great cars—notably the Atlantic and the "Count Trossi" SSK—have appeared in advertisements with himself as a model, further blurring the line between man and brand.

"It's not a machine," he reproves me, in a beautiful, rich whisper. "Why is it a machine? You're cynical." (At this moment I feel the chances that Mr. Lauren will loan me his Lamborghini Reventon for the weekend slipping away). "Everything I do and everything I love I put into this company and I have done it with integrity.... I didn't buy the Bugatti because I thought it would be great for my ads. Now, I have used the cars in my ads because they're part of the world I'm designing."

But, I ask, is there something calculated about the collection itself in a way that the Ralph Lauren brand is calculated, along the axis of otherworldly, mega-wealth aspiration? The exhibit is so fundamentally great, so full of obvious reference standards—Ferrari 250 GTO, Alfa 8C2900 B Mille Miglia, McLaren F1 LM—that it comprises a sort of greatest hits of automobility, the most bankable and unquestionable classic cars on earth, the Bach, Beethoven and Brahms of horsepower. The canon, in other words. This assortment of cars would seem to be of a piece with the Ralph Lauren ethos, engaging notions of timeless luxury, impeccable standards and transcendent quality. 

Mr. Lauren takes exception to the calculation idea, and as for the thought that these cars are canonical, he explains the causality of the matter.

He notes that the museum curated the exhibit and picked the cars it wanted: Mr. Lauren's rather more eclectic group of cars, the Morgans, the Jeeps, the 1948 Ford Woodie, the Porsche 959, they're still back in Westchester County in his garage/gallery. Actually, Mr. Lauren says, outside of the Atlantic, the cars he's most emotionally attached to are fairly run-of-the-mill classics, including the Jaguar XK120 and the Gullwing.

"My philosophy of cars is that I love cars that are timeless," he says. "That when you drive them they don't feel old, as if they don't have an age." 

And he goes on to share how he fell in love with many of the cars in his collection long before he had the means to buy them. The story is familiar: Mr. Lauren came from humble origins in the Bronx, and demonstrated a gift for clothing, design and business savvy early on. Like a lot of American boys in the '50s, he was obsessed with cars. Upon marrying Ricky in 1964 he was obliged to sell his beloved Morgan sports car, but as his business grew he marked success with a series of cool cars, like a 1971 Mercedes-Benz 280SE (silver over tan) and a couple of black Porsches. By the time Ralph Lauren and Polo were household names, he had become one of the most discriminating car collectors in America.

And today, for all I don't know about Ralph Lauren—and that's just about everything—the one thing I'm utterly positive about is that he's a serious car guy. For one thing, he knows his car stuff: How many McLaren F1 LMs were built? Who's Woolf Barnato? How many alloy-bodied XKSSs did Jaguar build?

For another thing, Mr. Lauren's collection includes some of the most vicious, ornery and demanding high-performance machines ever made. If Mr. Lauren has managed to drive his 4½-liter Bentley Blower at all—even if it's just around the block—it's a major feat of piloting.

Mr. Lauren's restoration expert, Paul Russell, said the night before: "Ralph is not an engineer, and sometimes it's hard to know what to do with the information he gives us: 'Something in the car is a little off song.' Well, what's that mean? But then we tear get into the car and find something not right, and I think, 'Damn it, he was right!' "

No, he's a car guy, all right. But he's also a guy with his name on the crockery, and I don't think Mr. Lauren does much that doesn't have an image component. A little later, he concedes as much, though perhaps not on purpose. "I think this exhibit is great for the car industry, and it's great for me," says Mr. Lauren. "And if people who don't know much about Ralph Lauren come to see the cars, they might say, 'The cars are great. Let's go look at his clothes.' "

 (This article has been corrected. It initially gave Woolf Barnato's surname as Bernardo.) 