Policy makers at Europe's center are at risk of losing hold of their monetary and fiscal levers.

This ought to make investors uncomfortable, not least because it threatens an aggressive rate response by the European Central Bank.

The fiscal problems are most immediately obvious. The Irish and Greek bailouts pushed through last year are only a temporary solution—they saddle countries already struggling to cover their obligations with even more unaffordable debt.

Ireland wants to renegotiate the terms of its rescue to a lower interest rate paid back over a longer period. In exchange, the Germans and French want an increase in Ireland's 12.5% corporate tax rate, which is about half the euro zone's average.

Greece, which agreed to sell and let public land and to continue its austerity program, was granted better terms on the €80 billion ($112 billion) of EU bail-out funds it was given last year. The interest rate was cut by a percentage point to 4.8% while the repayment period was extended to 7.5 years from three years. 

So far, the Irish have dug their heels in. For them, the low corporate tax rate has been both a source of economic growth and a symbol of national sovereignty. German Chancellor Angela Merkel is reported to be relenting on the issue of corporate taxation. It could be that the conditions Ireland has to meet in exchange for better borrowing terms prove more politically symbolic than fiscally important.

Greece's promises could also prove a chimera. Not only has the Greek finance minister this week admitted that the country could well need more bail-out money than the €110 billon provided so far by the EU and the IMF, but the revenue due to be raised from land sales could be considerably lower than the projected €50 billion if, as in the past, the sales are met by popular revolt.

Meanwhile, Portugal is also getting closer to needing a bailout. Although it has deepened its austerity program in an effort to shrink its deficit more rapidly, the market is skeptical it'll be able to manage without a rescue. Yields on Portuguese government debt have climbed sharply and are well above the 5% or so Portugal would have to pay for rescue funds—its 10-year government bond yields 7.6%.

Ms. Merkel may not be willing to press these beleaguered countries too hard, if only out of self interest. Borrowers at Europe's periphery owe German banks a lot of money. 

For instance, the Irish owed German banks more than €88 billion at the end of 2010, according to the Bundesbank. Greeks owed €25 billion. Were they to be forced into a default, Germany's finance industry would face meltdown. 

Should the problems spread to Spain, which owes German banks €135 billion, the consequences could be beyond even a German government rescue.

Of course, Germany could seek to offset the periphery's lack of fiscal control by tightening its own belt. Germany's 2012 budget deficit is projected to fall back under the 3% of GDP ceiling set out by the Maastricht Treaty, which laid the foundations for the single currency. It's been a ceiling largely observed in the breach.

But while Germany's economy is growing strongly, its fiscal position is vulnerable to an energy crisis. The disaster at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant in Japan has caused the Germans to rethink their own atomic energy program. 

Germany generates only about a third of its energy needs domestically. Paring back on nuclear power, which in 2009 was responsible for around a quarter of its electricity generation, would make it that much more dependent on imported oil and gas.

Other euro-zone countries as dependent on energy imports as Germany but with much weaker economies will be further tempted to ignore fiscal rules.

ECB President  Jean-Claude Trichet has been quick to complain about how little the constraints on euro-zone governments were toughened at this week's meeting of EU finance ministers. Sanctions for breaking rules are still too weak, he argued at the meeting.

But the ECB itself is in a difficult position. Following its most recent policy meeting earlier this month, Mr. Trichet gave the clearest indication yet that the central bank was preparing to raise interest rates, perhaps as early as next month. This is in response to rapid German economic growth and rising inflationary pressures. The Japanese catastrophe isn't likely to have changed Europe's economic fundamentals substantially.

But action by the Central Bank of Ireland shows the ECB is not in full control of euro-zone money supply. The Irish central bank has been fast expanding its Emergency Liquidity Assistance facility, a mechanism by which national central banks can print money independently of the ECB. 

By late February, the Irish central bank's ELA program had grown by €19 billion on the month to €70 billion, equivalent to more than 40% of Irish GDP. These funds had been pumped into Ireland's deeply troubled banks on the backing of the government.

While half of the increase was related to changes in European collateral rules, the underlying growth in Ireland's ELA will nonetheless make the ECB uncomfortable. Should the Irish banks not pay the money back, and there is no sign they will be able to, the assistance could prove a massive debt monetization.

A threatened reversion of European fiscal policy to the bad old ways and new liquidity being pumped into the euro zone seemingly outside of the ECB's control could well tempt the ECB into bigger and faster rate rises than the market expects.

 Write to  Alen Mattich at alen.mattich@dowjones.com 