DAMASCUS, Syria—At least two people were shot dead in Syria as authorities sought to put down small demonstrations that broke out in several cities after Friday prayers, according to activists and human rights groups.

Protests in the past three days are the first open expression of unrest in the country, one of the region's most authoritarian, and represented the most serious challenge to President Bashar al-Assad since he inherited power from his father, Hafez, in 2000. In an attempt to quell growing unrest, the Syrian government has stressed in recent days that reforms will go ahead this year.

The clashes with security forces on Friday happened in the southern city of Deraa, which witnessed the largest gathering. Activists' claims that protesters numbered into the hundreds weren't verifiable. 

Other cities confirmed to have witnessed protests include Banias on the coast; Homs, which is north of the capital, Damascus; the eastern city of Deir Ezzor; and Damascus, where a small gathering was held inside the central Omyyad mosque.

An activist is Deraa said that security forces fired live bullets at protesters. A video circulated on the Internet showed fire trucks directing their hoses at the crowd. An eyewitness told Reuters news service that helicopters had flown in troops.

Reports from Twitter and videos posted on YouTube showed a group of men chanting "there is no God but God" in Damascus's mosque. Afterward, a pro-regime rally is reported to have taken place outside Damascus's mosque. Videos from Homs, Banias and Deraa showed protestors shouted slogans calling for freedom.

In Deraa, there were also reports of damage to the ubiquitous posters and statues of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad.

A Facebook group had called for protests, dubbed a "Day of Dignity." 

Malath Aumran, the pseudonym for an activist leading a network of sources across the country, said the protests were unplanned and came from a range of people without connection to one another.

Syria's state news agency SANA reported that "acts of sabotage" had broken out in Deraa as "a number of instigators tried to create chaos," prompting security forces to intervene. Gatherings are illegal under emergency law, in place in Syria since 1963. 

Friday's unrest is the latest in a run of protests earlier in the week.

The White House on Friday sharply criticized Syria's response to the protests.

"Those responsible for today's violence must be held accountable," said Tommy Vietor, the spokesman for the National Security Council. "The United States stands for a set of universal rights, including the freedom of expression and assembly, and believes that governments, including the Syrian government, must address the legitimate aspirations of their people."