"They love me. All my people with me, they love me," beleaguered Libyan dictator Muammar Gadhafi told ABC's Christiane Amanpour yesterday. "They will die to protect me, my people."

He seems determined to see to it that as many of them die as possible. "Gadhafi's forces struck back at his opponents on three fronts Monday, with special operations forces, regular army troops and, rebels said, fighter jets, in an escalation of hostilities that brought Libya a step closer to civil war," the Associated Press reports from liberated Benghazi.

The Libyan situation ought to occasion some embarrassment at the United Nations. U.N. Watch, a Geneva-based nongovernmental organization, reports that the U.N. Human Rights Council has issued a 23-page report praising the Gadhafi regime's human-rights record.

The council has not officially signed off on the report, which, per U.N. Watch, is to be "presented on March 18, and then adopted by the council at the end of the month." U.N. Watch urges the council to reject it, which it seems likely to do, since it voted yesterday to expel Libya. That recommendation requires ratification by the General Assembly, which is expected today.

We'd say the council should ignore U.N. Watch's advice and approve the report praising Libya. For it tells us a lot about the U.N. Human Rights Council. U.N. Watch quotes the words of praise from the council's member nations, a rogue's gallery of tyrannies:

And that's far from comprehensive. Gadhafi's regime, of course, did not just start slaughtering and oppressing Libya's people last week. It has been at it for 42 years. Nonetheless, until just now the regime has been a member of the U.N. Human Rights Council.

The council is a joke, and its actions should be judged by the same standard as any other joke. It ought to approve the report because that would be funnier than rejecting it.

  Bitter Yemen   "Yemen's president has hit out at Israel and the US, accusing them of destabilising his country and the Arab world as protesters demanding his ouster press ahead with demonstrations," Al Jazeera reports:

Wow, a dictator who resists giving up power--that's what passes for "very significant" over at Al Jazeera. The network quotes a tweet from State Department spokesman P.J. Crowley: "The protests in Yemen are not the product of external conspiracies. President Saleh knows better. His people deserve a better response."

What does seem significant is that it is a teetering dictator--and a somewhat "friendly" one at that--who is blaming America and Israel for his woes. Daniel Pipes argues that this is characteristic of the continuing Mideast revolution:

Pipes is appropriately cautious in his optimism, but it does seem to us he has identified a crucial difference between this Middle Eastern revolution and the last one, in Iran in 1979.

  'We're at War'--With Taxpayers   The Boston Herald reports on more martial rhetoric from Bay State officials:

It's not a literal war, like the one Muammar Gadhafi is waging against Libyans, but it is worth noting that some government officials see themselves as being engaged in combat against taxpayers and on behalf of unions representing government employees.

Back in Wisconsin, Oshkosh's Northwestern reports that the local Democratic assemblyman was forced to apologize "for comments he made on the floor of the Assembly following a vote on a contentious budget repair bill":

Milwaukee radio host Charlie Sykes reported that Hintz told Litjens, "You're f---ing dead."

Remember back in January when liberals kept telling us how much they deplore "violent" and "eliminationst" rhetoric? Neither do they.

  A Civics Lesson for E.J. Dionne   It's not surprising that left-liberal Washington Post columnist E.J. Dionne sides with unions over taxpayers. This passage from his column yesterday is somewhat surprising, however, for Dionne's ignorance about basic U.S. law:

In fact, Obama is insisting that a two-thirds majority is required to repeal ObamaCare. Hasn't Dionne ever heard of the presidential veto?

  You Report, We Decide   We were wondering if the Boston Globe, the liberal hometown newspaper of the late Ted Kennedy, would tell its readers about the latest Kennedy revelations. Turns out it did--but in a rather revealing way:

The story reminds us of the Fox News slogan "We report, you decide." The Globe's approach to news seems to be precisely the opposite. Here, Judicial Watch did the reporting. The only thing the Globe adds is its decision that the story is "unlikely to alter public opinion." You report, we decide!

  Great Moments in Socialized Medicine   "Shocking as it may seem, U.S. government doctors once thought it was fine to experiment on disabled people and prison inmates," the Associated Press reports:

Really gives you confidence in ObamaCare's government takeover of health care, doesn't it?

  Homer Nods   Paul Wolfowitz is a former deputy defense secretary. He did not serve as defense secretary, contrary to an item yesterday (since corrected).

 Out on a Limb 

  There's No Place for This Kind of Name Calling   "Haley, Obama Butt Heads on Health Care"--headline, State (Columbia, S.C.), March 1

  And He Can Moor His Yacht There Tax-Free   "Ocean View B&B Provides the Best Kerry Accommodation"--headline, Ocean View B&B press release, Feb. 28

  Be He Alive or Be He Dead, I'll Grind His Bones to Make My Bread   "Giant Food Workers Worry About Job Losses at Jessup Facility"--headline, Baltimore Sun, Feb. 27

  Questions Nobody Is Asking   "Reality Check: Do Oscar Losers Get Free Space Tourist Flights?"--headline, Space.com, Feb. 28

  Obama to Public Workers: Don't Vilify Governors--Now That Would Be News   "Obama to Governors: Don't Vilify Public Workers"--headline, TheAtlantic.com, Feb. 28

  Everything Seemingly Is Spinning Out of Control   "Breast Is Best for Elton John as He Is Depicted Nursing Baby Son in Controversial New Artwork"--headline, Daily Mail (London), March 1

  News of the Tautological   "College Senior Turns Oil Into Fuel"--headline, WNEP-TV website (Scranton, Pa.), Feb. 28

  Breaking News From 2004   "Croker Under Lights, Dubs on Fire, Kerry Beaten . . . Does It Get Any Better Than This?"--headline, Evening Herald (Dublin), Feb. 28

  News You Can Use   "How to Eat Brains and Other Offal Things"--headline, FoxNews.com, March 1

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  Fight Fat With Mystery Meat   A local lawmaker in San Francisco is worried that schoolchildren will receive a "dangerous message," the Associated Press reports:

Meanwhile, "Taco Bell is maintaining its drumbeat of self-defense against a lawsuit claiming that its taco filling isn't beefy enough," The Wall Street Journal reports:

The ad appeared recently during Fox's animated program "Bob's Burgers," right after a scene in which a health inspector posts a sign saying: "This premises is under investigation. Food may contain human flesh." Then the Taco Bell ad: "There's been a lot of talk about our seasoned beef. But here's the truth. Here's the real deal. Our seasoned beef is 88% premium ground beef . . ." Now there's a way to combat obesity!

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Ed Lasky, Joe Perez, Monty Krieger, Steve Prestegard, Michele Schiesser, Bill King, John Bobek, Parker O'Brien, Kyle Kyllan, John Sanders, Peter Huntsman, Norv Clontz, Dave Nemzek, Zack Russ, T. Lydon, Bryan Fischer, Roy Cullan, Chris Hayes, Hillel Markowtiz, Imo Umoren, Ed Thompson, John Alder, William Schultz, Andrew Terhune, Storrs Warinner, Bruce Goldman, Dave Ceely and George Dainis. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)