NEW DELHI -- India's inflation, in a surprise turnaround, accelerated in February as prices of manufactured products firmed up, putting the central bank's year-end inflation projection at risk and mounting pressure on it to increase rates more aggressively.

The wholesale price index rose 8.31% in February from a year earlier, quicker than January's provisional 8.23% rise.

The reading was in contrast to market expectations of a deceleration to 7.80%, according to the median estimate in a Dow Jones Newswires poll of 15 economists.

The government also revised higher December's inflation reading to 9.41% from a provisional 8.43% reported earlier.

Government bond prices fell, with the most-traded 8.08% bond due in 2022 touching an intraday low of 99.77 rupees ($2.2) from 100.23 rupees pre-data.

With the current fiscal year almost over, the data has lowered the odds that inflation will ease to 7% by the end of March as the government and the central bank had forecast.

Finance Minister  Pranab Mukherjee said the high reading is worrisome, conceding that inflation may be higher than 7% by the end of the fiscal year.

"We have to take a long-term view on it [inflation]," Mr. Mukherjee told reporters after the data release. "It is possible to have [inflation of] 7% to 7.5% by the end of March," he added.

Economists expressed concern that price pressures may spill over to the wider commodity basket if left unchecked.

"For fiscal year 2012, we do not see the average inflation trending significantly downwards,"  Jay Shankar, chief economist at Religare Capital Markets, said. "The concern going forward would be the generalization of inflation across sectors," he added.

The high inflation reading has ratcheted up expectations that the Reserve Bank of India will have to resort to chunkier rate hikes, building expectations of a 50 basis points move when it next decides on rates Thursday, double the 0.25 percentage points increase that most were earlier anticipating.

"The reading is indeed scary and reflects substantial hardening of manufactured product prices due to accelerating cost pressures and surging domestic and external demand,"  Rupa Rege Nitsure, chief economist at Bank of Baroda, said.

The RBI has raised its lending and borrowing rates seven times since March 2010, but each time it lifted them by 0.25 percentage points, reflecting a cautious and calibrated shift in policy stance from supporting growth toward taming inflation.

Despite the substantial tightening, inflation has remained uncomfortably high in Asia's third-largest economy due to high food prices and intensifying price pressures in non-food commodities--a nagging pain that the government has failed to treat.

Food prices recently spiked due to untimely showers that damaged standing crops and choked supplies. An increase in demand for more protein-rich foods--driven by the burgeoning middle class' growing wealth--also is fueling inflation.

Monday's data showed prices of manufactured products rose 4.94% in February from a year earlier.

But the index of food articles in February cooled 5.2% from January as market supplies continue to improve.

The lower food index drove down the index of primary articles, which declined 2.9% in February from January. But the non-food articles index, which is a part of primary articles, rose 4% from January.

 Write to  Anant Vijay Kala at anant.kala@dowjones.com 