You may have heard about the blizzard that just hit the northeastern U.S. Let me tell you, it was nothing compared with the snow job  Charles Schwab Corp.
SCHW


0.90
%




 dumped on investors Tuesday.

The San Francisco company announced a settlement with U.S. and Illinois regulators in which the discount brokerage firm agreed to pay $119 million in fines and restitution related to a short-term bond fund called  Schwab YieldPlus Fund that is run by Schwab's investment-management unit.

Schwab said in a news release that the mutual fund, which lost 10% of its value and was nearly wiped out by redemptions in the early stages of the mortgage crisis, was the victim of "an unprecedented and unforeseeable credit crisis and market collapse." The company pointed out that founder and Chairman  Charles R. Schwab was one of YieldPlus's biggest investors.

Regulators tried to send a different message.

According to the Securities and Exchange Commission, Financial Industry Regulatory Authority and Illinois regulators, chaos in the bond market wasn't the problem. Instead, Schwab quietly and radically shifted YieldPlus's investment strategy, leading to gaping investor losses.

In late 2006, regulators say, YieldPlus began heavily investing in mortgage-backed securities and other securities tied to mortgages. Schwab's investment board signed off on the change, which allowed YieldPlus managers to increase its holdings of mortgage-backed securities to more than 50% of the fund's assets.

When the credit crisis hit, mortgage-backed securities had ballooned to more than 90% of YieldPlus.

You might be wondering: It sounds like a risky investment took a turn for the worse. So what's the big deal?

For starters, YieldPlus wasn't a hedge fund. Yet it was marketed as a kind of souped-up money-market fund, regulators claim, and was supposed to produce small but stable returns.

Moreover, YieldPlus wasn't aimed at young investors who are decades away from retirement. Schwab customers at least 65 years old made up about 40% of the investor base.

Regulators claim that most of the fund's investors weren't told of the strategy shift by YieldPlus. And when the fund started selling like hotcakes, increasing its assets by $13.75 billion in 18 months, Schwab collected $17.5 million in fees.

What investors didn't know was that some Schwab insiders were concerned that the fund was in trouble, according to regulators. They say that inside Schwab, YieldPlus was saddled with the new nickname "Yield Minus." Still, Schwab advisers pushed YieldPlus as if it were a safe investment, regulators claim.

In a statement Tuesday, Finra said Schwab's "product manager for YieldPlus advised others that the firm needed 'to get away from saying YieldPlus is equivalent to a money market fund,' but the firm failed to stop this practice."

By early 2008, big losses and an investor exodus shrank the fund's assets to just $1.8 billion from a peak of $13.5 billion in 2007.

Judging by the regulators' assessment, Schwab fell down on the job. But the company's press release Tuesday included no acknowledgment that the firm miscalculated or made any mistakes.

The company said it "hopes that greater focus and attention will ultimately be given to the investment banks that created mortgage-backed securities and the ratings agencies that legitimized them with triple-A ratings, which have so far largely escaped scrutiny and accountability."

To Schwab, the mess isn't the result of its decision to abandon the fund's diversification strategy and load up on mortgage-backed securities. It isn't about YieldPlus's managers who arguably failed to adequately examine the securities they were buying. It isn't about keeping damaging information under wraps.

Disappointingly, Schwab is playing the blame game. Blame the credit-rating firms and investment banks that packaged all those mortgages into securities. Blame fund-rater  Morningstar Inc.,
MORN


-1.11
%




 which awarded YieldPlus a five-star rating between December 2004 and September 2007.

Schwab said it "would never seek to profit at the expense of its clients." And  Greg Gable, a spokesman for Schwab, defended the language "it really is important that we put out a legitimate insistence there were events that were outside of our control."

When I asked Mr. Gable if Schwab took responsibility for YieldPlus, he cited continuing litigation. "We feel we stepped up," he said. "We're trying to help people we feel have been harmed."

"It's a real balancing act here," he added.

In Schwab's defense, it cited as part of the settlement and consent judgment problems with internal controls. The company agreed to an order that requires that an independent consultant review Schwab's policies.

Those mea culpas were buried the legal documents. In its news release, Schwab essentially said that everyone else failed to do their homework but Schwab. The buck-passing is worse than the common legal boilerplate of "neither admitting nor denying any wrongdoing."

Schwab's handling of the YieldPlus fiasco undermines the company's biggest strength: the trust it has built with clients. The company has long touted itself as a Wall Street outsider, with the ad slogan "Talk to Chuck."

"Investors rule," Schwab proclaims in its motto, and the firm has amassed $1.5 trillion in client assets with its Main Street image. To pay for the settlement, the company is taking a $97 million charge—a hefty sum considering that Schwab earned $335 million in the first three quarter of 2010.

Can you still talk to Chuck? Of course. YieldPlus obviously doesn't make all Schwab investments questionable or its advisers unscrupulous.

But make sure to wear the proper footwear. It could snow.

 Write to  David Weidner at david.weidner@dowjones.com 