The global economic downturn has gone some way in debunking the myth that luxury goods are unaffected by recessions. From some angles, 2009 was an annus horribilis for the luxury industry. That year, Forbes reported the average net worth of the world's billionaires plunged 23% from the previous year to £3 billion ($4.9 billion). As global wealth shrank so did luxury sales, which fell 8%, according to consulting firm Bain & Co. "Even people who had money were nervous because it was very unclear how the financial situation was going to pan out," says  Tory Frame, head of consumer products for the U.K. at consultant Bain & Co. But the industry's pain was short-lived. 

Read the complete  Watches and Jewelry report.  

Bain & Co reports that global revenues from luxury goods grew by a whopping 15% in 2010. A rise reflected by the world's biggest luxury goods company,LVMH Möet Hennessy Louis Vuitton, which last year upped its stake in luxury rival Hermès to 20% and this month took control of Italian firm  Bulgari. The firm reported a 19% increase in revenue in 2010 from the previous year. 

But despite its rapid rise from the ashes of the recession, the luxury landscape has undergone a transformation. A period of belt-tightening by high-net-worth individuals as well as the advent of public parsimony has put an end to the age of conspicuous consumption that characterized the pre-recession years. 

Luxury consumers have become less interested in acquiring status symbols and more interested in the actual worth of products. The brands that have proven robust are ones which have "pedigree, heritage and resources," says  Milton Pedraza, chief executive of the Luxury Institute in New York. "Consumers now are more discerning," he says. "They want great design, great craftsmanship and great service. . . a product they can pass down as an heirloom." 

"[The rich] still have lots of money, but there has been a fundamental change in their willingness to spend it," says  Pam Danziger, president of Unity Marketing, a research company that conducts quarterly surveys of the consumer habits of 1,200 high-net-worth individuals in the U.S. "They've become much smarter and know how to get value for their dollars." 

While most luxury companies wobbled during the recession, purveyors of men's luxury products thrived. Giles English, co-founder of Bremont Luxury Watches for Men, says the firm continued to expand throughout the recession, with 20% growth in 2009. Furthermore, watches priced at the higher end of the spectrum sold better than those in lower price brackets, underscoring a trend observed by many luxury firms – the rich may have curbed their spending, but for those in the highest echelons of wealth, it is as if the recession never happened. "If you have got used to buying a certain level of quality, then you are not going to compromise," says  Guy Salter, deputy chairman of British luxury industry lobbyist, Walpole. Companies such as luxury phone maker Vertu have reaped the benefits of the rapid rebound in spending among the super-rich. 

Last year, it reported organic year-on-year growth of 40% for 2009.  Stuart Hughes, a British designer famed for his glittering mobile phones, says that sales of his most expensive designs have outperformed cheaper alternatives. Since launching the diamond iPhone in 2009, prices for which range between £20,000 and £5 million, Mr. Hughes has sold around four a month to a roster of wealthy clients. But for some designers, such as  Stephen Webster, a top British jeweler with a cult celebrity following that includes Madonna, the ebb-and-flow of the economic cycle will only ever temporarily dent his wealthiest clients' confidence. Over the past few years, items such as $300,000 jewel-encrusted silver cutlery sets and $100,000 matching champagne flutes have been snapped up. "If you offer a beautiful product with high quality craftsmanship and interesting design, there will always be a home for it," he says. As this report was going to press, the Dubai based jewelry house, Mouawad, unveiled the world's most expensive handbag, valued at $3.8 million. The individual that is prepared to spend this amount on a handbag is not the type that notices a global economic downturn. 