HONG KONG—Hedge-fund manager  John Paulson, who made his name betting against subprime mortgages in 2007, is the latest high-profile investor to expand into Asia.

Mr. Paulson, president of Paulson & Co., received a license from Hong Kong's Securities and Futures Commission to deal in securities, according to a filing on the regulatory watchdog's website. Mr. Paulson got a Type 1 license to deal in securities for Paulson Asia Ltd., on Feb. 21, according to the website. 

Such a license gives Paulson Asia the right to deal in stocks, bonds, stock options and funds, but doesn't cover futures trading or asset management. 

Three former  Morgan Stanley
MS


0.00
%




 Asia executives who left the bank in recent years are involved with Paulson Asia, according to the filing on the commission's website.  Sandra Lee, who left Morgan Stanley in July 2008, and  Deng Xiaoli, who left Morgan Stanley in November 2009, are listed as "responsible officers" in the firm. Mr. Deng was formerly vice president at Morgan Stanley Alternative Investment Partners. 

  Winnie Wong, who left Morgan Stanley in early 2008, is listed as a representative of Paulson Asia. 

Mr. Paulson's decision to set up shop in Hong Kong comes at a tumultuous time for hedge funds in Asia. Ever since the financial crisis, which led to a spate of fund closures, big funds and big names have succeeded in raising funds from wealthy Asian investors, while smaller ones have suffered, experts say. 

"Asian money tends to buy the better-known global manager brands, and also, since the financial crisis, a hedge fund that has an institutional structure helps to attract institutional money," said  Andrew Gordon, head of BNY Mellon's alternative investment services in Asia. "There are a number of smaller managers that have closed down because they haven't managed to attract capital, and had average performance investment." 

Last year, 100 Asian hedge funds closed down, data from hedge fund tracker Eurekahedge show. 

The relatively poor recent performance of Asian stock markets—the MSCI Asia Pacific index is up just 0.04% so far this year, compared with the MSCI North America index, which has gained 4.7%—has also taken a toll. 

The Eurekahedge Asia ex-Japan hedge fund index, which tracks funds in the region, fell 1.2% in January, while the North America index rose 0.75%. 

Och-Ziff Capital Management LLC said Tuesday three of its four funds ticked higher last month, benefiting from a 3.4% rise in the Dow Jones Industrial Average, while its Asia Master Fund declined by 0.1%.

Earlier this week, the head of Highbridge Capital Management's Asia investments,  Carl Huttenlocher, told colleagues he was leaving the multibillion-dollar hedge-fund firm owned by J.P. Morgan Chase
JPM


-0.09
%




 & Co., people familiar with the matter said. He oversees about $2 billion in assets including the Hong Kong-based Highbridge Asia Opportunities Fund, which will be wound down. 

At the same time, high-profile traders are setting up their own hedge funds after leaving investment banks that are in the process of spinning off or shutting down proprietary trading operations, as trading with their own capital is discouraged under the U.S.'s Dodd-Frank legislation. 

Former Goldman Sachs Group Inc. star trader  Morgan Sze registered his new hedge fund, Azentus Capital Management Ltd., with Hong Kong's SFC on Feb. 21, according to the regulator's website. 

Mr. Sze, the former global head of Goldman Sach's principal-strategies proprietary trading desk, is planning a $1 billion-plus hedge fund that will launch in the second quarter, people familiar with the situation said. 

 Write to  Nisha Gopalan at nisha.gopalan@dowjones.com 