It sure looks as if Mitch Daniels is running for president.

The Indiana governor maintained the suspense over whether he will actually enter the GOP primary field during last night's annual dinner of the state Republican Party -- "I am not saying I won't do it" -- but clearly had some presidential-sounding lines crafted for his speech. "We see people as creatures of dignity, not objects of therapy," he said.

However, last night's 1,000 dinner attendees were not actually watching Mr. Daniels the closest. All eyes and ears were on Cheri Daniels, his wife and at times reluctant participant in his political career. Mr. Daniels showcased her achievements as Indiana's First Lady and introduced her as "my bride." The crowd rose to its feet to applaud her and Ms. Daniels gave a highly effective presentation on her efforts to improve health care in Indiana.

Daniels supporters breathed a sigh of relief last night because the major impediment to their man running for president -- his wife's reluctance -- seems to have been overcome. A spate of stories in yesterday's newspapers, including the New York Times and the Washington Post, mentioned the turbulent marital history of the couple. If Ms. Daniels intended to avoid public mention of their past, that political horse was already out of the barn.

"Many years ago Daniels and his wife divorced," writes Peter Roff of U.S. News and World Report. "She left him and their children behind in Indianapolis to move out west, where she married another man. The second marriage didn't last, and the governor and his wife are, to all indications, now happily married once again. Nevertheless, it's not exactly the kind of storybook romance most candidates prefer to portray their marriages as being."

But it appears the Daniels's are willing to have their family history discussed as part of the lead-up to a presidential campaign. While it will certainly be the subject of gossip, Mr. Daniels himself is candid about how he views it. "There was a happy ending," he told a reporter some months ago.

The real challenge that Gov. Daniels faces is convincing conservatives that they can rely on him. He riled social conservatives last year by calling for a "truce" on cultural controversies in light of the nation's fiscal troubles. And he angered right-to-work supporters early this year by refusing to push forward on a bill that was vociferously opposed by unions because he feared it would sidetrack his education reforms. He has yet to sign the anti-tax pledge put out by Americans for Tax Reform and said kind things about the efficiency of a value-added tax during a Hudson Institute speech last year.

Mr. Daniels is clearly a thinking man's candidate for president. But first he will have to convince a broad swath of the conservative movement not to worry about his fidelity to their principles.

To read more stories like this one, please subscribe to Political Diary.