BAGHDAD—Dozens of Iraqis were killed or wounded in bomb attacks targeting pilgrims flocking to the Shiite holy city of Karbala, underscoring the resiliency of the insurgency during a sensitive period for the country's new government.

The bloodshed Thursday followed a series of suicide bombings against security forces this week and brought the overall toll to more than 100 killed and 400 wounded, according to officials.

"It's going to take a long time to completely defeat the terrorists," said Brig. Gen. Jeffrey S. Buchanan, spokesman for U.S. forces in Iraq. "The attacks of the past days remind us just how critical it is for the Iraqi government to maintain pressure on the [insurgent] networks."

Two remotely detonated car bombs parked on the shoulder of the highway at the southern approaches of Karbala exploded in the path of some of the millions of pilgrims marching toward the golden-domed mausoleum of Shiite Imam Hussein in the city center for the culmination of an annual religious rite, according to Maj. Gen. Jihad al-Jaberi, director of the Interior Ministry's Explosive Ordnance Disposal unit.

A similar attack involving one car bomb targeted pilgrims flocking to Karbala from the north, said Gen. Jaberi. His account was backed by a member of the Karbala provincial council. 

However, Iraqi state-owned television, quoting other officials, said the attacks south of Karbala involved bombs packed into suitcases that exploded at a security checkpoint where pilgrims are usually searched before entering the city's limits. 

There were similar discrepancies with the toll. An official at the Interior Ministry, speaking on condition of anonymity, said at least 50 people were killed and 150 wounded, most of them pilgrims. Deputy health minister, Khamis al-Saad, gave a toll of 27 dead and 231 injured.

The bombings in Karbala occurred despite the extraordinary security measures that usually accompany Shiite religious events, which have been targets since the U.S.-led invasion in 2003. Militants linked to al Qaeda consider the practices of Iraq's Shiite majority an aberration of Islam. 

It wasn't clear who was responsible for the attacks.

Tens of thousands of Iraqi soldiers and security force members as well as the country's scarce air assets were mobilized to protect the pilgrims marching toward Karbala from across the country to commemorate the martyrdom of Imam Hussein at a battle in 680 AD that sealed the Sunni-Shiite split in Islam.

Thursday's bombings seemed to only add to the zeal of the pilgrims, as well as eliciting solidarity from many Sunni Iraqis. Many Iraqis would rather forget the bloody sectarian conflict that pitted Sunnis against Shiites a few years ago.

"To die for Hussein is martyrdom," said Ali Ajami, 34 years old, a pilgrim reached by phone. He said many fellow pilgrims started shouting "At your service Hussein!" when they heard about the bombings.

"These are terrorist acts that target innocent people," said Haidar al-Dulaimi, speaking by telephone from the town on Iskandariya between Baghdad and Karbala.

Mr. Dulaimi, a Sunni, said his family was offering food and shelter to resting pilgrims.

Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki, who clinched a second term in December at the helm of an unwieldy coalition government after the prolonged stalemate following last year's elections, urged the country's security forces in a statement Thursday night to "track down the criminals" and those among their own ranks who "neglect their duty."

Earlier on Thursday, a suicide car bomber detonated his payload outside police headquarters in the restive city of Baquba, northeast of Baghdad, killing three and wounding 33, according to a police spokesman there. This came one day after a similar attack against another police facility in Baquba killed four and wounded 57.

On Wednesday Mr. Maliki fired the police chief in Salaheddin province, north of Baghdad, a day after a suicide bomber killed 69 and wounded 150 in an attack against a crowd of police recruits there. 

The renewed bloodshed shatters a period of relative calm since last November and comes at a delicate time for Mr. Maliki.

He has yet to fill key security posts in the new government as the country prepares for the scheduled withdrawal of all of the estimated 50,000 U.S. soldiers that remain in Iraq by the end of this year.

The violence coincided with a call by the country's President Jalal Talabani to all Arab leaders to attend a planned summit in Baghdad in March. 

Iraq is also hoping to jumpstart its economy this year by attracting foreign investors and kicking off desperately needed infrastructure projects as foreign oil companies boost production.

It isn't clear which group is responsible for the recent attacks. U.S. military commanders have warned of a "complex" security environment ahead of the American pullout, with insurgent groups of all stripes competing for relevance—including those tied to al Qaeda, to Saddam Hussein's ousted regime, and groups backed by Iran.

—Munaf Ammar, Ali A. Nabhan and Jabbar Yaseen  contributed to this article.