When Christopher Wheeldon walks into a studio filled with dancers ready to learn a new work, he brings a water bottle, a digital video camera and almost no plans.

There's a bit of chit-chat, then it's time to work. He'll demonstrate a step, giving each movement a count in the music and maybe some verbal description with ballet terms: "jeté, jeté, pas de chat and turn!" He'll take a step back to watch the dancers repeat the phrase of movement. Something in the way they replay the choreography on their own bodies may lead him to a next step. Then something in the music may suggest another idea after that.

 "I just see where it goes," said the 37-year-old ex-dancer, resembling a boy-band lead singer in a tight hoodie sweatshirt and decorated jeans.

Mr. Wheeldon, who is based in New York City, travels internationally to choreograph for the world's top ballet companies. In November, his new "Sleeping Beauty" premiered at the Royal Danish Ballet. In March, his production of "Alice's Adventure's in Wonderland" will open at London's Royal Ballet.

In the studio with dancers, the first steps are tentative. He drinks water from his bottle almost incessantly, something of a nervous habit that results in many bathroom breaks. "It starts out quite anxious because you don't know which way it's going to go. But it always just plays itself out in one way or another," he said. "If things aren't working and you're not satisfied with what you're creating, but you get far into it, it's better not to fight it and just accept that this is what this is in this moment."

Choreographers typically do not have the luxury of time. Every minute counts because studio space is allotted in time increments. Rehearsals must fit into dancers' schedules and, in some cases, union rules. 

Fortunately, speed is characteristic of Mr. Wheeldon's style. For the San Francisco Ballet, he whipped out a 16-minute work for the full company (24 dancers) in nine rehearsal days—and titled it, appropriately, "Number Nine." "I work fiendishly fast. If I'm on a roll, I just go. Sometimes I get into trouble because people can't move that quickly or process choreography that quickly," he said.

To keep track, choreographers typically have an assistant (often known as a ballet master) in the studio to observe and record—a notoriously difficult aspect of ballet. "I usually do a count breakdown that outlines the structure of the music and where the curtain might go up and what is happening at each point," said Mr. Wheeldon. "I have a Flip camera and either I film or my assistant films." For "Alice," Mr. Wheeldon also has a three-ring binder with sheets of paper that note the timing of the music.

In the evening, he will review footage to determine what needs to be achieved the next day. Though that leaves him with "countless hours" of rehearsal videos, it can come in handy when he feels that he's stuck.

Shaping a full-length ballet with a new story, using original music, requires a broader scope of work. A choreographer has to introduce characters and plot in movement. 

Mr. Wheeldon began work on "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland" about a year ago, even though he'd already read several books about Lewis Carroll and had been thinking about the story for a production that fell through at another company.

He brought in playwright Nicholas Wright and composer Joby Talbot to his apartment to establish the scenario and synopsis. "We spent about four or five days going through the story, deciding on which moments and which character we wanted to bring to life. How long should each section be? Where does the intermission come?" 

With the broad plans in place, Mr. Wheeldon could now focus on the character he wanted Alice to be, envisioning a curious 15-year-old on the cusp of becoming a woman. After watching the company, he chose Lauren Cuthbertson. "She's got a feistiness about her, and she's very English," he said. 

Casting abstract ballets is almost the reverse: Mr. Wheeldon chooses a dancer with whom he wants to work, based on factors such as their musicality, ability or personality. Then, in the studio, he tailors the steps to their qualities. And since he has no preconceived notions about the choreography, anything can happen. 

"It can only be put down to the right combination of personalities with the right music," he said. "That's why sometimes you make a bad ballet. Because something's not right. You're not inspired by the dancers, or you think the music is going to move you in a certain way, and then it doesn't."