Ohio Gov. John Kasich, mirroring the moves of other newly elected Republicans, proposed a two-year budget Tuesday that would close an $8 billion gap by selling prisons, reshaping Medicaid and sharply cutting aid to cities.

Mr. Kasich said his proposal would help local governments offset their loss of state contributions by making it easier for them to share services and by erasing a requirement that they pay prevailing union wages on construction projects. 

Pending legislation that would curtail public-employee bargaining rights also would help local governments deal with the cuts, he said. That bill, which passed the state Senate and is expected to pass the House, sparked weeks of protests from tens of thousands of union members and their supporters.

On Tuesday, an advocacy group called Stand Up for Ohio comprising about 30 labor, faith and civil-rights groups, held 13 rallies, arguing that Mr. Kasich's budget proposal would hurt communities hit by high unemployment and foreclosures.

"We're not asking any one group of people to give up any more than any other group," Mr. Kasich said during a news conference Tuesday.

The $55.5 billion general-fund budget would reduce current state aid to municipalities by 25% in the first year and an additional 25% in the second.

The governor's priorities echoed those of GOP newcomers in Wisconsin, Michigan, Florida and elsewhere, who aim to close huge budget deficits by selling state assets, reducing health-care spending, cutting local aid and forcing or negotiating concessions from public workers.

Tim Burga, president of the Ohio AFL-CIO, said Mr. Kasich's budget would hurt middle-class workers by forcing local governments to cut services and lay off workers, or to raise property taxes.

"This draconian budget proposal is less about balancing our budget and more about a partisan political agenda," he said.

Republican state Sen. Keith Faber said he thinks the cuts to local governments are "absolutely" necessary. "Certainly there are going to be sacrifices in this budget that I wished we didn't have to make," he said, but added that residents and businesses are already taxed "beyond their ability."

Mr. Kasich wants the state to sell five prisons to private operators for an estimated $200 million. He also wants to lease Ohio's state-run liquor distribution to a new public-private partnership.

Democratic Senate Minority Leader Capri Cafaro said privatizing the prisons could pose a security risk. She also said the governor's budget would make it harder for municipalities to provide services and merely shift the tax burden to the local level. 

"I think it's going to cause a significant strain on local governments," she said.

Mr. Kasich's plan would cut $1.4 billion from Medicaid, the state-federal health-care program for the poor, which accounts for 30% of Ohio's budget. Doctors and hospitals would be paid less for treating Medicaid patients, and the state would de-emphasize nursing homes in favor of cheaper alternatives. 

The governor proposed sweeping changes to education, including expanding a state voucher program, lifting a cap on the number of charter schools, easing teacher-licensing requirements and allowing parents or teachers to take over failing schools. He proposed having teachers be laid off on merit rather than seniority.

The proposed budget would slightly increase state funding for K-12 education, but wouldn't offset schools' loss of $875 million in federal stimulus funding.

Ohio's superintendent of education, Deborah Delisle, submitted her resignation Tuesday, saying in a letter that Mr. Kasich's staff had asked her to leave.

Like most states, Ohio propped up its budget in recent years with billions of federal stimulus dollars. Those funds largely have been spent, but revenue hasn't recovered, leaving states with major shortfalls.

Mr. Kasich said Ohio needs to operate more efficiently to help create jobs and reverse the flow of workers leaving the state.

The governor campaigned on a pledge not to raise taxes, and the budget proposed Tuesday maintains a 4.2-percentage-point cut in the state income-tax rate that took effect Jan. 1. Ohio's income-tax rates are now 21% lower than they were in 2004.

 Write to  Amy Merrick at amy.merrick@wsj.com and Kris Maher at kris.maher@wsj.com 