NEW YORK—Gold futures fell to a three-month low Tuesday as investors continued looking for a bottom amid the metal's ongoing correction. 

The most actively traded contract, for February delivery, fell $12.20, or 0.9%, to settle at $1,332.30, a troy ounce on the Comex division of the New York Mercantile Exchange. Thinly traded nearby January gold also lost $12.20, to $1,332.30, the metal's lowest close since Oct. 27. 

"We've had a normal correction," said  Sterling Smith, market analyst at Country Hedging in Minnesota. "We'd become laden with profits." 

Gold has lost 6.3% so far this year as investors have gained confidence in the economy, feeling less of a need for gold as a hedge against financial turmoil and European sovereign debt issues. Those fears had sent the metal to a record intraday peak of $1,432.50 in December. 

Now, the declining prices are sending shorter term investors scurrying. 

"A lot of it is panic selling," said  Bob Haberkorn, senior market strategist with Lind-Waldock in Chicago. 

Goldman Sachs also reined in its outlook on the gold market. The bank was tipping a top of around $1,750 a troy ounce in 2012, it now says "the risk is that the peak in gold prices we anticipate in 2012 may have been pulled forward [and] our forecasted peak may occur sooner than expected, in 2011." It maintained its three-, six-, and 12-month gold price targets at $1,480, $1,565 and $1,690, respectively. 

Some of gold's allure as a hedge against rising consumer prices took a hit Tuesday on news that the U.K.'s economy contracted 0.5% in the fourth quarter of last year, well below economists' expectations of a modest expansion. 

With gold already on the defensive, a strengthening U.S. dollar sparked further selling Tuesday by making dollar-denominated gold more expensive for foreign buyers, damping demand. 

The ICE Futures U.S. Dollar Index was up 0.1% after news that U.S. home prices fell in November from a month earlier, extending a downward trend that began in August. 

That left market participants continuing to search for what they see as a fair price for gold. 

"Prices were too high," said  Ira Epstein, director of the Ira Epstein division of the Linn Group. "The market is searching for that zone where prices come back." 

Other precious metals traded in New York also fell. Comex March silver fell 1.9% to settle at $26.805, its lowest close since Nov. 26. Nymex April platinum lost 1.8% and March palladium on the exchange declined 3.9%. 

 Write to  Matt Whittaker at matt.whittaker@dowjones.com 