BRISBANE—Parts of the downtown district of Australia's third-largest city were emptying out Wednesday morning as frightened residents and workers fled floods that have ravaged the state of Queensland, killing more than 10 people and displacing thousands.

Police swept the streets here, warning people to seek higher ground as offices and shops closed, sending workers home to sandbag their properties, or get out of town. Hotels in the central business district normally buzzing in the peak summer season were empty as guests checked out before the Brisbane River began overflowing.





Electricity supplies were cut off as hotels, restaurants and banks all sent staff home as cars and equipment were abandoned.

"Today is very significant, tomorrow is bad, and Thursday is going to be devastating for the residents and businesses affected," said Brisbane Mayor Campbell Newman on Tuesday.

In a country often racked by adverse weather conditions like cyclones and droughts, the monthlong floods that have destroyed infrastructure, crops and shuttered mines across Queensland state rank as one of the worst environmental disasters to befall Australians. 

Water levels across the state are forecast to surpass those last seen in 1974 with the damage bill including lost revenue so far estimated to exceed 10 billion Australian dollars (US$9.9 billion).

"There is no doubt we are now in a very different disaster," said Anna Bligh, premier of Queensland, of which Brisbane is the capital. 

Australian Deputy Prime Minister Wayne Swan on Tuesday cut short a visit to the U.S. as officials predicted the death toll from flooding in his home state is likely to mount. 

Ms. Bligh urged people across the state to stock up on food and water as stores ran out of supplies.

Australian meteorologists say the current weather pattern in Queensland is caused by one of the strongest, if not the most severe La Niña weather event since records began. Such a weather system is caused when water temperatures across the equatorial eastern central Pacific Ocean are lower than normal. 

The flooding is expected to continue across the resource-rich state for at least another week.

Australian Prime Minister Julia Gillard and a number of senior ministers from her cabinet arrived in Brisbane on Wednesday to lend their support to the city's residents. 

The federal government has deployed a fleet of 17 helicopters to the region and readied 700 troops for deployment to help evacuate people trapped in the worst-hit areas around the provincial town of Toowoomba about 70 miles west of Brisbane. 

In the nearby district of Forest Hill, 300 residents were airlifted to safety as the torrent wrecked homes and swept away vehicles on its way to the coast.

"We can't get up the road," said Anne Holland, a 50-year-old vacationer from New Zealand, who was trying to leave the city Wednesday morning before the Brisbane River peaked. Flood waters here are expected to peak at about 21 meters on Thursday.

A survey of a dozen economists by Dow Jones Newswires, estimated that the flooding as a whole will shave around 0.2 percentage point to 0.6 percentage point off Australia's gross domestic product, spread over the final quarter of last year and the first three months of 2011. That is twice as bad a prognosis as they had one week ago. 

But for Brisbane residents and business owners their immediate priority remains to escape while they still can. "It's a little bit like "The Day After Tomorrow,' " said Christine Jung, a 21-year-old marketing executive, referring to the disaster movie. Ms. Jung, who was sent home from her office here, planned to head back to her home in the city's Spring Hill, itself flooded. "It has just got water running through it," she said.

At the Queensland Symphony Orchestra, overlooking the river in the west of the suburb, Chief Executive Patrick Pickett said that harpsichords, double basses and cellos had been moved to higher floors and the building evacuated. 

"We're quite high above the river bank so we're hoping we'll be comfortable, but we're waiting for the river to peak," he said. 

The West End Park Cafe, one of many such businesses in the trendy, inner-city West End suburb, said it was still dry but employees were planning to leave shortly. "We're operating for another hour or so," said owner Amit Maharaj. "We're probably one of the highest points on Montague Road so we're pretty much hoping for the best."

—Geoffrey Rogow and David Fickling in Sydney and Ray Brindal in Canberra contributed to this article.

 Write to  Enda Curran at enda.curran@dowjones.com 