Ben Lambert, who founded the Harlem Day Charter School a decade ago, hopes he can save the failing school by stepping down.

"I'm facing up to the fact that we don't deserve" to have the school's charter renewed for an additional five years, said Mr. Lambert, the founder of a real-estate services company, in an interview from his 22nd floor office overlooking Central Park. Dismal English and math test scores for several years in a row make it unlikely that the school's authorizer, State University of New York, will grant the renewal.

Mr. Lambert, 72 years old, is trying to convince SUNY to allow what he calls a "restructured renewal"—a model that has never been attempted in New York. Another charter operator would take over the school, wiping out Mr. Lambert's board and potentially replacing the principal and teachers. All the students would stay. SUNY is considering the plan, according to a spokeswoman.

Harlem Day, which opened in 2001, is one of the city's oldest charter schools, and one of its worst performing. Mr. Lambert, who has been the chairman of the school's board since its inception, acknowledges that he presided over "a long line of disappointments," including repeatedly picking the wrong principals to lead the school. "We've had a very difficult time finding competent leadership," he said. 

There are 125 charter schools in New York City educating 38,000 students, compared with 1.1 million children in traditional public schools. Since 2001, seven charters have closed. Last month, the city announced it would seek to close Ross Global Charter School because of poor performance. 

In the most recent state tests, charter schools, on average, outperformed the traditional schools in their districts in both math and English. 

After Mr. Lambert's suggestion several months ago, SUNY asked charter operators for applications to take over Harlem Day. Only one applied: Democracy Prep Public Schools, which had the highest-ranked middle school in the city this year based on improvement in student performance. 

Seth Andrew, founder and superintendent at Democracy Prep, said he is prepared to turn around Harlem Day. Charter schools typically begin with one or two grades, with just a few dozen children, helping to create a culture slowly. In the case of Harlem Day, Democracy Prep would be taking over six grades with 260 children in one fell swoop. 

Nevertheless, Mr. Andrew said his organization is qualified to take on the task. He said that 90% of the students who enroll in Democracy are below grade level, and 20% have special needs. "Yet after just a few years," 97% of 10th-graders pass their Regents biology exams and 95% pass their algebra exams, he said. 

"We take students that are behind their peers and propel them to new heights rapidly," Mr. Andrew said. Among the methods that Mr. Andrew uses at Democracy Prep are a longer academic day and year, intensive tutoring and student assessments every six weeks to identify weak areas that need more attention. 

Mr. Lambert grew up on the Upper East Side, and traveled to private school in Riverdale as a child, passing every morning by the public schools in Harlem where poor children learned. In the 1990s, he wanted to do more than just give away his money to schools or organizations. "At some point you say to yourself, 'I'm going to do something about it,'" he said. He put in his own money to acquire a building, and also recruited friends and family to contribute. 

But the school never really found its footing. In a visit to the school in May of 2009, SUNY representatives noted that "in most classes, teaching was not effective." For multiple years in a row, Harlem Day failed to perform better than even the dismal showing among the traditional schools in the same neighborhood.

After yet another leadership change last year, including help from outside consultants, Mr. Lambert thought it was possible that a turnaround was at hand. But this past summer, while he was vacationing, he got a phone call about the test scores. In English, only 20% of the Harlem Day students were on grade level, compared with 36% of kids in the rest of the district. In math, 25% were proficient, compared with 46% among the other neighborhood schools.

"I was devastated," he recalled, choking up during the interview

The test scores were the last straw, and he knew that SUNY was likely to call for the school's closing. He started to think of a way to find a proven charter operator to take over the school and do what he, his fellow board members and school staff had been unable to do. 

"At some point," Mr. Lambert said, "you have to check your ego at the door." 

 Write to  Barbara Martinez at Barbara.Martinez@wsj.com 