 Paul Gigot: Up next on "The Journal Editorial Report," one week into the Libya campaign, what's gone right, what's gone wrong, and what happens after the bombing? We'll ask former deputy defense secretary Paul Wolfowitz. And the political fallout, with the president facing criticism from both parties, has he done enough to bring the Congress, the public, along? Plus, the Wisconsin union battle takes a new twist, as liberals target a state Supreme Court justice. We'll have the latest in that showdown.

 Gigot: Welcome to "The Journal Editorial Report." I'm Paul Gigot. 

After nearly a week of wrangling and uncertainty, NATO agreed late Thursday to take over part of the military operations in Libya. The enforcement of the no-fly zone will now fall to that body, though the U.S. and its allies will continue to manage the bombing campaign, a role President Obama has made clear he is eager to give up. 

Joining me now is former deputy secretary of defense Paul Wolfowitz.

Welcome back. Good to have you here. 

 Wolfowitz: Good to be here. 

 Gigot: So, a week into this, how's it going? 

 Wolfowitz: Well, it seems to me we're in a situation where, for lack of a strategy, we end up in these long circular debates about tactics and the question of who runs the air campaign. It's a very important question, but it is a tactical question. I think the strategic question is: Are we prepared to live long-term with a stalemate in Libya? And that doesn't mean that we're prepared to put American troops on the ground to resolve this conflict, but it has to be a lot more than just this tightening the noose through economic sanctions. I think the real questions that should be addressed are: What kind of support are we going to give to Libyan opposition, starting with the issue of sending a presence--having a presence in Benghazi, recognizing them, agreeing on some principles about the long term for the country, but also providing them with assistance?

 Gigot: OK, I want to get into the opposition, because a lot of people say, "You know, we don't know who they are. We haven't--I mean, they could be Islamists, for example. They may be people who aren't really democrats after all. So if we don't know them that well, why should we back them?" What's your response to that? 

 Wolfowitz: My first response would be, one reason we don't know who they are is because we've made very little effort, as far as I can tell, to get in there and work with them and find out who they are and find out which among them we'd be more comfortable backing and which ones less so. Although I must say, they include quite a few officials from the old regime. The ambassador here in Washington, for example, who's gone over the opposition, is somebody we've known for a while. 

 Gigot: Yeah, a lot of defectors. 

 Wolfowitz: The problem is, we know--we know who's ruling in Tripoli, and it seems to me that that should be enough to create a presumption in favor of the opposition. 

 Gigot: OK, now, the president has said--before the bombing started, he said, look, Gadhafi must go. But now that the bombing has begun, he says the goal of the no-fly zone is not to oust Gadhafi. What do you make of that strategy, and should--should we want to get rid of Moammar Gadhafi? 

 Wolfowitz: I think we should want to get rid of him. But I think--and I think it's correct--in this respect, I guess I would agree, though I'm not sure where the administration really is. I would agree with the proposition, that's something for Libyans to do. But there's just a big gap between saying the goal of the bombing isn't his removal, but we want him removed by some other means. Well, what are those other means? And I think you simply have got to begin to take sides, and we seem to be unwilling to take sides. We seem to be unwilling to support these people. They're incredibly brave people, and they've made a number of indications that they want a unified Libya, that they want a democratic Libya. It's true, these are just words at this point. We could be doing a lot to reinforce the words. We could be doing a lot to make the post-Gadhafi future clearer and better, and we're not doing it. 

 Gigot: So, what--there's some conservatives who are saying, "We don't have a real national-security interest in Libya. We have a humanitarian interest--OK, I understand that--but that's not enough to commit U.S. troops." So why doesn't you tell our viewers what you think the real national-security interest is, that the U.S. has right now, in intervening in Libya? 

 Wolfowitz: But let me be clear, it's not to commit U.S. troops. I think--

 Gigot: Right. 

 Wolfowitz: I think the--

 Gigot: Fair enough. 

 Wolfowitz: The mission of the bombing was basically humanitarian. I think that's important. But I think we have a big interest, especially now that Gadhafi has taken himself even further beyond civilized norms, we have a real interest in how this comes out, and it's not an isolated issue. The whole Arab world is looking at this--people in Egypt and in Tunisia and elsewhere are going around demonstrating with Libyan flags. So how this comes out and how we're seen, which side we're seen as taking, or whether we sit on our hands in a neutral way is important to that whole issue. 

And I'd say finally, I know people worry, well, what's the--what's going to come after Gadhafi. Well, he has already broken the country. We already face big uncertainties about where Libya is going to be. But a Libya where he is still installed in power and controlling some significant part of the country and some significant part of its assets, I think is going to be dangerous for the whole world. 

 Gigot: So that kind of a stalemate, if the opposition takes--retakes half of the country, say, and some of the oil assets, and Gadhafi sits in Tripoli and maybe some other parts of the country--that outcome for you is unsatisfactory and would be seen by the world as a defeat for the United States?

 Wolfowitz: I think absolutely. And I think you will have a man bent on revenge now controlling some significant power. I think that would be bad for the United States. I also believe that the--where we are right now, where it seems as though our main goal is to hand over the bombing mission, the air mission, to someone else--is sending a message to Tripoli that we are prepared to get out of there and leave it to undefined forces, that we are prepared to live with a stalemate. And since so much of this fight at the moment is a matter of psychology and momentum, I'm afraid we're giving him the opportunity to regain the momentum, and that's very bad. 

 Gigot: So your ideal outcome here would be that Gadhafi goes and that some kind of opposition form a new government in Tripoli, obviously with our help, but from their own purposes.

 Wolfowitz: Yes, but what I'd like to see and what--an opportunity we're missing is to get that opposition movement committed to some kind of democratic referendum process, not just a new regime installed with guns. And the more we keep a hands-off attitude, the less we deal with them, the less the chance of locking in, I think, some agreement on the principles that could define a post-Gadhafi future. 

 Gigot: OK, we'll see how this develops. Thank you, Secretary Wolfowitz. 

When we come back, the political fallout from Libya. President Obama's facing criticism from both parties. So what's fair and what's not, and who's flip-flopping when it comes to getting involved in the first place?

 Gigot: Well, when President Obama returned home from his Latin American trip on Wednesday, he was he greeted by a bipartisan chorus of complaints. Some lawmakers believe he overstepped his authority by launching missile strikes into Libya without first consulting Congress. Others think he acted too late. And still others are questioning the clarity of the mission.

In a letter to the president this week, House Speaker John Boehner said, quote: "I and many other members of the House of Representatives are troubled that U.S. military resources were committed to war without clearly defining for the American people, the Congress and our troops what the mission in Libya is and what America's role is in achieving that mission." 

Joining the panel this week, Wall Street Journal editorial board member Matt Kaminski, OpinionJournal.com editor James Taranto and senior editorial page writer Collin Levy. 

So, James, has the president adequately made his case for this mission to Congress and the American public? 

 Taranto: I don't think he has. There was a Gallup poll that came out that found only 47% of Americans support this military action, the lowest proportion of any military action in the last three decades. That's really--

 Gigot: At the start of an action.

 Taranto: Right, exactly--and against Moammar Gadhafi, a guy who has a long record of murdering Americans. Compare that with 1986, when Reagan bombed Tripoli, and it was 71%. So I think the president--I support this action, but I am dismayed at the president's failure to communicate. 

 Gigot: What's happening here? I mean, is it partly the fact that he took off for Brazil or changed his mind so quickly? What's going on? 

 Levy: I think it's that, and I think it's also that he just doesn't seem to own what he's doing. And I think if he doesn't want America to be the tip of the spear in this actions, I think Americans could come around to accepting that. That's even possible. The problem is that he has sort of said this is a humanitarian mission, and then we're also interested in regime change, but he hasn't made his case to the American public. And so until he's able to do that, this is essentially a communications issue for the White House. I think that's one of the biggest problems here. 

 Gigot: Can he make the sale, Matt, do you think, if he actually made an effort to do so? 

 Kaminski: I think he has every constitutional authority to do what he's doing. I mean, we've only--

 Gigot: Let me take that point. Does anybody disagree with that, that the president, in this case, has a responsibility--or has the authority, excuse me, to do this? 

 Taranto: I don't disagree with that, although I do think he should have consulted with Congress more. 

 Gigot: That's a different--

 Taranto: That's a political matter, yes. 

 Gigot: That's a different issue than whether or not he had the legal right under the Constitution to introduce troops, OK. 

 Kaminski: Right, because it's actually sort of quite bizarre for someone as obsessed by perception as this administration is--and you know, they went out of their way to bring the Arab League on board, to bring the U.N. on board, make sure no one in the world was upset by this--for them to sort of ignore the domestic public here. It's strange he did not go on air the night this started--I mean, we are leading this military attack, even though we're trying to pretend we're not.

 Gigot: We're saying we're not. We're saying we're not leading it. We're saying, "Get us out of this as quickly as possible." As Paul Wolfowitz said, they seem to want to back out right now. 

 Kaminski: We launched 140 Tomahawk missiles. The British launched two. We are leading this military operation. 

 Gigot: Yeah, the Qatar four jets is not going to dominate this--this mission?

 Kaminski: I don't think it's going to make a difference there. But Bill Clinton--he went into Kosovo, he went on air from the Oval Office, explained what he was doing, and had the support domestically more or less to do that. It's strange for Obama to go to Brazil, for Robert Gates at the same time to be off in Moscow talking about arms-control deals. 

 Gigot: OK. 

 Taranto: But there's a very simple explanation for this, which is, Obama is projecting an indifference toward this operation because he is indifferent toward it. He's not that interested. America was dragged along on this by the French and the British. Obama, from what we've heard, was dragged along on it by Mrs. Clinton and Susan Rice and Samantha Power.

 Gigot: White House advisers. 

 Taranto: Yeah, I mean, Obama just doesn't care that much. 

 Levy: Because there is this sense, too, that the coalition comes first, and I think that's one of the big issues. You know, generally, whenever we've had a military action, you define the mission and then you get people to go along with you. But here, because the first thing seemed to be to make sure that we had a coalition with us, then, you know, you sort of--then you kind of figure out what the mission is, and I think that that's made it a very difficult sell and difficult for the American people, because they look and they say: "Well, what if one of the coalition partners falters? Do we then step back, too?" So they're just not sure how much conviction is there. 

 Gigot: All right, I want to talk about the Republicans' building opposition to this, if that's what it is. And we have a tape from Newt Gingrich talking to Greta van Susteren on March 7 about what to do about Libya:

  Gingrich: Exercise a no-fly zone this evening, communicate to the Libyan military that Gadhafi was gone, and that the sooner they switched sides, the more likely they were to survive. . . . This is a moment to get rid of him. Do it. Get it over with.  

 Gigot: And this week, this is what former speaker Gingrich said on the "Today" show:

  Gingrich: I would not have intervened. I think there were a lot of other ways to affect Gadhafi. I think there are a lot of allies in the region that we could have worked with. I would not have used American and European forces.  

 Gigot: What do you make of that, Matt? 

 Kaminski: I think he's President Obama's best friend. I mean, he makes him look decisive and mature on national-security issues here. And that's a problem for Republicans. I think that the Republicans--John Boehner makes a good point. They should clarify the mission, figure out who is in charge, make clear to the American public and to yourself what the end goal is. But they're sending the message that they're actually flip-flopping. They're not sure what they would do. 

 Gigot: They're making it seem as if their opposition is not principled but is partisan. How much of it is partisan, and how much is genuinely a sincere support for the operation, but wondering about how it's being implemented? 

 Levy: Yeah, I mean, I think they can't really mix their messages there, though. I mean, I think it's important that Republicans have always had a natural advantage on national-security issues, and I think they're trying to maintain that. But what they're actually doing is sending this mixed message. They're not sure how they really feel about the mission, but they want to make sure that Obama speaks differently about it. So I think that's actually to their detriment here. 

 Gigot: James? 

 Taranto: Well, the Republicans right now are 288 members of Congress. Of course they're going to send mixed messages. It's not a unified--like the executive branch is. I guess--

 Gigot: What do you make of Boehner, were those good questions? 

 Taranto: I think they were good questions. I think the other question Boehner should be asking, with respect to Newt Gingrich, is, "Who is that guy?" I mean, he's been out of office--he's been out of office for 12 years. 

 Gigot: He may be running for president. Probably is running for president, so we're going to be talking a lot more about him, James, but--

 Taranto: I can hardly wait. 

 Gigot: All right, when we come back, just when you thought it was over, the battle in Wisconsin moves to a new arena. This time, liberal groups are targeting the state Supreme Court. Find out why, next. 

 Gigot: Well, if you thought the bitter political battle in Wisconsin was over, here we go again. Liberals there are now trying to make next month's state Supreme Court election into a referendum on Republican Gov. Scott Walker and his push to rein in public unions. They're pouring millions into the state to unseat Justice David Prosser, who, along with six others on the court, could ultimately decide the fate of Walker's controversial budget repair law, which limits collective bargaining rights for state employees. 

So this is not a recall election, Collin. It's a normal judicial retention election, suddenly escalating into a full-scale brawl. Is this the first liberal counterattack against Walker? 

 Levy: Oh, for sure. It's the first liberal counterattack against Walker. It's designed to send a message, I think, not the just in Wisconsin but across the country, that the unions are going to stop at nothing, that this is all-out war, that they're not going to accede to any of these sorts of negotiations and reforms over their issues. And I think that, unfortunately, you've got a justice here who's sort of come into the cross-hairs. And so, although he was very dominant favorite going into this, now that there's all of this money pouring in, that's changing. 

 Gigot: He got 58% of the vote in the primary election. 

 Levy: That's right. Right. 

 Gigot: It's a jungle primary, which means it's nonpartisan and everybody participates.

 Levy: Right. 

 Gigot: The second-place finisher--

 Levy: Her name is JoAnne Kloppenburg. 

 Gigot: Kloppenburg, is she a well-known liberal? 

 Levy: Yes, she's been assistant attorney general, and she's been an environmental attorney. She actually was an intern for the chief justice, liberal chief justice of the Wisconsin Supreme Court, whose name is Shirley Abrahamson, who's very much interested in the balance of power shifting back to her side. So she would be a clear ally there. 

 Gigot: And Kloppenburg got over 25% of the vote in the primary. 

 Levy: Right. 

 Gigot: So Prosser would be a big favorite, except now those polls are a lot closer as the money pours in. 

 Levy: That's right. 

 Gigot: James, what are the stakes here legally? 

 Taranto: Well, that depends. There's already a case that has delayed the publication of this law, which means it can't go into effect, based on a Wisconsin open meetings statute. That case is now at the appellate court level. This past Friday, the appellate court said the Supreme Court needs to take this up right away. So the Supreme Court could actually take that up before even the election takes place. Once the election takes place, if Kloppenburg wins--and you have to say she has a pretty good shot now, because these are low-turnout elections. 

 Gigot: Very low turnout. 

 Taranto: And the ability of groups like--

 Gigot: Intensity really matters.

 Taranto: Right, exactly, exactly. So--but if she's elected, she doesn't take her seat until August. So there's some time to resolve the legal questions before she gets there. 

 Gigot: And the Wisconsin Supreme Court is closely balanced, 4-3, slight tilt to the right. So if you turn one seat, then it's going to be 4-3 on the left. And if they don't get the court to overturn this, they figure the larger political message will be sent that you try to go against us, the unions, and we will get you. 

 Levy: Oh, for sure. And by the way, there's also other legislative issues that will also be affected by this court if it shifts. Other priorities of Walker's because--

 Gigot: Such as? 

 Levy: Such as tort reform--some of the tort reforms that Walker passed early on. You know, the last time the court was a Democratic, liberal majority, they just decimated a lot of different tort-reform issues. And that--

 Gigot: That's been a big priority of Walker. He passed that right away, as soon as they took office in January, February. 

 Levy: Right, so that could also be another big piece of fallout from the election. 

 Gigot: Looks like, James, to me, that the Republicans are caught flat-footed here. I mean, they didn't think that this would be a contest. Are they getting with it here and fighting back and giving Prosser a chance? 

 Taranto: I'm not sure. I think they're probably not doing a good enough job. On the other hand, let's look at what's going on in other states. Michigan has passed new legislation curtailing union power. Ohio is moving in that direction. So there's a lot of--

 Gigot: Indiana is battling over collective bargaining, for teachers narrowly. 

 Taranto: Yeah, that's right, that's right. So in the broader picture, this is a defensive maneuver on the part of the left. Let's keep that in mind. 

 Gigot: All right, we'll be watching. Thanks. 

We have to take one more break. When we come back, "Hits and Misses" of the week. 

 Gigot: Time now for "Hits and Misses" of the week. Collin, first to you. 

 Levy: Paul, Indiana Democrats are apparently trying to outdo their Wisconsin counterparts for how long you can camp out in Illinois to evade your constitutional responsibility to vote on legislation. They left the state to avoid some right-to-work legislation. They've stayed out to evade some education legislation. And altogether, this, in conjunction with what's going on in other states, the state Democrats seem to be sending a message that they're going to be the last public employees to give up the right to strike. 

 Gigot: OK. What is so great about Illinois, anyway? James? 

 Taranto: This week a Chilean reporter in Santiago asked President Obama to apologize for U.S. support of Augusto Pinochet, the anticommunist military dictator. Obama declined. He said, "I can only speak to the policies of the present and the future," not the past. It was a perfect rebuff, noncommittal but firm. So a hit to the president for finally breaking the apology habit. 

 Gigot: All right. Matt? 

 Kaminski: Paul, a hit to federal judge Denny Chin, who this week put the kibosh on Google's plans to create the world's biggest digital library and bookstore. He said that a deal between Google and a group of publishers was not legal because it gave Google a de facto monopoly to profit from the work of authors without their permission. This is a real victory for an idea that goes back several centuries before the digital age, which is copyright laws and intellectual property protections. 

 Gigot: Yes, all politics is local here for us writers when it comes to copyright protection. We'll take that. 

All right, and remember, if you have own "Hit or Miss," please send it to us at jer@foxnews.com. And be sure to visit us on the Web at foxnews.com/journal. 

That's it for this edition of "The Journal Editorial Report." Thanks to my panel and to all of you for watching. I'm Paul Gigot. We hope to see you right here next week. 