Bi Feiyu's novel "Three Sisters," which was awarded the Man Asian Literary Prize last month, follows the lives of a troubled Chinese family during a troubled time: the Cultural Revolution and its aftermath. Wang Yumi, the eldest of eight children, marries a high-ranking military official in order to escape the entrapments of her philandering father and her small hometown, where his dalliances are everybody's business.

Awakened to the perks of high political station, Yumi begins to enjoy the power she gains by marrying the much older man, even if day-to-day life is merely tolerable. Before long her sister Yuxiu joins her as an attendant to the cadre's young daughter. Yuxiu's motives are uncertain; lonely and disgruntled, she is at times simply "waging an intractable war with tranquility." Soon enough the sisters are jostling for household dominance. 

Mr. Bi's novel then leaps forward a decade to find the youngest Wang daughter, Yuyang, as a student at a teacher-training college. Bright but naïve, the girl keeps her head in books to avoid the tumult of a social life. 

One day, a fellow student reports that 20 yuan has gone missing from her things. Wide suspicion erupts; no one evades scrutiny. When the police lose interest in the case, the teachers and students assemble a surveillance unit, "a dragnet that would snare even the most cunning fish." Surveillance turns into vigilantism, which in turn becomes an all-out witch hunt. Yuyang, though innocent, becomes one of the victims.

There is enough material here to flesh out two decently fat novels, and in his trim book Mr. Bi struggles to knit the pieces into a coherent whole. Where he succeeds, "Three Sisters" achieves the loose, rambling sweep of an epic family drama, abundantly detailed and rich with feeling. Where he fails, the result is tedious and exasperating.

 By Bi Feiyu  Translated from the Chinese by Howard Goldblatt and Sylvia Li-chun Lin  Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 288 pages, $24

It is significant that Mr. Bi has managed to make even a half-broad-shouldered novel out of his Cultural Revolution story, because his focus is trauma on a smaller scale than the political upheavals that Western readers may be more familiar with. There are no ideological purges in "Three Sisters," no public humiliations of intellectuals. Instead we get gossip, surprise pregnancies and schoolyard scandal. The Cultural Revolution was not merely a political contest. It roiled families and communities, and the weight of the societal strain, Mr. Bi reminds us, was borne disproportionately by women.

The disruption created as many wily shrews as it did steel magnolias, though. The novel's most memorable image comes when Yuyang reminisces about her eldest sister's fate as a cadre's wife. A few years after getting married, Yumi makes a trip home to the village, fatter and prouder and sporting a gold tooth. She has a new taste for cards and liquor, and after a fevered night of both, she contemplates Yuyang's academic success. "A foolish girl can enjoy foolish good fortune," Yumi thinks to herself in a woozy fit of envy. 

In Yuyang's teachers' college, sex is the preferred weapon to undermine a social opponent; bodice-ripping encounters are surprisingly common. But this is where the novel starts to seem overcooked. More than once a fateful story turn begins with a frantic kiss, a tender caress, a hand placed suddenly under a blouse. In a letter to a suitor, Yumi writes: "Elder Brother Guoliang, I hold you fast in my heart. No one is closer to me. You are the love of my life." 

The problem, here and throughout, is a distinct absence of irony. Mr. Bi's prose is as woodenly earnest as a smitten girl's love letters. We could take his characters more seriously if he took them less seriously.

And perhaps because of the sincere focus on the personal side of the Cultural Revolution, "Three Sisters" stumbles when the concern does get broadened. A recurring theme is the idea that language was warped and strained into bland conformity under Mao Zedong, that even when confessing deepest love the cadres sounded like they were "giving a report on current affairs and political missions." This is not incorrect, historically. But it makes for lukewarm narrative fiction. The men in "Three Sisters" are craven to the point of caricature. As characters they are barely there.

Balancing the personal and political is not easy for any writer of historical fiction. But it is crucial to understanding the Mao era in particular. Amid China's urban rise today, it is worth remembering that the Cultural Revolution was essentially a village phenomenon, executed by small-time party secretaries, men of peasant stock, and reverberating most strongly in rural communities. Not for nothing was Mao's philosophy of government called "agrarian socialism."

It wasn't just that China's economy was agrarian; the culture was too. Over the centuries the Middle Kingdom grew big in its farm towns and villages, each of which suffered the jealousies and petty squabbling endemic to small, isolated places. Upon this Mao built a personality cult, willfully oblivious to the social consequences. The combination of a central personality and a disparate countryside may have sounded appealing to a party functionary who wanted a modern authority to corral the masses into peace and productivity. Instead, it brought out the worst of both worlds.

 Mr. Zhong is a Princeton-in-Asia fellow at The Wall Street Journal Asia's editorial page. 