After years of merely dabbling in disposal of my accumulated stuff, I think I might now be a candidate for "extreme downsizing." If I can be ruthless enough.

Read the complete  Next: Planning & Living the New Retirement report .

The idea has taken hold in recent months. I have been disposing of boxes filled with junk (or, if you prefer, treasured family possessions that have been passed to me though the years) and helping the family of a friend do the same. In the process, my decorating fantasies are shifting from Martha Stewart-style rooms filled with charming doodads to living with (and taking care of) not just fewer and fewer things—but virtually none at all.

Interestingly, this same dream seems to belong to more and more of my friends. While some baby boomers are acquiring second homes, others seem to have resurrected a hippie fantasy of living with the bare minimum of possessions and going where the spirit moves us.

This is not mere decluttering. Extreme downsizing is, like old age, not for sissies. You start by realizing that if you lived in an apartment, you wouldn't need all that lawn and garden equipment. Then it occurs to you that in a warm climate you wouldn't need seasonal wardrobes.

Next, you become aware that you never actually look at the pictures on the walls or the collectibles set out so artfully on the tops of the cupboards. You have proof of this when you realize that the collectibles, which require climbing a ladder to be viewed properly, have grown furry edges. How could you not have noticed?

When I got out of law school, I had three goals for my incipient life as a real person: a real bed that didn't fold out, framed pictures on the wall (instead of posters stuck up with masking tape that doesn't leave a mark and cost you part of your security deposit), and matching dishes and flatware.

I have all of those things. But since I developed back problems, I find I am more comfortable sleeping on the couch. I don't entertain at home except to barbecue in summer; for those rare occasions, paper plates would suffice. As for the pictures on the walls, I think I would prefer more windows and less wall space anyway.

Perhaps this fantasy of having nothing (and thus not needing to dust anything) is based on my dream of moving to Hawaii. Not only is housing there expensive, but getting your stuff there would be even more so. (You can't just throw it all into your car and drive.) When my friends Jan and John built a home on Grand Cayman, they chartered a small plane and stuffed it with all of the things they couldn't trust to shippers, including their computer, their dog and their cat. Needless to say, it cost them a mint to move. Less stuff means less to ship (and less space needed there).

The electronic age is aiding and abetting those of us who dream of a bare-bones existence. As someone who comes from a family of readers and writers, I have reluctantly come to realize that those wall-to-wall bookshelves can be replaced by a single hand-held electronic reader. Research can be done so quickly and efficiently online that you no longer even need a dictionary—and I don't know anyone who still uses a telephone book.

There are different ways to embark on this. My friend Barbara had a Dumpster placed on her driveway and filled it—twice. My friend Sharon rented a storefront and has run an antiques and collectibles shop without having to purchase any inventory. (It all came out of her house.) Her friend Carol, left to downsize after the death of her husband, purchased a condo and carefully moved over all of the things that she couldn't part with. Then she called an auction house and let them cart off everything that was left.

Memories of the days when I could throw my dog and my swimsuit into my Volkswagen Beetle and take off are tempting me again. If years of exposure to House & Garden (later HG) led me to believe that I needed a wallpaper-lined linen closet with piles of matching towels in neat stacks, the call of the open road is stronger than that.

So I have been sorting, cleaning and disposing—and suddenly understanding where my mother was coming from when she started to do the same. ("Here," she would say, handing me a bag of miscellany. "This is yours." Most of the time only some of it was; the rest belonged to my siblings but found its way into my house via those bags.) There comes a day when things you used to treasure seem less important than the time it takes to look after them.

Not that any of this is easy. I know I talk a good game. But the key, I'm discovering, is ruthlessness. For instance, I found myself backpedaling recently over what to do with a present that my late Aunt Anna had given me. She wanted me to have something of hers to remember her by, she said. I chose a triangular china plate that I now keep next to my stove, where it holds my salt and pepper grinders and a small bottle of olive oil.

Aunt Anna was right: Every time I reach for the salt or pepper, I think of her. But lately I've also been picturing a tiny condo I once rented in Hawaii. There was no counter space in that condo for my triangular plate. So the idea got into my head that if I couldn't find a place for that plate, I couldn't go.

My friend Sharon snickered at this roadblock. "You've got to have room for a single china plate," she told me. "Stick it in the cupboard."

But that defeats the purpose! To do extreme downsizing, you've got to emulate Mother Hubbard. Your cupboards have to be virtually bare. Lose sight of that, and in no time flat your shelves will be groaning again—with objects you can't bear to give up, and others you can't remember why you kept. Say goodbye to dreams of "throw your Pucci in your Gucci and let's go."

So…give me some time. I'm determined to get extreme. If I manage it, I hope Aunt Anna will forgive me.

 Ms. Kozak is a lawyer and writer in Wisconsin. She can be reached at next@wsj.com. 