The strongest earthquake to hit Japan in at least 300 years rocked the country's eastern coast on Friday afternoon, killing hundreds and perhaps many more. The earthquake—at magnitude 8.9, one of the five biggest since 1900—triggered a 30-foot tsunami that engulfed cars and buildings in the north, forcing tens of thousands of people to evacuate their homes and setting off tsunami warnings for 53 countries around the world. Aftershocks continued well into the night, with one clocked at magnitude 7.1, according to the U.S. Geological Survey, which estimated the damage could reach tens of billions of dollars. The government late Friday declared an emergency at one of the country's nuclear-power plants, after the quake automatically shut down its reactors and caused problems with its cooling system. Beyond the quickly mounting death toll, the disaster could derail the country's nascent economic recovery and increase Japan's already massive public debt, currently at 200% of gross domestic product. 

Forces loyal to Libya's dictator stepped up their offensive against rebel fighters in the east. At the same time, Gadhafi's government suffered a series of diplomatic setbacks, as France formally recognized Libya's main opposition group, the U.S. said it would hold talks with the rebels, and European nations extended sanctions on the Libyan government and its banks. Elsewhere in the region, Saudi police fired over the heads of protesters a day before a planned pro-democracy "day of rage." Arab Gulf states approved a $20 billion economic-aid package for Bahrain and Oman, which have also seen large antigovernment protests. Anger at authoritarian regimes simmered in Azerbaijan as well, where police detained more than 40 people who tried to repeat Egypt's Facebook uprising. And Iran's highest-ranking moderate official was ousted from his position at the head of the country's powerful clerical committee, a move that appeared to consolidate power in the hands of the Islamic republic's hard-line rulers. 

Republican senators in Wisconsin maneuvered around Democrats to pass Gov. Scott Walker's legislation stripping public employees' unions of collective-bargaining rights. That set the stage for other cost-cutting states to pursue similar steps, in one of the broadest challenges to organized labor in decades. In national politics, the Senate rejected both parties' budget-cutting proposals. Three Republicans—conservatives with close ties to the tea party who want deeper cuts—joined all Democrats in voting against the GOP bill to cut $57 billion from current spending. Ten Democrats and one liberal independent joined all Republicans to vote down the Democratic plan to cut less than $5 billion. Longer term, the efforts of a bipartisan group of senators to attack the budget deficit is picking up support, raising hopes of reaching a deal within weeks. The "Gang of Six" are looking to slice $4 trillion off the government's projected deficit over 10 years. 

The Obama administration lifted a freeze on new military trials at Guantanamo Bay and laid out its legal strategy to indefinitely detain prisoners the government says can't be tried but are too dangerous to free, reversing its position.

The head of National Public Radio resigned under fire after a video created by a conservative activist posing as a member of an Islamic group showed NPR's fund-raising chief disparaging the Republican Party and tea-party activists.

Families shouldered a smaller debt burden in 2010 than at any point in the previous six years, by defaulting on their loans and scrimping on expenses. That puts them in position to start spending more—and goosing the economy. But worries over rising commodity prices, exploding Chinese trade and the threat of Middle East turmoil to oil supplies remains. 

The FDA approved the first new drug for lupus in more than half a century. The approval marks one of the first big bets a major drug company—GlaxoSmithKline—has placed on the effort to mine data from the human genome to discover and develop new medicines. 

A young woman who stood up to Mexico's drug gangs fled her post to seek asylum in the U.S. The flight of  Marisol Valles, who had been celebrated for stepping forward to lead her Mexican hometown's police department after a predecessor was beheaded by gangs, adds to Mexico's struggle to convince both Washington and its own people that it can take on the gangs. 

Jared Lee Loughner pleaded not guilty to 49 federal charges including murder and attempted assassination in the January shooting outside Tucson, Ariz., that killed six and injured 13, among them U.S. Rep. Gabrielle Giffords. Giffords is making "leaps and bounds" in her recovery, her doctors said Friday.

U.S. companies' cash holdings at the end of 2010.

Corporate America is raking in cash as businesses cut costs and boost profits, but it doesn't seem to know what to do with the money. As of the end of 2010, cash and other liquid assets made up 7% of the total assets of nonfarm, nonfinancial corporations, according to the Federal Reserve. That's the highest level since late 1963. The hesitance to spend the cash on hiring or expansion suggests managers still don't have a lot of faith in the recovery, or want to have plenty of their own funds around in case financial markets seize up again. 

-- Mark Whitehouse 

The NFL descended into turmoilas talks between owners and players broke off, setting up a potentially lengthy court battle that could have serious consequences for both the league and the sports industry in general.

Renault prepared to exonerate the three managers it fired for alleged corporate espionage, possibly presaging a shake-up in the French auto maker's senior management. In one scenario being discussed by the board, Chief Operating Officer Patrick Pelata would resign.

A judge cleared the way for movie-rental company Blockbuster to sell itself to a group of hedge funds, after lawyers brokered a deal with movie studios that had objected to the sale terms. The ruling gives the movie studios a better deal and staves off immediate liquidation of the assets.

General Motors finance chief Chris Liddell is leaving after just 14 months on the job, to be succeeded by Dan Ammann, a former Morgan Stanley managing director, who became the auto maker's treasurer a year ago. 

LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton, already the luxury-goods industry's No. 1 player, moved far ahead of its rivals with the $6.01 billion takeover of Italian jeweler Bulgari. 

  Charlie Sheen sued Warner Bros., a  Time Warner unit, and "Two and a Half Men" co-creator Chuck Lorre for $100 million plus punitive damages over his firing from TV's most popular sitcom after outbursts and a history of drug abuse and arrests. 

Prosecutors played two of their best cards in the trial of Galleon Group founder  Raj Rajaratnam: testimony from their star witness and secretly taped telephone recordings of the former hedge-fund manager allegedly receiving inside information. 

The historic bull market marked its two-year anniversary with a rocky week, as uncertainty about U.S. jobs, debt in Europe and turmoil in the Middle East and North Africa kept investors on edge. Stocks held up Friday despite a giant earthquake in Japan. The Dow industrials posted three-digit swings on Tuesday and Thursday, then rose 0.5% Friday to close at 12044.40, down 1% for the week. Crude prices hovered above $101. The U.S. expects the average price for 2011 to be $105 a barrel, up from last month's $91 estimate. 

EU officials are poised to let member nations use their own definitions of a key gauge of banks' health in coming "stress tests." Skeptics fear a rerun of last year's tests, which were panned for giving passing grades to banks that later required bailouts. The chairman of the European Banking Authority said the scenario envisioned in the 2011 tests is "more severe than last year."

Municipal-bond issuance is on pace for its lowest quarter in at least 11 years, as government borrowers wrestle with strained budgets. Meanwhile, Pimco founder  Bill Gross said the world's biggest bond fund had sold all its Treasury debt. Gross has recently characterized Treasurys as artificially expensive because of the Fed's bond-buying program. 