Finland's caretaker government struck an agreement with opposition lawmakers to win the country's backing of an aid package for Portugal, clearing the way for European Union finance ministers to sign off on the deal in meetings next week. 

Officials from the European Commission and leading euro-zone countries have said finance ministers will approve the three-year, €78 billion ($112.4 billion) package of aid from the EU and the International Monetary Fund at meetings Monday and Tuesday in Brussels. 

"I would assume that the finance ministers...next week will adopt the Portuguese program," German Deputy Finance Minister Jörg Asmussen said Wednesday in Berlin.

But all 17 euro-zone members must approve the deal, including Finland, where the euro-skeptic True Finns won an unprecedented 19% of the vote in national elections last month. The prospect that they could enter a governing coalition with the conservative National Coalition Party of current Finance Minister Jyrki Katainen raised fears that they could complicate efforts to win Finnish support for both Portugal's aid package and EU treaty changes set for approval later this year. 

But without a government, Finland's approval fell to a 25-member committee that includes lawmakers from each of the eight parties in parliament. The True Finns have five seats on the committee after their electoral triumph, but Mr. Katainen said Wednesday evening that the Social Democratic Party had agreed to back the bailout, giving him 18 votes on the committee with the votes from his own party and a mandate to support the bailout. 

"Finland is now set to act in a responsible way," Mr. Katainen said. 

Finland was the last euro-zone country to guarantee its support for the plan, people familiar with the negotiations say, and EU officials had sought to play down the likelihood that Finland would reject Portugal's package. "I trust that Finland can support the EU-IMF program for Portugal for the sake of economic sustainability of the EU as a whole," Olli Rehn, the EU's economy commissioner, said Tuesday. Mr. Rehn has said previously that the package must be approved by May 25, in time for Portugal to receive a first tranche of aid in June. 

Officials in Portugal, also led by a caretaker government since Prime Minister José Sócrates dissolved his government in March and called for national elections, said last week that they were prepared to accept a bailout package from the EU and International Monetary Fund, and to pursue tough austerity measures in return. 

Both Mr. Sócrates' political allies and opposition lawmakers have agreed to support the plan, so whoever wins the June elections will be expected to pursue federal spending cuts, reform labor and housing markets, and privatize companies including national airline TAP Air Portugal and power companies Energias de Portugal SA and Redes Energéticas Nacionais SGPS SA.

—Riva Froymovitch in Brussels contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Patrick McGroarty at patrick.mcgroarty@dowjones.com 