BERLIN—German leaders are divided over whether to boost the bailout fund for euro-zone countries, amid growing calls from other European leaders to greatly expand the currency bloc's safety net.

German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble voiced support for changes that would significantly raise the bailout fund's true lending capacity, which is currently much lower than its headline €750 billion ($985 billion) size due to quirks in its fine print. "We must discuss whether it wouldn't be right that €750 billion is actually available" as rescue loans, Mr. Schäuble told foreign correspondents in Berlin on Thursday.

Doing so wouldn't amount to increasing the fund, Mr. Schäuble argued: It would merely fulfill a pledge Europe made in May of last year. But it would require considerably beefing up the main part of the safety net with extra credit guarantees or capital from euro-zone governments, he said.

While Mr. Schäuble, Germany's most powerful supporter of deeper European integration, signaled flexibility on new measures to combat the euro-zone debt crisis, other German officials dismissed proposals to boost the rescue fund as unhelpful. Economy Minister Rainer Brüderle said Thursday that the safety net is "sufficient" as it stands, adding: "I don't think it's good to make new proposals every day." 

German Chancellor Angela Merkel hasn't come out in favor of such an increase. Her spokesman, Steffen Seibert, said Wednesday that a discussion on increasing the size of the bailout fund "isn't pertinent at the moment." 

The European Union has for days been debating an overhaul of its aid mechanisms for euro-zone countries struggling with debt, with the aim of presenting what Mr. Schäuble called a "comprehensive package" by March that would restore market confidence about the EU's ability to master the crisis. 

Germany's finance minister has suggested increasing the European Financial Stability Facility's lending capacity. Among the options:

 --WSJ research 

But Europe's ability to take bold action is being held hostage by domestic politics in Germany, the EU's biggest economy and its financial powerhouse. In a replay of last year's divisions over how to handle a budget crisis in Greece—the first euro member to lose investors' trust because of its debts—Ms. Merkel, wary of electoral fallout at home, is putting the brakes on ambitious proposals by other European leaders.

A chorus of top EU officials is calling for a bigger bailout fund, to reassure markets that Europe has enough firepower to support any country that might need aid, including a large euro-zone nation such as Spain. 

Jean-Claude Trichet, president of the European Central Bank, called Thursday on euro-zone governments to increase the size and flexibility of the euro zone's main rescue fund, the €440 billion European Financial Stability Facility. "The message is to improve the effectiveness of this instrument, both in quantity and quality," Mr. Trichet said.

His words echoed those of the head of the EU's executive arm, European Commission President José Manual Barroso, who said Wednesday that the bailout mechanism's "funding capacity must be reinforced." 

Not all euro-zone members support the bailout fund. The finance minister of Slovakia, one of the euro area's poorest members, said Thursday that efforts to defend the euro via the bailouts are failing, and warned that financial stresses could increase over the next two years. Slovakia's right-leaning government, which took office last year, refused to participate in the Greek rescue package and has criticized the establishment of the EFSF. 

However, the main problem with the bailout system agreed to in May between the EU and the International Monetary Fund is that Europe's main contribution—the EFSF—can in reality lend far less than the €440 billion in credit guarantees with which euro-zone governments have so far equipped it. It has already lent about €17.5 billion to Ireland. Because of the entity's need for a high credit rating, its lending rules, and other factors, it would be able to lend only about a further €240 billion if both Portugal and then Spain were to need help.

Further funds are available from the EU's budget and from the IMF, but many economists say the total would still fall short of Spain's financing needs in the next three years, which come to around €350 billion, according to analysts at HSBC. Spain insists it won't need any aid, a case bolstered by its success Thursday in auctioning about €3 billion of five-year bonds, though it had to offer high interest rates. 

Mr. Schäuble said doomsday scenarios that would exhaust currently available aid are unlikely. But he acknowledged widespread uncertainty in financial markets about whether Europe has set aside enough money to cover all eventualities. 

"This is an argument for us to make it clear that what we agreed in May is truly available," he said. To raise the EFSF's true lending capacity, governments could back it with "many more guarantees," or they could "equip it with capital," he said, implying that the Luxembourg-based fund could then operate like a bank, with a loan portfolio backed by a capital reserve. Governments could also promise to replenish this reserve if needed, he said. 

Such measures wouldn't enlarge the bailout fund, he argued, but merely fulfill its size as originally advertised. 

Mr. Schäuble's comments show that the finance ministry is searching for a compromise between pressure from around Europe to expand the safety net, and political fears in Germany of a voter backlash if Berlin is seen as sending more taxpayer money to euro-zone countries that have failed to balance their books. 

The finance minister, a veteran conservative who is Germany's longest-serving federal lawmaker, said Europe should aim for an ambitious agreement in March on the bailout fund and other aspects of its crisis strategy, so that investors are finally reassured about the euro zone's stability. 

However, Mr. Schäuble is less constrained by domestic politics than his boss, Ms. Merkel, who has struggled for months to manage her unruly supporters in parliament.

—Bernd Radowitz in Berlin and Sean Carney in Bratislava, Slovakia, contributed to this article.