BERLIN—German retail sales slumped unexpectedly for a second month in December, indicating that the recovery in household demand remains fragile. 

An early onset of winter pushed unemployment slightly higher in December, creating some pressure for retail sales. Retail sales declined 0.3% in December from the previous month, in price-adjusted terms, after falling a revised 1.9% in November, the Federal Statistics office said Monday. The data don't include car sales. 

"German retail sales ex-cars disappointed once again," said  Alexander Koch, economist at UniCredit Research. "Ice and snow created considerable headwind for the retail business during the Christmas shopping season." He added that a recent rebound in consumer price inflation, especially for daily-use products, poses a potential for negative effects on the shopping behavior of households. But Mr. Koch acknowledged that retail sales figures are revision-prone. 

Retail sales were down 1.3% from December 2009, despite the fact that there was one more working day in December than in the same month in 2009. An early and harsh onset of winter, however, had driven up slightly the number of unemployed in December. The weather pushed the unadjusted number of people out of work back above 3 million, reaching 3.016 million, or 7.2% of the workforce. 

Unemployment, however, is expected to fall throughout 2011, and consumer confidence, as measured by market research group GfK, is expected to rise. GfK's forward-looking consumer climate index for February came in at 5.7 points, up from an upwardly revised 5.5 points in January. The first reading for January was 5.4 points. 

Both falling joblessness and rising consumer confidence could help boost retail sales in coming months. Food, drink and tobacco sales fell 0.1% in December from the year-earlier period, in price-adjusted terms. Nonfood sales rose 0.4% over that period, the statistics office said. 

Despite recent disappointments, private consumption could still become the growth surprise in 2011, ING economist  Carsten Brzeski said, adding that wage developments in particular could contribute to that.

"After today's numbers it might sound like a whistling in the dark, but with increasing wages, dropping unemployment and pent-up demand, private consumption should become an important growth driver this year," Mr. Brzeski said. 

