BRUSSELS—The European Union is proposing an areawide framework for confronting bank and investment-firm failures that urges bondholders to share the burden. 

The EU executive arm, the European Commission, Thursday released a 100-plus page consultation paper that aims to abolish the excuse that a bank is too big to fail. The paper, which is open to public comments until March 3, asks whether bank bondholders should share in paying for future bailouts and seeks to give greater authority to national regulators over bank leadership and business strategies when a country's economic stability is at risk. 

The goal is for key bank services, such as withdrawing deposits and making payments, to remain unaffected in the process of winding down a bank and for the cost of that winding-down not to weigh on government budgets. 

"It can be intrusive," said an EU official, but should be used when "necessary, justified, proportionate and aimed at achieving the right outcome." 

The lack of an EU-wide game plan and rules for engagement between countries in the case of a bank collapse heightened the uncertainty during the financial crisis, given the number of institutions that operate across borders and co-dependency between countries. The crisis highlighted that many states were ill-prepared to provide financial assistance to banks integral to their economic systems. Banks, too, were found unready to plan for their own exits. 

Officials intend to propose legislation in early summer, although it is unlikely to come into force before 2013. 

"A clear framework to manage cross-border banking crises is an essential complement to our work on supervisory and bank reforms," said  Michel Barnier, the European commissioner for internal markets and services.

"[We] must put in place a system which ensures that Europe is well-prepared to deal with bank failures in an orderly manner—without taxpayers being called on again to pay the costs," Mr. Barnier said in a statement. 

EU officials admit the legal hurdles to holding secured bondholders—those that have rights to actual assets in the case of bankruptcy—responsible will likely keep them safe. However, the rights of unsecured bondholders are up for debate. 

"We haven't seen creditors of any classes bearing significant losses during the crisis," a diplomat said. 

Still, the officials said any rules that are approved would only affect new bonds. However, if bonds are rolled over because of a creditor's inability to repay—as is expected to happen in Ireland—it is possible these bonds would be subject to the new provisions when they come into effect. 

The consultation paper targets all banks, regardless of size, and certain investment houses. 

The paper said lenders and shareholders are unlikely to be able to cover the total cost of a resolution. As a result, the European Commission intends to propose that governments establish national funds whose sole purpose is covering the costs of failed banks, a requirement that could be met through national deposit-guarantee schemes. 

The initiative follows a Group of 20 summit last year when leaders committed to recommendations from the Financial Stability Board to reduce the moral hazard posed by systemically important financial institutions. 

The EU paper suggests enhanced powers for national supervisors allowing them to intervene early, to require the replacement of management, to make an institution implement a recovery plan or to withdraw from specific activities or business lines that pose an "excessive risk to its financial soundness." 

Officials also said supervisors should be able to monitor the growth rate of bank balance sheets much more closely and have the authority to impose limits if necessary. 

In the case of default or bankruptcy, the EU advises that regulators have the power to transfer bank assets and liabilities to either another private-sector entity or a bridge bank, a temporary institution set up to resolve outstanding deposits and liabilities. 

Another proposal would require banks to issue a certain level of debt that could be bailed in. The EU also suggested the creation of a special manager to replace or assist existing bank management to stabilize the situation, although their decisions would require shareholder approval for any actions that ordinarily require such clearance. 

 Write to  Riva Froymovich at riva.froymovich@dowjones.com 