The new provisions of the Indian competition law that deals with mergers, also referred to as anti-trust law in some countries, will go into effect June 1. 

While the additional changes will bring more regulation to the table, it is expected to cause significant delays before private equity deals can close. Further, there could be potential conflicts between the Competition Act and other Indian laws and regulations, including the Takeover Code and capital and disclosure requirements. 

The objective of competition law is to protect the interest of consumers by ensuring competition in the market. Many countries, including other emerging-market economies like Brazil, Russia and China have robust competition regimes. In India, competition law was enacted in January 2003 to replace the earlier law which focused on curbing monopolies. 

While the law already prohibits anti-competitive agreements and abuse of a dominant market position, the provisions relating to "combinations" that go into effect this June will help in regulating transactions that may have an adverse effect on competition in India. 

Combinations, or merger-control regulations, include acquisition of control, shares or voting rights, as well as mergers and amalgamations. The Competition Act will regulate all such combinations that meet the prescribed threshold for assets held within India and across the world of both the acquirer and target companies. 

For instance, in the context of a private equity transaction, if the investor and the target company together have an asset size exceeding 15 billion rupees ($320 million) in India, the transaction would qualify as a combination. For foreign private equity funds that have made investments in India, that threshold may have to be evaluated taking into consideration their existing investments. 

Subject to certain exceptions, the provisions relating to combinations would apply to any acquisition of shares in a company, irrespective of the percentage of shares being acquired or the company being listed on a stock exchange. 

If a transaction is regarded as combination, the Competition Commission of India would need to approve it. The Commission needs to get a notice within 30 days of the execution of any agreement or other document for acquisition, while it may take up to 180 days to respond to the approval request. By default, if the Commission is unable to pass an order within the prescribed time limit, the transaction is deemed approved. 

The impact of the competition law on foreign private equity investors does not seem to be intentional. However, given the language used in the act, such investors would need to seek an approval if the transaction is regarded as a combination. Given the number of deals that involve foreign private investors in India, this class of investors may consider approaching the regulator for a relaxation. 

The federal government already has eased the provisions relating to combination deals by public financial institutions, banks and venture capital funds in India. The only class of foreign investors specifically given a relaxation is foreign institutional investors. 

It seems like the intention under the competition law is to provide a reprieve to financial investors. However, no specific exemption has been provided for foreign venture capital investors (registered with SEBI), or for other types of foreign investors that seek to act merely as financial investors.

The federal government should reconsider the provisions of the competition law in the broader context of all current and proposed regulations, and not pass a law that may work just in isolation.

—Sheetal Nagle is associate director and Rashmi Soans is manager with PwC, India's tax and regulatory services. 