Archaeologists working in the Arabian peninsula are redrawing the road map of the first human migrations out of Africa, offering new evidence that roaming bands of relatively modern humans reached the Persian Gulf 125,000 years ago—about 50,000 years earlier than previous estimates.



An international research team reported Thursday that, contrary to previous scholarship, these early migrants may have traveled directly from Africa to eastern Arabia, rather than moving up the Nile Valley or through the Near East, by fording the shallows of the Red Sea in an era when sea level was lower than today.

"Our findings should stimulate a re-evaluation of the means by which we modern humans became a global species," said Simon Armitage, a geologist at the University of London, who worked on the study.

The researchers speculated that changes in ancient climate, as glaciers receded and the Arabian Desert briefly bloomed, may have spurred these first waves of human migration, rather than advances in the technology of tools.



"Up until now, we thought of cultural developments leading to the opportunity of people to move out of Africa," said archaeologist Hans-Peter Uerpmann at Eberhard-Karls-University Tübingen, in Germany, the team's senior scientist. "Now we see, I think, that the environment was the key to this."

As evidence for their theory, the researchers offered their recent discovery of an isolated cache of unusually primitive stone tools at a rock shelter at Jebel Faya in the United Arab Emirates, coupled with a reconstruction of the regional climate during the period when the implements were made. The team documented their find, located about 34 miles from the Persian Gulf, Thursday in the journal Science.

By analyzing the sands in which the tools were buried, Dr. Uerpmann and his colleagues determined that the implements belong to a time much earlier than previous estimates of the first human journeys from East Africa, where anatomically modern humans first appeared about 200,000 years ago. 

No early human remains were found with the hand axes and scrapers, so nobody knows yet who made the tools, where these people came from or where they went. 

But the distinctive stone axes, blades and scrapers resemble Stone Age tools often found in East Africa, rather than more advanced tools found at sites elsewhere in the region, the researchers reported. 

By a process of elimination, the researchers concluded that these tools could be evidence of previously unknown migrations from East Africa across the Arabian Peninsula, perhaps to as far away as India.

The Arabian Peninsula was much wetter at that time, with more vegetation, wildlife and a network of rivers and lakes, according to the evidence of sea-level changes and climate during the period. The Bab al-Mandab Strait, which today separates Arabia from the Horn of Africa, also would have been shallower, making the passage much easier, the researchers said.

"They could have used rafts or boats, which they certainly could make at that time," said Dr. Uerpmann. "They are our ancestors. I have no doubt about that."

 Write to  Robert Lee Hotz at sciencejournal@wsj.com 