ABU DHABI—Syria's widespread and deadly crackdown on anti-regime protesters has emboldened a new set of voices, including students in Syria's two largest cities who are protesting the crackdown itself.

Scores from Aleppo University were detained by security forces Tuesday and Wednesday after more than 1,000 students marched through streets around the northern city's university. Activists said the protesters were demanding Syria's military lift its ten-day siege on the southern city of Deraa, where Syria's protests started seven weeks ago, that has left its residents cut off from electricity, food and water.



The unrest marks the first significant protests in Aleppo, Syria's second-largest city and an industrial center that is seen as a stronghold for loyalists of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad. Aleppo remained quiet even as thousands marched across Syria on Friday and hundreds chanted against the regime in a central district of Damascus, the conservative capital. 

Students also gathered to protest Wednesday at Damascus University, according to reports posted online by pro-democracy activists.

The protests come after anti-regime activists, preparing for a drawn-out confrontation with Mr. Assad's regime, called for sit-ins across the country to protest the Deraa siege. The spread of protests into urban centers or universities, penetrating more affluent areas at the core of Syria's still largely silent majority, risks further polarizing a country sharply divided between supporters and opponents of Mr. Assad's regime. 

Activists say that after Friday's large demonstrations, military officers joined plain-clothed security forces in door-to-door home raids across most of Syria's southern Houran region and in a handful of major suburbs around the capital Damascus. On Sunday in Deraa, 499 people were arrested in house-to-house raids, according to Amnesty International. At least 66 people were arrested Tuesday in Zabadani, a city northwest of Damascus close to the border with Lebanon, one activist said.

In all, as many as 8,000 Syrians are now missing, according to Insan, a Europe-based human-rights and pro-democracy group that focuses on the Middle East. Security forces have released many "severely tortured" detainees over the last 10 days, Insan said Tuesday in an updated brief on Syria. 

Despite the rising death toll from weeks of unrest, people across Syria continue to protest the government of President Bashar al-Assad. See events by day.

Track events day by day in the region.

Popular demonstrations in Tunisia toppled a president and spread to countries across the region. See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

"Released detainees were instructed by security forces to share what happened to them in detention," the note said. 

In an initial response to protests, Mr. Assad sacked his government and agreed to lift a decades-old emergency law. Syria's new government has pledged commitment to reforms in a series of statements carried by the state news agency. But Mr. Assad hasn't addressed the issue of reforms or protests for nearly three weeks.

Syria's government has given a deadline of May 15 for people who have been "deceived into taking part in unlawful acts, either bearing arms, breaching security or making misleading statements" to give themselves in for amnesty, according to an interior ministry statement. 

Aleppo's protests broke out Tuesday, according to accounts by activists and videos posted online. Foreign journalists have been expelled from Syria or are barred from covering areas of protests.

"Aleppo has been sleeping," said an activist who helped organize the protests there. He said by telephone that the demonstration started at about 8:30 p.m. Tuesday when 200 to 300 students from Deraa marched around the Aleppo University campus.

A video of the protest posted on YouTube shows hundreds of students pulsing their fists in the air, chanting "break the siege" and "God is great." 

The activist said Wednesday that security forces began to disperse the protesters using tear gas and tasers. Students watching from their dorm-room windows jumped down to defend them, he said.

"When we saw our classmates being beaten, we started pounding the windows from above to shatter glass on the security forces," the activist said. 

The protest grew to more than 1,000 students, activists estimated, the city's largest yet. The crowd had reached some 1,500 students, the activist said by telephone Wednesday, when security forces brought out speakers and blasted patriotic songs to counter the protesters' chanting.

About 75 students were detained during and after the protest, and at least five members of the security forces were severely injured, the activist said.

Insan, the human-rights group, says it has verified 2,843 names of detainees and is working to verify what is says is more than 5,000 more. Intermittent telecommunications in key cities and suburbs where the detentions have been concentrated have made it difficult to reach families to verify, it said. 

Insan estimates 632 people have been killed in Syria since mid-March. A preliminary list compiled by two London-based organizations—the Syrian Human Rights Committee and the Arab Orient Center for Strategic and Civilization Studies—names 854 killed in the uprising as of April 29. 

"This crackdown can not and will not paralyze the movement," said Wissam Tarif, Insan's executive director and a pro-democracy activist, in a post on his Twitter page. "It is empowering the movement and gaining more sympathy," he wrote.

"This slow momentum building might secure a stronger uprising, and maybe a better outcome in the end," said Obeida Nahas, head of the London-based Levant Institute, a Syria think tank, and an opposition member who is affiliated with the Muslim Brotherhood.

While reports of rifts within the military have surfaced, the regime's main constituents—including the army—appear to remain steadfast. Residents of Deraa have reported particular violence by soldiers they identify as members of an elite army unit headed by Mr. Assad's brother, Maher, who were deployed as part of the military operation in the city.

Mr. Assad was quoted by a local newspaper, Al Watan, on Wednesday as saying the military operation in Deraa would end "very soon." 

A video posted on YouTube on April 29, which activists said was shot in Greece, shows Jihan al-Sharaa, a niece of Syria's vice president Farouk al-Sharaa, emotionally denouncing the siege of Deraa. A stalwart of the Assad regime, Mr. Sharaa and his family are from Deraa. "Have we become criminals? What did they do?" she said in the video. "Bashar al-Assad is a puppet, a puppet in the hands of his brother Maher."

—Laurence Norman in Brussels contributed to this article.

 Write to  Nour Malas at nour.malas@dowjones.com 