  Antonio Horta-Osario has only been chief executive of  Lloyds Banking Group for two months, but he has already sprung his first major surprise: a thumping £2.44 billion first-quarter loss. A typical kitchen-sinking exercise by the incoming boss as he tries to reset expectations while he can still blame losses on his predecessor? Unfortunately not: the reality is that the market has been too bullish about Lloyds' prospects. 

True, the lion's share of the losses arose from a £3.2 billion provision against possible claims over the mis-selling of consumer credit insurance. That followed a defeat for the U.K. banking industry in the High Court last month.

Lloyds has decided to abandon the legal process and settle with its customers. Even so, the money set aside is nearly double what the market anticipated, contributing to a fall in the core Tier 1 ratio to 10%. 

More worrying is the operating performance. An extra £1.1 billion of provisions against the Irish real-estate portfolio is hardly a surprise, given the deterioration in that market and previous concerns that provisioning was inadequate. Yet even after the latest write downs, reflecting expectations of a further 10% fall in prices, provisions still only cover 56% of nonperforming loans, suggesting further large losses may lie ahead. 

Meanwhile, underlying revenue was down 6% year-to-year, Barclays Capital estimates, raising doubts over forecasts for a 4% fall in the whole of 2011. And while Lloyds has made admirable progress towards reducing its reliance on central bank funding, down by £20.6 billion to £70 billion, this has inevitably taken its toll on margins which at 2.07% are already below the bank's guidance earlier this year. 

Even bigger challenges lie ahead: the Independent Commission on Banking's demand that Lloyds dispose of further branches to satisfy competition concerns and its half-baked proposal that U.K. banks ring-fence their retail operations mean considerable regulatory uncertainty remains. Doubts remain about Lloyds' ability to unwind its vast portfolio of U.K. commercial real estate, particularly now that the Irish National Asset Management Agency plans to accelerate disposals of its £15 billion portfolio. 

Worse, the U.K. economic environment is deteriorating as fiscal austerity and high inflation take their toll on growth. That could yet have ramifications for Lloyds both on the asset side, should households struggle with their debts, and the liability side, if a loss of confidence in U.K. government bonds affects bank funding costs. 

Lloyds shares were already among the worst performers in the sector this year, falling 10% since February. They fell a further 8% Thursday morning— evidence perhaps that market expectations are finally becoming more realistic. No kitchen sink required. 



 Corrections & Amplifications: Lloyds's first-quarter loss was £2.44 billion. An earlier version of this article misstated the figure.