The name Smith Barney, which survived financial crises, mergers and the grandiose plans of some of Wall Street's greatest deal makers, is teetering on the edge of oblivion.

  Morgan Stanley
MS


0.01
%




 is considering dropping the 73-year-old Smith Barney name from its roughly 18,000-member brokerage force, according to people familiar with the situation. 

The Smith Barney name currently constitutes the back half of the name of Morgan Stanley's joint venture with  Citigroup Inc.,
C


0.88
%




 which was announced in early 2009 as the firms staggered out of the financial crisis. 

In recent weeks, Morgan Stanley, which controls the venture, asked its clients to choose among six potential names for the operation, none of which included Smith Barney.

If Smith Barney were to be dropped it would join a raft of Wall Street icons to disappear. Morgan Stanley itself killed off the Dean Witter name, and Citigroup offed Salomon Brothers. The financial crisis claimed the names Lehman Brothers and Bear Stearns. 

Morgan Stanley now holds 51% of the joint venture, Wall Street's biggest brokerage force, and has said it plans to buy the rest in the coming years. Morgan Stanley Chief Executive  James Gorman has made the retail brokerage business a key part of his strategy for the firm.

A Morgan Stanley spokesman declined to comment specifically on a potential name change, but said "we regularly survey clients about a lot of things relevant to our brand, and I wouldn't read a whole lot into this." 

A Citigroup spokeswoman declined to comment. 

Smith Barney traces its roots Charles D. Barney & Co. and Edward B. Smith & Co., both of which were founded in the late 1800s. In 1937, the two firms merged to form Smith, Barney & Co. The brokerage had a reputation as a cost-conscious and conservative operator, in contrast to its go-go Wall Street peers. 

Starting in the 1970s, Smith Barney was roped into a series of corporate marriages that spawned a rotation of hyphenated names. 

First, Smith Barney merged with Harris Upham & Co. to create Smith Barney, Harris Upham & Co. Then in the 1990s,  Sanford Weill's Primerica put together Smith Barney Shearson by buying  American Express Co.
AXP


-0.43
%




's Shearson Lehman Brothers brokerage operation.

Two years ago, Citigroup was pressured to spin off Smith Barney into a joint venture with Morgan Stanley. Only months earlier, Citigroup CEO  Vikram Pandit proclaimed his affection for Smith Barney. "I love that business," Mr. Pandit said in November 2008, according to The Wall Street Journal. 

  Alois Pirker, a research director at Aite Group, said brokerages typically try to simplify their names following a merger or change in control, but "a year or two isn't enough to wipe away that memory." 

Mr. Pirker, who specializes in wealth-management trends, said it's unlikely that legacy Smith Barney brokers would leave the firm solely based on a name change, but for some it's more of a "psychological issue" that could represent the "tip of the iceberg" if they were already contemplating a move to a rival firm. 

A Morgan Stanley Smith Barney adviser in the southeastern U.S. said many of his colleagues likely view a re-branding of the joint venture as a final nail in the coffin for their former firm. "If you are a legacy Smith Barney [employee] and you have been holding out hope that your legacy will continue, that's probably gone," he said. 

The most effective promoter of the Smith Barney brand was the droll actor  John Houseman, who ended commercials for the firm with the tagline: "They make money the old fashioned way. They earn it."