MADRID—Basque armed-separatist group ETA declared Monday that it will lay down arms for good, the organization said in a video posted on the website of Basque newspaper Gara, but the Spanish government largely rejected the overture. 

ETA said its "permanent and general, internationally verifiable" cease-fire is a sign of its commitment to a definitive peace process in the Basque region and toward an end to armed confrontation. 

The cease-fire, were it to hold, could put an end to a 42-year campaign of violence to create an independent Basque state.

ETA has announced several cease-fires in the past, the latest one in September, only to return to violence when its demands haven't been met. 

Monday's announcement seeks to open the path for the reconstitution of Batasuna, ETA's political wing. Spain outlawed Batasuna in 2003, calling it a front for a violent organization. 

"Basque citizens should have a say in their future, without any type of interference," one of three hooded ETA members said in the video, which shows the ETA's traditional banner depicting a serpent and an axe, as well as three flags from the Basque and Navarre regions, which ETA also claims as part of the Basque homeland. 

The Spanish government swiftly dismissed ETA's political aspirations and claims for the self-determination of Basques to separate from Spain.

"This isn't bad news, but this isn't the news" that everybody wants to hear, said Deputy Prime Minister Alfredo Perez Rubalcaba. "ETA wants to maintain its position as the guardian of [a process of political] negotiations, assuming that the end of violence has a price." 

ETA, which has used Gara for many of its announcements in the past, has killed 829 people during a four-decade campaign for an independent Basque homeland in northern Spain and southwestern France. The U.S., Spain and the European Union classify the group as a terrorist organization. 

The collapse of a peace process in December 2006 was a blow to Socialist Prime Minister José Luis Rodriguez Zapatero, who had staked much of his political capital on an ETA peace deal. 

The deal fell apart after ETA planted a car bomb in the parking lot at Madrid's Barajas Airport. 

"This is the fifth time over the last few years that a cease-fire [has been] announced," said Maria Dolores Cospedal, secretary-general of the conservative Popular Party, Spain's main opposition party. "This cease-fire is just a pause, not a repudiation of its criminal activities." 

ETA said it is willing to submit to the supervision of international monitors, as the Irish Republican Army did during the peace process in Northern Ireland. However, Mr. Rubalcaba said that under the rule of law, government institutions and law-enforcement agencies are the ones to verify a truce. 

The cease-fire announcement also comes after police intensified their pressure on ETA in France and Portugal, dismantling cells and closing weapons depots. 

Spain has arrested more than 400 ETA suspects in the past four years. 

Batasuna members claim there are more than 800 Basque political prisoners in Spain, many of them facing terrorism sentences. 

The government says defendants facing terror-related charges aren't political prisoners.

Basque activists close to ETA hope the cease-fire will allow Batasuna to regain legal status and participate in local elections in May. However, it remains unclear whether Batasuna will retain political control over dissident ETA members unwilling to lay down arms, analysts say. 

The video, two minutes and 20 seconds long, ended with a salute in Basque. 

The ETA members raised their left arms in the air with clenched fists. "Hail an independent Basque country! Hail a socialist Basque country! Onwards with socialist independence, until the end!" they said. 

 Write to  Santiago Perez at santiago.perez@dowjones.com and Christopher Bjork at christopher.bjork@dowjones.com 