The latest alleged trend to set the world in a tizzy is the Crisis of Shorter Attention Spans, a dire development that has been brought about by the rise of the Internet. Or texting. Or iTunes. Or Twitter. Or whatever. I find it hard to get upset about this existential threat to Western civilization, though, perhaps because I'm part of the problem. My attention span is much shorter now than it was a decade ago—and that's just fine with me.

Part of the "problem," after all, turns out to be that Americans have gotten smarter, or at least quicker on the uptake. Take a look at any TV sitcom of the 1950s and '60s and compare it to modern-day televised fare. It's startling to see how slow-moving those old shows were. The same thing is true of live theater. The leisurely expositions of yesteryear, it turns out, aren't necessary: You can count on contemporary audiences to get the point and see where you're headed, and they don't want to wait around for you to catch up with them.

Does this mean that the discursive masterworks of the past are no longer accessible? Yes and no. A great work of art that is organically long, like "The Marriage of Figaro" or "Remembrance of Things Past," will never lack for audiences. But just as most of Shakespeare's plays can and should be cut in performance, so should today's artists always keep in mind that most of us are too busy to watch as they circle the airport, looking for a place to land.

"The Intelligent Homosexual's Guide to Capitalism and Socialism With a Key to the Scriptures," the new Tony Kushner play that opened in New York last week, is three hours and 40 minutes long—a half-hour longer than the Donmar Warehouse production of Shakespeare's "King Lear" that is currently playing in Brooklyn. Even if "The Intelligent Homosexual's Guide" were 15% better than "Lear," Mr. Kushner's play would still have profited from being stripped of its lengthy digressions and superfluous subplots, most of which serve only to obscure the play's good parts.

Anyone who doubts the virtues of brevity should take a look at Oxford University Press's "Very Short Introduction" series, in which celebrated experts write with extreme concision about their areas of expertise. Each volume in the series is about 140 pages long and runs to roughly 35,000 words of text. (Most serious biographies, by contrast, run to between 150,000 and 200,000 words.)

How much can you say about a big subject in 35,000 words? Plenty, if you're Harvey C. Mansfield writing about Alexis de Tocqueville or Kenneth Minogue writing about politics. These "Very Short Introductions" are models of their kind—crisp, clear and animated by a strong point of view. They are terse but not anonymous: Both men express themselves not in the blandly corporate tones of an encyclopedia entry but in their own distinctive voices.

Take, for instance, this passage from the last chapter of Mr. Minogue's book:

"In an egalitarian world, everyone is equal, except perhaps the managers of equality. And certainly in the foreseeable future, there will be endless and not unprofitable work for those whose business it is to spell out in ever greater detail the rules of the game of life, and to adjudicate conflict, and to teach the benighted what thoughts a just society requires. Politics will have died, but everything will be politics."

I couldn't have put it better. In fact, nobody could have put it better.

The volumes that deal with art are equally impressive. Elijah Wald's "The Blues: A Very Short Introduction," for instance, is the most illuminating short treatment of the blues ever published, while Kathryn Kalinak's introduction to film music not only manages to sum up a complex subject in the briefest possible compass, but does so in a near-unprecedented way: Ms. Kalinak discusses film scoring not just in the familiar context of the Hollywood-based movie business but from an international perspective.

Naturally, there's more to be said about politics or the blues than can be found in Oxford's "Very Short Introductions." But you don't have to be in a hurry to learn from these books, for it is their compression that makes them so invaluable. Force a writer to be brief and you force him to think clearly—if he can. No, I don't think that "War and Peace" would have profited from being written in 140-character tweets. But I do think that our impatient age might just be getting the best out of a great many artists and thinkers who, left to their own devices, would never have learned how to cut to the chase.

—Mr. Teachout, the Journal's drama critic, writes "Sightings" every other Friday. He is the author of "Pops: A Life of Louis Armstrong." Write to him at tteachout@wsj.com.