"Hello?"

"Peyton?"

"Who is this? It's 2:45 a.m."

"It's Rex. Rex Ryan. Head coach, New York Football Jets. Is this Peyton Manning?"

"Why are you calling me, Rex?"

"Good question! It's the strangest thing—I don't know if you happened to see that piece in the Daily News the other day. Some folks theorized that if the NFL lockout goes a certain way, you could become an unrestricted free agent...and possibly end up with us."

"The Jets?"

"Yes."

"Playing football?"

"Yes!"

"Uh, don't you already have a quarterback?"

"Mark Sanchez! Yes, he's a heck of a kid. Smart, dedicated. But as you know, Peyton, I've made a few bold predictions lately, and I need to get a Super Bowl win, pronto, or I'm going to be coaching Arena ball and doing Coors Light commercials."

"Rex, isn't this call technically tampering? Are we even allowed to talk during the lockout?"

"Don't be such a sissy, Peyton. This is just two NFL colleagues having a cordial conversation. Strictly hypothetical. Pretend it's not happening."

"It's almost three in the morning. I wish it was not happening"

"Peyton, have you ever thought about playing in New York?"

"No."

"There's nothing like it, Peyton. Ask your brother, Eli: greatest town in the world. Best people, best food, fantastic energy. A completely retooled Spiderman musical on its way. And we have all these new bike paths!"

"Biking's not really my thing."

"Maybe you should try it some time. I like nothing better than getting on my folding bike, riding down the West Side Highway, and then pedaling over to Hampton Chutney for a grilled chicken dosa."

"I don't know what any of that means."

"And the celebrities! The other day I was waiting to try on jeans at Scoop when I saw the guy who played Johnny Sack on the Sopranos. At least I think it was. Not 100% sure."

"Rex, I have a busy day tomorrow."

"Peyton, do you think you have what it takes to 'Play Like a Jet'?"

"Huh?"

"Can you 'Play Like a Jet'?"

"Jeez, Rex, I hope so. At a bare minimum."

"Because this is not the Same Old Jets. You saw the HBO show. We've changed. We're winners."

"I know you're winners, Rex. I was there in Indy in January when you beat us in the last minute."

"That's right! Totally forgot. So you know what we're all about."

"Is this really Rex Ryan? Or is it Dallas Clark pranking me? Howard Stern?"

"Peyton, you're the best in the game. I don't know if you've heard me needle Tom Brady by comparing him to you."

"Yes, I heard. Classy."

"But Peyton, you're a little boring to be a Jet."

"Boring?"

"Yeah, just a little vanilla. We like our players to have some dirt—at least one scandal in the rear view"

"Well, I'm not going to apologize for not having dirt."

"Have you ever done anything wrong, Peyton?" 

"Uhhh..."

"Anything?"

"I uhhh....once ironed my no-iron khakis."

"That's not much"

"I forgot to feed the cat last Saturday."

"Call 911!"

"I don't answer Ryan Leaf's phone calls."

"Who does?"

"I still haven't returned "Ulysses" from the University of Tennessee library. It's been 15 years!"

"Now we're talking, Peyton! If you come to New York, we need you to be more wild."

"I could change my name to Peyton Dieciocho."

"Oof. No."

"I could grow my hair into a ponytail like Brady did!"

"You sure you have enough hair upstairs to do it?"

"A guy can try! I'll text you some photos."

"Please don't. Team policy."

 Write to  Jason Gay at jason.gay@wsj.com 