At one time, what played out on Friday night seemed nearly impossible. There were loud boos booming through the same arena that had roared for Carmelo Anthony just four weeks ago. And there was a Knicks team hanging its head after a fifth straight loss.

The Knicks are now 7-11 since trading for Anthony, and Friday night the Milwaukee Bucks were the latest in a seemingly endless parade of mediocre teams that have toppled the collection of stars the Knicks have put together. 

New York never led the disjointed 102-96 affair, which looked like a "greatest hits" of the previous five losses. The Knicks suffered from poor shot selection, defensive lapses and a slow start—they trailed 35-24 after one quarter, which was actually a significant improvement from Sunday, when they were down 32-9.

Bucks guard Brandon Jennings scored 37 points, a season high, while Andrew Bogut scored 21 points with 17 rebounds.

Amar'e Stoudemire scored 28 points with nine rebounds while Anthony scored 25 with eight rebounds. Toney Douglas added 16 points.

Knicks point guard Chauncey Billups, who has yet to look sharp since he suffered a bruised thigh to begin the month, struggled again, scoring just seven points.

"Everything is so hard; it's not fluid—it's like mud in your engine," Knicks coach Mike D'Antoni said. "The ball's not flowing well, its not moving and it gets pronounced in the fourth quarter."

D'Antoni said he sees the team getting dejected in the fourth quarter. He said the Knicks "don't have a presence now. We don't feel it."

The Knicks failed to complete a fourth-quarter comeback, after they trailed by as many as 16 in the first half. Their best run occurred at the start of the fourth, when Douglas made a 3-pointer to start the quarter and cut the Milwaukee lead to 84-82. The fourth-quarter run was notable because Anthony wasn't on the floor for it—he didn't check in until five minutes into the quarter. Midway through the fourth, however, the offense bottomed out. Before Anthony had a lay-in that cut the score to 98-90 with 2:58 left, the Knicks stumbled through 11 straight misses and a stretch of 19 misses in 22 shots in the quarter. The Knicks made just four of their 19 3-point shots on the night with Billups, who sank just one of five attempts, the worst offender.

The latest player to carve up the Knicks defense was Jennings, the second-year guard who has haunted the Knicks since the 2009 draft, when they selected Jordan Hill eighth overall instead of Jennings, who fell to 10th. 

Hill didn't last a season as a Knick before getting traded, and Jennings proved his worth once again on Friday. He scored 23 in the first half before scoring just one point in the third. He exploded again in the fourth and had a crucial back breaker for the Bucks: After a particularly poor turnover from Shelden Williams with eight minutes to go, Jennings sank a long two to make it 91-86.

 Write to  Kevin Clark at kevin.clark@wsj.com 