 On Wednesday, we gave you some nuggets of wisdom on the NFL's playoff contenders from the NFC, straight from the mouths of people who played against them this season. Today, we bring you the AFC.  

See a statistical analysis of the 12 teams still standing and hear from NFL players on how to beat them.

We know from watching sports programs on the television box that the AFC is supposed to be the league's tougher, smarter and altogether more presentable conference. Its teams have more overall wins this season than the NFC's teams, it has three Super Bowl-winning quarterbacks to the NFC's one and its players like to spend their down time discussing Jonathan Franzen novels. 

But according to ten current NFL players who've actually faced these AFC playoff teams on the field this season, the practical differences are rather small. These almighty AFC teams, they assure us, can be beaten on any given Thursday, Saturday, Sunday or Tuesday. Here's what they had to say about the AFC's contenders: 

The conventional wisdom on the Patriots says they have somehow cracked a magical football code. Head coach Bill Belichick, who was created by MIT scientists by splicing the DNA of Vince Lombardi, Bill Walsh and Jack Kevorkian, is one of the best game planners in the NFL. It helps that quarterback Tom Brady dreams the opposing team's plays in vivid detail the night before each game and the dream always comes true. But there is, in fact, a way to beat them. 

 THE BIG REVEAL: Here's a little- known NFL fact: On November 7th, the Cleveland Browns beat the Patriots 34-14. Chris Gocong, a linebacker on that Browns team, said it was a matter of making educated guesses.

The Patriots are all about executing their plays well, Mr. Gocong says, but their offense is rather predictable. If a defense lines up in Cover 2, for instance, the Patriots will almost always run. When the Browns lined up in Cover 2, they simply expected the run and played accordingly. When Patriots running back Danny Woodhead was in the game, the Browns figured he'd get the ball to the outside. The Browns often guessed right, and won. 

"It wasn't about trying to outsmart them in blitzes, it was knowing exactly what they're going to do," says Mr. Gocong. 

The Steelers' trademark is a solid 3-4 defense that comes hard around the edges with its linebackers and is anchored by a nasty nosetackle. On offense, quarterback Ben Roethlisberger gets all the attention for his ability to create extra time by moving deftly in the pocket. 

 THE BIG REVEAL: Teams can't count on scoring a lot of points against the Steelers defense, so they should probably just focus on making sure their offense doesn't carve them up like Cornish game hens. Despite the attention given to Mr. Roethlisberger, the Steelers offense really revolves around a meaty offensive line that's made even meatier by the double tight-end sets the team often uses. 

James Anderson, a linebacker for the Carolina Panthers, says the biggest mistake defenses make against this unit is trying to get around them. The Steelers' line exploits such errors by using an agnostic blocking technique—whichever way the opponent moves, the Steelers line drives them in that direction. This can create enormous gaps for the running backs. Mr. Anderson says the best way to contain the Steelers' overfed blockers is to take them head-on.

Anyone who has watched the Ravens play is quite familiar with the team's diminutive running back, Ray Rice, it's efficiently mobile quarterback, Joe Flacco and its star-studded corps of receivers. Fans gush about the team's storied defense, led by linebacker Ray Lewis. 

 THE BIG REVEAL: The Ravens defense is known for its scary linebackers. But when Geoff Hangartner, a center for the Buffalo Bills, played them this season, he had another concern: on some plays, before he snap, not a single Ravens player actually had his hand on the ground. 

By having the players avoid the traditional three-point stance, the Ravens players are able to play almost any position at any time. By moving to one side or another just before the ball is snapped, the team often overloads one side of the ball. This allows them to put extra pressure on quarterbacks. 

Cincinnati Bengals center Kyle Cook said that without good communication between the offensive line and the quarterback before the ball is snapped, it's likely a member of the Ravens defense will come at the quarterback unblocked. 

The Chiefs are known for a league-leading running attack, led by Thomas Jones and Jamaal Charles, that averaged 164.2 yards per game, and a defense that's racked up 38 sacks. 

 THE BIG REVEAL: For all the talk of a renaissance in Kansas City, Chris Hope, a safety on the Tennessee Titans, said he thinks the team's most effective weapon is a veteran offensive line that has 41 years of collective NFL experience. 

That, Mr. Hope, says, could be the antidote to the team's biggest weakness: the rest of the roster consists of young, inexperienced players. Mr. Hope says younger players tend to panic when they face adversity in the playoffs. 

The Colts are known for extremely quick defensive ends who put pressure on quarterbacks and an offense that revolves around the quick thinking of the always prepared quarterback Peyton Manning. 

 THE BIG REVEAL: The Colts offense is missing a lot of pieces, but none of them is as glaringly absent as veteran tight end Dallas Clark, who caught a quarter of Peyton Manning's passes last season. "He makes all the tough catches. He does the dirty work," says Chris Hope, a safety for the Tennessee Titans. One thing to watch is what Mr. Hope calls the Colts signature play—a play-action pass to the tight end up the seam. With Mr. Clark out, those passes will go to Jacob Tamme. 

The Jets offense is like an Aston Martin with no driver. The team still relies on its dynamic, blitzing defense to keep the score low and the game manageable. They control the clock with a competent running game that averages 148 yards. 

 THE BIG REVEAL: Quarterback Mark Sanchez's biggest weakness isn't his relative inexperience, it's his inaccuracy. Donte Whitner, a safety for the Buffalo Bills, says Mr. Sanchez quite often just misses throws, especially when he gets a little pressure. To get going, Mr. Sanchez needs the running game to pull in the linebackers and help the receivers get open. 

—Scott Cacciola contributed to this article.

 Write to  Reed Albergotti at reed.albergotti@wsj.com 