NEW YORK—Sugar futures fell after India said it plans to increase exports of the sweetener by 50% this season.

Raw sugar futures on IntercontinentalExchange settled Tuesday at 27.16 cents a pound for May delivery, down 1.2% on the day. White sugar for May delivery on London's Liffe settled 0.8% lower at $700.40 per metric ton.

On Tuesday, government officials said India, the world's second-largest producer of the sweetener, will allow an additional 500,000 metric tons of white-sugar exports this year. The decision brings India's total 2010-11 sugar exports to a little more than 1.5 million tons.

Still, the reaction to India's decision was muted in New York and London as the increase wasn't expected to make much of a dent in the shortfall of global supplies.

"We've got a very tight situation of availability as opposed to demand this year…so these exports are welcome," said  Leonardo Bichara Rocha, a senior economist at the International Sugar Organization. 

  Sugar Exports: Too Little, Too Late?  

He said the London-based body had already factored in the additional exports from India in its forecast last month. India had debated and delayed the decision for months, but forecasts for a domestic surplus and high global prices encouraged the government to act.

The price of ICE raw sugar futures has increased more than 50% over the past 12 months, after weather problems in major producers slashed output. Supplies are expected to remain tight until sugar from top producer Brazil makes its way onto the market in May.

"In the medium term, I think the market will be focusing on the start of the Center-South crop in Brazil rather this half-million tons of Indian exports," said  Peter de Klerk, a senior analyst at U.K. sugar-trade house Czarnikow. The Center-South region accounts for 90% of Brazil's sugar production. 

Mr. de Klerk said India's exports will likely be sent to regional markets, such as Bangladesh, Indonesia and Sri Lanka.

India, the world's top sugar consumer, expects to produce 24.5 million tons of the sweetener in the year through September, up from around 19 million tons last year. It consumes an estimated 22 million tons annually.

An Indian Food Ministry official told Dow Jones Newswires that the exports could start around April. 

If prices sink, however, exports could be curbed. 

"The question is at what point does it become unprofitable to export," said  Michael McDougall, a senior vice president at brokerage Newedge.

Futures prices received some support Tuesday from a forecast of a narrower sugar surplus by F.O. Licht, a Germany-based analyst. 

F.O. Licht cut its 2010-11 surplus estimate to 1.3 million metric tons, down from 1.7 million tons it forecast in November.

"It is worth noting that the surplus is quite small and by no means sufficient to allow for a restocking of depleted inventories or cushion against future supply shortfalls," the firm said. 

—Alex MacDonald in London and Rajesh Roy in New Delhi contributed to this article. 