Before you read this, please put on the Playoff T-shirt. 

It's folded on top of your seat. Don't worry. The T-shirt will fit. They're all XXXXL. You could fit that thing on a Honda Civic.

Put those arms in there, shove your head through....Good! Don't you love your Playoff T-shirt? Now we all look the same. It's totally awesome, enthusiastic, playoff-a-licious. We're one big post-season family, looking mildly crazy in oversized T-shirts. 

Have you ever seen anything like it? There's thousands of us, dressed alike. It's going to freak out our opponent, a team that has never played before an entire crowd of fans wearing the exact same T-shirt—except when they are at home, playing before their fans, wearing the exact same T-shirt. 

Don't be cynical! Don't be such a New York snob individualist! Everyone's doing it these days—it's just some sports fun for the playoffs. Nothing wrong with a little bit of monochromatic rah-rah and bonding. Didn't you love it in high school? Or mime camp?

Ugh, please don't complain about the scratchy cotton. Sorry that Rag & Bone doesn't make heaven-soft playoff T-shirts made from organic unicorn hair. 

And don't moan that you'd already picked out a perfect outfit for the game. Nobody wanted to see your Don Henley Inside Job Tour 2000 denim jacket, Andre Leon Talley. 

Now we're going to kick this up a level. We're not through. Reach under your chair—you'll find a crisp pair of pants. Yup: 100 percent officially licensed 2010-11 Playoff Pants. Elastic waistband, flame retardant, wearable after the game, in the VIP booth at the nightclub. 

Really? The pants don't fit? Not to worry. Reach into the right pocket. There you go: Playoff Spanx. Pull those suckers on. Secret fashion miracles. You'd be shocked at how many players use them. 

Now reach into the other pants pocket. Yes: playoff socks. Guaranteed stink-proof, like our team.

No, there aren't playoff shoes. Don't be ridiculous. OK, we asked Christian Louboutin. He said no. 

But there is a Super Fun Time Playoff Hat. Slap it on, flip the lid upwards. Yes, it's a tad dorky, but it looks tremendous on ''SportsCenter.'' 

There should also be a roll of tattoos. Temporary tattoos. They're all letters, in the team color. Spell your favorite player's name across your forehead. Hopefully your favorite player is not Zydrunas Ilgauskas. And relax: These tattoos will wash out in the shower in less than seven months.

Now flip your palms down and hold out your hands. Are you serious: You've never had your playoff nails done? Everyone's getting the same color. Commit! You have a playoff T-shirt, playoff pants, playoff Spanx and a tattoo across your forehead. Nails are going to be a deal-breaker? 

And you've got to get a Playoff Spray Tan. Just enough for a glow, not a reality show on MTV.

And don't forget a haircut. Just a little off the side, and a little off the top. Then a little more off the side, and a little more off the top, until your head is completely shaved bald. Trust us: it is going to look amazing. Especially if you're getting married in a few days.

Finally, reach into your cup holder. There's a bottle of water and a Playoff Pill. Don't be afraid: it's nothing crazy. You won't hallucinate...that much. Simply a little 3-hour energy supply so we all can give our team everything you have. And it's at least 3% herbal. 

Congratulations—we all look incredible. We are ready for the playoffs. Hopefully we don't get eliminated in a couple of hours.

 Next round, we're all supposed to get Playoff Kittens! 