ABU DHABI—Oman made another bid to end daily antigovernment demonstrations Monday by meeting one of the protesters' key demands—a sweeping cabinet reshuffle that includes the removal of the country's powerful economy minister. 

The reshuffle was the second in two days—and the third since last week—in the Arabian peninsula monarchy of 3 million people. It was aimed at quelling 10 days of unrest that led to at least one death and was sparked by revolts in other Arab countries.

"This was really a case of listening to the demands of the people," said an Omani official attending a meeting of Persian Gulf foreign ministers in Abu Dhabi.

The most prominent victim of the reshuffle was Economy Minister Ahmad Mekki. Sultan Qaboos bin Said Al Said, who has ruled Oman for more than 40 years, also replaced Interior Minister Saud bin Ibrahim al-Bousaidi and at least three ministers who were appointed only last week, said the official. 

Foreign affairs minister Yusuf bin Alawi bin Abdullah told reporters in Abu Dhabi the ministerial changes come as part of an ongoing enhancement of government that seeks to "utilize and benefit from the energies of the youth."

A first glimpse at the new cabinet suggested the reshuffle represented a significant attempt to meet some of the protesters' demands, said historian and political analyst J.E. Peterson of the Center for Middle Eastern Studies at the University of Arizona. 

"To make so many changes is a concession," Mr. Peterson said. "Ahmad Makki was once seen as the most competent man in government—to remove him is a very big thing."

However, Mr. Peterson said the move might not be enough to end the demonstrations. 

"The impulse for the protests is economic, and the sultan has promised new jobs. But I don't know where he can find them," he said. 

Hundreds of protesters in Oman's capital Muscat and the northern town of Sohar have demanded an increase in the minimum wage to 500 Oman rials ($1,300) a month, legislative powers for the elected Majlis al-Shoura—now a purely advisory body—and the replacement of most ministers.

The government had already raised the minimum wage by 40% to 200 rials and instigated a number of other reforms, including the introduction of unemployment benefits and higher grants for students. 

The public prosecutor had also announced it will investigate protesters who last week torched a supermarket and a police station in Sohar and barricaded roads in the town.

Demonstrators have insisted their protests aren't directed at bringing down Sultan Qaboos. Instead, they are protesting against a government they say has developed overly close ties to local businesses.

"The reshuffle was the most urgent of the protesters' demands," said Ibtisam Al Ketbi, a professor of political science at the United Arab Emirates University. "Now the government will wait to see what the impact is on the people."

Oman is the poorest member of the Gulf Cooperation Council, which also includes Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates. 

Its position at the southeastern corner of the Arabian Peninsula gives it some control over the Strait of Hormuz, the world's most important route for oil shipments.

 Write to  Nour Malas at nour.malas@dowjones.com 