Concerns over reported spikes in radiation emission at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant in Japan led its operator Tuesday to evacuate all nonindispensable staff and closely monitor the health of the remaining 50 who are fighting to keep the plant's reactors cooled down manually.

On Wednesday morning those workers were temporarily moved to safer locations when radiation levels began rising sharply. But by 11:30 a.m. the workers were back on the job, the government's nuclear safety agency said.

Meanwhile, Japan's nuclear safety agency said two workers were missing at the stricken plant's No. 4 reactor, where a fire broke out Wednesday. 

The workers' safety is of concern because they are most likely to be exposed to the highest doses of radiation from the plant's core, which could lead to acute or chronic health effects.

After the explosion at Chernobyl, the biggest nuclear power plant disaster of all time, 28 firefighters and emergency workers died from acute radiation sickness in the first three months, according to the International Atomic Energy Agency, the United Nation's nuclear watchdog.

Radiation levels at the Japan plant appear to be nowhere near those of Chernobyl, which involved a fire in the reactor core and no containment zone to keep the radiation from contaminating the environment, say experts. Also, in Japan, the public is being notified of radiation risk and workers are being monitored.

The IAEA said 150 people from the area around the plant in Japan have been monitored for radiation levels; 23 have had decontamination measures, it said. With monitoring and precautions at current exposure levels, workers at the Daiichi plant wouldn't be expected to get radiation poisoning, said Peter Caracappa, radiation safety officer and a clinical professor of nuclear engineering at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Troy, N.Y. 

Early morning recordings at Fukushima Daiichi topped out at a radiation exposure level that nuclear experts called alarmingly high but later fell to a level of 60 microsieverts per hour, a level that still requires limiting exposure, according to experts. 

The currently reported Japanese radiation measurements are "well below" the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission's dose limits of 10,000 microsieverts per nuclear event, according to an NRC statement. The average American receives an annual exposure of 6,200 microsieverts from background and man-made radiation, such as X-rays.

The annual occupational limit for workers who deal with radiation on the job is 50,000 microsieverts, according to an NRC spokesman.

Just minutes of exposure to intense doses of radiation can cause acute radiation sickness, a potentially deadly condition that destroys the cells in the body that make new blood cells and wreaks havoc on the body's intestinal tract, leading to an inability to absorb nutrients. In the longer term, radiation exposure can cause cancer, particularly thyroid cancer or leukemia.

Limiting radiation exposure—either by reducing time of exposure, increasing distance from the source or using shielding—is critical because relatively little can be done once radiation has been ingested or inhaled and damaged the body.

Decontamination efforts, such as scrubbing the skin with soap and water, can help remove radioactive material from the skin to reduce risk of further radiation exposure. Chelating agents can also be given to absorb the radiation, but their effect is limited. Those with radiation poisoning can receive a bone-marrow transplant in some instances, according to Chandan Guha, vice chairman of the radiation oncology department at Montefiore Medical Center and Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York. 

Radiation contamination was relatively limited in the Three-Mile Island accident in Pennsylvania in 1979 because a containment zone contained the meltdown and the contamination, according to Naj Meshkati, a University of Southern California professor who has studied nuclear safety for 30 years and visited both Chernobyl and Three-Mile Island.