WASHINGTON—Lawmakers are pressing Attorney General Eric Holder to explain how federal agents came to use investigative tactics that appear to have allowed guns bought in the U.S. to enter Mexico illegally. 

Critics say the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives lost track of guns it was supposed to be monitoring, letting the weapons pass into the hands of Mexican cartels and perhaps be used in violence against U.S. officials. 

One particular case has drawn scrutiny: a December shooting in Arizona that killed a U.S. Border Patrol agent. Authorities suspect traffickers or bandits operating near the border killed the agent. Weapons recovered near the scene were traced to a suspect who was already under investigation by the ATF, according to documents released by congressional investigators. 

At a House hearing Tuesday, Mr. Holder said the Justice Department's policy is to stop weapons from being trafficked to Mexico. "Under no circumstances should guns be allowed to be distributed in an uncontrolled manner," he said, describing his instructions to ATF and other agencies under his charge. 

California Rep. Darrell Issa, a Republican, said to Mr. Holder at the hearing: "There are dead Americans as a result of this failed and reckless program." 

Mr. Issa asked Mr. Holder whether he or top lieutenants were aware of the tactics. Mr. Holder said he became aware of the probe, dubbed "Operation Fast and Furious," only in recent weeks. In a letter to lawmakers in April, the Justice Department said the probe was approved by the Phoenix U.S. attorney, the local ATF office and a regional task force to combat organized and drug crimes

The Fast and Furious operation targets top gun traffickers who are believed to funnel weapons bought in Texas, Arizona and other border states to Mexican drug cartels. The traffickers often depend on a network of buyers who are paid to purchase guns in small quantities.

Iowa Sen. Chuck Grassley, the top Republican on the Senate Judiciary Committee, has said he has information from whistleblowers who allege that ATF agents in Phoenix leading a 2010 operation failed to stop buyers from acquiring as many as 1,700 weapons. The agents in the operation lost track of some of the weapons, according to the information cited by Mr. Grassley. 

Some of the guns are believed to have ended up in Mexico. 

Two weapons recovered near the scene of the border agent's shooting in Arizona were among the guns tracked in the Fast and Furious operation, according to ATF documents released by Mr. Grassley. The weapons were bought in January 2010, at a time ATF was tracking the man who later was arrested and charged with purchasing weapons for cartel use. 

Investigators haven't identified the weapon used to kill the agent.

Messrs. Issa and Grassley have also raised questions about the ATF's work in another case that later was linked to the death of a U.S. agent. In recent weeks, ATF agents traced the firearm used in February to kill an Immigration and Customs Enforcement agent in Mexico to a suspect who was under ATF investigation.

The suspect purchased the weapon in October 2010, ATF investigators later found. In November, ATF investigators had begun an undercover probe targeting the same suspect. 

The issue is among the most contentious to hit the ATF since 1993, when ATF agents were ambushed at a cult compound in Waco, Texas, and four were killed.

Mexican and U.S. officials say weapons trafficked mostly from U.S. border states are fueling the cartel wars that have killed thousands of people in Mexico in recent years. The ATF uses a program called Gun Runner to help Mexican investigators trace weapons found at Mexican crime scenes to purchases in the U.S.

The congressional probe is at the center of a growing controversy over ATF, an agency that for years has been at the center of a tug-of-war between gun-rights groups and advocates of restrictions on weapons purchases. 

Politically powerful gun-rights groups have criticized ATF attempts to regulate gun purchases, which they argue infringe on Second Amendment constitutional rights. At the same time, the Obama administration has been under pressure from big city mayors and others who favor tighter restrictions. The ATF has been without a Senate- approved director since 2006, with both the Bush and Obama administration unable to win approval for nominees over the objections from gun-rights groups and lawmakers. 

In a 2010 Justice Department audit, the agency was criticized for pursuing too many small-buyer cases and not using its resources to find major gun traffickers. Some ATF agents argue that criticism prompted the Fast and Furious operation, which aimed to see if these straw buyers could implicate bigger fish.

In a letter to Mr. Grassley on Monday, Ron Weich, assistant attorney general, wrote: "It remains our understanding that ATF's Operation Fast and Furious did not knowingly permit straw buyers to take guns into Mexico."

Tracy Schmaler, Justice Department spokeswoman, said Mr. Holder took the lawmakers' concerns seriously and has ordered an investigation by the Justice Department's inspector general. 

 Write to  Evan Perez at evan.perez@wsj.com 