"There are always these good Samaritans that help you out through life," said the filmmaker and East Village resident Rachel Amodeo recently. 

That generosity of spirit is at once a part of the onscreen story and behind-the-scenes genesis of Ms. Amodeo's sole feature film to date, "What About Me." Shot between 1988 and 1992, "What About Me" stars Ms. Amodeo and actor Richard Edson as a fictional homeless couple within a close-knit community of East Village outsiders. Much of the film takes place in and around the real-life tent city that sprang up in Tompkins Square Park before it was closed, cleared and renovated beginning in 1991. 

Though it has never received significant theatrical distribution, "What About Me" has been blessed with admirers. One such Samaritan cineaste is filmmaker, teacher and Film-Makers' Cooperative director M.M. Serra. The nonprofit group holds a print of the 16mm black-and-white feature among some 4,500 films representing more than 950 experimental and avant-garde filmmakers. "Every chance I get, I show Rachel's film because I don't want it to be forgotten," Ms. Serra said. 

On Saturday, "What About Me" will screen at Millennium Film Workshop on East Fourth Street as part of "The Urban Landscape in Cinematic Transformation: Storytelling & Local History," a four-part series programmed by Ms. Serra from the Cooperative's holdings. The Millennium series is itself part of the New Museum's continuing and wide-ranging "Festival of Ideas for the New City." The film will also be released in a new DVD edition in June. 

The film "really captures the essence of a particular time and community and subculture in New York City," Ms. Serra said. "It documents the appearance of the Lower East Side, and the buildings, the graffiti, the trash on the street, the people, the music, and the artists that were actually there before gentrification happened."

Ms. Amodeo said that making "What About Me" began as a conversation in 1988 with another downtown filmmaker, Nick Zedd. "I was complimenting him on a film he'd made and I don't know why I said this but I told him, 'Oh, I'm going to make a film.' He said, 'Oh, you are? Well, if you're going to make a film, I'd like to be in it.'" 

That community affirmation was, Ms. Amodeo said, responsible for both the cast and crew. Her partner, animator M. Henry Jones, shared cinematography duties with filmmaker Mark Brady, whom the couple auspiciously met on the eve of the first day's shooting. "We ran into Mark at a weird party he was having with some bands," she said. "We said that we were going to shoot this film tomorrow and asked him, 'Would you like to come along?' He said, 'Okay, I have nothing to do tomorrow.' We saw him every day for the next three years after that." 

Along with Ms. Amodeo and Mr. Edson, "What About Me" features a cast comprising musicians Johnny Thunders, Jerry Nolan, Richard Hell and Dee Dee Ramone, actors Rockets Redglare and Judy Carne, and poet Gregory Corso. The common performance thread in the eclectic cast of alternative culture luminaries was, according to the director, a combination of willingness and homegrown charisma. "I tell you, if you get a real New York character and put him in a dramatic situation, you're going to get a lot of good stuff," Ms. Amodeo said. 

That giving spirit even extended to the film's locations. "On the first day right before we went into the park to shoot, it started to snow in such a beautiful way," she said. "It looked like a Charlie Chaplin set. We did the scene and two days later I'm watching it with Richard and Henry and Mark and I was like, 'Wow, this is good!' " 