It's early, yes, but you can tell a lot about a team after its first month of games. We already know that the homer-happy 2011 Yankees are contending to be the most powerful team of all time, that their bargain-bin shopping this winter paid off with a surprisingly strong pitching staff. In first place to finish the month, these Yankees are doing enough right that it's hard to argue with their performance so far.



 OFFENSE: 

These Yankees win with the home run, even if they do little else. They already lead the majors with 41—the next closest team has 33.

Yet when they don't hit a homer, they don't score. Their inability to manufacture runs and draw walks—they ranked second in the majors in walks last year and 18th now—speaks to the lack of production the Yankees are getting from the top of the order. 

But it's too early to say that Derek Jeter is on his way to a punchless season, despite so many of his hits being infield dribblers. 

And it's too early to say that Brett Gardner can't repeat his .383 on-base percentage from last season. But the failed leadoff man is being abused by aggressive pitchers who have challenged him in a way they didn't last year. 

For now, the Yankees can bash their way to success. But it would be nice to see some of those solo home runs turn into three-run shots because more walks have put men on base. 

 GRADE: B+



 PITCHING: 

Just when it seemed these Yankees would validate all the preseason worries—that this staff was CC Sabathia and a gang of uncertain spare parts—the Yankee starters allowed three earned runs over 35.1 innings in the past week, their best stretch since 2002. And this is with a bunch of no-names like Ivan Nova and supposed has-beens Bartolo Colon and Freddy Garcia taking the ball every fifth day in light of Phil Hughes's health woes. 

Garcia and Colon have been revelatory, but there's always the sense with them that the Yankees are playing with house money—ride this hot streak, yes, but don't expect it to last forever, especially with Colon, as his innings count rises. 

"There's still a concern that when gets to a certain level, what happens to his stuff?" Yankees manager Joe Girardi said.

Meanwhile, A.J. Burnett has been quietly efficient, giving the Yankees much-needed dependability. The bullpen has done its job, as well, though the struggles of Rafael Soriano are worrisome. But his track record is too good not to expect more from him going forward. 

 GRADE: B



 INTANGIBLES 

This is a team of veterans, and it shows. 

They've moved past distractions and uncertainty with ease —from the Hughes situation, to Jeter's struggles, to the questions about the rotation, to Soriano implosions. 

From top to bottom, this is a team of pros: even the backups are battle-tested. Meanwhile, Russell Martin may be the steal of the winter, bringing stability to the pitching staff. 

"It's not a bunch of young players necessarily counting on one guy or two guys," Girardi said. "It's guys that understand that they have a job to do, and if they do their job, and everyone does their job, things usually turn out okay." 

The Yankees can also make the impressive claim that they were the last team in the majors to lose two games in a row— and they responded to those losses by thumping Chicago in the next two games. 

 GRADE: A 