The fees that mutual-fund firms collect for managing portfolios are set as a percentage of fund assets. But over the past few years, a few well-known fund firms have joined a small number of peers in also linking those management fees to a fund's performance versus its benchmark.

Read the complete  Quarterly Investing in Funds report .

That raises the question: Do these so-called performance or incentive fees enhance returns, or are they just a marketing tactic intended to persuade investors that they're buying superior management? 

In theory, incentive fees should be good for investors by giving active managers an added reason to boost performance. After all, asset managers will be paid a higher percentage of fund assets the better their funds do and a lower percentage the worse they do.

While some studies have suggested that performance fees do, indeed, boost returns slightly, there also is evidence they may encourage managers to take on added risk. Moreover, calculating performance fees can confuse investors and, arguably, introduce inequities in the way the fees are levied. The question, some say, may boil down to how much value an investor places on active management.

"If you believe active fund managers provide better returns than passive index funds, then performance fees should add value for an investor," says  Max Rottersman, a principal of Hanover Technology Group LLC, a consultant for asset managers based in Hanover, N.H. If you don't believe in the value of active management, "then performance fees may have no effect, since the random up years will compensate for the random down years."

Fidelity Investments began using performance fees in the 1970s and now has them on 73 equity funds, or about half of its equity-fund assets, spokeswoman  Sophie Launay says.

More recent converts include  Janus Capital Group
JNS


-1.23
%




 and Putnam Investments. Janus started using performance fees in 2006, and last year added them to eight more funds for a total of 20. Putnam put performance fees on six funds launched in early 2009 and later that year introduced them to 12 existing funds, whose base fees it slashed. 

Still, as of Oct. 31, only 4.1% of open-end equity portfolios in the U.S.—representing 9.5% of the $6.57 trillion in such funds—charged performance fees, according to Lipper Inc., a unit of Thomson Reuters that tracks mutual-fund data. Only 1.1% of open-end bond and money-market funds—or 0.4% of their $1.98 trillion in assets—charged performance fees. Two firms—Fidelity and Vanguard Group—together accounted for about 80% of the assets in funds with performance fees as of Oct. 31, Lipper says.

Fund companies say the purpose of incentive fees is to better "align" the interests of managers and investors, meaning they encourage managers to act in ways that benefit shareholders as well as themselves. Some studies support this argument—at least in part.

A 2003 article in the Journal of Finance concluded that managers at 108 U.S. incentive-fee funds tracked from 1990 to 1999 "exhibited better stock-selection ability" than managers at those without them. They also achieved higher risk-adjusted returns—0.084 percentage point a month better than similar actively managed funds—as well as lower expense ratios. But the authors also noticed that the funds tended "to increase risk after a period of poor performance and decrease it after a period of good performance." Added risk could mean, for example, making bets on more volatile stocks outside of the benchmark.

  Martin Gruber, who authored the study along with his New York University colleague  Edwin Elton and Fordham University's  Christopher Blake, says he believes incentive fees offer managers a real reason to take higher risk: "If I have the same risk with the index, the same beta with the index, I'm not going to earn any performance fee." 

A 2008 Lipper report found that over the 10 years through 2007, incentive-fee funds outperformed their classification averages by an average of 0.74 percentage point a year, and by even more during the bull market of 1998 to 2000. When Lipper looked at performance adjusted for the amount of risk the funds assumed, it found the incentive-fee funds beat their peers over three- and five-year periods through 2007 but not over the trailing 10 years.

Some companies that use performance fees say they aren't designed specifically to juice returns. "We do not employ such arrangements to improve performance, but to ensure that the interests of fund advisers are aligned with those of the fund shareholders," says  John Woerth, a spokesman for Vanguard Group, which has performance fees on 23 funds, all of them externally managed. 

  Chris McIsaac, a Vanguard principal and head of its Portfolio Review Department, says Vanguard hasn't looked recently at whether its performance-fee funds have done better than its funds with flat-rate fees. "But I don't suspect that you're going to find that they're a big driver of performance," he says. "There's already fundamentally a fair amount of alignment, and we just use incentive fees as a way to further that alignment."

Indeed, a typical fund company's compensation already is tied in some degree to performance, even in funds that charge flat-rate fees. If a fund stands out as a good performer, it will attract more assets, which in turn will translate into more dollars for its manager.

The backward-looking nature of performance fees is one reason many people object to them.

Management firms reap incentive fees after the performance period for which they are assessed—typically 36 months. So a new investor may be paying a higher management fee because of strong performance that occurred before he invested or may be getting a bargain on the fee because of lagging performance suffered by earlier investors. 

"The impact on investors is asymmetrical, depending on when they buy or sell shares," says  Loren Fox, senior research analyst with consulting firm Strategic Insight. 

Then there is the belief that incentive fees create a bias toward risk taking. The Securities and Exchange Commission tries to discourage excessive risk taking by requiring symmetrical fee structures—meaning managers must stand to lose the same percentage in fee income when underperforming as they gain when outperforming. Bridgeway Capital Management of Houston has experienced the bite of symmetry. Two of its funds— Bridgeway Aggressive Investors 1, down an annualized 13.8% for the three years through December, and  Bridgeway Micro-Cap Limited, down 4%—actually had negative expense ratios in the fiscal year through June 2010, meaning the management company paid the funds. 

Still, the potential penalties are arguably never as large as the potential rewards. A higher return will result in higher fund assets, all other things being equal, making the reward for outperformance larger in dollar terms than the penalty for underperformance. 

"This gives the portfolio managers more to gain by outperforming than they stand to lose by underperforming," says Mr. Fox, though he notes that fund investment committees are supposed to have controls in place to prevent excessive risk taking.

Meanwhile, varying fees can be confusing to fund buyers, who are used to relatively stable expense ratios from year to year. TFS Capital of Richmond, Va., abandoned a performance fee on a small-cap fund last year because "financial advisers didn't want to explain it to their clients," says Sam Harris, a TFS spokesman. 

Variable fees can confuse fund companies, too. Four years ago, Dreyfus, Gartmore, Kensington Investment Group Inc, Numeric Investors LLC and Putnam settled with the SEC after it found they overcharged investors at various points between 1997 and 2004, apparently as a result of miscalculations.

None of this has been very good press for incentive fees, but whether it matters that much may hinge on whether an investor thinks such fees are a marketing ploy or a real spur to performance.

"One of the things that really bothered me about my own research is that we see funds with incentive fees doing slightly better," says Mr. Gruber, co-author of the Journal of Finance article. "But did they adopt incentive fees because they knew they were going to do better and they wanted to advertise it, or did they do better because they were working harder for incentive fees? I can't answer that."

 Mr. Gay is a writer in New York. Email him at reports@wsj.com. 