DETROIT—For nearly half a decade, Volkswagen AG has been laying the groundwork for a gambit to reconquer the U.S. Now comes the most ambitious part: the debut of a midsize sedan that could add more upheaval to the auto market's most contested segment.

To be unveiled Monday at the North American International Auto Show in Detroit, the revamped Passat, made bigger and less expensive to appeal to American consumers, will be the first car to be built by the German auto maker in the U.S. since the 1980s. The car goes on sale later this year.

The Passat's mandate is to wrest big slices of market share from the likes of the Toyota Camry and Honda Accord as VW seeks to elevate its bit-player status in the U.S. and more than triple its total annual sales there to 800,000 cars by 2018. 

Whether the new Passat can help VW reach its lofty goals is far from certain. The auto maker will have to post annual sales of more than 10 times the 12,497 Passats that it sold in the U.S. last year to meet its eventual target, and do so in an auto market still about two-thirds of its prerecession size of more than 16 million annual car sales. 

Still, even with modest success, VW is poised to serve as a disruptive force in an auto market already shaken up in recent years by brands such as Hyundai Motor Co. and Kia Motors Corp. of South Korea and Nissan Motor Co. of Japan. VW's comeback effort occurs amid major upheavals in the U.S. market's competitive landscape, creating challenges for the German car maker and niche rivals such as Japan's Subaru, a unit of Fuji Heavy Industries Ltd., and  Mazda Motor Corp.
7261


-0.71
%




 

After years of outpacing Detroit's Big Three,  Toyota Motor Corp. and  Honda Motor Co.
HMC


1.10
%




 are experiencing a slowdown in car sales. In some segments, such as midsize cars, the two Japanese auto makers have lost ground to more-nimble Asian rivals and the resurgent  Ford Motor Co.
F


1.16
%




 and  General Motors Co.
GM


0.28
%




 Toyota's sudden-acceleration crisis and subsequent drop in sales over the past year helped reopen the field to other companies. 

"Toyota is no longer the default anymore for a lot of car buyers," says analyst  Rebecca Lindland of market-research firm IHS Automotive. "People are taking a closer look at other, smaller brands."

Indeed, some of the fastest-selling cars in 2010 were the midsize offerings from the segment's smaller competitors. Sales of Hyundai's Sonata shot up nearly 64%, while sales of the Ford Fusion increased 21%.The Subaru Legacy, Nissan Altima and Chevrolet Malibu also posted higher sales.

As VW re-enters the fray this year, it could shake up the field further. At VW's U.S. headquarters in Herndon, Va., over the weekend, the auto maker's U.S. chief of four months,  Jonathan Browning, said VW is hoping to take market share away from a broad set of rivals but has Honda, Toyota and Hyundai particularly in its sights. 

"The midsize-sedan market is the largest market opportunity for us," he said. In total, he added, VW aims to increase its U.S. sales 17% to 300,000 cars this year, not including sales of its Audi luxury brand. 

That is potentially bad news for Toyota, which is launching a redesigned Camry later this year and needs a hit to help turn around its slumping U.S. sales. (The Camry, despite an 8% drop in sales to 327,804 cars last year, remained the top-selling car, excluding light trucks, in the U.S.) Chrysler also aims to reclaim a piece of the midsize market this year with a revamped version of the Sebring, now called the Chrysler 200, and is expected to make a midsize car on a  Fiat SpA platform within a couple of years.

In the late 1960s and early 1970s, the original Volkswagen Beetle helped make VW the leading auto-import brand in the U.S. Since the demise of that car later in '70s, VW has made previous stabs at U.S. comebacks. But this is its first effort in years to be fueled by a full model offensive and plans to produce in the U.S.—at a new $1 billion plant in Chattanooga, Tenn. 

Besides the redesigned Passat, VW launched a revamped version of its slightly smaller Jetta sedan in October and plans to introduce a redesigned New Beetle this year. It also plans to import the Golf R, a more-powerful four-wheel-drive version of the hatchback, and is contemplating bringing a sport-utility vehicle to the U.S. that is larger than the company's Touareg model.

Though VWs dominate the roads in Europe, Brazil and China, Volkswagen holds just 2.2% of the U.S. market, even after the company's auto sales rose 20% in the U.S. last year. Its cars' European aesthetic and German-engineered handling have attracted a core of VW enthusiasts over the years. But the cars have often been too expensive and too late in coming to the U.S. market to compete against better-selling rivals. VW missed the minivan and SUV booms by years. 

Much of VW's model strategy in the U.S. is now predicated on selling consumers bigger cars at prices more competitive with better-selling rivals. The new Passat will carry a starting price of roughly $20,000, $8,000 lower than its current $28,000 base price. VW redesigned the Jetta with the same approach, switching to a less-advanced suspension and less-costly interiors. While some VW loyalists have lamented the move, sales are off to a robust start, climbing 40% from a year earlier in the fourth quarter. 

Few rivals, though, have to pull off so many feats at once as VW does with the new Passat. Few models are instant successes in their first generation, analysts say. VW also is producing the Passat at a plant that is manufacturing cars for the first time. 

In addition, VW's U.S. operations are still adjusting to a change at the helm four months ago, when the German car maker appointed  Jonathan Browning, an executive at GM's international operations, to succeed  Stefan Jacoby, who steered VW's U.S. strategy before leaving to become chief executive of Volvo Cars. "There's a lot on VW's plate," says Ms. Lindland.

One of VW's biggest challenges might be overcoming car-reliability issues. Dogged for years by electrical bugs that would often cause windows and windshield wipers to jam, as well as other snafus, VW has shown some improvement in consumer-quality ratings in recent years. Last year, though, it fell back to No. 31 out of 33 spots in J.D. Power & Associates' Initial Quality Survey.

Mr. Browning called the result "very bad" and said the auto maker was taking steps to climb into a top-five ranking in the J.D. Power survey. "This organization is absolutely committed to turning around" its reliability scores, he said. 

 Write to  Vanessa Fuhrmans at vanessa.fuhrmans@wsj.com 