Facebook Inc. raised $1 billion from investors in a deal arranged by  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
GS


0.33
%




 that values the fast-growing company at $50 billion, in the social-networking company's largest funding to date.

The cash came from a controversial private offering to Goldman's non-U.S. clients that closed on Friday. The company said the total funding round was $1.5 billion, including $500 million from Goldman and Russian investment firm Digital Sky Technologies that closed in December. 

Facebook could have accepted as much as $1.5 billion from Goldman's overseas offering, bringing the total to $2 billion. The offer was oversubscribed, but the Palo Alto, Calif., company said the choice to limit the offering was a "business decision." 

At a $50 billion valuation, Facebook joins the ranks of the largest Silicon Valley firms, making it worth more than either  eBay Inc.
EBAY


0.66
%




 or  Yahoo Inc.
YHOO


0.16
%






Last weekend, Goldman was forced to make an about-face on its original plan to make the private placement available to its U.S. clients, too, because Goldman said intense media spotlight about the deal left it in danger of violating U.S. securities laws. That move had angered many U.S. clients.

A Goldman spokesman declined to comment. 

Facebook had the choice to raise anywhere between $375 million to $1.5 billion in the private placement, but the company wanted to maintain some flexibility about how much cash to take in, said people familiar with the matter. 

Using a range as a target for funding insured Facebook against appearing to fall short of raising money if there wasn't lots of demand for the deal, said the people. 

As it turned out, Goldman could have raised at least $5 billion in the special-purpose-vehicle, said one of the people. 

But Facebook was always aiming for a in investment of $1 billion from the special placement, said people familiar with the matter.

When it came time for Goldman to allocate Facebook shares to its clients overseas, the investment bank saw so much demand it was often unable to give people the amount they requested, said one of the people familiar with the matter. 

Typically in hot deals for private offerings or for initial public offerings, investors know to ask for extra, knowing they will get a fraction of their request. 

Facebook said it had no immediate plans for the money. In a statement, Facebook's Chief Financial Officer  David Ebersman said the deal gave the company "greater financial flexibility to explore whatever opportunities lie ahead." 

The company has been spending money to acquire small start-ups for talent, and also to build out its data center infrastructure to support growing user demand from around the world. 

Facebook's last major investment round came in mid-2009, when Digital Sky bought roughly $100 million in shares from employees and invested $200 million directly in the company at a $10 billion valuation.

In announcing the investment, Facebook also confirmed details about its timeline to disclose its financial performance and possibly hold an initial public offering. 

Facebook said that even before the latest round, it had expected at some point in 2011 to pass 500 shareholders, a threshold that would require it to make public financial reports by not later than April 30, 2012.

—Anupreeta Das contributed to this article.

 Write to  John Kell at john.kell@dowjones.com 