KABUL—Afghan lawmakers said they and President Hamid Karzai reached a tentative compromise to avert a looming constitutional crisis, paving the way for the country's newly elected Parliament to gather within days.

Mr. Karzai, who cut short a trip to Russia to deal with mounting international criticism of his decision to postpone the Parliament's inauguration until late February, backed down Saturday night and agreed to preside over the incoming legislature's opening as soon as Wednesday, legislators said,

In exchange, parliamentary leaders said Mr. Karzai demanded that lawmakers accept in writing the authority of a special court the Afghan president created to investigate allegations of fraud in the Sept. 18 elections. 

Nawab Mangal, a lawmaker from Paktia province, said most of the 249 legislators backed the deal, but final discussions continued late into the night and there still was a possibility the compromise could collapse. So far, legislators, Afghan election authorities and Western diplomats have rejected Mr. Karzai's special court as unconstitutional.

The breakthrough came after lengthy, and sometimes heated, talks between Mr. Karzai and the parliamentarians. After hearing Mr. Karzai's offer, lawmakers canceled plans to inaugurate the Parliament on their own on Sunday morning, a move that could have sparked a violent confrontation with Afghan security forces. 

In a statement on Friday, the United Nations, backed by the U.S. and European allies, expressed "deep concern" over Mr. Karzai's order to delay the Parliament's inauguration and urged the legislature's convening "as soon as possible."

Under the Afghan constitution, inaugurating the Parliament is among the "duties and authorities" of the country's president. Opening the legislature without Mr. Karzai, as parliamentarians had planned on Sunday, "would not be legal," said Karim Baz, Afghanistan's deputy minister of parliamentary affairs. 

Mr. Karzai has repeatedly expressed his dissatisfaction with the new Parliament's makeup, saying it doesn't give enough representation to the Pashtuns, the country's biggest ethnic group, to which he belongs. Several of Mr. Karzai's supporters in the previous legislature failed to win re-election, and the new crop of lawmakers is significantly more hostile to the president.

The special court created by Mr. Karzai, an affiliate of Afghanistan's Supreme Court, would have the ability to disqualify some of the winning candidates if there is enough evidence of fraud. Both the Supreme Court and the special court are packed with Karzai loyalists. 

The acceptance of the court's jurisdiction by parliamentarians means that Mr. Karzai would be able to change some of the legislature's makeup, possibly increasing Pashtun representation, and removing some of his critics. 

"This is not a defeat for Karzai," said Shukria Barakzai, a lawmaker from Kabul. "He'll still get his way through the Supreme Court."

—Habib Khan Totakhil contributed to this article.

 Write to  Yaroslav Trofimov at yaroslav.trofimov@wsj.com 