TOKYO—Anger in Japan is mounting at  Tokyo Electric Power Co.
9501


0.14
%




, the country's leading utility, not just over the precarious nuclear situation but also over its mismanagement of a series of planned blackouts that caused mass confusion and delays in the commute for many Japanese heading back to work on Monday. 

Critics say the power provider was ill-prepared for the rolling blackouts, didn't disseminate information swiftly enough and constantly changed its plans. The train lines into Tokyo Monday morning were severely delayed, stranding thousands of commuters already rattled and worn out by the quake's ordeal.

"I was really confused about both the power cuts and the train services. If Tepco already has decided on the power cuts, they should go ahead and implement them instead of changing at the last minute. It's just too confusing," Nobuyoshi Takashimaya, 56 years old, an insurance firm employee in Tokyo. He said he had to walk one hour from home to reach his office because his train wasn't working. 

A Tepco spokesman, responding to the barrage of criticism, said he regretted there was inaccurate information about the areas affected by the blackouts. The company also apologized to the Japanese government over the confusion it caused, according to the Japanese media. 

Even before Monday's confusion, the company took out a full-page ad in the Nikkei newspaper, Japan's leading financial paper, apologizing for the inconvenience of the blackouts and asking for Japan's cooperation in conserving energy. 

Sunday night, Tepco said it would implement rotating power cuts in parts of Tokyo and eight other prefectures, divided into five zones, from Monday morning until April. So many people rushed that night to check the schedule that the company website crashed.

The last-minute schedule changes added to the confusion. 

One student, a resident of Kanagawa prefecture, said she was stuck on the train Monday morning for about an hour. "I watched the TV saying that our areas shouldn't be affected in the morning, but my line was delayed due to an impact from power shortage," she said.

A Japan Railways spokesman said the majority of lines were shut early Monday and that on average only 20% were running. Tokyo Metro, one of two subway lines, ran trains with longer gaps than usual.

Early Monday, Tepco said it would skip power cuts for the first planned group, because demand had dropped as homes began conserving energy. But after an hour, the company backtracked and said there would still be a possibility of blackouts depending on the supply-demand gap. Then, the power provider ultimately skipped power cuts for the first, second, third and fourth zones on Monday, and decided to implement the power cuts for some parts of the fifth zone, which includes a part of Ibaraki and Shizuoka prefectures. The list also made mistakes in naming cities and areas.

Japan's Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism had asked the Agency for Natural Resources and Energy to have Tepco exempt railways from the list for power cuts. A ministry official said Tepco should have reported its plans to the ministry earlier to avoid the chaos. "If these [last-minute decisions] continue, we'll fall into a difficult situation," he said. 

Tepco said it would likely have a news conference every evening about the next day's blackouts plan. 

—Kana Inagaki and Paul Jackson contributed to this article.

 Write to  Atsuko Fukase at atsuko.fukase@dowjones.com 