When the Parks Department invited me to visit the baby great horned owls in Alley Pond Park in Queens, I wasn't so naïve as to assume they'd have constructed the equivalent of one of those treetop hotels they have standing beside African salt licks, where you can watch rhinos, elephants and giraffes from the comfort of your bedroom.

But I didn't think a tree stand or owl cam was too much to ask. Bird cams are all the rage these days. There's that one for some red-tailed hawks on the ledge outside President  John Sexton's window at NYU. And a few weeks back my daughter sent me a link to a bald eagle nest in Iowa. I appreciated the thought. But to be frank, watching a bird incubate her eggs, even if it's the national bird, is like watching paint dry. 

So it would be a stretch to say I was stoked as I headed out to the park with  Sarah Aucoin, the director of the Parks Department's Urban Park Rangers. We were in something of a rush, with Ms. Aucoin at intervals in communication with her lieutenants at the park, because one of the babies had already fledged, meaning abandoned the nest, and the fear was that his sibling wasn't far behind. And I suppose if there's anything less bracing than watching a bird hatch an egg—you may recall the trials of faithful Horton sitting atop Mayzie Bird's nest—it would be to drive all that distance to watch an empty nest.

And there was another problem. One of the babies kept falling out—or was pushed by its sibling. Ms. Aucoin reported that the infant was spotted on the ground by a park visitor, who carried it to the Alley Pond Park Environmental Center. They called  Bobby Horvath, a wildlife rehabilitator and city firefighter, who returned the bird to the nest.

"He was able to get a ladder tall enough for us to put it back," Ms. Aucoin said. "He got the ladder from the Fire Department through his connections. As Bobby was coming down the ladder, it came tumbling out and he recaught it."

First things first. What are the babies names? I was already confused which chick was the bully and which the sap. And if they didn't have names I was more than happy to suggest a few. How about something topical like Prince William and Kate Middleton (Did we even know their sex? The answer was no.) Or we could just pluck a couple of names from the Yankees pitching rotation? Sabathia has a nice ring to it. Or even pick the names out of a hat? 

"We try not to do that," the top park ranger explained. "When we humanize them too much it encourages people to get too close. By not naming them it helps to keep them wild."

I felt like saying—but you've already interceded in their lives by summoning that hook and ladder. What's next—going to Ikea to purchase pillows to break their fall? 

Of course, an owl cam would solve all those problems. People, present company excepted, are crazy about animal cams. As soon as Horny, or the Duchess of Cambridge, or whatever we choose to call him/her, took a tumble, the Parks Department's phones and website would light up with panicked birders reporting the little beast missing.

"We've done that before," Ms. Aucoin said, referring to a bald eagle cam in Inwood Hill Park, as she started to muse about a solar-powered owl cam. "It's something we're looking into. Possibly for next year."

As we passed LaGuardia airport—this park was way out there, about as far out as you can go and still be in the city—the ranger chief confessed that she's actually an herpetologist. "I study amphibians and reptiles," she explained. "I studied frogs and salamanders for my master's degree."

We got into a spirited discussion about salamanders, Ms. Aucoin describing their lifecycle. By the time we reached the part where the now sexually mature creatures returned to the water to lay their eggs we were pulling into the Alley Pond Park parking lot. A short distance away waited her park ranger colleagues. To the relief of all involved they reported that the remaining baby was still in the nest.

So we trooped through the woods to a tree stump, gazing about 30 feet up through the drab light, to observe something whitish and furry. I'm a bird lover so I wouldn't call it a letdown, even though there was no viewing platform, or even a footstool. But it wasn't "Planet Earth" in HD either. 

"In the daytime," reported  Howard Kreft, an Urban Ranger sergeant who seemed to know pretty much everything there is to know about owls, "they usually sleep."

I half hoped Tweety Bird, or whatever we were going to call her even though we weren't, would take one of her or his famous tumbles just so we could get a better look. All was not lost, however. We continued on our walk until we spotted the sleepy owl's sibling. He was seated at the end of a dead branch, and impressive looking. Though only a month old he was already huge but still covered in puffy white fuzz resembling the animal skins those slovenly Viking wears in the Capital One ads. 

And the fledgling's proud and massive mom—she appeared three feet long—sat on a branch, high on a tree behind him, keeping careful watch. And well she should. The problem with city parks, even one as remote as Alley Pond Park, is that word gets out and a crowd forms. I'd like to say that I managed to commune with the bird in solitude, but there were a good half dozen of us there, jockeying for a better look, among them Scott Dere—who said he normally shoots weddings and bar mitzvahs—with a camouflaged telephoto lens as long as a howitzer. "It's impossible to get them both in focus," he said of mother and baby. "I'll Photoshop it tonight."

We returned to the former stump to take one more look at the fledgling—still doing his best Garbo imitation—and ended up examining his scat instead. "I don't recommend the public do this," Sgt. Kreft said, "but you can take it and see what animals they're eating."

I let him do the honors.

 Write to  Ralph Gardner, Jr. at ralph.gardner@wsj.com 