Indian stocks soared to extend gains on Tuesday, with auto companies leading after Monday's federal budget didn't raise excise duties and as February sales increased.

Most other regional markets also advanced, with stocks in Shanghai and Hong Kong advancing after two separate surveys showed China's manufacturing activity continued to expand in February, albeit at a smaller pace.

Japan's Nikkei Stock Average advanced 1.2%, Taiwan's Taiex finished 1.5% higher and India's Sensex climbed 3.5%.

China's Shanghai Composite Index rose 0.5% and Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index gained 0.3% after Chinese manufacturing PMI data were announced.

China's official manufacturing PMI slowed to 52.2 in February from 52.9 in January, while the HSBC PMI for February fell to 51.7 from 54.5 in January.

A PMI reading above 50 indicates an expansion in manufacturing activity, while below 50 indicates contraction. Both sets of data also highlighted rising input-cost pressures, drawing different responses from market participants on monetary-policy options facing Beijing.

"We expect the PMI to retreat further in the months ahead; that may diminish the likelihood of stronger tightening measures from Beijing," said Tang Yonggang, an analyst from Hong Yuan Securities.

Credit Suisse economist Dong Tao said the firm doesn't expect a change in Beijing's monetary policy because of Tuesday's data, and that more hikes in interest rates and reserve-ratio requirements were expected to follow.

"The continued rise in the PMI input-prices index highlights the need to bring monetary conditions under control, but this will likely be balanced with Beijing's fear about uncertainties in the global economy, pertaining to a demand shock triggered by the surge in oil prices," the economist.

Aluminum Corp. of China rose 2.1% in Shanghai but dropped 4% in Hong Kong. The company swung to a profit in 2010, though the figure fell short of expectations.

In Hong Kong, heavyweight HSBC Holdings slumped 5.1% a day after it reported that 2010 net profit more than doubled to $13.2 billion, but also fell short of expectations.

UBS said that rising costs for HSBC are becoming a concern, though loan growth and robust deposit momentum look compelling. "Rampant cost growth and a resolute unwillingness to discuss revenue prospects leave us without confidence in the 2011 outlook," it said in a report.

In Mumbai, shares of Tata Motors rose 5.5% and Maruti Suzuki climbed 6.8%, after Finance Minister Pranab Mukherjee on Monday didn't raise excise duties on vehicles. Many investors had feared that the taxes would rise.

The gains were also aided by news that the two auto makers' February sales rose from a year earlier.

Japanese stocks were cheered by the weaker yen and by expectations for solid numbers for the U.S. Institute for Supply Management manufacturing data due later in the global day.

"It will be easier to shift from the pessimistic to optimistic sentiment this week on the back of a recovery in the U.S. economy," said Masayoshi Yano, a senior market analyst at Meiwa Securities.

Dentsu rose 4.9% on a business tie-up with Facebook, while Shinsei Bank rose 7.7% on a Credit Suisse upgrade to outperform after the bank announced a capital-raising plan.

Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group added 3.2% on a plan to buy back 210 billion yen ($2.56 billion) of its preferred shares for retirement.

Daiichi Sankyo added 0.4% after saying it will spend $805 million to buy California-based drug maker Plexxikon.

Australia's S&P/ASX 200 ended 0.1% lower, with banks declining after the Reserve Bank of Australia decided to leave its cash-rate target on hold at 4.75%, as had been widely expected.

Shares of Australia & New Zealand Banking Group dropped 0.5% and National Australia Bank lost 0.9%.

Equinox Minerals dropped 6.1% after making a A$4.9 billion ($4.99 billion) hostile bid for Canada's Lundin Mining. Lundin has said the offer is insufficient.

South Korean markets were shut for a public holiday.

Elsewhere in the region, New Zealand's NZX 50 rose 0.4% and Philippine stocks finished 0.5% higher. Singapore's Straits Times Index rose 1.9%, Indonesian shares added 1.2% and Thailand's SET Index rose 0.7%.

Dow Jones Industrial Average futures were up 69 points in screen trade.

In foreign-exchange markets, demand from importers as well as improved risk appetite after the DJIA's gains supported the U.S. dollar against the Japanese yen. The risk-sensitive euro also rose on stronger equities. 

The dollar was at 82.19 yen, against 81.79 yen in late New York trade Monday, while the euro was at 113.58 yen versus 112.90 yen, and at $1.3821 compared with $1.3805. 

Lead Japanese government-bond futures were down 0.19 at 139.35 points. The yield on the 10-year cash JGB was up 1.5 basis points at 1.270%. 

Spot gold was at $1,413.10 a troy ounce, up $1.90 from its New York close on Monday.

March Nymex crude-oil futures were up 26 cents at $97.23 a barrel on Globex. 

 Write to  Colin Ng at colin.ng@dowjones.com 