The final quarter of 2010 rewarded investors with substantial gains on their stock funds. But several types of taxable and tax-exempt bond funds posted losses as interest rates rose. 

Read the complete  Quarterly Investing in Funds report .

Diversified U.S.-stock funds returned an average of 11.4% in the quarter, amid indications that the U.S. economic recovery is finally gaining steam. They rose an average of 17.1% for the year, according to Lipper Inc., a unit of Thomson Reuters. Funds focused on small stocks did best for the quarter and the year.

International-stock funds lagged behind their domestic counterparts, amid renewed debt worries in Europe. Still, they returned an average of 7.4% in the fourth quarter and 10.7% for the year.

On the fixed-income side, investors suffered as rising interest rates pushed down prices on existing bonds paying lower rates. The most widely held taxable-bond funds, holding intermediate-term investment-grade debt, posted a negative 0.9% return on average for the fourth quarter, according to Lipper. They were up 7.7% for the full year.

General muni-debt funds averaged a negative 4.7% quarterly return, leaving them with a 1.7% return for the year. Many categories of single-state muni funds performed similarly.

Among the 25 largest funds and ETFs, the best performer in the fourth quarter was  Vanguard Total Stock Market Index, up 11.7%, and the worst was the only pure bond fund on the list,  Pimco Total Return, down 1%.

 In recent weeks, the bond-market woes have led investors to pull more money out of bond funds than they put in—a break from steady and substantial bond-fund purchases in 2009 and the first 10 months of 2010.

Still, including inflows in October, the fourth quarter through Dec. 22 saw a net $8.6 billion flow into bond funds, according to estimates by the Investment Company Institute trade group. With one week to go in the year, bond funds had taken in an estimated $251.9 billion for 2010.

While fund investors have cooled toward bond funds, they haven't warmed up to U.S.-stock funds. Those stock funds saw investors pull out $18.7 billion more than they invested in the fourth quarter, through Dec. 22. For 2010, through the same date, investors pulled a net $80.1 billion from those funds.

International-stock funds took in a net $22 billion in the fourth quarter, through Dec. 22, and $53.3 billion for the year of 2010 to date, the ICI estimates.

Because it's human nature to ignore information that runs contrary to one's views, "we have formalized the role of the devil's advocate to force a structured dissenting view in our investment meetings…. By designating another senior member of our team to argue against an idea with the same rigor with which it was researched by the industry specialist, we ensure a balanced argument is not only presented but also heard."

 John W. Rogers Jr., Ariel Fund  

—Ms. Damato is a news editor for The Wall Street Journal, based in South Brunswick, N.J. Email her at karen.damato@wsj.com.