Our Monday column on union thuggery prompts this response from reader John Benjamin:

Let's begin by rehearsing the Leiter statement in question. Referring to government policies of which he disapproves--specifically, curtailments of public-sector "collective bargaining" privileges and funding for public universities--Leiter, a scholar of philosophy and law at the University of Chicago, wrote on his blog: "At some point these acts of brazen viciousness are going to lead to a renewed philosophical interest in the question of when acts of political violence are morally justified."

This comes nowhere near meeting the legal definition of incitement, which the Supreme Court set out in  Brandenburg v. Ohio  (1969):

The key word here is "imminent." Leiter's statement not only is unlikely to incite or produce imminent lawless action but is carefully worded to refute any claim that that is its intent. As a legal scholar, he presumably knows the legal limits.

In fact, he could have been much more direct without risk of legal action. As we noted in January, the hard-left sociologist Frances Fox Piven has expressly advocated political violence and is at no legal risk for it. Leiter doesn't even advocate violence; he merely says that "at some point" (not imminently!) there will be "renewed philosophical interest in the question."

We find this amusing rather than menacing because it is so pathetically weak. Again, contrast Piven with Leiter. She came right out and called for "something like the strikes and riots that have spread across Greece"--a despicable sentiment, but one that at least has the virtue of clarity, in contrast with Leiter's coy insinuation that there may be challenging academic papers in the offing if his political foes aren't careful. Piven, a woman who will be 80 next year, is acting manlier than Leiter, decades younger and male.

Althouse does not profess to find Leiter's statement menacing either but "disgusting." (Nor does she urge that he be silenced.) If we read her correctly, her disgust is largely the product of what she, as an academic with integrity, sees as his abuse of his scholarly authority: "He's inclined to approve of the impulse toward violence on the left and willing to mobilize the discipline of philosophy to generate rhetoric to support its political goals. It's quite disgusting."

The reason we find Leiter's comments amusing rather than disgusting is that we, unlike Althouse, are not part of academia and thus have no personal investment in the ideal of disinterested and honest scholarship. Rather than offend our ideals, Leiter reinforces our stereotype of academia as being filled with fools and knaves. You can see why this would bother Althouse, a scholar who does not fit the disparaging stereotype.

Althouse's emotional reaction to Leiter's comments is similar to ours when the New York Times publishes blatantly slanted stories on its news pages or outright lies on its opinion pages. Those are our professional standards the Times is transgressing. Some of our readers thought our outrage at the Times naive; we would say that, like Althouse's disgust with Leiter, it was merely idealistic. It is possible to be knowing without being cynical.

To return to John Benjamin's letter, we certainly agree that it is better if "foolish, crazy or hostile ideas" do not survive, or at least do not thrive. A good deal of our work is devoted to combating them with the weapons of logic and mockery. As the disgusted Althouse demonstrates, shaming can also be an effective tactic. 

Look at Leiter's defensive updates to his initial blog post. He accuses Althouse of an "inflammatory hatchet job" and us of a "drive-by smear." He answers by asserting that "I did not, and do not, call for political violence"--technically an accurate statement, as explained above, but a curious claim for him to deny since neither Althouse nor this column ever made it. Leiter wouldn't be acting like such a crybaby if he weren't losing this argument. 

This little kerfuffle is a good illustration of the First Amendment piety that the answer to offensive speech is more speech, not censorship. Indeed, for generations the U.S. Supreme Court has protected speech far more offensive to common sense than anything Leiter has likely ever said:

 Brandenburg overturned the conviction of a Ku Klux Klansman who had advocated (but not incited) violence against blacks and Jews.  Hustler v. Falwell  (1988) overturned a civil award against a pornographic magazine for what the court described as "an ad parody offensive to [the plaintiff], and doubtless gross and repugnant in the eyes of most." And most recently,  Snyder v. Phleps  (2011) overturned a judgment against the Westboro Baptist so-called Church, the "God hates fags" creeps, for protesting near the funeral of a fallen Marine.

All these decisions were unanimous save for Snyder, which drew a lone dissent by Justice Samuel Alito. We found Alito's opinion to be a compelling and eloquent defense of common sense, and we're glad he wrote it--although we're also glad no other justice joined it. Political freedom is much better served by a regime of near-absolute free speech than one that attempts to impose common-sense limits on speech.

This is for two reasons. First, exhortations to respect common sense--defined by Merriam-Webster as "sound and prudent judgment based on a simple perception of the situation or facts"--presuppose that one has discretion over one's actions: "If you post that on your blog, you'll look foolish, Prof. Leiter. That's just common sense." It's too vague a basis for making legal rules, which require the drawing of clear lines. The First Amendment, in fact, is such a rule, designed to limit government's discretion in policing speech.

Second, common sense is too easily swamped by senseless intellectualism. The experience of generally free countries that do limit speech--including Canada, England and many Continental European lands--is that the limits are dictated by political correctness rather than common sense. The same is true of American institutions of higher education.

We might accept common-sense limits on free speech if Justice Alito were making all the decisions. But we don't for a second trust the political and legal elite to ensure that future justices are men like Alito, whose nomination was fiercely opposed by the party that now controls the White House and the Senate majority. Yielding to the temptation to censor the speech of guys like Leiter--or even Fred Phelps of Westboro infamy--would only make it more likely that guys like Leiter would eventually gain the power to censor the speech of the rest of us.

  Baghdad Bob Again   All these years, we're beginning to think, we've failed to appreciate the comic potential of the fatuous E.J. Dionne, whom even his own newspaper, the Washington Post, describes as a "left-leaning columnist." Here's Dionne with the New York Times's David Brooks and host Robert Siegel, discussing Gov. Scott Walker's legislative victory in Wisconsin:

Now of course, to say "it's never happened before" doesn't settle the matter. Sometimes things happen for the first time. But "this will be the first" is a very weak rejoinder. If you want to claim persuasively that a longstanding historic trend is about to be broken, you ought to have some evidence either that conditions have changed or that the facts of the case in question are unusual. The best Dionne can do is allude to selective and evanescent poll numbers.

Although at least he didn't claim, like fellow left-leaning Post writer Greg Sargent in a headline, that "The Public Agrees With Dems, but They Don't Know It." It's not even clear who "they" are--Dems or the public?

Meanwhile, check out this New York Times report on actual voters who have had their say in Miami:

Alvarez is a Republican, but his policies are not what you'd call Walkerite. (He also gave big raises to his aides and drove around in a tax-subsidized Beemer, a warning to pols of both parties who like to live large.) He lost by an astonishing margin of 88% to 12%. That speaks louder than polls, pundits or even mobs of greedy government employees.

  'I Have the Hat to This Day, You Betcha'   "Palin's Hat Not in the Ring, but She's Still in the Mix"--headline, FoxNews.com, March 15

 Life Imitates 'The Simpsons' 

  If It Tweets, It Wasn't a Duck in the First Place   "Aflac Fires Spokesduck Following Offensive Tweets"--headline, MediaBistro.com, March 15

  One Al Franken Is Enough   "Bill Would Ban Human Cloning in Minnesota"--headline, Associated Press, March 15

  'I Just Flew In From Tehran, and Boy Are My Arms Tired!'   "Report: Plane With Arms From Iran Lands in Turkey"--headline, Associated Press, March 16

  So Much for the War on Drugs   "Bills' Administrative Staff Takes a Hit During Lockout"--headline, Buffalo News, March 16

  What a Luckey Guy   "Volvo Names Construction Unit's Chief Persson to Succeed Johannson [sic] as CEO"--headline, Bloomberg, March 16

  Hey, Kids! What Time Is It?   "To Hell With Celebrities: Time to Roast You!"--headline, MediaPost.com, March 15

  Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking   "Why 'Crossover Day' Matters"--headline, Atlanta Journal-Constitution, March 16

  Keeper Bites Panda--Now That Would Be News   "Panda Bites Keeper at San Diego Zoo"--headline, San Diego Union-Tribune, March 14

  Mainstream Media Slam Bachmann--Oh Wait, That Isn't News Either   "Bachmann Slams Mainstream Media"--headline, National Review Online, March 15

  News of the Oxy Moronic   "Oxy Usage Doubles in Three Years"--headline, The Wall Street Journal, March 16

 News You Can Use 

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  Hit Parade   Hey, kids! What time is it? "Time for NPR and PBS to End Their Abusive Relationship With Congress," according to the headline of a Puffington Host post by Craig Aaron, executive at a left-wing corporation called Free Press that actually advocates for government control of the press. Writes Aaron:

There are bills in both the House and Senate to cut all federal funding for the Corporation for Public Broadcasting -- putting thousands of local stations and tens of thousands of local jobs at risk.

Members of MoveOn.org, CREDO Action and Free Press have spoken out against this attack on local media and our local communities. . . .

By "restore these funding cuts," he means restore the funding that was cut. So if you accept the analogy, his advice to a woman in an abusive relationship is to continue the relationship and remain economically dependent on the abuser. What kind of misogynistic outfit is the Puffington Host, anyway?

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Paul DiGiovanni, Dan Goldstein, Michele Schiesser, Rod Pennington, James McAughey, James Foster, Hillel Markowitz, Joe Perez, Ravi Baskaran, Rex Pilger, Clifford Crouch, Mark Swanson, Brett Black, Michael Davin, John Bates, Mike Curcio, Shawn Turk, John Sanders, John Williamson, Clay Westbrook, David Espindle, Ed Thompson and David Neidert. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)