 The Beacon Theatre  2124 Broadway, (212) 496-7070  Wednesday

Ever since he was a 20-something singer-songwriter, the subject of age has been a constant throughout Paul Simon's career. There were the childhood reminisces on "Me and Julio Down by the Schoolyard" and his ode to the older "Mrs. Robinson." Decades later, he was through the mirror, the elder talking to the next generation, as he did on his 2006 song "Father and Daughter." For Mr. Simon's 12th studio album, "So Beautiful or So What," his twilight years remain foremost on his mind. But rather than a dour meditation, we get the man imagining the afterlife as bureaucratic imbroglio: "You got to fill out a form first and then you wait in the line." More trenchant spiritual insight follows. Mr. Simon has returned to building his sprightly songs up from the melody, rather than the rhythm-first method he's deployed since "Graceland." He'll no doubt attack mortality from both sides at the Beacon.



 Bowery Ballroom  6 Delancey St., (212) 533-2111  Thursday

Since his 2002 debut, singer-songwriter Cass McCombs has kept in the shadows of indie-rock, rarely veering into the light, even with standout albums like 2009's "Catacombs." His fifth album, "WIT's END," is his darkest yet, but also his most graceful and gorgeous. It's deserving of a wider audience—perhaps one still gripping its old Leonard Cohen records? Who else can sing the chorus of "Buried Alive" so that it sounds like the loveliest fate imaginable? On record, Mr. McCombs's band couches intricate lyricism in soft rock and piano balladry, but with sumptuous touches of arcane instruments like celesta, Hammond organ, and bass clarinet. Album opener "County Line" might be the most devastating soul ballad that the Band's Richard Manuel never recorded. In the hushes of the Bowery Ballroom, expect to capture every nuance.



 The Bell House  149 7th Street, Brooklyn, (718) 643-6510  Friday

"Is it too late to do it again? Or should we wait another 10?," asks the Feelies' Glenn Mercer at the opening of the band's latest album, "Here Before." Considering the iconic New Jersey group's last studio album was released in 1991, devout fans (who range from R.E.M. to Yo La Tengo to novelist Rick Moody) might think 10 is quite manageable. Thankfully, the band reconvened in 2008 and began to play intermittent shows throughout the tri-state area. And with Fridayt's record-release show at Brooklyn's Bell House, one won't have to wait for a major holiday to hear them. Live, the Feelies show that they can still attain the velocity of their classic first album, "Crazy Rhythms," as well as the melodic jangle of their 80's work. They're also likely to play some of their favorite covers, which run from the Beatles to the Velvet Underground. 



 Issue Project Room  232 Third St., Brooklyn, (718) 330-0313  Thursday-Saturday

With all manner of noise now fully embedded in the production of indie-rock and hip-hop, it's hard to remember a time back in the early 1990s when such weird sounds were kept underground. It was an aesthetically minimal record label based in Atlanta—one named for the periodic table of elements—that brought such sounds to the surface. The Table of the Elements label released music by Sonic Youth members as well as an unknown musician named Jim O'Rourke. Running out of elements now, this loud and adventurous three-day festival will still offer plenty to go deaf to: the grandfather of minimalism, violinist Tony Conrad, as well as guitarist Stephen O'Malley of experimental metal band Sunn O))). Harpist Zeena Perkins performs on opening night (incidentally her album was the label's first), while Jonathan Kane's group, February, plays on Saturday. Mixing minimalism and the blues, Mr. Kane will reveal the dark drone beneath that song form.



 Webster Hall  125 E 11th St., (212) 353-1600  May 17

Over the past few years, Sweden has offered up a varietal pack of pop chanteuses for export and download. There's the fierce bubblegum of Robyn, the surreal art-electronics of Fever Ray, and the cute yet icy pop offered up by magazine cover-ready Lykke Li. Her debut "Youth Novels" found her in the company of Kings of Leon (who she covered), Kanye (who she performed with), and Drake (who sampled her). For this year's "Wounded Rhymes," she left Sweden for the endless summer of Los Angeles, though even the sunshine couldn't quite melt her heart. Detailing a breakup by going drum-crazy, Lykke Li laid her heartache over rhythms veering from the tribal to the girl group-ready, her own vocal delivery alternating between the cold and the sensuous. She'll bounce between both extremes on Tuesday. 