Paris's Galerie Kreo is the red-hot center of European design, displaying limited-edition pieces by the likes of Konstantin Grcic, Hella Jongerius and the Bouroullec brothers. But the first thing that caught my eye during a recent visit was a plain white vase, transformed into an uncanny masterpiece, by Portuguese designer Fernando Brízio.

The idea is simple enough. Mr. Brízio has taken some 30 felt-tip pens in assorted colors, manufactured by the Italian brand Giotto, and attached them to niches up and down the surface. The color seeps into the clay, creating a polka-dot pattern; meanwhile the pens are left suspended on the vase, sticking out like Technicolor flower stems. The effect, of a piece Mr. Brízio calls "Painting a Fresco with Giotto #3," is mesmerizing. 

In the rambling rooms of Galerie Kreo, Fernando Brízio can more than hold his own with the design world's superstars. However, outside that gallery, in the design world at large, he is a bit like his country—an exotic presence, at the very edge of the continent. Now, all that may change, as Mr. Brízio, based in Lisbon, finds himself in the middle of a series of high-profile launches.

Last fall, Droog, the Dutch design label, came out with Mr. Brízio's trompe l'oeil bedside table, called "What You See is Not," which combines a photograph-like decal of a nightstand, stuck to a wall, with a real, functioning drawer. This winter, the Italian brand Il Coccio included Mr. Brízio's piece Float in a series of humidifiers created by designers such as Patricia Urquiola and Achille Castiglioni. And next month, Mr. Brízio will launch a cork stool and bowl, produced by the Portuguese company Amorim, at the Milan Furniture Fair.

But arguably the stand-out launch took place this week in Lisbon, when Portugal's celebrated ceramics manufacturer, Faianças Rafael Bordallo Pinheiro, known for its lush novelty items, debuted a limited-edition set, featuring Mr. Brízio's take on the 125-year-old firm's traditional style. After going into the archives, Mr. Brízio rehabilitated a pair of fanciful elephant bookends and used them to support—and appear almost to tip over—an otherwise simple vase and fruit bowl.

I caught up with Mr. Brízio in his family's Lisbon apartment, near the Alameda underground station. His mother had recently moved out, and Mr. Brízio, 43 years old, plans to turn the cavernous ground-floor flat into an archive and atelier. Although Mr. Brízio spent the later years of his childhood here, he was actually born in southern Angola, in the twilight years of the Portuguese empire, and was one of hundreds of thousands of so-called retornados, Portuguese citizens who came back to Portugal from its rebelling African colonies. 

It could be said that Mr. Brízio's career started right here, when he found children like himself.

"In Africa, I used to play in the street and make my own toys," he says, citing bows and arrows made from the branches of pruned trees. "When I came to this neighborhood, some of the kids also came from Africa. In Portugal, people stay in the house. But we had different habits." They designed and built their own toy cars, he recalls, which they fashioned out of the large wooden crates the retornados had used to ship back their furniture. 

Portugal in the 1970s was going through a period of rising hope, but also of great uncertainty, as the authoritarian regime set up by the country's longtime prime minister, António de Oliveira Salazar, came to an end in a military-led coup. The Portuguese, who had been politically and culturally isolated from the rest of Europe, needed years to rejoin the European mainstream. 

In the past few decades, Portugal has seen the rise of an internationally recognized architectural tradition, embodied by Pritzker Prize-winner Alvaro Siza, and a number of Portuguese artists are finding galleries and collectors in Europe and both Americas. However, design has yet to catch up—it is hard for design-lovers, even inside Portugal, to come up with a prominent name other than Mr. Brízio's. Can he explain why?

"The country was closed for decades," says Mr. Brízio, who recalls that the design profession in Salazar's Portugal had taken an entirely separate path.

"The expectation," he says, of the period leading up to the time he started studying design in the 1991, "was that you would work for public institutions, not industry." He says a designer could look forward to a career planning counters for reception rooms. Design, as the rest of Europe understands the term, "is quite new here."

Although the Portuguese design scene may lack anyone with the gifts of Mr. Brízio, the country has a rich handicraft tradition. For centuries, the Portuguese have used elaborate ceramic tiles to decorate building facades as well as interiors. And cork, one of the country's main natural resources, has proved a testing ground for craftsmen of all kinds.

Didier Krzentowski, co-director of Galerie Kreo, sees Mr. Brízio as working in a distinctively Portuguese tradition—"he is an artisan of the 21st century," he says.

Mr. Brízio himself doesn't like to make great claims for his work, separating himself from both European modernists and Portuguese craftsmen. Does he hope to use design to invigorate, or just investigate Portuguese identity? No, he answers. "I don't have a mission as a designer: I don't want to save the world."

He also seems to have a limited sense of commercial ambition. One of his most celebrated projects—a fashion adaptation of his Giotto vase, called "Restarted Dress," created between 2005 and 2008—has yet to go into production because Mr. Brízio could never decide on a firm to work with. And Mr. Krzentowski complains that he has spent years trying to get Mr. Brízio to do a solo show in Paris.

In talking about his career and his country, Mr. Brízio can sound quite fatalistic, invoking the famous Portuguese melancholy, which permeates Lisbon's Fado music and sets the country apart from its gregarious Spanish neighbors and its distant cultural cousin, Brazil. "I am melancholic," he admits. 

Does this melancholy find its way into his designs? No, he says; but I would beg to differ. Although his work often relies on humor and illusion, it is never pat or glib, and is often downright cerebral. His ghostly ceramic elephants seem to represent the past itself, both supporting and imperiling the blank vessels of the present that dwarf them.

This is design at its most contemplative. Mr. Brízio may not want to save the world, or Portugal, but he wants to create work that leads people "intellectually to something unexpected."