This Sunday afternoon, if the NFL isn't really your bag, consider joining several thousand New Yorkers who plan to nonchalantly ride the train in their underwear as part of the 10th annual No Pants Subway Ride. 

The event is organized by the trouble-making collective Improv Everywhere, who were responsible for the people freezing in unison in Grand Central Station, a stunt whose Youtube video garnered more than 24 million hits. Of course the "improv" in their name belies the coordination involved: The No Pants Subway Ride is global, with planned, pantless counterparts in 47 cities world-wide, even ones without subways. In El Paso, they take to buses, and in Minneapolis, to the Mall of America tram.

"One of the few rules is to keep a straight face," said the group's low-key founder,  Charlie Todd, 32, surrounded by Flaming Lips, "Star Trek" and Upright Citizen's Brigade posters in his Penn Station area apartment. Another rule is to not take pictures.

"People document too much," he said. The idea is to create a "celebration of silliness," and politics are kept separate. "It would be less magical if we added a statement," he said.

When Mr. Todd first started the ride a decade ago, he was accompanied by a dozen twenty-something-white-male performers. Now, he said, the demographics more closely resemble the city as a whole, with a strong presence from high-schoolers from the Bronx, people waist-up in business suits, and "new moms with babies in Bjorns, both pantless." By Friday morning, 8,400 people had committed via Facebook. But, "just because you click, doesn't mean you show up," Mr. Todd said.

Participants gather at 3 p.m. at six meeting points and are dispatched to all of New York's 10 subway lines, where deputies give them specifics regarding the gradual unfolding of the stunt. One instruction dictates that if a random pants-wearing subway rider asks a participant why he is in such a state of undress, he is supposed to respond that he forgot to put pants on, and to insist that it's a coincidence that others forgot, too.

If things go according to plan, everybody ends up in Union Square, pantless, emboldened and amused. "The golden rule for a prank is that it should be as fun for the person getting pranked as it is for the prankster," Mr. Todd said. "New York winters can be really brutal, and when people start to go a little crazy, it's nice to have an outlet."

—Lizzie Simon