GLENDALE, Ariz.—Decades before the University of Oregon's football team reached this year's national-championship showdown, the Ducks played in a much less auspicious game: the Toilet Bowl.

The day was Nov. 19, 1983. The matchup was Oregon versus Oregon State, two of the era's most hapless and hopeless programs. And it was raining—a cold, sideways downpour.

By the time the game ended there had been four missed field goals, including two rare failures from less than 30 yards. There were five interceptions and six fumbles, plus five other fumbles that were recovered by the team that fumbled the ball.

Fans chanted "BOR-ING!" and sarcastically applauded nonevents, such as first downs.

The final score, a perfectly futile 0-0, has maintained its dubious place in history. It was the last scoreless tie ever in major college football. Since 1996, with the introduction of overtime play, there are no tie games anymore. 

The game's nickname, which took hold immediately, was self-explanatory. "It felt like you were sitting in a toilet bowl," says former Oregon quarterback Mike Jorgensen.

Oregon's date with Auburn University in Monday's national-championship game marks the school's ascension to an exclusive society of college football blue bloods.

"I'll never forget that game," says Gary Campbell, Oregon's running-backs coach then and now, of the 1983 tie.

When Oregon took the field at Autzen Stadium in Eugene that day, the Ducks had a record of four wins and six losses. They hadn't played in a postseason bowl game since 1963, and with scant resources and a small recruiting base, the program had fallen far behind the glamour teams of the time in the Pacific-10 Conference—Southern California, UCLA and Washington.

Oregon State, the Ducks' longtime rival, was in even worse shape with a record of 2-8. Still, the lure of the annual meeting of these teams, which is known across the state as the Civil War, was strong enough to attract a crowd of 33,176.

Up in the stadium press box, Oregon's coaches had an unusual problem: They couldn't see the field. Because of the rain, the press-box windows fogged up. With the rain blowing sideways, the coaches had a choice: Open the windows and get drenched along with all their notes or keep the windows closed and struggle to see. "We just decided to let the rain in," says Steve Greatwood, Oregon's offensive-line coach.

On the field, the conditions were so poor that players fumbled the ball even when they weren't touched by an opposing player, and that turned the game into one long comical pigskin pursuit. 

"The ball would squirt out, and you'd dive on it and think you've got it, and it squirts out again and somebody on the other team gets it," says Rich Brooks, Oregon's head coach at the time. "There were so many strange plays. You'd almost have to script it to believe it."

On one of Oregon's two interceptions, Oregon freshman quarterback Chris Miller—a future NFL player—heaved the ball into an area of the field where there weren't any Oregon players. (Asked for his memories of the game, Mr. Miller, now the quarterbacks coach for the NFL's Arizona Cardinals, joked, "I can't remember a thing.")

On the game's final play, the Ducks—who were a two-touchdown favorite—nearly avoided all the ignominy. On a play that started deep in Oregon territory, fullback Ladaria Johnson took a lateral pass and nearly reached the end zone as time expired. But officials ruled he stepped out of bounds near midfield. 

"By the last 10 minutes, people were starting to catch on that nothing was going to happen out there," says Oregon's archivist emeritus Keith Richard. "It all became more of a joke."

Mr. Jorgensen, the former Ducks quarterback, didn't even play in the game—he got hurt a couple of weeks before—but when it comes up in conversation, people still assume that he was part of the inaction. 

"I attribute it to the fact that I was a crappy quarterback," he says. "You play enough pathetic football, you tend to get associated with some of the worst games ever played at Oregon."

Over the next several years, Mr. Brooks steadily brought Oregon to respectability, winning the Pac-10 in 1994. The team has now been catapulted into the sport's elite, fueled by millions in donations from Nike co-founder and alumnus Phil Knight, innovative offensive strategy, broader recruiting and snazzy uniforms.

But for those who remember it, the memory of the Toilet Bowl remains strong, making the team's current circumstances all the more pleasurable. "The national championship?" says Mr. Jorgensen. "To be honest with you, I just didn't think it would ever happen in my lifetime."

 Write to  Darren Everson at darren.everson@wsj.com 