The Obama administration awarded $2 billion in grants for 22 passenger-rail projects Monday, including upgrades to Amtrak lines in the Northeast and Midwest and the start of construction on a bullet-train project in California.

The money, a mix of dollars from the 2009 economic-recovery package and last year's budget, was freed up when Florida's governor canceled a fast-train project in February. 

The $2 billion is the final award the Obama administration will make from a $10 billion high-speed rail program. Budget battles that have focused on spending cuts have dimmed the prospects for future high-speed-rail funding. 

Monday's announcement drew criticism from House Republican leaders, who questioned both the decision to divide the money into nearly two-dozen grants around the country—instead of concentrating it into fewer major projects—and the fact that many of the projects will benefit Amtrak, the federally subsidized passenger-rail operator.

"We need a comprehensive, responsible plan for the Northeast Corridor, and Amtrak, our nation's Soviet-style passenger rail service, is incapable of carrying out a project of this scope and significance," House Transportation Committee Chairman John Mica (R., Fla.) said in a statement. The funds have already been appropriated by Congress, and the awarding of them to specific projects doesn't need further approval.

Amtrak spokesman Steve Kulm said the projects funded Monday wouldn't significantly reduce trip times but were necessary to eventually bring high-speed rail to the U.S. "Today's announcements are not particularly sexy," Mr. Kulm said. "But it's necessary. If we want to get to 220 miles per hour, we have to do some basic infrastructure improvements to get there."

Amtrak received $450 million, mostly to upgrade a heavily traveled route between Morrisville, Pa., and New Brunswick, N.J. Amtrak said it would improve its electrical network, signal systems, track and overhead wiring along the 24-mile segment. Those changes will allow trains to reach top speeds of 160 mph, up from 135 mph, though average speeds will remain much lower. Amtrak will also redesign track switches to increase train speeds and the flow of traffic heading into New York City's Penn Station.

New York, Maryland, Massachusetts, Connecticut, Rhode Island and Pennsylvania will receive money mostly for track improvements that will benefit Amtrak lines.

Illinois and Michigan will split about $400 million to upgrade lines heading into Chicago, speeding up travel to Detroit and St. Louis. Elected leaders in those states said the money would create jobs and spur economic development in areas hit hard by high unemployment.

California will get $300 million to continue planning and construction of a high-speed rail line between the Los Angeles and San Francisco areas. The money will help build track in the Central Valley, the first segment of what would one day be a line that could carry trains reaching speeds of 220 mph, far faster than any other trains in the U.S.

Another $336 million will be administered by various states to buy faster locomotives and rail cars for passenger-rail lines. The funds are subject to "Buy America" requirements designed to benefit U.S. jobs and firms.

Still, a number of foreign manufacturers with rail U.S. operations are expected to compete. Companies expected to compete for contracts include General Electric Co. of the U.S., Siemens AG of Germany, Alstom SA of France, Bombardier Inc. of Canada, and Patentes Talgo SL of Spain.

—Kate Linebaugh contributed to this article.

 Write to  Josh Mitchell at joshua.mitchell@dowjones.com 