Investors were given another stark glimpse Friday of the chasm between the euro zone's struggling periphery and its thriving core.

First, Portuguese sovereign debt was hit after both Standard & Poor's and Fitch Ratings downgraded it late Thursday. Their decisions followed the resignation of Prime Minister Jose Socrates, which in turn came on his government's parliamentary defeat over a package of austerity measures. Mr. Socrates is now staying on in a caretaker capacity.

Yields on Portugal's 10-year bonds pushed higher, moving above 7.8%, from below 7.7% at Thursday's close, and near to euro-era highs. The country's five-year bonds now yield more than 8.3%, compared with the 2.6% Germany pays.

S&P cut Portugal to BBB from A-minus, two notches closer to junk grade, and kept the country on watch for a further downgrade. Fitch also downgraded the country to A-minus. 

Financial markets were fairly sure Portugal was going to need help from the International Monetary Fund and the European Union to meet its commitments at some point this year, but the government's defeat makes this "a nailed on certainty," said  David Buik, strategist at BGC Capital in London. 

However, as Portugal suffers, Germany celebrates.

Business sentiment there remained close to 20-year peaks in March, according to the Munich-based institute Ifo. Its headline business-climate index inched lower, but only marginally, to 111.1 from 111.3. 

In any case, its February's reading was the highest since records for a reunified Germany began to be kept in 1991. The resilience of German activity and confidence to the recent run of adverse news from Japan and Middle East has been remarkable, perhaps even suspiciously so. 

Given that the Ifo received a large share of survey replies before the Japanese earthquake struck, there may be some residual drag on sentiment next month. However, the German purchasing managers' index covers the period since and has held up extremely well.

So, given this disparity between member states supposedly able to co-exist under a single monetary policy, and the heightened chance of a Portuguese bailout, European markets look oddly calm. Indeed, haven investments like bunds slipped on Friday, while the region's stock markets closed higher.

This may not last. "Eerie stability appears to have gripped financial markets during this week, but a quarter end and fiscal year-end 'lock down,' associated with uncertainty about geo-political and economic developments, looks to be the cause," said  Marc Ostwald, a strategist at Monument Securities.

"Once these calendar-related hurdles have been overcome, a renewed spike in volatility must be almost pre-programmed."

In other words, April really could be a cruel month for European markets, especially given the high likelihood of an interest-rate increase from the European Central Bank.The German economy, at least, clearly looks as though it could do with one, but Portugal, Ireland, Greece and others can only expect more pain if rates go up.

The gulf between core and periphery can yawn a lot wider yet.

 Write to  David Cottle at david.cottle@dowjones.com 