ISTANBUL—Talks between global powers and Iran aimed at containing Tehran's nuclear program broke down Saturday, and the two sides set no future date for any further dialogue.

U.S. and European officials said Iran's chief nuclear negotiator, Saeed Jalili, refused during two days of meetings here to discuss any new mechanisms through which Tehran could address international fears that the Middle East country is pursuing atomic weapons. Iran says its nuclear program is purely civilian.

Instead, Mr. Jalili laid down two preconditions that he said the U.S. and its diplomatic partners must meet before Iran engages in any substantive talks, according to these officials. 

One, Mr. Jalili said, the diplomatic bloc comprised of the five permanent United Nations Security Council members plus Germany has to formally recognize Tehran's right to indigenously produce nuclear fuel.

Second, the U.S. and other global powers must begin easing the expansive economic sanctions imposed on Tehran in recent years because of its nuclear work.

Catherine Ashton, who led the delegation of global powers, said Tehran's position made it impossible to move ahead with the negotiations beyond this weekend. 

"We had hoped to have a detailed and constructive discussion of those ideas. But it became clear that the Iranian side was not ready for this unless we agreed to preconditions," said Ms. Ashton, the European Union's foreign policy chief, at an Istanbul news conference. "This is not the conclusion I had hoped for."

The British diplomat stressed that she and her diplomatic partners—which include the U.S., U.K., Russia, China, France and Germany—would leave the door open for Tehran to reflect on the proposals and re-engage constructively in the future.

U.S. and European officials said they specifically laid out Saturday for Mr. Jalili a plan to rework a year-old initiative under which Tehran would ship out a substantial portion of its stockpile of low-enriched uranium overseas in exchange for Western energy assistance. Such a deal is seen as limiting Iran's ability to quickly "break-out" and produce the weapons grade fuel required to develop an atomic bomb.

Mr. Jalili only listened to the presentation, without responding, according to these officials. Iran claims its nuclear program is strictly for peaceful purposes.

Ms. Ashton said she also sought to explore with Tehran new ways to allow U.N. inspectors greater access to Iran's expanding nuclear infrastructure. The U.N.'s nuclear watchdog, the International Atomic Energy Agency, has voiced increasing concerns in recent months that Tehran is constricting its site visits and access to documentation.

Mr. Jalili laid bare Saturday the apparently widening gulf between Iran's position on the nuclear issue and the international community's during a wide-ranging news conference he held near the banks of Istanbul's Bosporus strait.

The Iranian diplomat acknowledged he had set "prerequisites" for any future talks with the international community. And he said Washington and the European states were to blame for the breakdown of the diplomacy because of the double-standards he says they practice in addressing the nuclear issue.

He said the international community, rather than targeting Tehran, should be focused on Israel's presumed nuclear weapons program and the failure of the U.S. to drastically reduce its atomic weapons arsenal.

"Who gave Israel nuclear arms? Has anyone looked into that?" Mr. Jalili said through a translator. "This is one of the most important subjects we need to cooperate on."

Mr. Jalili said Iran was still willing to hold more talks with Ms. Ashton's delegation, but only on Tehran's terms. "We can even continue right away this afternoon, but within the framework we have stated," Iran's chief negotiator said.

The breakdown of the talks in Turkey offers no clear path forward for the international community's attempts to use diplomacy to end Iran's nuclear program. U.S. and European officials had hoped a constructive meeting in Istanbul could pave the way for another round of negotiations in the coming weeks, possibly in Vienna. They also came to Turkey voicing increasing confidence that economic sanctions imposed against Iran, coupled with other overt and covert actions, are slowing Tehran's nuclear work.

Ms. Ashton said she had asked Mr. Jalili to take the proposals she had presented on Saturday back with him to Tehran for further consultation.

U.S. officials in Istanbul said Iran is a notorious for being a difficult negotiating partner and could come back to the table. They said it is possible Mr. Jalili was testing to see if he could split countries such as Russia and China away from Washington's and the Europeans' negotiating position.

"I think it remains to be seen if the Iranians are willing to be serious and engage in the substantive issues," said a senior American diplomat who took part in the talks. "I honestly don't know."

Mrs. Ashton and her staff pushed for Mr. Jalili to have a one-on-one meeting this week with Washington's top diplomat at the talks, Under-Secretary of State William Burns, in a bid to push the diplomatic process forward, according to European officials. The Iranian negotiator refused.

"We told the Iranians several times that we thought it was a big mistake not to talk to the U.S.A.," said a European diplomat.

For now, Washington's likely policy options will include, along with allied countries, imposing more economic sanctions on Tehran. President Barack Obama has regularly stated that the U.S. would continue to apply financial pressure on Iran until it shows a willingness to engage diplomatically. U.S. officials think there are more economic interests that can be targeted in Iran, beyond those included in recent U.N. sanctions lists. "There are certainly options out there," said the senior U.S. diplomat.

