PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla.—Unthinkable as it may seem, the Mets had good reason to hold on to Luis Castillo a little bit longer. None of the other candidates to replace him have distinguished themselves during spring training. And for as flawed as Castillo may be, he was arguably the team's best second baseman.

By releasing him Friday, the Mets showed just how badly they want to rid themselves of the symbols of their recent past. The fact that the Mets still need a second baseman and don't have anyone clearly better than Castillo was secondary. That Castillo still had $6 million remaining on his contract was largely irrelevant.

This was a cathartic decision as much as it was a baseball one. The Mets were eager to purge themselves of a player many fans despised, fairly or not.

 And they sensed the need to signal a new direction, even if that direction, as far as second base goes, remains murky.

"I don't think there's any question that there's some linkage between his situation and a perception of the Mets that has existed to this point," general manager Sandy Alderson said. "That's something that was taken into account. At some point you have to make an organizational decision, and it goes beyond an ability to play or not play."

The four-year, $24 million contract that the Mets lavished on Castillo in late 2007 proved to be among the worst decisions made by former general manager Omar Minaya. And a combination of underperformance, injuries and one epic blunder made Castillo a frequent target of fans' ire. His moment of infamy came on June 12, 2009, when he dropped a routine fly ball with two outs in the ninth inning to hand the Yankees a victory at Yankee Stadium.

Even in spring training, where the games don't count and the mood is tranquil, Castillo was booed recently.

 Castillo, 35, may have a weak bat and limited defensive range. But it was the negativity that surrounded him that ultimately prompted the Mets to cut him loose. Castillo had eight hits in 28 Grapefruit League at-bats, a .286 batting average. But manager Terry Collins said the overriding factor was "all the negative things he would have to face in returning to New York."

"Had he had a good 10 days and then a bad day, the good 10 days would have been second place to the bad day," Collins said. "We just thought maybe it was time to move on."

That line of thinking suggests the release of another beleaguered, high-paid symbol of the Minaya era might not be far off. The same logic would apply to pitcher Oliver Perez, who threw one scoreless inning Friday in a 3-0 exhibition win over the Atlanta Braves. Alderson declined to comment when asked about Perez, who is owed $12 million this season.

The only certain impact of releasing Castillo is that it reduces the number of candidates for the second-base job. But that situation is far from settled. Collins said four players—Brad Emaus, Daniel Murphy, Justin Turner and Luis Hernandez—remain in contention. "Nobody's jumped ahead of the pack," he said.

Neither Castillo nor his agent, Seth Levinson, returned calls for comment. But the decision could not have come as a surprise. In an interview Wednesday, Castillo acknowledged that he was auditioning not just for the Mets but also for other teams. "If I don't play here, maybe I can play for another team," he said.

One possible destination could be Philadelphia, with Phillies second baseman Chase Utley out with a knee injury.

 When asked if the Phillies had any interest in signing Castillo, assistant general manager Scott Proefrock said, "That remains to be seen."

For a moment Friday, it appeared Castillo had been spared. The Mets summoned eight players into Collins' office around 8 a.m. to inform them they had been cut from the major-league camp, but Castillo was not among them.

His name was in the starting lineup posted on a bulletin board, so he dressed for batting practice. But after teammates and reporters had filtered out of the clubhouse, Castillo was called into a meeting with Alderson and Collins.

One hour later, his locker was empty. The nameplate above it was blank. And one of the most loathed Mets players in recent history was gone.

—Mike Sielski contributed to this article