"The Green Hornet" may not be the end of movies as we know them, though the people who made this atrocity were certainly in there trying. The question—which rises to the level of an industrial mystery—is, trying to do what? Turn a dumb concept into a smart entertainment? Save a dim production by pouring a fortune into stupid effects? (The budget was reportedly as high as $130 million.) Kill the special-effects industry by doing a parody of its excesses? The effect of those effects, and of the cheesy 3-D process pasted on as an afterthought, is simply numbing. The film's only unqualified success is the end title sequence—because it's genuinely stylish, because it looks like it was shot in genuine 3-D and, most of all, because it's the end.

The initial notion must have been a retro goof on the theme of the Green Hornet, a masked vigilante who, with his valet/sidekick Kato, first entered American popular culture via a radio series in the 1930s. (The semisuperhero is the alter ego of a newspaper publisher named Britt Reid.) And why not? There's nothing sacred about the Hornet; indeed, there's never been anything particularly distinctive about him, not on the radio or in any of his subsequent iterations in comic books and on TV. But the notion became a concept when Seth Rogen was hired to play the venerable crime fighter—not only to play him, but to write the script, with his longtime friend and collaborator Evan Goldberg, and to produce the film. (Michel Gondry was the director.) 

Mr. Rogen is a funny man—he was terrific in "Knocked Up" and "Superbad"—with a distinctive voice that mingles chortle, yodel and gargle. None of his comic chops, however, could fill the void at the center of the character he chose to inflict on himself. In keeping with the star's persona, Britt Reid is now a doofus slacker, an amiable goon, a dim-bulb rich kid who doesn't have a clue what to do with his inherited money or his shallow life. The brains of his operation belong to Kato, who is now less of a valet and more of a mechanical and electronic genius and kung-fu virtuoso, plus a casual sorcerer who can freeze time. (The movie freezes time too. At 119 minutes it seems all but endless.)

Kato is played with deadpan nonchalance by the Taiwanese actor Jay Chou, who is very entertaining at the outset. So is Christoph Waltz, who brings to the role of the bad guy, Chudnofsky, the mélange of sweet reason and Stygian evil that he pioneered in "Inglourious Basterds." Yet the brains of the script operation are missing in action, or buried beneath it. Who cares about the bumbling hero, even when he starts to think that he knows what he's doing? Why care about a movie that disses its source material without finding a good reason for having used it in the first place?

It's pleasantly silly when, in the absence of any other motivation, Britt says to Kato, "Let's do something crazy," and off they go to decapitate a statue of Britt's late father. It's mildly amusing that Britt keeps referring, with winks and nods, to their implicitly gay relationship. "Girls are such a drag, Kato. Thank God we have each other." They also have Cameron Diaz to woo. She plays a journalism-school graduate—let's hear it for serious practitioners of the profession—who, although hired as a secretary, has a vision of Britt's paper that he lacks.

Still, pitifully little comes of the male rivalry, or her presence. In this film, nothing comes to anything but the chaos of special effects: the usual explosions and subwoofer blasts; general-issue fireballs; crazed car chases; vehicles going airborne; bullets spewing from retractible machine guns mounted on the hood of Black Beauty, the Green Hornet's car, an old Chrysler Imperial sedan gussied up with a new grille and so heavily loaded with assorted weapons that it could pass for a technical in Somalia. And oh, the awful photography! Not only the pseudo 3-D, with its steep light loss through Polaroid glasses, but the grungy palette and bleached-out colors. How could such a costly production look so crummy? Don't ask me. I started off by saying it was mysterious.

Special effects can be glorious (from "2001: A Space Odyssey" through "Star Wars" to Pixar and "Avatar"), as well as good, bad or indifferent. What they always prove to be is challenging—otherwise they wouldn't be special—and draining. A reminder of how that challenge can affect another medium turned up on the cover of this week's New Yorker magazine—a cartoon showing a hospital ward full of Spider-Men in various states of orthopedic extremis. The wryly humorous reference was to injuries recently sustained by performers in "Spider-Man: Turn Off the Dark," the Broadway musical that has embraced the allure of cinematic effects with unprecedented fervor, and has spent unprecedented—for a stage show—amounts of money in the process.

As a professional moviegoer, I often feel I'm drowning in the FX tide; just when I thought I'd recovered from "Tron: Legacy," along came "The Green Hornet." As a theatergoer, though, I enjoy adventurous stagecraft, so I couldn't resist the chance to see a Spidey matinee. (No glasses required: every member of the cast appears in genuine 3-D.)

Since this "Spider-Man" continues to play in previews, and since my colleague Terry Teachout, the Journal's theater critic, won't publish his review until after the official opening, I'll confine myself to noting what everyone who has followed the show's development already knows: the aerial sequences are remarkable, even if Spidey and his nemesis, the Green Goblin, fly around the theater on wires that the Spider-Man movies rendered invisible; and the mechanisms that produce various effects don't always work. One famously balky prop is a giant cocoon that entraps the heroine, Mary Jane. It got stuck for a while during the performance I attended, but it also bestowed the gift of a memorable image for FX-dependent movies, not to mention live shows that seek to emulate them—productions trapped in a cocoon of technology.

That entrapment is most obvious in a fiasco like "The Green Hornet," which took refuge in technology as a means of averting box-office failure. What can never be measured on screen, though, is the extent to which a film's special effects have drained the filmmakers' energy, distracting them from fundamental concerns of storytelling, performance and pace. And that drainage comes with the FX territory. A stuck cocoon on stage is kids' stuff compared to the things that can and do go wrong in the movie industry with today's immensely complicated visual wizardry.

This is not to say the movies should go back to painted scenery and handmade models standing in for flying saucers. Who doesn't thrill to special effects when they go well? Even when they go incomparably well, though, effects can't carry a film on their own. "Avatar" or the "Toy Story" trilogy stand as the signal achievements they are because they use technology in the service of their narratives. It's also worth noting that digital manipulation ranged from invisible to nonexistent in two of last year's finest feature films, "The Social Network" and "The King's Speech." Drama remains the most special effect.

 Write to  Joe Morgenstern at joe.morgenstern@wsj.com 

Seth Rogen first scored on the big screen in Judd Apatow's raunchy and endearing comedy about Andy Stitzer, a shy guy played by Steve Carell, who is, at the age of you-know-what, still a you-know-what until he finally does you-know-what, then falls in love. Mr. Rogen, who plays Cal, a tattooed sexaholic, was all of 23 years old, and surrounded by a fine cast that included Catherine Keener as the object of Andy's love, plus Paul Rudd, Jane Lynch, Romany Malco, Elizabeth Banks and Leslie Mann. Messrs. Apatow and Carell wrote the script.

Tom Wilkinson, who has a smallish role in "The Green Hornet" as Britt Reid's late, unlamented father, is an avenging father in Todd Field's wonderful debut feature; the director and Rob Festinger adapted the screenplay from a story by the late Andre Dubus. Mr. Wilkinson is Matt Fowler, a doctor with a solid practice in a picturesque town on the coast of Maine. Sissy Spacek is his wife, Ruth Fowler. Their son, Frank, is played by Nick Stahl. Marisa Tomei is Natalie, an older and not-quite-divorced single mother with whom Frank has a fateful affair.

Cameron Diaz is sexy, sluttish Maggie, whose life is in ruins, and Toni Collette is Rose, Maggie's older, plain-Jane sister, a prosperous lawyer who keeps picking up the pieces. The film, directed by Curtis Hanson, is manipulative, but confidently so, and improbably affecting. Nothing in Ms. Diaz's career foreshadowed this beautiful performance. Her Maggie is a vivid creature, body and soul, a perpetually adolescent party girl coming slowly to understand that the party's over. Shirley MacLaine is Ella, the sisters' long-lost grandmother. Susannah Grant adapted the screenplay from Jennifer Weiner's comic novel.

—Joe Morgenstern