MELBOURNE, Australia—Kim Clijsters has finally earned the nickname "Aussie Kim." 

A longtime fan favorite in Australia, the Belgian defeated Li Na of China, 3-6, 6-3, 6-3, in the finals Saturday night to claim her first Australian Open title. 

Ms. Clijsters, who came back from an early retirement to win the U.S. Open as a wild-card player in 2009, had not won a Grand Slam title outside of the U.S. until tonight. It was an emotional victory. Both Ms. Clijsters and Ms. Li were in tears at the conclusion of the match. 

The nickname "Aussie Kim" dates back to the days when Ms. Clijsters was engaged to Australian tennis star and former No. 1 Lleyton Hewitt in the early part of the last decade. While their relationship is long since over, the nickname still echoes through Rod Laver Arena when Ms. Clijsters is in on court. 

To Ms. Clijsters, the Australian Open holds special significance. 

"This one to me is the one, when I think back of my childhood, I remember just watching the Australian Open and seeing Monica Seles win many times, and seeing her [run into] the stands," Ms. Clijsters said in a post-match interview. "It was something I was so amazed by and it seemed like such a fairy tale so I always think of that when I come to Australia. People have been so supportive and I really appreciate it and I feel like I haven't been able to give something back." 

Until now. 

It started out looking like the final was Ms. Clijsters' to lose, she opened the match by winning eight straight points and the first two games. But at the beginning of the third game on Ms. Clijster's serve, Ms. Li hit her first winner and went on to break Ms. Clijsters' serve and regain her confidence. 

Ms. Li fought hard. On her serve, at 2-3 in the first set, she saved three break points to even the score. On Ms. Clijsters' subsequent serve, at the end of a 10-stroke rally, Ms. Li brought Ms. Clijsters to the net and, with her strong backhand, forced an error on one of the Belgian's forehand volleys. Ms. Li won that and the two successive games to take the first set. 

In the second set, it seemed the women's serves were made to be broken. The first four games were marked by aggressive offensive play, each player breaking the other's serve twice before Ms. Li was finally able to hold her serve and gain a 3-2 lead in the set. 

It was on that serve Ms. Clijsters found her momentum, hitting winners from both the net and baseline to even up the score. From there, Ms. Clijsters did to Ms. Li what Ms. Li had done to her in the previous set, she turned things around. 

At 3-3 on Ms. Li's serve, Ms. Clijsters broke her with a backhand passing shot. Ms. Clijsters, with the crowd largely behind her, went on to win the next three games to take the second set. 

At times, the tennis was pure entertainment. In one point, Ms. Clijsters did her signature running slide-split to return a wide forehand from the baseline with a drop shot, bringing Ms. Li to the net where the two women hit a series of drop shots back and forth before Ms. Li hit a passing shot down the line to win the point. 

In the third set, Ms. Clijsters established an early lead, breaking Ms. Li on her first serve and playing the brand of tennis that she is famous for, plunging into splits to return shots that could have been—should have been—winners. 

Still, Ms. Li was undeterred. In the third game of the third set, on her second chance to break Ms. Clijsters, Ms. Li hit a forehand to the far corner of the court to put herself back on the scoreboard. Again, Ms. Clijsters responded by breaking her right back. Both women stayed on serve throughout the third set. 

Up 5-3 in the third set, Ms. Clijsters served out the match without giving up a single point to her competitor in the final game. 

When asked if she'll be back at the Australian Open next year, Ms. Clijsters said she hopes to be. Ms. Clijsters, who is married and has a two-year-old daughter Jada, did say this is likely to be her last full season on the tour. 

Ms. Li, whose husband is also her coach, was the first Chinese woman to ever play in a Grand Slam final. During the match, she complained to the chair umpire a few times about what she later said was all the on-court coaching Chinese fans were offering her during the match. Being the first Chinese woman to play in a Grand Slam final didn't seem to concern Ms. Li too much. 

"I'm not sure how big the news [is] in China, but I think, like this," she said, holding fingers up an inch apart. 

As for her losing the match after winning the first set, she said: "Back in the locker room I made the joke, tennis, you should only play one set!"

 Write to  Cynthia Koons at cynthia.koons@wsj.com 