TOKYO—Japan's finance minister said Friday he will carefully watch the rising yen, but stopped short of threatening currency-market intervention in a sign that it may take sharper gains in the currency to spur Japanese action. 

The yen strengthened to a seven-week high against the dollar on Thursday, leading to speculation that Japanese authorities may move to stem the currency's rise, which would hurt the export-led economy. 

"We will closely monitor (the currency market) at this point," Finance Minister Yoshihiko Noda said when asked whether he intended to contact other Group of Seven major nations to discuss moves in the currency market that saw the dollar fall below Y80 overnight. 

Mr. Noda, who authorizes currency-market interventions, also said he will keep a close eye on moves not only in the foreign-exchange market, but also in commodity markets, pointing out that various factors had led to the yen's climb. 

On Thursday, Mr. Noda had said the conditions behind the yen's recent strength are "different" from those on March 18, when the G-7 intervened in the market to curb the yen's rise. 

Other officials said the yen's rise was also due to dollar sales related to falls in commodity prices, with Economy Minister Koru Yosano describing it as a reflection of the dollar's weakness rather than the yen's strength. 

Their comments reinforce the view that the authorities won't take action unless the yen appreciates drastically or has a clear impact on the economy, as symbolized by share prices. 

The yen's appreciation over recent weeks has been markedly less volatile than the surge that spurred the rare G-7 joint step in March, the first in a decade, to weaken the Japanese currency. 

Masafumi Yamamoto, an analyst with Barclays Capital in Tokyo, said since the yen's rise hadn't led to sharp falls in share prices, Japanese authorities were unlikely to take action. 

"If you look at the past, Japanese authorities have not reacted to the yen's strength alone. Unless it has an impact on share prices, they don't show caution against the yen's appreciation," said Mr. Yamamoto, Barclay's chief FX strategist, and a former official at the Bank of Japan. 

He added Japan wouldn't take action unless the benchmark Nikkei stock average were to fall below 9,000 or the dollar were to dip below Y75. The Nikkei closed down 145.00 points on Friday at 9859.20. 

Other analysts also pointed out that while the dollar has breached the symbolic Y80 level, the yen remains relatively weak against most other currencies, including against those of its biggest trade partners, including the euro zone and Asian neighbors such as China. 

"The goalposts have moved slightly," said Gareth Berry, foreign-exchange strategist for UBS in Singapore. "The 80 level may have lost a little of its significance." 

Against a basket of its largest trade partners, the yen is almost 5% weaker than it was before the G-7 intervention. 

The dollar briefly fell to Y79.57 Thursday, the lowest since the joint G-7 action, and although it has recovered to around Y80.50 since, speculation remains that concerns over the U.S. economic outlook may cause the U.S. currency to fall in days ahead. 

Friday's comments by Mr. Noda and other officials struck a relatively relaxed tone compared to those before the March 18 intervention when Japanese officials blamed "speculators" for causing "one-sided" yen rises, or in September last year when Japan intervened alone, with Mr. Noda arguing that the yen's gains were too speculative. 

And winning G-7 support for fresh joint yen-dumping may be challenging with Europe being mired in a debt crisis and the U.S. struggling to strengthen growth, a Japanese government official familiar with currency issues told Dow Jones Newswires. 

The world's sympathy toward quake-hit Japan won't last forever, he said, as concerns over the nation's economic prospects slowly wane as reconstruction efforts accelerate. 

Weakening the yen helps Japanese exporters by making their products more competitive abroad, but would hurt their rivals in the U.S. and elsewhere. 

But some Finance Ministry officials are growing irritated by the yen's rise, according to a person familiar with the matter. Some officials feel that the yen's moves are "not at all in line with economic fundamentals," with the economy that is still struggling to recover from the March 11 earthquake and tsunami, the person told Dow Jones Newswires. 

Kenichiro Ikezawa, senior fund manager at Daiwa SB Investments said that if the yen's strength sets off falls in Japanese and then global stock markets, as it did before the G-7 intervention, another joint yen-selling by the group could not be ruled out. 

—Alex Frangos and Kosaku Narioka contributed to this article.

 Write to  Takashi Nakamichi at takashi.nakamichi@dowjones.com 