 Fruity (Dairy) Pebbles 

It's not every day you find cottage cheese packaged with a separate fruit-on-top container, but that's not the only reason to get excited about Nancy's. It's also the first organic version. 

Established in 1960, the company's family-owned-and-operated Oregonian creamery has introduced cottage cheese that deserves some attention.

Adding probiotic cultured cream to the curds brings a savory sourness that might remind some of fromage blanc and yields a smooth, rich texture not usually found in cottage cheese, let alone one that's low-fat. Stir in the jam-like peach, pear or strawberry topping (we especially loved the peach) and it's muncher's heaven! $2.50, wholefoodsmarket.com  

 Fantastic Filberts 

A master chef always knows where to source the best ingredients. No exception, Nancy Silverton, of Los Angeles's three Mozza eateries, discovered some domestically grown raw hazelnuts so wondrous she decided to share them with the world. 

Oregon-based organic producer Trufflebert Farms (trufflebertfarms.com) grows them and Ms. Silverton takes them to an even better place by having the enormous gems roasted and salted (with an additional touch of the starring nut's oil) at the kitchen of her take-out shop on Melrose Avenue. Crunchy, toasty perfection. $15 per jar, mozza2go.com  

 How Not to Butcher Your Butchery 

If you've recently started buying shares in whole animals from local farmers, curing your own prosciutto or cooking with offal, the Gourmet Butcher DVDs are for you. 

One of the country's most seasoned butchers, Vermonter Cole Ward, has been honing his trade for more than 30 years. Now he's tutoring via video. Both of his discs—one deals in cow, the other, pork and lamb—are must-haves for meat lovers. 

Starting with a side of beef, Mr. Ward breaks it down, literally—he shows you how to quarter it; section it into recognizable culinary parts and, finally, turn each of those into a tasty dish. People who simply wish to sharpen their meat-cooking skills will appreciate the thorough recipe demos. $30 for both DVDs, thegourmetbutcher.com  

—Charlotte Druckmam