The technological achievement most associated with World War II is the atomic bomb, but the development of radar involved a similarly intense scientific and engineering effort—with dramatic influence on the course of the war. The atomic bomb bought about the end of the conflict with Japan; radar facilitated the Allied defeat of the entire Axis, aided British protection against German bombing raids and rocket attacks, provided the Allies with an advantage over enemy submarines and guided bombing runs in Europe and the Pacific. But unlike the Manhattan Project, which has become an almost reflexive response to any "Jeopardy!" clue linking technology and the war, the Tizard Mission might not occur immediately even to the Watson supercomputer.

With "The Tizard Mission" Stephen Phelps hopes to recapture for readers the sense of wonderment that once attended, as the subtitle has it, "The Top-Secret Operation That Changed the Course of World War II."

As Mr. Phelps notes, bombing from the air was used to a limited extent, and with limited effectiveness, during World War I, but in the 1920s the British, fighting against rebels in the Empire, improved the technology for delivering bombs by airplanes. Technological advances, of course, are notoriously difficult to contain within political boundaries. By the early 1930s, the increasingly bellicose Germans were threatening to rain bombs down on Britain, which was particularly vulnerable to air attack because of its compact size and dense population. With British fears mounting, Stanley Baldwin—the once and future prime minister—bluntly warned Parliament in 1932: "The bomber will always get through."

It was imperative that the British have early warning of enemy bombers flying over the English Channel: RAF fighters could be scrambled and citizens could take cover. But visual detection was often hampered by the island nation's overcast skies, and the technological means of spotting aircraft were primitive at best. One scheme involved a massive concrete "sound mirror" that picked up the noise of an approaching engine—unfortunately, though, the device wouldn't have been able to distinguish between the invading Luftwaffe and a passing British lorry. A technological breakthrough was needed, and the Committee for the Scientific Study of Air Defence was appointed in 1935 to identify one. The group came to be known as the Tizard Committee, named after its leader, Sir Henry Tizard, a chemist who had risen from modest beginnings to attend Oxford and later become rector of the Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine.

Among the promising ideas pursued by Tizard's committee was one to measure the time that emitted and reflected sound waves took to travel to and return from an object in the sky. This method of "radio detection and ranging" came to be known by the acronym radar, with the word's palindromic nature echoing the system's operating principle. But possessing a scientific understanding of how something should work is not sufficient for getting it designed, built and operating. That was an engineering challenge, one that involved working out the practical details, building prototypes, testing them, modifying the design, retesting, modifying again and— finally—manufacturing. Meeting the challenge became an urgent need with the outbreak of World War II in 1939 and the commencement of Luft waffe attacks on England.

The committee soon realized that the radar could not be produced solely with British resources. For one thing, German bombing had severely impaired British manufacturing capabilities, and so the help of the Americans was sought in 1940. Unfortunately, America did not wish to get involved in the war—but the U.S. was well-disposed toward its friend across the Atlantic and agreed to host a mission dispatched by the British war cabinet to trade technology secrets. The mission "aimed to draw America into the war, or at least to secure the vast manufacturing might of the United States by dazzling the giant neutral nation with a glimpse of the future."

 By Stephen Phelps  Westholme, 323 pages, $28

Traveling on the liner Duchess of Richmond, the group carried "a small black japanned box," Mr. Phelps writes. "Inside it were the country's top scientific secrets, and the passengers were on their way to give them away." Tizard led the mission, which offered the Americans information about self-sealing fuel tanks and jet-propulsion engines. The British hoped to find out about an effective bombsight they coveted, but they also aimed simply to "create goodwill"—Mr. Phelps provides an appendix with minutes of the group's first meeting—so that the Americans, who were also working on radar development, would lend a hand. (Germany would eventually come up with its own wartime radar as well.)

What proved to be a key component for operating radar was a device of complex geometry called the cavity magnetron, which converted electrical current into microwaves. Yes, the technology that helped defeat the Nazis would one day be put to use in microwave ovens. But in 1940, the British had only a dozen prototypes of the magnetron. Tizard's mission to the U.S. brought along one of them in the japanned box. The "lump of metal a few inches across" became the basis for America's eventual manufacture of more than a million units, making the widespread use of radar possible.

Mr. Phelps traces the development of radar from the British prototype through the involvement of Bell Labs and the creation of the Radiation Laboratory at MIT. But "The Tizard Mission" is more than a history of technology; Mr. Phelps skillfully interweaves other aspects of the story, bringing in warfare, politics, science, engineering and the personalities involved.

Among the book's arresting leitmotifs is the presence and influence of several scientists who were well connected, both to Cambridge laboratories and to American social circles. We meet, for example, Alfred Lee Loomis, a lawyer, millionaire financier, and amateur physicist who moved comfortably among his several homes, which included a 17,000-acre estate on Hilton Head Island off South Carolina, a penthouse in New York City, and a country estate 40 miles up the Hudson River in Tuxedo Park. It was there that Loomis had built a "state-of-the-art laboratory" that was visited, at various times, by Niels Bohr, Werner Heisenberg, Enrico Fermi and Albert Einstein. The social and scientific hospitality that Loomis provided at Tuxedo Park nurtured the cooperation of the British and Americans in designing radar equipment that was light and compact enough to fit into airplanes.

One of this book's many attractions is its emphasis on the importance of interrelationships among social, political and technical worlds in bringing ideas to reality. If there is a reservation to be had about the storytelling, it is that Mr. Phelps often seems to emphasize science over engineering. Science was certainly important to the development of radar, of course, but the technology was supremely an engineering achievement.

—Mr. Petroski is a professor of engineering and of history at Duke University. His most recent book is "The Essential Engineer: Why Science Alone Will Not Solve Our Global Problems" (Knopf).