Um, where did the New York Jets go?

The AFC Championship game is Sunday, correct? Jets at Pittsburgh, for all of Brent Musburger's remaining Tostitos. If Rex Ryan's team wins, it's the first Jets Super Bowl berth since 1969. Mayor Bloomberg's already got your private plane to Dallas warming up. Jerry Jones says you can sleep in his poolside cabana.

But where's the Jets trash talk? You know, the impolite, filthy, R-rated "Hard Knocks" stuff. The kind that makes traditionalists wave their canes—and clogs up Internet message boards about the coarsening of society.

Where is the foolish bloviation, the press conference meteors, the egomaniacal insults that the poor New England Patriots will hear in their nightmares until next September? Where is the angry performance art from the brilliant Bart Scott, who concluded Sunday's Pats upset by thundering at ESPN like a WWE heel?

So far, it's absent. Tough talk has been dialed down in the build-up to Sunday's showdown. There's been no repeat of the one-way hate parade the Jets cooked up before buzz-sawing New England.

"It's a different feel," Rex Ryan says.

A different feel? It feels like a snuggly lovefest. The Jets say they respect the Steelers, the Steelers respect the Jets, nobody's calling out Ben Roethlisberger, and Mr. Ryan sounds as if he wants to take Pittsburgh head coach Mike Tomlin out for a snack. Ex-Steeler Santonio Holmes won't even bother to make it a personal revenge drama. The whole thing has gotten cozier than a long car ride to the Catskills with Nick Drake on the satellite radio.

"All I want to do is find a way to win," Mr. Ryan said on Wednesday.

"We want to be a part of that. I want that green and white confetti coming down. We want to hold the trophy."

Zzzzzz.

Have the Jets been chastened? Has the public scolding and the NFL tsk-tsk about bad-mouthing finally penetrated? Are the Jets trying to win this one with...dignity?

Some may view this as a pleasant transformation, but it's kind of a letdown. It calls to mind the scene in stand-up comedian movie "Funny People," when Jonah Hill's chubby comic scolds Seth Rogen's for losing weight.

"No one wants to watch Lance Armstrong do comedy," he says.

Exactly. Why is the Team America Loves to Hate being so lovable? Does anyone want to see Rex Ryan be deferential and polite? Do you go to Peter Luger's for a salad?

Then again, the Jets have dialed it down before. Remember that the Jets entered the 2010 season with a loud "Hard Knocks" rumble, and had a couple of messy off-field weeks with the Ines Sainz embarrassment and the Braylon Edwards arrest. But then Woody Johnson's warriors went through a long stretch of low-fi dorkiness and stayed out of the headlines. They quietly won 8 out of 9; it was only until late in the season that things began to unravel and look like a bachelor party RV again.

What if the polite Jets are the real Jets and the smack talk Jets are the act? It's already been a week of contorted, "Inception''-style explanations. ESPN Tom Jackson came out the other day and explained that he hadn't actually picked against the Jets in the Patriots game because he thought the Jets would lose, he just did it because he wanted to...motivate the Jets.

Hmm, okay.

What a weird, placid week. Is it an evolution or an aberration? Will it matter after Sunday? Does anyone know if the Jets hate the Bears or the Packers?