BERLIN—German Chancellor Angela Merkel reshuffled her cabinet Wednesday to replace Defense Minister Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg, who resigned a day earlier after revelations that his doctoral thesis was largely plagiarized. 

Ms. Merkel said she will appoint Interior Minister Thomas de Maizière, a politician from her Christian Democratic Union, or CDU, as the new defense minister on Thursday. 

Hans-Peter Friedrich, the parliamentary leader of the Christian Social Union, or CSU, will succeed Mr. de Maizière as interior minister. The CSU is the Bavarian sister party of Ms. Merkel's CDU. Mr. Friedrich works in a "problem-oriented" way, but also seeks to find compromise, Ms. Merkel said. 

The departure of Mr. zu Guttenberg, a politician with close to celebrity status in Germany, is seen by pollsters as hurting Ms. Merkel in a series of state elections this year. These include a key election in Baden-Würtemberg, traditionally a bastion for Ms. Merkel's Christian Democratic Union party that she can't afford to lose. 

Still, a poll conducted by the Forsa surveying institute for broadcaster RTL and Stern magazine puts the race uncomfortably close. Ms. Merkel's CDU polled at 39% and her Free Democratic Union coalition partner at 6%, or 45% for both parties. That puts the CDU party, which has governed the state for decades, even with the joint result for the opposition Social Democrats and Green Party. A national poll forecasts the opposition jointly at 43%, or four percentage points ahead of Ms. Merkel's governing coalition. 

"Even as many citizens were opposing the resignation of the defense minister, the scandal still led to irritation and shock among the [CDU's] own supporters," said  Manfred Gülner, the head of the Forsa surveying institute. 

Ms. Merkel's party has been battered in polls as voters reacted to German concessions in bailing out Ireland and Greece, while increasing taxes at home. She now is in tough talks with euro-zone partners to revamp the currency bloc's system of economic governance, which could drag on her polls if she is seen as conceding too much. 

Ms. Merkel's CDU earlier this year suffered a major defeat in an election in the city-state of Hamburg, which the opposition Social Democrats won. 

"No one has the popularity and charisma of Mr. zu Guttenberg," said  Oskar Niedermayer, a political scientist at Berlin's Freie Universität. "But it was good that [Ms.] Merkel has resolved the cabinet reshuffle fast." 

He added that it was important to find a new defense minister rapidly as Germany is in the midst of reforming its armed forces, or Bundeswehr, abolishing the obligatory draft. Finding voluntary recruits has proven more difficult than anticipated by the government.

"De Maizière will succeed to win the trust of soldiers fast, and to continue the reform of the Bundeswehr that has been initiated by Karl-Theodor zu Guttenberg," Ms. Merkel said at a briefing.

Ms. Merkel added she feels politically connected to Mr. de Maizière since the peaceful revolution in 1989-90 that toppled the government of formerly Communist East Germany. Mr. de Maizière in 1990 had served as a state secretary for his cousin Lothar de Maizière, the last prime minister of the German Democratic Republic. 