The Donmar Warehouse, an intimate 250-seat theater in central London that used to be a banana warehouse, has presented some of England's most memorable award-winning theater experiences. Over the past 19 years, the Donmar has stood out for its repertoire and its high production values. Artistic director  Michael Grandage, who took over from Sam Mendes in 2002, says, his ambition was "to create a diverse body of work that would reflect my taste, my house style, my voice." 

It is that brand, its distinctive style, that helps transport Donmar productions to other spaces. "It's all about audience development," Mr. Grandage admits. "We're reaching out. I'm saying, 'We're a theater in England, we want your custom, we want to show you our work—this is what we do.'"

With exports as diverse as "Frost/Nixon," "Mary Stuart," "Hamlet," "Red," and "Creditors," Mr. Grandage has cemented the relationship with the U.S. Now his universally acclaimed "King Lear," with the legendary  Derek Jacobi in the title role at age 72, arrives at the Brooklyn Academy of Music for a sold-out run.

"I've introduced a European repertoire and I've continued our relationship with America." says Mr. Grandage, who is leaving the Donmar this fall when he will direct the Metropolitan Opera's "Don Giovanni." "Creating a touring program and an education program has nearly quadrupled our audience base." 

Alluding to BAM's long association with the Donmar, executive producer  Joseph Melillo says, "When I brought 'Creditors' here, I asked Michael to bring 'King Lear' to the Harvey [Theater]. After consulting Derek, he accepted my invitation. … Clarity in storytelling is a skill that British theater directors have, so everyone walks out of the theater understanding classical plays." 

Explaining his minimalist style, Mr. Grandage says, "The essence of the piece—the purity, honesty, simplicity of the narrative—the strongest part of the evening, is achieved with high-calibre actors, pared-down storytelling and minimal (but stunning) design. Very little stands in the way between the acting and the audience." 

To this end, he keeps the production team small. 

Commercially, producing in the U.S. is far more costly than in Britain so failure can be risky. That is one reason the Donmar has teamed up with  Arielle Tepper Madover, a Broadway producer, in a "first look" deal: For about $333,000 a year, she picks whatever she believes will succeed before it is offered elsewhere. "Arielle's a good fit for us—she brings in young audiences, she's interested in new writing, is engaged with theaters outside the commercial sector, and is not interested in creating Donmar policy," says Mr. Grandage. 

He asserts that American audiences respond differently than British: "With 'Frost/Nixon,' nobody in England was invested in the president but everybody knew David Frost. Here, nobody cared who Frost was, it was all about Nixon. With 'Red,' [ John Logan's play about painter Mark Rothko], everyone in England rooted for the underdog, Rothko's assistant. Here, Rothko strode the stage, people wanted to bring him home." 

Often logistics of the space create varying responses. London audiences were inside Rothko's studio on Donmar's wraparound stage; Broadway viewers were distanced, watching Rothko at work on a proscenium stage. "I thought it would be diminished here but it was enhanced: We were able to engage in the action which happened as in a painting," he says. 

Wanting the widest possible audience for "Lear," Mr. Grandage customized it for life beyond the Donmar from the outset, after consulting Mr. Jacobi. He created a spare, white-daubed, timber-framed presentation that evokes a pagan feeling, yet is modern in offering immediate access to the text. Nothing stands in the way of the narrative that segues from one scene into the next.

Aware that "Lear" is a milestone in his theatrical life, the Donmar's, and that of theater-goers, Mr. Jacobi agreed to a substantial U.K. tour, a New York run and a live HD broadcast that beamed the play to 300 cinemas in 22 countries. No changes were made for international consumption: "The DNA of the piece you put together in the rehearsal room, its threadline, has to be the guiding force wherever you take it," Mr. Grandage says. 

The challenge of producing "Lear," Shakespeare's greatest play, (his "hardest" according to Mr. Jacobi), was coming up with the concept.

"Deciding what you're doing with a play is the biggest hurdle—we're interpretive artists, the writer alone is creative," Mr. Grandage says. "How we interpret this great work, where and when you set it, is the challenge. Luckily, 'Lear' was a long time in the making, Derek and I discussed it over 10 years." 

Reluctant to set Shakespeare's "pagan" play in any specific period, Mr. Grandage recreated the purity of the white-walled rehearsal room where his production was born: With the simplest set and pan-Asian variations of a timeless T-shaped garment that suggest "anytime," he takes us to a place that doesn't alienate. It isn't "history" but remains of another time, another place. 

As for Mr. Jacobi, Mr. Grandage says, "My process and his work ethic are a good match: I let the actor lead and play umpire to his ideas. I never say, 'This is how we'll do it, fit into this.' Derek's an actor of extraordinary versatility with a huge vocal presence. … He can't sever the connection while he's in performance, he's thinking of Lear constantly. Through the last performance, his approach will be total—that, for a director, is thrilling." 

And what about Mr. Grandage's own role? "For me, giving up the director's role in the rehearsal room is sad. Actors run with this thing and you wonder how much of what's there is yours anymore," he says. 

"But watching it run free can also be joyful if the actors believe in it totally and continue believing in it," Mr. Grandage adds. "Derek does that for himself and leads the company so that the actors continue the journey, the exploration remains alive, it's debated every night. You see a different performance each night." 