In the world of professional hockey, Washington Capitals forward Alex Ovechkin has been called the closest thing to perfect. The 6-foot-2, 235 pound Russian's combination of speed, power and outrageous offensive skills makes him a wrecking ball on skates. 

But in last season's playoffs, the Montreal Canadiens did something in 120 minutes that was deemed inconceivable: They stopped the unstoppable.

Montreal, an eight seed, held Ovechkin to one assist in the final two games of its first-round playoff series. Doing so helped the Canadiens pull off an upset of the league's best team and perhaps provided a blueprint for how to defend hockey's most fearsome player.

The aftershocks from that upset have seemingly carried into Ovechkin's current season. At a time when he should just be entering into his prime, Washington's 25-year-old captain has seen a steep dropoff in his production. His 32 goals and 85 points were both career lows. In one particularly rough stretch, he scored just twice in 19 games. 

While his scoring numbers still rank among the best in hockey, Ovechkin's standards are different. In his first five seasons, he has scored 50 goals or more four times, including 65 in the 2007-08 season.

"Teams are more ready for him," said Craig Button, hockey analyst with the NHL Network and former general manager of the Calgary Flames. "They know what he does well and what to do to take it away."

The strategy is simple enough: Keep Ovechkin from gathering speed in the first place, which is precisely what the Canadiens did in last year's playoffs. In hockey parlance, the tactic is known as gapping-up, or stepping up to challenge the puck carrier near the neutral-zone redline instead of the defending team's blue line. 

Teams also instruct their forwards to apply intense back pressure on Ovechkin, challenging him simultaneously from the front and back whenever he touches the puck. This makes it difficult for him to gain momentum and cut to the middle of the ice, where he can use his speed to blow by defensemen. "You want to make sure you've got him angled to the boards at all times," said John Torchetti, assistant coach of the Atlanta Thrashers. "You don't want to give him the middle of the ice."

Besides the defensive tactics employed to slow Ovechkin, a shift in strategy by the Capitals could help explain his scoring decline. The playoff loss to the Canadiens caused Washington to rethink its high-octane attack, which has been successful during the regular season but hasn't translated into playoff success. The Capitals have only won one playoff series with Ovechkin. 

"We gave up too many goals last year," said Capitals winger Brooks Laich. This season, the team has emphasized defense, taking fewer chances, blocking more shots and being more responsible in their own end. As a result, the Capitals yielded just 191 goals this season, fourth fewest in the league and well below the 227 allowed last season. However, the team only scored 219 goals compared to last season's league-leading 313.

Ovechkin has bought into the change. In a January game in Toronto that may have marked a turning point in his season, he dove head first to block a shot late in the game with his team under siege. The attempt may have been feeble, but it was the act that mattered, as it sent a message that he was prepared to do whatever it takes to win. 

Yet as the Capitals begin their playoff conquest Wednesday versus the eighth-seeded New York Rangers, opposing defenses will surely devote much of their attention to stopping No. 8. Last year, the Canadiens used 6-foot-7, 250-pound Hal Gill, a savvy veteran who could challenge Ovechkin physically. Not only do such behemoths like Gill match him in size, they eat up space on the ice leaving him less room to maneuver, Torchetti said. 

The Rangers need to be careful, though, as there's evidence Ovechkin is learning how to counter such swarming defensive tactics. 

Recently, Ovechkin appears to be sharing the puck more with teammates, both at even strength and on the power play, where the Capitals have struggled this season. "If two guys are going to go to him, it usually means somebody else is open," Laich said. "Everybody talks about his shooting, but he's also a great passer."

By distributing the puck more, Ovechkin becomes less predictable, forcing defenders to pull back and give him more space. In his final 16 games, he was able to tally 22 points, including 14 assists. 

Ovechkin is confident the team is better prepared for the upcoming playoffs. "We [have] more experience," he said before a game last week in Toronto. 

Capitals coach Bruce Boudreau said his team hasn't devised a master plan to jumpstart Ovechkin. "I mean we will not dissect frame by frame where Alex has to go," he said. "We say, 'Alex, the guy is putting back pressure on you. They're not allowing you the middle of the ice. You've got to find something different to do."

Boudreau also isn't worried about his team's captain. "He's still the same beast," he said. "He still hits. He still shoots."

 Write to  Stuart Weinberg at stuart.weinberg@dowjones.com 