Protests in the streets of Egypt shook global financial markets on Friday, tempering the optimism that has dominated investor sentiment so far this year.

Though most investors believed the effects of the protests would fade quickly, few were taking chances on Friday.

"The more-dire situation would be continued instability in the Middle East, leading to oil prices continuing to rise and having a real economic impact," said Jim McDonald, chief investment strategist at Northern Trust in Chicago. "The odds favor things settling down, but it's hard to say."

The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 166.13 points, or 1.4%, to 11823.70, the worst one-day performance for the blue-chip index since mid November. The day also saw the index retreat further from 12000 after flirting with the milestone for much of the week.

The Standard & Poor's 500-stock index fell 1.8%, to 1276.34, after approaching 1300 for the first time since August 2008. The Nasdaq Composite Index, which struggled with technical problems early in the trading day, fell 2.5% to 2687.06.

Nymex crude-oil prices surged $3.70 or 4% to $89.34 a barrel on fears that turmoil in Egypt could spread throughout the region and threaten the supply of crude, a significant amount of which travels through Egypt's Suez Canal.

Egyptian financial markets were closed on Friday, but the effects of the riots there were seen in other markets. The  Market Vectors Egypt Index,
EGPT


2.25
%




 an exchange-traded fund of Egypt-related stocks, fell 3.4% on Friday and is down nearly 21% in the past two weeks.

In Turkey, the most liquid Middle Eastern market, government-bond prices fell, and the Turkish lira fell to its lowest level against the dollar since April 2009.

The cost of protecting against the sovereign default of other countries in the region, including Saudi Arabia and Morocco, jumped. Saudi credit-default swap prices, which typically move very little, rose 57.5%, according to Markit. 

Safe-haven investments were in hot demand. Ten-year Treasury notes rose, pushing their yield to 3.333%. Comex gold prices jumped $22.30 an ounce or 1.7% to $1,340.70.

The Chicago Board Options Exchange's Volatility Index, or VIX, a measure of investor anxiety, leaped 24% to its highest since early December.

The Dow ended lower on the week, breaking an eight-week winning streak dating back to last December. The last time the Dow had such a streak was in March to April of 2009. 

That string of gains was broken by Europe's sovereign-debt crisis, and Friday's action was reminiscent of the turmoil last spring. European debt issues, along with the "flash crash" in U.S. stocks around the same time, derailed investor confidence for months.

Turmoil in the Middle East doesn't seem to raise the sort of systemic risks for global financial markets that Europe's crisis did, many observers said. That suggests Friday's market fears could be short-lived.

Nevertheless, the news out of Egypt may have offered an excuse for a pause in financial markets that some skeptics say have come too far, too fast in recent months. 

  Lee Munson, chief investment officer of Albuquerque, N.M., wealth manager Portfolio LLC, said the escalating crisis in Egypt caused "bedlam" on his firm's trading desk on Friday as traders scrambled to assess the impact on their gold and oil positions.

Mr. Munson said he moved money into cash, after months of being bullish on equities. Though it meant he missed the rallies in gold and oil on Friday, Mr. Munson said he felt good about his decision, concerned that the unrest could spread elsewhere in the Middle East. 

"I've been bullish for a while," Mr. Munson said. "To get me to stop and pause, it took a riot." 

Recent unrest in the Middle East may just be the beginning, to the extent that it has been fostered by rising commodity prices, driven by emerging-market demand and easy monetary policy in developed economies. 

Egypt is a net importer of food and fuel, and its government has been weakening the Egyptian pound in an effort to bolster the export sector. It has been importing inflation as a result, noted  Rachel Ziemba, a senior analyst of geostrategic risks at Roubini Global Economics. It is not alone in the world.

"The financial and economic stresses that are underlying forces in Egypt are pervasive in other countries," said Ms. Ziemba. "They could result in not only higher inflation in those countries and throughout the world, but also in stresses to institutions."

The political turmoil also serves as a reminder of the risks facing investors who have poured into emerging markets in recent years on the promise of higher returns without making distinctions between markets. 

An Egyptian 10-year bond issued last May with a 5.75% coupon now yields 7.02%, according to  Michael Roche, emerging-markets strategist at MF Global. Yields move inversely to prices, and that rise represents a drop in price of more than 9%.

Egyptian sovereign debt is thinly traded and mainly held by Egyptian banks, notes Mr. Roche, but will likely suffer more in the days ahead. Other emerging-market debt could suffer as investors reassess their particular risks.

"Emerging markets aren't a monolithic story; there are definitely weak spots," said Win Thin, head of emerging-markets strategy at Brown Brothers Harriman. "That gets papered over when sentiment is positive, but when things are uncertain, it becomes glaring."

—Mary Pilon contributed to this article.

 Write to  Mark Gongloff at mark.gongloff@wsj.com 