Anne-Sophie Mutter has a confession to make. "I'm a Michael Jackson fan, I have to admit," says the German violin virtuoso, who also listens to Beyoncé on her iPod and scours the Internet for historical musical performances. "YouTube has amazing stuff," she says. She is also a jazz fanatic and an advocate of difficult contemporary music by Polish composers Krzysztof Penderecki and Witold Lutosławski.

This weekend, however, Ms. Mutter returns to the traditional heart of the classical-music world—and to the origins of her own career—when she and the Berlin Philharmonic, under the direction of the orchestra's chief conductor Sir Simon Rattle, initiate an unusual mini-tour featuring Dvorak's "Violin Concerto in A minor." Starting at what amounts to the North Pole of the German-language musical world, the Berlin Philharmonie, the tour culminates next week at its South Pole, Vienna's Musikverein.

Composed in the 1870s, the Dvorak work was a mainstay in Berlin during the long postwar tenure of conductor Herbert von Karajan, who discovered Ms. Mutter and put her on the concert stage when she was 14 years old. Ms. Mutter, now 47, performed the work as a young soloist, but eventually left it behind—as did the Berlin Philharmonic, which has only scheduled it twice since von Karajan's death in 1989. "Taste in musical history goes in waves," says Ms. Mutter, speaking by telephone from her Munich home. The Dvorak concerto "is a piece of immense importance in the violinist's repertoire," she says, "because it showcases the instrument like very few others do." However, she adds, "it does have these very tricky high-register passages," which have caused it to fall out of favor with some soloists.

Until she was in her mid-20s, Ms. Mutter regularly appeared with von Karajan's Berlin Philharmonic. While continuing her career elsewhere, she took a 13-year pause from the orchestra during the tenure of von Karajan's successor, Claudio Abbado. "When I went back to the Berlin Philharmonic years after Karajan's death," she recalls, she was still in her 30s, but "I felt like a fossil." The old musicians were gone, she says. For nearly the whole of the von Karajan era, the orchestra was exclusively male and overwhelmingly German; now there are members from nearly 25 different countries and about one in 10 musicians is a woman. 

The orchestra's approach to music had also shifted. "Much of what we had as a sound concept in the '80s has radically changed—specifically for Baroque music and Mozart," she says, alluding to the influence of the more restrained, period-instrument movement, which stood in opposition to the large sound and Romantic tendencies that von Karajan used to render music from earlier periods. "That is something that probably never will come back, and I think rightfully so." 

She believes that the orchestra, particularly under the baton of conductor Seiji Ozawa, who was von Karajan's protégé, can still "resurrect" the famous von Karajan sound in pieces like the Beethoven Violin Concerto. But she can sound wistful when talking about the von Karajan era. "The most important part of the 13 years I spent with this great musician was the rehearsals," she says. Von Karajan had "a relentless interest in melting instrument groups of the orchestra together," and actually rehearsed them separately—a rarity at the time—so that, according to Ms. Mutter, "the orchestra could understand their inner voices" first. Von Karajan was "burningly passionate about what he did," she says. "You would think it's normal, that it happens in concerts every day. No, it doesn't." 

That is why she adores jazz. "There, you cannot just lean back," Ms. Mutter comments, adding that jazz musicians "compose in an instant and have to react immediately." This "careful listening" was something she says von Karajan was also able to evoke.

The catwalk and the concert stage have grown closer in recent years, as classical musicians attract attention for their clothes, as well as their music making.

Anne-Sophie Mutter is known for playing a Stradivarius violin—and for wearing the same strapless John Galliano gown, which she has in any number of colors. "I haven't counted them," she says, when asked how many Gallianos she actually owns. "But it's always the same dress, because I feel comfortable in it."

Angela Hewitt, the London-based Canadian pianist noted for her Bach interpretations, as well as her elegant stage presence, says fashion "is a fun part of my job." Ms. Hewitt, who likes the young Scottish designer Jonathan Saunders and Italian legend Roberto Cavalli, considers what she is playing, as well as where she is playing, when deciding what to wear. 

"If I have worn a certain dress before" in a particular city, she says, "I try to keep it in mind." For a Milan concert later this month, where she will play Bach, Beethoven and Brahms, Ms. Hewitt says she is thinking about wearing Cavalli. "In Milan you can't walk on looking a frump."

Male soloists, who still tend to wear tuxedos, are thought to have less to worry about, if also less variety to choose from. 

However, cellist Mischa Maisky, known for his unconventional approach to clothes, gave up tuxedos long ago. "I feel very uncomfortable in this traditional 'penguin' outfit," says the Riga, Latvia native, who is now based in Brussels.

"I started designing myself comfortable shirts, then I discovered Issey Miyake." The Japanese designer's clothes, says Mr. Maisky, "are incredibly comfortable and interesting looking, but practical. You don't have to iron them. I can squeeze six outfits in my bag."

Mr. Miyake is also the favored designer of German clarinetist Sabine Meyer. His designs, she says are "athletic and elegant, and go with everything." She says she buys her Miyake outfits in Tokyo, or else in Zurich, where there is a Miyake boutique. 

Many soloists dress to draw attention to themselves, but at an upcoming concert in Vevey, Switzerland, where Ms. Meyer will be part of a chamber ensemble accompanying 

German soprano Juliane Banse, she has to worry about blending in rather than standing out. Her solution is the male soloist's standby—a tuxedo, which she will wear tieless. It will be "a sober contrast," she says, to Ms. Banse's "great gown."

Von Karajan's later years were devoted to a constant re-examination of the classical and Romantic musical traditions—at the expense, his critics charged, of encouraging new works by living composers. Ms. Mutter, who regularly commissions and records works of new music, says she finds "a certain beauty in restricting the repertoire" to what von Karajan "thought he was best at," but she also admires the way the orchestra has "enlarged and changed its perspective."

The Berlin Philharmonic under Sir Simon, who became its chief conductor in 2002, has become a conspicuous champion of new music, and the orchestra's and Ms. Mutter's shared passion dovetailed in 2007, when Sir Simon and the orchestra premiered an ambitious new violin concerto by the Hamburg-based Russian composer Sofia Gubaidulina, called "In Tempus Praesens," written especially for Ms. Mutter. Ms. Mutter remembers the first rehearsal, with Ms. Gubaidulina in attendance. "It was a very moving and extremely intense moment," she says.

Composers themselves are often moved in return. New York composer Sebastian Currier remembers the first rehearsal with Ms. Mutter in the weeks leading up to the premier of his 1994 work, "Aftersong," also written for Ms. Mutter. A few weeks before a performance, musicians are often just having a first look at the music—"that's the reality," he says. "At that point," he remembers, Ms. Mutter "played it for me from memory. Pretty stunning—that level of commitment and preparedness. I was quite struck by that."

Ms. Mutter's appearances this winter with the Berlin Philharmonic come in the middle of a year in which she has been designated the Mary and James G. Wallach Artist-in-Residence at the New York Philharmonic—only the second artist to receive the recently instituted honor. She and the orchestra will premier Sebastian Currier's new work, "Time Machines," this June, in addition to giving the New York premier of "In Tempus Praesens." "Having this residency in New York is really one of the great moments in my life as a musician," she says, adding that the orchestra "has an audience that is very curious about contemporary music."

Though now noted for a glamorous stage presence, including a number of strapless John Galliano gowns, Ms. Mutter is still remembered in Germany as the somewhat awkward, if beaming, South German teenager at von Karajan's side.

For Yoheved Kaplinsky, artistic director of the pre-college division at New York's Juilliard School, a great display of talent as a child or a teenager "is not necessarily an indication of a mature artist in the future." Ms. Kaplinsky, who works with musical prodigies, says "the emotional maturity and expressive ability" necessary for a musical career often "don't develop at the same pace or don't develop at all" after musical talent is discovered and encouraged in childhood. "That transition is so hard for them to make," she says of prodigies, and Ms. Mutter "obviously made it." 

Ms. Mutter says that her two teenage children are musically and artistically inclined (they are the ones responsible for uploading Beyoncé onto her iPod), but aren't yet choosing music as a career. They have, however, influenced her own musical career. She refers to her children when asked why she has yet to attempt what many regard as the greatest challenge for a violinist—the set of six sonatas and partitas for solo violin by Johann Sebastian Bach. "If you have a choice between having two children or [mastering] the Bach solo sonatas, you have to say, 'I can only do that much. I have to choose now.' Once they have grown up and my hair has turned gray, I might find the time, and the peace of mind, to go through all the things I have learned and make some sense out of them."