HONG KONG—Billionaire Stanley Ho has handed the reins of a key part of his gambling empire in the world's most profitable casino city to his fourth wife, Angela Leong.

Ms. Leong was appointed the managing director of Sociedade de Jogos de Macau SA, holder of the gambling license for Hong Kong-listed SJM Holdings Ltd., which is Macau's biggest casino operator by revenue.

Ms. Leong's appointment was approved by the board of directors Dec. 30 and was effective immediately, according to a statement seen Friday. The Macau Post Daily first reported the change last week.

The announcement is the latest step in preparations for a change of power in the gambling empire of 20 casinos controlled by the 89-year-old Mr. Ho, who held a four-decade long gambling monopoly until it was broken up in 2002 and whose ailing health has raised concerns about succession.

Since then, gambling revenue in Macau has been soaring as rich mainland Chinese flock to the casinos to bet, eclipsing Las Vegas in revenue. In 2010, gambling revenue jumped 58% to 188.34 billion Macau patacas ($22.85 billion). Las Vegas companies Wynn Resorts Ltd. and Las Vegas Sands Corp. now earn the majority of their revenue in Asia and are focusing increasing efforts on Macau.

Ms. Leong, a member of Macau's legislative assembly, is an executive director of SJM Holdings and has her own business interests as well. She has plans to invest $1.3 billion to build a family-friendly theme park that won't have a casino, part of efforts to diversify the city's economy to draw in more tourists.

The appointment is the latest in a series of steps preparing for Mr. Ho's succession.

Earlier in December, Mr. Ho divested a 12% stake in property and hotel firm Shun Tak Holdings Ltd., to a company in which his three daughters—Pansy Ho, Daisy Ho and Maisy Ho—each own 20%.

Later that month, he transferred a 7% stake in SJM Holdings to Ms. Leong, according to a filing with the Hong Kong stock exchange.

 Write to  Shai Oster at shai.oster@wsj.com 