Bowery Ballroom

6 Delancey St., (212) 533-2111

Wednesday

The old, high-heeled stomping grounds of lower Manhattan may no longer offer the same pills, thrills and bellyaches as they did in the early-'70s heyday of the New York Dolls, but four decades later the group somehow remains an institution. Or rather, duo—the reaper caught up to original guitarist  Johnny Thunders in 1991 and drummer  Jerry Nolan in 1992, and bassist  Arthur Kane passed away in 2004, leaving only the skeleton crew of singer  David Johansen and guitarist  Sylvain Sylvain to soldier on. The group re-formed at the behest of fan Morrissey, and while their latest studio album, "Dancing Backwards in High Heels," won't soon get conflated with their first two albums of trashy glam and proto-punk ear candy, expect that for these shows (celebrating that album's release) you'll hear from that particular strain of old New York that includes raucous classics like "Frankenstein" and "Personality Crisis."

The Church of St. Paul the Apostle

405 W. 59th St., (212) 265-3495

Thursday-Friday 

In 2002, with the Iraq war still a gleam on the horizon, the Montreal commune/recording entity Godspeed You! Black Emperor released its last record, the brooding and orchestral "Yanqui U.X.O." (a term denoting American unexploded ordinance). The nonet was nothing if not bold: What other band in a post-9/11 world would use its liner notes to diagram a connection between major record labels and the military industrial complex? And what other band could politicize such a dark and evocative din when its music remains wordless? On tour through the U.S. in that fraught year of 2003, GY!BE made the news when an Oklahoma gas station attendant had local police stop the group's van on suspicion of terrorism. They were released but shortly thereafter went on hiatus, dedicating themselves to side projects, child-rearing, gardening and the like. Reconvened now, and playing five nights in New York, these remain potent times for Godspeed's powerful sound.

Zankel Hall (at Carnegie Hall)

881 Seventh Ave., (212) 903-9600

Saturday

Ranked No. 19 on Rolling Stone's "Greatest Guitarists," what distinguishes Richard Thompson from many of his fellow six-stringers is the sheer breadth and longevity of his work. He came to prominence as guitarist for 1960s folk-rock act Fairport Convention, where his quicksilver leads entwined with the skin-tingling pipes of vocalist Sandy Denny to make the group one of the era's finest. By the early '70s, Mr. Thompson married singer  Linda Peters and as a couple they recorded albums that wrapped the bitter pill of Mr. Thompson's lyrics around his wife's gorgeous vocals and his own economical playing, culminating with 1982's "Shoot Out the Lights," both an artistic pinnacle and documentation of their marriage's collapse. As a solo artist, Mr. Thompson continues to write, record and tour vigorously, and tonight he performs as part of "WFUV's Live at Zankel," where he's as likely to explore his deep back catalog as he is to cover a 13th-century folk song or  Britney Spears.

Radio City Music Hall

1260 Sixth Ave., (212) 247-4777

Monday

In the 21st century, it's more likely that you've seen pop star Janet Jackson somewhere other than atop the pop charts. Her last studio album, 2008's "Discipline," was her lowest-selling to date and she hasn't dominated Billboard like she did during her indomitable run between 1986 and 2001. Instead, she's acted in  Tyler Perry's rom-coms and her self-help book, "True You," topped the New York Times bestseller list earlier this year. That said, ignore Ms. Jackson's return to New York City at your own peril. While her second collection of hits, "Number Ones," dates back to the 2009 holiday season, it provides the structure to her latest world tour, where fans can go to her website and choose which of her 35 No. 1 hits they'd like to hear her belt out while dancing and racing around the stage. But the subtitle of the tour, "Up Close and Personal," is key, meaning it gives fans the chance to witness Ms. Jackson in the more intimate setting of Radio City.

Webster Hall

125 E 11th St., (212) 353-1600

Monday

  Svein Berge and Torbjørn Brundtland, the Norwegian duo who make downtempo electronic music together as Röyksopp, have achieved a level of ubiquity unparalleled by other Scandinavian acts of their ilk. Their analog-keyboard electro-pop has been licensed to  Geico
S1146


1.47
%




 commercials, a slew of aught-era films and  Apple Computers,
AAPL


0.92
%




 whcih had the band's song "Eple" (translation: "apple") play when users installed the Panther Operating System. But Berge and Brundtland are not the aural wallpaper they appear to be. Their music also veers into techno and house, and they've also served as a platform for any number of breakout Scandinavian singers, collaborating with the likes of Robyn, Erlend Øye,  Karin Andersson of the Knife and  Lykke Li. Their most recent albums, 2009's "Junior" and last year's "Senior," found them separating their pop from their introspective sides, respectively, though when playing live they bank on the former to get the crowd off the wall and onto the floor.