This morning Gov. Scott Walker signed into law a ban on so-called collective bargaining for government workers. This is a scheme in which "unions"--similar in form to actual industrial labor organizations--collude with politicians to direct taxpayer money to the unions themselves (in the form of dues), to union members (as extravagant benefits) and back to the politicians (campaign contributions).

The loss of this easy access to tax dollars can be expected to exact a heavy toll on Democrats, as Sasha Abramsky argues at the left-wing site Salon.com:

An alternative view comes from E.J. Dionne, a liberal columnist at the Washington Post. He is convinced that liberals won a big victory in Wisconsin. How can that be? The Democrats who fled the state "defined the political argument on their own terms--and they are winning it." 

Sure, Walker and his fellow Republicans succeeded in outlawing "collective bargaining," but "voters have sided with the itinerant senators and the unions." But that's not quite true. No one has voted since November. But the Democrats are doing very well in opinion polls: "Republicans may win a procedural round but lose further ground in public opinion."

So what Dionne is saying--although tellingly, he does not use this analogy--is that this is ObamaCare in reverse: Republicans won a legislative victory but overreached, just as Democrats did a year ago, and they are going to pay a political price, just as the donks did in November.

It could happen. But out of curiosity, we went back to see what Dionne had to say about ObamaCare at the time, and guess what? That was a big liberal victory too, not the tiniest bit Pyrrhic:

But what about public opinion? It turns out it was on the Dems' side then, too: "With success comes the chance to defend what is, in many of its particulars, the sort of plan a majority of Americans said they wanted."

We understand that when Dionne was a kid, the other kids used to call him "four eyes." Then he got rose-colored glasses, and they started calling him "pink eyes"!

 Your Car Will Never Go on Strike 

  A Cut Above NPR   "PBS confirmed Wednesday that, like NPR, one of its executives attended a lunch with people who posed as members of the Muslim Education Action Center Trust, a fictional group," the New York Times reports:

James O'Keefe, the man behind the prank/sting operations, confirms that the meeting took place and, like the NPR one, was taped. If Bentley's account is accurate, PBS's execs are a good deal smarter than NPR's.

And the latter are looking dumber all the time. Another Times report notes that Betsy Liley, who accompanied the since-defenestrated Ron Schiller to lunch with the fake Muslims, later spoke with them on the phone:

According to emails released by NPR, its CEO, Vivian Schiller--who is unrelated to Ron Schiller but who, like him, was ousted this week--eventually set Liley straight. Still, we got a kick out of that "not reflective," after Ron Schiller's statement, which we noted Wednesday, that his bigoted remarks were "not reflective of my personal beliefs."

It reminds us, too, of the statement Director of National Intelligence James Clapper's office put out in December after Clapper revealed he didn't know about a big terror bust in Britain: "The DNI's knowledge of the threat streams in Europe is profound and multidimensional, and any suggestion otherwise is inaccurate."

Yesterday, ABC News reports, Clapper came under friendly fire for predicting that Libyan dictator Moammar Gadhafi "will prevail" over the current rebellion:

"Not reflective." "Multidimensional." When a bureaucracy repeatedly falls back on words and phrases that no one would ever think to use in real life, perhaps it's a sign that something is amiss.

  Too Creepy to Sting   Daily Caller, meanwhile, reports that Newsweek's Jonathan Alter, appearing on MSNBC the other day, worried that he may be a target of a similar prank:

Alter is lucky, though, in that the views he puts in writing are so ugly and grotesque that it wouldn't be worth trying to embarrass him with such a video. 

 NewsBusters.org reminds us that not all mainstream news organizations forswear such tactics:

The targets of ABC's "stings," unlike those of O'Keefe's, actually are just ordinary people minding their own business. If they are fair game, surely executives of taxpayer-subsidized corporations are.

  'Don't Stand So Close to Me'   "NPR CEO Resigns in Wake of 'Sting Video' "--headline, NPR.org, March 9

  The Gray Lady Is No Silver Fox   Howard Kurtz of the Daily Beast follows up on New York Times executive editor Bill Keller's complaints about Fox News, which we noted Monday:

We're not sure about that. Our knowledge of these reporters' work is sub-encyclopedic, but Stelter was the author of the Times's ludicrously slanted piece about Fox host Glenn Beck and advocate of violence Francis Fox Piven, which we noted in January.

But really, who cares? Asking if the Times is fair in its coverage of Fox News is like asking if the New York Post is fair in its coverage of the Daily News, or vice versa. No one is hurt less by a news organization's unfair coverage than a rival news organization. What's interesting is that Keller, whom you might expect to adopt an above-it-all attitude, instead is seeking out a rivalry with Fox.

Kurtz closes with this observation:

It seems to us not entirely fair to lump Beck in with Krugman. Consider this acknowledgment by Krugman the other day:

It's true that both Krugman and Beck are highly opinionated, often intemperate and sometimes paranoid (in the political rather than the clinical sense of the term). But no one can accuse Beck of being as incurious as Krugman is.

  Get a Room, You Two!   "Bill Keller Accuses Me of 'Aggregating' an Idea He Had Actually 'Aggregated' From Me"--headline, Arianna Huffington post, Puffington Host, March 10

  Other Than That, the Story Was Accurate   This is one of the funniest corrections we've ever read. Dan Froomkin, a left-liberal writer whose 2009 termination from the Washington Post occasioned outrage on the left, had a Puffington Host post the other day titled "A Reagan Republican Makes the Case Against the War--and His Own Party."

The post now begins with an "Editor's Note" directing the reader to this "update":

In addition to the truther stuff, Roberts has argued that Israeli Jews should be resettled in the United States and is an admitted admirer of hatemonger Helen Thomas. If Froomkin didn't know that Roberts holds crackpot beliefs, he must be about as widely read as Paul Krugman.

  Homer Nods   Contrary to yesterday's column (since corrected), the faculty at the University of Wisconsin's Madison campus is not unionized. The Chronicle of Higher Education reported last month that although they had the legal right to unionize under a 2009 law signed by then-Gov. Jim Doyle, they had not taken him up on it, although the faculties of the Eau Claire and Superior campuses have. (Its name notwithstanding, the Superior campus is actually inferior to the Madison one.)

Also, Columbus, Ohio, and Lansing, Mich., do have major university campuses nearby: Ohio State University and Michigan State University, respectively. We changed the column to state that they do not have elite university campuses nearby, which we expediently define to mean those ranked in the top 50 by U.S. News & World Report.

The Boston Globe, meanwhile, reports that Massachusetts' public-sector unions are trying to establish "collective bargaining" for municipal workers' health-care benefits. We wouldn't worry about it, though, Boston's not a big college town.

 With DNC in Mind, City Bans Carrying Urine, Feces 

  He Always Wanted to Be a DJ   "Obama Attempts to Spin His Record"--headline, HotAir.com, March 9

  Especially Wise Latina Hens   "Chickens Are Capable of Feeling Empathy, Scientists Believe"--headline, Daily Telegraph (London), March 9

  His Wife and Family Keep Giving Him Dirty Looks   "Got No Rhythm: 23-Year-Old Man Is First Documented Case of Beat Deafness"--headline, Time.com, March 9

  A Squirrel Walks Into a Bar, and--Oh, Look! A Beer!   "First Look: The Black Squirrel's Downstairs Tap Room"--headline, WashingtonCityPaper.com, March 10

  This Story Has No Happy Ending   "Virgin Forced to Pay £300,000 for Massage Injuries"--headline, Agence France-Presse, March 11

 Hey, Kids! What Time Is It? 

 Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking   "How the Human Penis Lost Its Spines"--headline, CNN.com, March 10

  Sheep Gives Birth to Well-Done Quintuplets--Now That Would Be News   "Sheep Gives Birth to Rare Quintuplets"--video title, CNN.com, March 9

  It's Always in the Last Place You Look   "Finding Happiness in Mystical Bhutan"--headline, CNN.com, March 8

  News of the Tautological   "Women Obsessed With Their Looks 'Post Photos of Themselves on Facebook to Compete for Attention' "--headline, Daily Mail (London), March 10

  Breaking News From Genesis 1:20-22   "Angry Birds Maker Raises $42 Million"--headline, The Wall Street Journal, March 11

  Breaking News From 1989, 2001   "Bush Settles In, Gets Ready to Make Mark"--headline, Lubbock (Texas) Avalanche-Journal, March 8

  News You Can Use   "Dude, Those Candied Walnuts Go Great at a Kegger"--headline, The Wall Street Journal, March 10

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  She Wrapped Herself in the Flag. How Could He Resist Her?   The Associated Press reports on another reason why we consider a Newt Gingrich presidential candidacy a frivolous prospect:

Things got a little out of hand. It's just this war and that lying son of a bitch, Clinton! 

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Hillel Markowitz, John Bobek, Zack Russ, T. Young, Daniel Goldstein, Clifford Crouch, David Gerstman, Monty Krieger, Ed Grinberg, Rebecca Billings, Jeffrey Naimon, Michele Schiesser, John Sanders, Ethel Fenig, Ed Desautels, Rick Weisenhan, Bruce Goldman, Bill Schweber, Rod Pennington, Stewart Levine, Brian Warner, David Smith, Ben Pearce, Ray Walton, Robert Kay, Tom Dziubek, Chris Smith, Martin Roth, Lew Olowski, James Lico, Kyle Kyllan, Robert Boddington, David Siegrist, Doug Latimer, Paul Strada, David Hallstrom, Stefan Sharkansky and Joe Perez. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)