There's no business like show business—an old-fashioned credo that underpins Ray Privett's next-wave notions about movie exhibition and distribution. A longtime programmer who has worked with seemingly every art-house and nonprofit cinema institution in New York, Mr. Privett looks for ways to restore magic to the moviegoing experience. At the same time, he promotes what he calls "micro-cinema" through inventive use of the Internet and social media.

"He thinks forward," said Vladan Nikolic, director of undergraduate studies in the film and media studies department of the New School. "A lot of people in the distribution business think backward." 

Mr. Nikolic, a filmmaker himself, will release his latest effort, "Zenith," through Mr. Privett's company, Cinema Purgatorio. The low-budget dystopian drama opens Wednesday at the Kraine Theater on East Fourth Street, launching a 16-city tour that includes major cities like Los Angeles, Boston and Dallas, but also spots that might seem off the radar, like Wayne, Neb., and Anchorage, Alaska.

"Zenith" is set in a near-futuristic Brooklyn, where Jack Crowley (Peter Scanavino), a scientist-turned-drug dealer, tries to solve the riddle of a videotape left behind by his father (Jason Robards III) detailing a secret conspiracy called Zenith. The film emphasizes the industrial desolation of blocks near the Gowanus Canal, Sunset Park, and Fort Totten Park, a former Army installation near Bayside, Queens. It fuses the trippy paranoia of Philip K. Dick's novels with canny use of locations that are already a bit post-apocalyptic.

"We're experimenting to see what we can do," said Mr. Nikolic, who designed the film with an online component at www.zeniththefilm.com that encourages viewers to engage the work in a participatory fashion—even accessing supplemental footage to edit their own versions of the story. And as a clue that this is no ordinary event, the screenings are being presented by an entity called the "Bureau of Surrealist Research."

Not merely a behind-the-scenes guy, Mr. Privett, 33, will be highly visible during the film's one-week run. "I'll be projecting and ticket-taking for all those shows at the Kraine," he said. "And making sure the hypnotists hit their marks."

That's where the showbiz comes in. On selected evenings, the feature will be preceded by a live performance featuring Claudio and Jos Laniado, a pair of actors whose actual roles Mr. Nicolic left a bit vague. "They are performance artists who are supposed to put the audience into a certain state of mind before the film starts," he said.

Mr. Privett has worked on more than 20 movie releases, whether personal projects or as a freelance "distributor-for-hire" since he started Cinema Purgatorio in 2007. One of his first projects was "Christmas on Mars," a rock 'n' roll sci-fi home movie made by Wayne Coyne of the Flaming Lips, which played in more than 70 cities and ran for three months at the Kraine, a 99-seat former speakeasy that once served as the Ukrainian Socialist Social Club. The venue, with its flavor of old vaudeville, is exactly the sort that Mr. Privett embraces for his bookings, wherever he can find them. 

"The large theater chains we have today emerged out of vaudeville," he said. "The vaudeville circuit has never really gone away. There are old movie theaters that never left that and other kinds of spaces that emerged in the last decade."

Prior to founding Cinema Purgatorio, Mr. Privett programmed the now-defunct Two Boots Pioneer Theatre in the East Village, where for four years he built a strong reputation as a champion of independent film with a maverick streak. "I loved having a great venue," he said. "But it's really exhausting to have to sort things for a venue, day in and day out. I had no ownership. No nothing." 

That's no longer the case. Releases such as "Zenith" and the forthcoming "Beyond the Game" will have physical screenings and DVD releases, and will be sold as videos on-demand. In the case of the latter film, a documentary about "World of Warcraft" and online gaming, free downloads will be promoted on BitTorrent sites through a Creative Commons license.

"The technology itself is not inherently evil," Mr. Privett said, adding that the freebies would come with incentives to buy DVDs and related artifacts. "There's no question that, as is the cliché, DVD is on the way out. But there is still a market. There's a large chunk of the country where broadband isn't as strong, and physical goods retain a very specific niche context."

Meanwhile, New York audiences can continue to expect Mr. Privett to pop up with cinematic surprises. But even he can't forecast what those might be. "The moment I know the answer to that question is the moment I know I'm in trouble."