Monday marks the two-week anniversary of the Carmelo Anthony trade. When the news broke, many fans were ecstatic, believing the addition of the high-scoring forward meant the Knicks could finally compete for a championship.

That was then. Now, the only good news is that the Knicks have another month until the next time they play the Cleveland Cavaliers, the NBA's worst team, which beat New York for the second time in a week Friday night.

There have been highs: The Knicks beat two playoff teams—the Miami Heat and New Orleans Hornets—and Sunday they added a win over the Hawks. But there's been little consistency on a nightly basis. With that in mind, we put together a handy guide to what's working and what's not with the new-look Knicks (statistics don't include Sunday night's game):

 Amar'e Stoudemire. There's no longer a fear that the old star would get fewer shots with the new star around. In fact, Stoudemire's shots have actually risen from 19 a game to 20. He's scoring 26 points a game, the same as he did before the trade.

But there are differences: With Anthony, who likes the ball near the basket, Stoudemire has adapted a more well-rounded shooting game. According to the website Hoopdata, Stoudemire made five mid-range jumpers in his first three games after the Anthony trade—which is as many as he made, combined, in the 15 games before that. He starts more possessions on the perimeter, and to his credit, his game has evolved to let Anthony play his own style, for better or worse.

 The Denver Nuggets. You might have blocked it out if you're a Knicks fan, but the Nuggets are on a roll. Despite Denver management's insistence that they got "killed" in the trade, the Nuggets won five of their first six games after trading Anthony, and their ex-Knicks are playing a major role. 

 Knicks Defense. Playing D was never the Knicks' strength, but it hasn't gotten any worse since Carmelo arrived. They give up 105.8 points per game this season, 27th in the league. Despite the fact that the Knicks have conceded at least 115 points three times since the trade, their defensive field goal percentage before and after the trade is 46%. The defense serves the same purpose it did before the trade: to get the ball back to start the offense, and the Knicks are doing it as effectively (or ineffectively) as before the trade.

 Carmelo's shooting. Since he was traded, Anthony leads the NBA in shot attempts with 21.2 per game. But he has made just 43% of his shots as a Knick. Stoudemire has made 52% since the trade. Upon joining the Knicks, Anthony promptly missed his first 12 shots outside the paint. The Knicks' two favorite stats are effective field goal percentage, which is a percentage that weighs 3-pointers, and true shooting percentage, which incorporates free throws. Anthony is ninth on the team in both.

 "Seven Seconds Or Less."  Knicks coach Mike D'Antoni made a name for himself with an offense by that name, which refers to the ideal time to get a shot off under his run-and-gun approach. In the past two weeks, that phrase has taken on a different meaning—it takes less than seven seconds to realize Anthony will take 20 seconds to shoot the ball. D'Antoni admits the team has gone to a style of play designed for one-on-one matchups, which suits Anthony and other Knicks better.

New point guard Chauncey Billups also has provided a slower offensive pace. D'Antoni, in a phone conversation with Billups immediately after the trade, gave Billups—who has been out with a bruised quadricep since last week—permission to run whatever offense he felt comfortable with.

 3-point shooting. The Knicks shipped out 3-point specialist Danilo Gallinari, but the thought was that other outside sharpshooters remained. It hasn't been that way so far. In the first six games after the trade, the Knicks hit their season average of 24 3-point attempts a game just once—when they took 30 of them against Orlando and made (gulp) seven. Shawne Williams, who spent most of the first half leading the league in 3-point percentage and hovered around 50% nearly all year, has made 25% of those shots since the trade. Anthony has made 35% of his. 

 Write to  Kevin Clark at kevin.clark@wsj.com 