 Fort Worth, Texas 

In art, reputations rise and fall, and today's canon can become tomorrow's cannon fodder. Today we venerate Caravaggio as the master of chiaroscuro (effects of light and shade), of saints with dirty feet, of dramatic religious encounters, as the painter of figures of epicene sexuality. Two hundred and fifty years ago, especially in Britain, he was unrecognized. Instead, throughout much of the Romantic Age, Salvator Rosa (1615-1673) was the name on every collector's lips. The tables have since turned.

Kimbell Art Museum

 Through March 27 

Which is why the Kimbell Museum's "Salvator Rosa: Bandits, Wilderness & Magic," the first major American exhibit of Rosa's paintings, deserves a visit. It is not an easy show to see, even though it displays a mere 36 pictures.

Whatever he was like in real life (apparently he was a combative, rebellious prototype of the bohemian artist), Rosa is not a painter you fall in love with. The first things you notice are what he does not have. There is little playfulness or joie de vivre. He was a contemporary, and knew the work, of Claude Lorrain and Nicolas Poussin, but he lacks the gentle softness of the former and the impeccable coloring of the latter, although his mythological scenes often replicate Poussin's neoclassical geometry. His unsettling landscapes move beyond Claude's pastoral harmonies, replacing them with dangerous, wind-swept, "sublime" ravines and crags, gloom and doom. The Kimbell's silvery light allows us to see the somberness up close. The pictures here are, by and large, dark: They have little bright color. Some come close to Goya's horrifying late black paintings. Shades of brown and other earth tones predominate even in the landscapes. The sun seldom shines. Rosa brings the underworld up to the surface. He is both classical and (pre-) Romantic.

Rosa's human figures never smile; instead they seem grim, wary, defiant, sullen or lachrymose. Some of the most intense ones have no faces at all: They look away or down. For example, "Jason and the Dragon" (c. 1665-1670), in which the hero's face is covered by his left arm as he fights a terrifying, snarling beast within a dark rocky landscape. Or "Soldiers Gaming" (1660-1665) in which a trio of shadowy, seated figures is watched over by a standing man turning away from us, his face obliterated while his uniform gleams, the folds of the garments taking the off-stage light. The bright luminosity and confident humanism of the High Renaissance have faded from the scene.

Born in Naples, where he painted landscapes and battles, Rosa moved to Rome, was befriended by people in high places, made enemies, and went to Florence under Medici protection. But he did not wish to be controlled, and returned to Rome, burning bridges with both secular and religious authorities. His 1659 "Fortuna," an allegorical, anti-Papal satire, a picture of excess and suffocation, almost got him arrested.

Popular among Italian intellectuals and free-thinkers, he became even more significant in the following century when the English developed new modes of landscape gardening, and Romantic writers, as well as British collectors, took to Rosa's savage landscapes, and to his bandits, witches and gypsies.

The Kimbell show groups Rosa's paintings by theme and subject rather than by chronology. Thus, we begin with nine portraits, most of them of allegorical figures, and move through landscapes, and witchcraft, to history and mythology. The show makes sense, even if not everything in it gives instant pleasure.

Horace Walpole, whose 1764 "Castle of Otranto" initiated the craze for the Gothic novel in England, wrote of the scenery on his 1739 Alpine tour: "Precipices, mountains, wolves, torrents, rumblings—Salvator Rosa." Rosa had already made his name, though like many painters of his age he wanted to be remembered as a history painter rather than for his landscapes or portraits.

Part of his originality was his subject matter. Rosa was the first Italian to take witchcraft seriously (and satirically) as a subject for painting. The monumental "Dream of Aeneas" (1665)—according to the British art historian Helen Langdon, who co-wrote the exhibition's catalog—is the first picture to depict the scene from the Aeneid, Book 8, in which the hero falls asleep and the god representing the river Tiber emerges and tells him of the founding of Rome.

Perhaps the two most memorable pictures in the exhibit combine Rosa's novelty of subject matter, his commitment to ancient philosophy and magic, his reimagining of landscape, and his inheritance from his contemporaries. Both the Kimbell's own "Pythagoras Coming Out of a Cave" (1662) and "The Death of Empedocles" (1665-1670)—the first European painting of a volcano, according to Ms. Langdon—deal with pre-Socratic philosophers who were renowned for magical powers and their status as tricksters. Sweden's Queen Christina, who shared an interest in Pythagoras with Rosa, inspired the former painting, although she couldn't afford to buy the finished picture. The scene depicts the philosopher emerging from his so-called descent to the underworld (a trick played on his followers) with a wicked grin on his face. On the left side of the picture, a frieze-like group of mostly female followers watches in various postures of astonishment. The geometric composition, but not the coloring, recalls Poussin.

More striking, "The Death of Empedocles" shows the philosopher leaping into Mount Etna (he goes down, as Pythagoras comes up!), his cloaks flying behind him. He is a small part of the scene. And the picture displays none of the neoclassical symmetry of the Pythagoras painting. Instead, rock and flame, jagged mountains and a turbulent sky overwhelm the hero, an inconsequential piece of humanity confronted and absorbed by nature's cosmic violence. In its antihumanism and in its thick impasto, with slices and diagonal blades of dark color making sharp edges à la Clyfford Still, this picture looks forward as well as backward.

Which is why Rosa deserves a reappraisal.

 Mr. Spiegelman is the Hughes Professor of English at Southern Methodist University. 