It didn't sink in for Kelly Faris until the flurry of desperation fouls in the final seconds of UConn's 71-59 loss to Stanford last week. Every game of her college career, the Huskies had somehow managed to find a way to win. But all of a sudden it became clear: This time they wouldn't.

"Then it was kind of like, 'Well, this is really unfortunate because we just threw it away, completely,'" said Ms. Faris, who scored a career-high 19 points. 

It was a leaden performance from an otherwise golden team that had dazzled the sports world by winning its record-setting 90th straight game in December. 

For months, the Huskies' identity—and the story of women's basketball—had been dominated by The Streak and their beguiling aura of invincibility. Now, 998 days later, the streak is over. This week, the Huskies ended another record run: 51 straight weeks as the top-ranked team in the country. 

They are human again, with two starting freshmen, scrapping in a suddenly competitive race for a national championship. Which, of course, prompts the question: What next?

"Life after the streak—that's exactly what is going to define this team because the streak wasn't built by this group," said star UConn forward Maya Moore, who had a subpar game and scored only 14 points against Stanford. "Everything we create from here on out is going to be us. It's going to be what we created, what we invested. And it's going to be extremely hard."

The answers begin on Wednesday, when the Huskies (12-1) face Villanova (7-6) at home. Tip-off is slated for 7:30 p.m.

It is difficult to remember the world wasn't always like this: When coach Geno Auriemma assumed control of UConn in 1985, the team had experienced just one winning season in its 11 years of existence. He went 12-15 that first year—and never recorded a losing season again.

Mr. Auriemma wasn't surprised by the loss, Ms. Faris said.

"He sees our mistakes every day in practice and he knows how to hide them," she said. "There just comes a point where somebody's going to figure out your weaknesses and they're going to expose you."

But the game's implications stretch beyond the Huskies' fate. UConn's streak had generated a national conversation that transcended a season, raising questions about the competitiveness of women's basketball even as the Huskies' historic quest propelled women's basketball onto the front pages of newspapers and national broadcasts. 

More than 100 media credentials were issued for the night UConn defeated Florida State for its record-setting 89th win. Ratings for Stanford-UConn game, televised on ESPN2, set a record for a regular-season women's basketball game on ESPN networks, with a 1.5 metered market overnight rating. In the game's final 15 minutes, the number soared to 3.1.

Now, the attention will likely subside. But some argued the streak's end was ultimately for the best.

"In terms of what's good for the game of women's basketball, I think it couldn't have been scripted any better," said Rebecca Lobo, who starred on UConn's first championship team in 1995 and now works as a reporter for ESPN. Not only did UConn break the record, but "when the tournament comes around, there's going to be greater interest. It's not going to be 'These teams are just competing to see who can lose to UConn.' "

Still, Kathryn Olson, the CEO of the Women's Sports Foundation, cautioned against viewing the streak and its dramatic end as a launching pad for a new era in women's basketball, noting the electric response when the women's national soccer team won the 1999 World Cup.

"It was like, 'Oh my gosh, the glass ceiling, it's broken! It's shattered! And then it falls off again,' " Ms. Olson said. "These moments are very important in women's sports, when the dialogue changes and the records are broken and the teams have great success. But one team isn't changing it for the entire sports industry for women." 

UConn's coaches and players are careful to point out that they never intended to set a record, nor was continuing the streak the point of their season. Still, players sounded chastened. 

After trailing for only 133 minutes and 58 seconds over the course of the streak, the Huskies didn't lead the Cardinal for a single second. A team renowned for its relentless focus suddenly seemed frazzled.

"It was just the way we played, not just that we lost," Ms. Moore said. "If we had played fighting and extremely competitive and working our tails off, it would have been different."

It was her worst game, Ms. Moore said, and the worst loss of her career—even surpassing her previous loss to Stanford in the 2008 national semifinals.

The loss prompted one more personal record for Ms. Moore: "It was the least-fun film session," she said. 

The Huskies began life after the streak with a marathon, if excruciating, tape session. They watched the full game, with Mr. Auriemma lingering over the worst moments. Sometimes he replayed them.

"You never want to see how you let your team down on film because film doesn't lie," Ms. Moore said. "It's terrible." 

The team finally stepped onto the court for the first practice of the post-streak era with a desire to be perfect. They left disappointed.

"That was one of those days that we wanted to go out and do everything right and we couldn't do that," said Ms. Faris. They failed to make defensive stops in scrimmages, tried to run through plays and tossed the ball away instead. "We know there's a lot of things we have to change if we want to make it all the way to the end."

Their first step on Wednesday night: avoiding the start of another streak.