BEIJING—An explosion at a rural bank office in northwestern China's Gansu province Friday injured 49 people, the state-run Xinhua news agency reported, citing the local government and witnesses.

The local government called the incident a case of "arson" in a news release, said the Xinhua report, which also cited an unnamed witness as saying the explosion happened when someone ignited a homemade gasoline bomb.

The county government reported later Friday that police had apprehended a man suspected of setting the fire, Xinhua said. The government said the man, a former bank employee who had been fired for embezzlement, allegedly ignited a bottle of gasoline and threw it into the bank as an act of revenge.

Among the injured, 19 people suffered serious burns on the face and hands while 33 suffered slight injuries, according to Wang Gui, a vice president of the local hospital, Xinhua reported.

The explosion occurred around 8:30 a.m. during an employee meeting at the bank in a heavily ethnic-Tibetan area of Gansu.

In its initial report on the incident Friday, Xinhua said the explosion had caused "dozens of deaths and injuries." A follow-up report indicated there were no deaths. It cited a witness saying he saw "more than 10 people throwing themselves out of the window" of the building's fourth-floor meeting room, while rescuers carried "many others, with charred bodies and limbs" out of the building on stretchers.

Xinhua said the street the bank sits on had been cordoned off while police and medical workers worked.

Explosions aren't uncommon in rural China, where there is easy access to fertilizer and other chemicals that can be used to fashion crude bombs—though such explosions are seldom very large.

Western China has been an area of frequent unrest by ethnic Tibetans and Uighurs who chafe at Chinese Communist Party rule. The Tibetan capital of Lhasa experienced deadly riots in 2008, as did Urumqi, the capital of China's Xinjiang region, in 2009.

Xinhua said Friday's explosion took place in the Tianzhu Tibetan Autonomous County, where it said about a third of the 210,000 county residents are ethnic Tibetans. Tianzhu sits just over 60 miles northwest of the provincial capital of Lanzhou.

A person answering the telephone at the bank said it is a rural credit cooperative located on Huagan road, one of Tianzhu's main roads. She said she couldn't provide details on the explosion because the situation still wasn't clear.

 Write to  Jason Dean at jason.dean@wsj.com 