Before setting off for my first meal at Noma in Copenhagen, I asked a few friends about their experiences there. When a restaurant makes a virtue of gathering such unusual products for consumption as reindeer tongues and fish sperm, you expect a wide spectrum of responses, and that is exactly what I got. They ranged from full swoon mode to those who warned me that at least a quarter of the dishes were virtually indigestible. While one blogger declared that his meals there had changed his life, another restaurateur likened it to a monastic cult "that speaks with a very clear voice but it's not one that I care to listen to for several hours." Two other friends nearly parted forever over irreconcilable views on a dessert made of smoked-caramel-infused bone marrow. And as for the preponderance of "natural wine," the absence of any serious Bordeaux or even a single bottle of Grand Marque Champagne on the wine list, you can imagine the outrage from veterans of other multistarred Michelin restaurants.

I knew in advance that I was going to be gripped by the experience, if for no other reason than that chef René Redzepi is a perfectionist. I also approve of the notion of letting a hundred flowers bloom, regardless of how inedible they might be. The four hours I spent in Noma's cavernous warehouse on the edge of the North Sea last week were pure theater, with the bonus that you are also part of the cast. Some might consider it quite an expensive undertaking, at around €1 per minute, but where else can you be entertained, educated and, most importantly, fed for such a fee? The seamlessness of this trio of experiences was marked by the complete blurring of the conventional role of management, staff and chefs—or, put more simply, the front and back of the house. All three (redundantly color-coded: suits for management, gray aprons for staff and brown for chefs) are equally well-informed on the composition and cooking methods of the dishes, which they take turns delivering to your table, including Mr. Redzepi himself. It builds a remarkable degree of trust, even faith, between the diner and staff. 

Nothing quite prepares you, though, for the olfactory spectrum you are subjected to—even if, like me, you have eaten New Nordic Cuisine elsewhere in Scandinavia. This is because although much is made of the natural or wild state of most of the ingredients, they aren't merely placed in front of you au naturel. The small stone container that accompanies the beautifully presented bread in its soft felt wrapping doesn't contain butter, but pork suet with crumblings of roasted solids from pig fat. The truffle-flavored sauce on reburied carrots has been slow-cooked for hours with boiled-down mushrooms and rapeseed oil. 

Although it might seem that this cuisine, so rooted in natural products from Scandinavia, is the polar opposite of Molecular (or Modernist) Cuisine, with its emulsifiers and foams, they do have a certain symmetry. They are both trying to challenge culinary conventions by pushing the envelope when it comes to ingredients and cooking methods. I know it should be irrelevant if a taste is whipped up in a laboratory or foraged in the Arctic Circle, but the fact that something emanates from a specific location and season gives it added resonance. Noma helped found a Nordic Food Lab, which has a gene bank that is collating information about the wild products in the region.

One of the 20 or so dishes I consumed over lunch included some horseradish leaves that were more intense than any horseradish sauce I have ever tasted. A member of staff explained that the gene bank had identified 160 different varieties of horseradish in Scandinavia, while Mr. Redzepi told me that the one they preferred was only edible for one month a year. It is this passion for detail and the extraordinary beauty of the presentation that bridges the gulf that could be caused by eating such out-of-the-ordinary products. The most arresting of these was a frozen landscape of pebbles with raw shrimps and strewn with wild beach plants such as sea arrowgrass, St. John's wort, Portulak and the unfortunately named scurvy-grass. It isn't just the beauty of the dish that makes it memorable; it turns out that the pebbles come from the same beach as the wild herbs. There was also a captivating oyster-and-the-ocean dish, served in a Le Creuset pot filled with seaside stones with freshly cooked seaweed underneath the oyster shell—providing accompanying beach aromas.

Unlike some Molecular Cuisine establishments that stick to rigorous and unchanging highlights for years, Noma ad-libs according to what is available. While I was being given a tour of the kitchens and the outside grills, a consignment of exquisite large scallops arrived from Trondheim in northern Norway. The person in charge of inspecting all incoming produce was only expecting these, but when shown cartons of large and restless langoustines, he spoke to Mr. Redzepi and instantly took the lot. The langoustine dish was then served less than an hour later, with the addition of intense dollops of oyster puree. Because of Noma's emphasis on what is available, the seven- or 12-course menus aren't written down and are only decided upon at the final meeting of all the staff at noon. After my meal, I asked Mr. Redzepi if this didn't make him a slave to nature. "Well, you could call it being a slave," he said, "but I prefer to call it a happy marriage, where the only time we argue is during winter, when it doesn't seem that nature is cooperating with us as much as in the summer." Even here, there is a constant effort to temper those winter arguments; there is a full-time person who specializes in pickling and preserving techniques in order to make things more interesting during the winter.

Does Noma justify its recent ranking as the top restaurant in the world? It is certainly the most influential one right now and, perhaps with the closure of Spain's elBulli this summer, the most provocative. There is something powerful about knowing that virtually everything you taste, apart from the imported wines, has its origins in the surrounding region. For me, it was the most stimulating and thought-provoking meal I have had this year. It wasn't necessarily the most sensual or pleasurable one, but that was never something it strove to achieve. The whole philosophy of Nordic cuisine stems from the effort made to extract natural products from a challenging environment and make you rethink your attitude toward food. On that basis alone, Noma fulfills its promise.

 Write to  Bruce Palling at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 