JOHANNESBURG—A stronger rand is helping to mute inflation pressures fanned by rising global food and oil prices, South Africa's Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan said Monday. 

"I think we've done a fairly good job of balancing things out on this issue," he told a meeting of economists and business executives. 

"We still want stability, less volatility and competitiveness. But the strongish rand, or less weakish rand, is helping the inflationary environment at the moment," he said, adding that it would have to be monitored for the foreseeable future. 

The finance minister also said the country needed a "growth-friendly" policy on budget deficits and spending, as the economy was too sluggish to warrant the kind of fiscal austerity seen elsewhere in the world. 

"We are not growing fast enough...not putting enough people into jobs fast enough," Mr. Gordhan said. "We require growth-friendly fiscal consolidation."

The Treasury has been criticized for its plans to run bigger budget deficits over the next few years as it increases spending to create more jobs and reduce the poverty rate.

In its budget statement last month, the Treasury predicted the shortfall for the fiscal year ending in March 2012 would reach 5.3% of gross domestic product, up from an earlier estimate of 4.6%. 

Mr. Gordhan said real growth in spending, which included the effect of inflation, had slowed to 2.7% a year from 9% a few years ago, which didn't mean that the government had abandoned prudent fiscal policy. 

Mr. Gordhan also signaled that the government wasn't going to change its policy of inflation targeting, which has come under fire from labor unions, who say the government keeps interest rates too high for the economy. "We are moving into a situation where inflation pressures need to be taken into account," he said. 

The rate of inflation is starting to edge higher in South Africa in response to rising food and oil prices, but is still less than 4%, well below the rate in most other developing economies. 

Local markets are pricing in a half percentage point interest rate rise this year, which would take the repo rate up to 6%. But many analysts believe this is unlikely given the government's concern over the pace of the economic recovery. 

The rand is down 3% since hitting a three-year peak of around 6.65 rands to the dollar at the end of last year, but it has recovered from its low of 7.35 rands in mid-February. On Friday, the rand closed at 6.89 rands. 