NEW YORK—Investors returned to the refuge of gold during violent protests in Egypt, helping the metal bounce from nearly four-month lows. 

Gold for February delivery rose $22.30, or 1.7%, to settle at $1,340.70 a troy ounce on the Comex division of the New York Mercantile Exchange. 

In addition to gold, investors were scrambling into other haven assets, including the dollar, the Swiss franc and U.S. Treasurys as they fled riskier holdings like stocks and the euro because of the mounting concerns in the Middle East. 

"Markets don't like instability in an already tense region," said  Carlos Sanchez, associate director of research with CPM Group in New York, noting concerns about emerging-market portfolios. "When you have an unstable government, it doesn't bode well for that region's equities." 

Protesters continued to rally in the streets for a fourth straight day against Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, triggering worries that the unrest will spread to other Middle Eastern nations. Yemen and Tunisia have already been rocked with protests. 

Gold is often considered a haven against political turmoil or economic downturns in part because it isn't as linked to industrial production as are other assets, such as stocks. 

"Egypt has got markets nervous," said  Sterling Smith, market analyst at Country Hedging in Minnesota. "That is naturally a good environment for gold." 

The gains in gold came during a prolonged price correction for the metal, leaving room for the outsized bounce. Through Thursday's close, gold had lost more than 7% this year as investors gained confidence in the economy, feeling less of a need for gold as a hedge against financial turmoil and European sovereign-debt woes. Those fears had sent the metal to a record intraday peak above $1,430 in December. 

A chunk of that selling came this week as a $10 million hedge fund, SHK Asset Management, liquidated gold contracts valued at more than $850 million as bets started going bad with the falling prices. 

Friday's bounce brought gold out of negative territory. It had neared a four-month low as data showed U.S. economic growth picked up speed in the last three months of 2010. The February contract's intraday low of $1,307.70 was its weakest price since Sept. 30. It finished the week near steady. 

U.S. gross domestic product rose at an inflation-adjusted annual rate of 3.2% in the fourth quarter. The increase takes total output to its highest level since the end of 2007, when the recession started. 

Despite gold's decline this month, prices are still at historically high levels, prompting miners to boost production. 

Russia's largest gold miner Polyus Gold said Thursday its 2010 full-year gold production was up 10% from the past year at 1.39 million troy ounces. 

Other precious metals traded in New York also gained Friday. Comex March silver rose 3.3%. Nymex April platinum gained 0.1%, and March palladium on the exchange added 0.4%. 

 Write to  Matt Whittaker at matt.whittaker@dowjones.com 