TOKYO—Intensifying shortages of staples such as bottled water, milk, diapers, tissues, and batteries are pinching this city of 13 million residents. Demand has soared on hoarding for some products, while supplies for others have been crimped by rolling blackouts, damaged factories, and distribution-chain woes.

Tokyo's inconveniences pale in comparison to the suffering of the northern agricultural region, where a quarter-million people remain in evacuation centers that need food and heating fuel.

Still, the lack of basic supplies is a jarring change of life for Tokyo residents, who are used to round-the-clock conveniences.

"It's becoming rare to get packaged foods like natto," a popular fermented-soybean dish, said Shota Yamada, a 22-year-old office worker. "The absence of meat and onion makes it hard to cook even a curry," he added.

"Water is not available....It's hard to get batteries for a flashlight," said Ideki Ikura, a 43-year-old taxi driver. "While I was driving my taxi around, I managed to get five bottles of mineral water, but I'm worried about what to do from now on," he said. "I don't want to give tap water to my 9-year-old son."

Some stores have taken to rationing, particularly bottled water, which has been in high demand. An AM/PM convenience store inside the Finance Ministry has set a rule that customers can buy a maximum of two half-liter water bottles at a time. At some Ito-Yokado supermarkets, workers have begun setting aside two-liter bottles during certain hours for parents with infants.

The company has ramped-up water-bottle supplies fivefold since the quake—but demand has shot up 30 times, said Yumiko Matsutani, a spokeswoman for  Seven & i Holdings Co.
SVNDY


0.39
%




, operator of 7-Eleven stores and Ito Yokado supermarkets.

Darkened refrigerators at several stores emptied out in the central district of Akasaka this week. While fresh produce was plentiful at a Maruetsu supermarket, there was no milk—aside from a "yogurt-milk" beverage and milk geared toward lactose-intolerant customers.

Milk cartons disappeared from Tokyo shelves since several factories in northern Tochigi prefecture, a major dairy supplier, suffered quake damage. Others were ordered not to ship milk if it has a higher-than-normal trace of radioactive material.

Meanwhile, paper factories in Tochigi were affected by the quake and forced to halt production of paper used in milk packaging. Problems in the paper factories have caused shortages of toilet paper and tissues, retailers say.  Japan Tobacco Inc.
2914


2.44
%




 said a shortage of filters and other supplies will force it to halt shipments of all 97 cigarette brands for the first 10 days of April. Total production for the month will be just one-quarter of normal capacity. The part-government-owned firm has more than a 50% market share in Japan.

—Ryosuke Hanada contributed to this article.

 Write to  Kenneth Maxwell at kenneth.maxwell@dowjones.com, Miho Inada at miho.inada@wsj.com and Hiroyuki Kachi at hiroyuki.kachi@wsj.com 