TOKYO—Japan's central bank refrained from pumping extra overnight funds into the banking system on Wednesday for the first time since the March 11 earthquake, a sign that the nation's immediate cash needs are stabilizing. 

Data also suggested the Bank of Japan is keeping extra yen in the currency markets, bolstering a united effort by Japan and other Group of Seven nations last week to bring down the yen and keep the nation's economy from suffering another blow. 

Japanese financial institutions scrambled for liquidity after the demand for cash from companies and households jumped following the 9.0-magnitude quake and ensuing tsunami, which caused widespread damage on Japan's northeast coast and crippled a nuclear-power facility that later leaked radiation. 

The yen surged as investors fled to investments considered safe and on the belief that Japanese investors would sell investments elsewhere and bring yen home. That increase threatened Japan's exporters, which are a major part of its economy and which become less competitive abroad when the yen rises.

Market participants watched the BOJ's money-market operations Wednesday, when transactions from Friday's yen-selling intervention settled, to see whether it left the additional yen in the market. Taking out yen to compensate for last week's sales is known as sterilizing, a move that reduces the impact of intervention on currency markets. 

To sterilize Friday's intervention, the BOJ would have drained funds from the money market on Wednesday—something it didn't do. 

The BOJ "appears to have practically entered the realm of unsterilized interventions even if it denies that," said Citigroup Global Markets Japan fixed-income strategist  Eiji Dohke. 

Japan's Ministry of Finance sets the country's foreign-exchange policy, but the independent central bank has discretion over how to manage liquidity in the domestic money market. 

The yen-selling intervention likely amounted to about ¥530 billion, or about $6.55 billion, according to BOJ data released Tuesday and market estimates of fund flows, a far smaller figure than the roughly ¥2 trillion some traders had previously estimated. 

The BOJ has flooded the banking system with a record amount of cash since the March 11 earthquake to ensure financial institutions have enough liquidity. It said its current-account balance—the funds that financial institutions in Japan keep at the central bank, which they can use for lending or other needs—increased to a record ¥41.83 trillion Wednesday, from ¥Y41.62 trillion on Tuesday. The BOJ forecast the balance will rise to ¥42.60 trillion Thursday, up sharply from ¥32.70 trillion Friday. 

BOJ policy board member Ryuzo Miyao said Wednesday that the central bank "will do its utmost to ensure stability in the settlement system and financial markets" amid high uncertainty following the earthquake, the largest ever to hit Japan. 

Given it will take a while to restore social infrastructure damaged by the disaster, "the degree of economic downside risks from the supply side is likely to be high—compared, for example, with the Hanshin Awaji earthquake 16 years ago—and it is necessary to pay careful attention to the possibility that such impact could be prolonged," Mr. Miyao told business leaders in Oita, southern Japan. 

The extra cash has moved the BOJ's quantitative easing into uncharted territory. The highest level the current-account balance had reached before this week was ¥36.36 trillion on March 31, 2004, when the BOJ was ramping up a previous quantitative easing regime to combat deflation and support a rickety banking system at the time. 

—Megumi Fujikawa and Kazuhiro Shimamura contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Arran Scott at arran.scott@dowjones.com 