ROME—Italian police arrested dozens of people suspected of links to Italy's most powerful drug-trafficking organization on Tuesday as part of a campaign to weaken the international network.

Italian prosecutors had issued arrest warrants for 41 people in Italy, Germany, Canada and Australia on suspicion of criminal association with the so-called 'ndrangheta, which Italian authorities call an organized-crime group that is based in the southern Italian region of Calabria. 

On Tuesday, Italian police arrested more than 30 suspects in Italy while police in Germany arrested six suspects on European arrest warrants issued by Italian prosecutors.

"This is an exceptional operation, because the 'ndrangheta's affairs are being hit hard overseas as well as in Italy," Italian Interior Minister Roberto Maroni said.

Italian authorities have said that in recent years, the 'ndrangheta has supplanted the Sicilian Mafia as Italy's most pervasive crime syndicate, spreading its tentacles across the globe. 

Unlike the Mafia, however, the 'ndrangheta doesn't have a highly centralized structure, making it difficult for Italian authorities to decapitate the organization.

Instead, the 'ndrangheta organizes itself in cells that are swiftly replicated across borders, prosecutors said, making the syndicate tough to stamp out.

On Tuesday, Italian police said five more suspects were sought by police in Canada or Australia, including Tony Vallelonga, the former mayor of Stirling in Western Australia, according to Italy's Interior Ministry. 

Mr. Vallelonga couldn't be located for comment.

Italian prosecutor Giuseppe Pignatone described the foreign cells as a "perfect reproduction" of the 'ndrangheta's operations in Calabria. 

Mr. Pignatone told Italian radio that the foreign cells were in steady contact with the syndicate's "mother house" in the city of Reggio Calabria, located at the tip of the Italian boot.

"They periodically come to take their orders, directives, long-term strategies, as well as give an account of what's going on," Mr. Pignatone said.

After lying in the shadows for decades, the 'ndrangheta grabbed international headlines in 2007 when an Italian restaurant in Duisburg, Germany, was sprayed with gunfire. Six Italian men died in the assault, which Italian police described as a reprisal for a clan feud. 

The slayings prompted Italian authorities to intensify their focus on the 'ndrangeta, leading to the arrest of 300 people with alleged 'ndrangheta links in July 2010, including alleged bosses in Calabria and Lombardy, Italy's center of finance and industry.

—Nathania Zevi contributed to this article.

 Write to  Stacy Meichtry at stacy.meichtry@wsj.com 