SYDNEY—Australia's government will likely stick with plans for a quick return to surplus in the annual budget this week largely through a mixture of higher revenues from mining exports and spending cuts, even as parts of the economy suffer under the weight of natural disasters, a soaring currency and rising prices.

Having largely avoided the global financial crisis, Australia is being torn between a red hot mining boom and a surging currency that is hammering the manufacturing, retail and tourism industries, creating what the government describes as a "patchwork" economy.





"The rivers of gold are in full flood, thanks to fast growth in China and India, our national income is climbing fast," said  Chris Richardson, a partner at Deloitte Access Economics.

The budget due on May 10 will be the biggest test Prime Minister Julia Gillard has faced since she scraped into office last year with the backing of independent lawmakers. Ms. Gillard's support has plunged in polls since reversing a key election pledge to not introduce a carbon tax and at the same time looking at spending cuts to balance the budget.

Adding to its problems, massive flooding in Queensland this year and weaker corporate tax returns have hurt revenue. Economists expect the deficit for the fiscal year ending June 30 will be close to 50 billion Australian dollars (US$53.47 billion) instead of A$41.5 billion projected in the December.

To be sure, Australia's economy remains the envy of the developed world, with a return to surplus expected around the middle of next year and net debt projected to peak below 6% of output. Treasurer Wayne Swan has said the budget will include measures to create more jobs, with the unemployment rate expected to hit 4.5% in 2013, compared with 9% in the U.S. That demand for labor, coupled with a projected A$380 billion in capital works in coming years in the resources sector, will add pressure to inflation as the country suffers a chronic infrastructure shortage.



The Reserve Bank of Australia, the nation's central bank, warns core inflation could rise beyond its 2% to 3% target band and that more interest rate increases will be needed. Tackling inflation is seen as vital for Mr. Swan, as higher interest rates will only fuel the currency and irk voters further.

Since trading at parity against the U.S. dollar in October for the first time since floating in 1983, the Australian dollar has gone from strength to strength, hitting a high of US$1.1013 in April. And factory owners are feeling the pain.

"It's killing us," said Robert Brodie Hall, 67 years old, the owner and manager of family-run Leather life, a Western Australia-based company established 30 years ago and a maker of the iconic Ugg boot made from sheepskin. The company has seen U.S. revenue plummet to 10% of its income from 50% before 2008, roughly mirroring the recovery of the Australian dollar from its lows after the financial crisis. 

"We no longer have a viable business in America," said Mr. Brodie Hall.

It's also a problem acknowledged by the government. "Tourism operators and manufacturers are feeling the pain," said Mr. Swan in his weekly economic note released Sunday. 

"Many punters simply want to know how to get a piece of the so called terms-of-trade bonanza," said  Stephen Walters, a Sydney-based economist with  J.P. Morgan Chase & Co.
JPM


0.03
%






 Write to  Enda Curran at enda.curran@dowjones.com 