What Dante called the dark wood of middle age is the subject of short-story collections by two eminent—and middle-aged—writers, Julian Barnes and Roddy Doyle. True to the authors' style, Mr. Barnes, perhaps best-known for the 1984 novel "Flaubert's Parrot," gives us a muted and measured portrait of the no-longer-young stage of life in "Pulse" (Knopf, 227 pages, $25), while the rougher-edged Mr. Doyle—his "Paddy Clarke Ha Ha Ha" won the 1993 Booker Prize—takes a more rumpled view in "Bullfighting" (Viking, 214 pages, $25.95).

Mr. Doyle, who made his name by impersonating the dialect of young, working-class Dubliners in his novels, here gives us the voices of Dublin men in their 40s whose bodies are rudely alerting them to their mortality. In the 13 stories, we encounter one man who has a kidney stone, another who finds blood in his stool, and another who—to his wife's disgust—has hair growing on his ears. In "The Slave," the process of "death becoming something real" is introduced when a father of three finds a dead rat in his kitchen: "What I used to take for granted, I can't take for granted anymore. I used to be able to walk across the floor without giving it a moment's thought. And now I can't."

In "The Joke" and "The Dog" marriages are casualties of the transition to middle age, though the men are at a loss to explain how they've grown apart from their wives. "Nothing had happened," one gropingly reflects. "It had just happened." Mr. Doyle often makes a fetish of this sort of masculine inexpressiveness, but in longer stories like "The Photograph" and "Bullfighting" he ably conveys his characters' hearty love of life along with their anxieties about its decline.

It may be an indication of national temperament that the Englishmen in Mr. Barnes's collection deal with their midlife crises more timorously, by becoming servants to cautious routines. One man turns "obsessive about [his] exercise program"; another, the fussbudget bachelor in "Trespass," drives a would-be girlfriend crazy by punctiliously noting their nature walks in a logbook. These repressed men are frequently stymied by instances of what one of them describes as "female illogicality." In "Gardeners' World," a married couple's deep differences are manifested in a dispute over whether a blackberry bush is attractive or just an ugly bramble.

Mr. Barnes keeps his characters' tensions buried so far below the surface that they often hardly register, giving the stories an almost sleepy quality. But he redeems himself in "Pulse" with the beautiful title story, which juxtaposes the protagonist's mean-spirited divorce with the tender heartbreak of his mother's death from a neurological disease. Here the midlife fear of loneliness and death is made touchingly real, and we comprehend why the main character is so devoted to order and routine: "You followed the logic, and that seemed to hold the panic at bay."

The women in Danzy Senna's story collection "You Are Free" (Riverhead, 219 pages, $15) haven't hit middle age yet—they're in their 30s—but they are also undergoing profound changes: either taking on the all-consuming responsibility of having children or avoiding such commitments and risking the loneliness that such a decision may entail. Ms. Senna draws a hard line between single women and those who have become wives and sleepless mothers of infants. "The Care of the Self" describes a new mother's sense of separation from her previous life: "Aging mothers," she thinks, are "the most beautiful creatures on the planet. The young, childless women, with taut skin and flat stomachs and anticipatory smiles, were not ugly to her, just meaningless, their beauty like grape juice to wine."

Ms. Senna is the author of "Caucasia" (1998), a novel about the ambiguity of racial identity. In "You Are Free" she is meticulous about describing the mixed heritage of each character, but here it's not always clear why. "Admission" is an excellent story about a black family whose son is hounded by a prestigious private school desperate to enroll him and diversify its student body. But issues of race are left undeveloped in other stories; they only confuse what are otherwise perceptive studies of the uneasy transition to motherhood.