LONDON—Global food prices hovered near record highs in April as a rise in cereals prices was offset by declines in sugar and rice, and the United Nations' food body warned weather problems in the world's top grain exporters could keep prices high next year as well. 

The Food and Agriculture Organization's food-price index, which tracks a basket of commodity prices, averaged 232 points last month, little changed from March but still 36% higher than the same time the year before. The index hit 236 points in February, the record high in real and nominal terms since the FAO started monitoring prices in 1990.

Grain prices climbed sharply in April, with the FAO's cereal-price index rising 5.5%, led by an 11% gain in the price of corn and a 4% increase in wheat. Prices are now 71% higher than the same time last year after a series of weather problems slashed global output and sent markets soaring. 

However, while grain prices remain at historically high levels, a 7% decline in the FAO's sugar index and a 2.4% fall in the price of dairy helped to keep the overall index stable. 

Large exports of rice also helped to keep prices for the world's most widely consumed grain subdued, the FAO said. 

Secretary of the FAO's Intergovernmental Group on Grains,  Abdolreza Abbassian, said dryness and delays to plantings in Europe and the U.S. could cause more production problems in the 2011-12 crop year. And with world cereals stocks forecast to fall to their lowest level since the food crisis of 2008 this year, markets will be vulnerable to any supply shocks. 

"Early indications are again good for cereals but with a big qualifier that our inventories are run down so our total supply situation is very exposed to what the weather will bring," he said. "The food index shows the uncertainty of what's ahead." 

Food-price inflation has climbed to the top of the international political agenda after hitting successive record highs this year. The World Bank estimates 44 million people may have been pushed into poverty by the price increases, and aid agencies warn high food costs threaten millions more. 

"High and volatile food prices continue to represent a major risk for poor people who spend up to 80% of their weekly income on food," said  Luca Chinotti, food policy adviser for Oxfam. 

Yet while forecasters expect an expansion in world production of many crops next season as farmers seek to cash in on high prices, especially in cereals, ongoing weather problems in the U.S. and Europe now threaten to cut production in the world's two biggest grain exporters next season. 

"As we go into May with the weather situation as it is, the longer is takes to make up for the delay [in plantings] the less of the expectation we will get the crop that we need," Mr. Abbassian said. 

Adding to potential supply problems are pressures from a weak dollar and high oil prices. A slump in the dollar makes U.S. corn more attractive to international buyers—as shown by this week's confirmation by China's Sinograin that it bought one million tons of U.S. corn in March, the sixth-largest single purchase ever—while high oil prices make corn more attractive as a biofuel. 

Mr. Abbassian said with U.S corn stocks already critically tight, any uptick in demand could pose a critical threat to the world market. 

This week, the U.S. took a far more lenient approach than initially expected to phasing out ethanol blending subsidies. Credits will be gradually reduced over the next two years, with subsidies after 2013 linked to the movement of oil prices. 

"With the old [corn] crop being as tight as it is, it really raises the question of do we have enough to get through to the next harvest," Mr. Abbassian said. "If we don't have a slowdown in demand we may have enough to last the summer." 

"Corn is going to play a critical factor in determining what the trend will be for the food crops in general," he said. 

 Write to  Caroline Henshaw at caroline.henshaw@dowjones.com 