Saudi police fired live ammunition into the air Thursday to disperse at least 200 Shiite protesters in the oil-rich Eastern province, the most significant escalation of unrest in the kingdom since popular demands for change began to sweep through the region late last year. 

Saudi activists have called for a "day of rage" on Friday, raising new concerns about stability in Saudi Arabia, the U.S.'s most important Arab ally and the world's largest oil producer. 

Three people were injured in the protest by activists in Qatif, in the oil-rich Eastern Province, calling for political reforms and the release of prisoners held without trial. 

Police fired live ammunition above protesters, after some attacked a policeman, said Interior Ministry spokesperson Maj. Gen. Mansour al-Turki. He said police didn't fire at protesters.

He said the policeman was injured, and two people were injured by gunshots. He said the police were investigating to find out the source of the gunshots. 

The Saudi regime has taken some steps to ease growing pressure from protests around the region, including neighboring Bahrain. 

Saudi King Abdullah, who is believed to be 87 years old, returned to the kingdom in late February after a three-month absence for medical treatment and introduced a number of social and economic overhauls. The package, estimated to cost around 135 billion Saudi riyals ($36 billion), included housing support and funding to offset inflation and support for students. 

The king also ordered permanent state jobs for Saudis on temporary labor contracts. He met with Sunni and Shiite tribal leaders this week, but no political reforms have been announced. 

White House spokesman Jay Carney said the U.S. was in consultations with oil-producing states, including Saudi Arabia, about the Mideast unrest and "the effect on oil prices."

"We remain confident that the global system has the capacity to deal with a major disruption," Mr. Carney said. Saudi Arabia has helped stabilize world energy markets by raising its crude production levels to make up for Libya's lost supply.

Relations between the U.S. and Saudi Arabia have been put to the test by the unrest sweeping the region. The Saudis privately protested President Barack Obama's decision to back Egyptian protesters calling for Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak's immediate ouster. Saudi Arabia had privately urged Mr. Obama to offer Mr. Mubarak a more graceful exit, officials said.

Tensions flared again last week when the State Department renewed its support for the rights of peaceful demonstrators to gather in Saudi Arabia, prompting private complaints from Riyadh to Washington that the U.S. was encouraging the opposition instead of rallying around a key Arab ally.

Saudi Arabia said protests, marches and sit-ins are banned and don't conform with Islamic laws. 

The White House said Thursday it would continue to voice support for the rights of peaceful protesters. 

"What we have said to the Saudis and to all the people of the region is that we're going to support a set of universal values in any country in the region, and that includes the right to peaceful assembly, to peaceful protest," said Ben Rhodes, deputy White House National Security Adviser.

Eastern province is home to both the kingdom's Shiite minority and its enormous oil reserves. Saudi Shiites have complained of job discrimination; the Saudi government denies discrimination and says it treats all citizens equally.

The Saudi population is richer than those in other countries affected by unrest and the government has deeper pockets to alleviate public anger. Calls for change have so far stopped short of attacks on the royal family. 

Analysts said it remains to be seen if the Saudi protests gather momentum. "It is possible that the latest protests could be a trigger to a revolution, but no one can be certain," said Tawfiq Alsaif, a Shiite political analyst based in Qatif.

 Write to  Summer Said at summer.said@dowjones.com 