Greek Prime Minister George Papandreou arrived in January 2010 at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, pledging that his indebted country would pay its bills and do what it must to avoid a bailout.

What has happened since then would have surprised most of his audience: Greece took a €110 billion ($150 billion) rescue package from other euro-zone governments and the International Monetary Fund. Ireland sought aid, too, to the tune of €67.5 billion. The European Union sought to bolster confidence by assembling a bailout fund with a headline figure of €750 billion.



Even so, the crisis hasn't been contained. Many financial-market analysts think Portugal, with its high debts and slow growth, will be next in line for a bailout package. Then there is Spain, whose economy is almost twice the size of Greece, Ireland and Portugal combined.

Lorenzo Bernaldo de Quirós, of Freemarket International Consulting in Madrid, describes the mood in the financial circles of Spain's capital as being one of "true terror." 

That's not because Spain's government debt is of Grecian proportions. According to the European Commission, Madrid's debt is equivalent to around 64% of economic output, well below the euro-zone average of 84%. This is forecast to rise to just 73% by the end of 2012.

But there are known unknowns that disturb investors. One is the size of the hole in Spanish savings banks that will have to be filled by government borrowing. Analysts at Barclays Capital estimate that Spanish banks need €46 billion to €90 billion in new capital—between 4.5% to 9% of Spain's economic output—and other estimates suggest even more will be required. Government officials have said €30 billion should do it.



Furthermore, Spain's central government is directly responsible for only about one-third of public spending. About the rest, which includes spending by autonomous regional governments and municipalities, there is insufficient transparency, says Mr. Bernaldo de Quirós.

Yet there is no consensus on whether Spain will need a bailout. Many economists concur with an analysis from Goldman Sachs last week that says Spain may face a liquidity crisis—a shortage of short-term funding that an international package should suffice to fill—but not a crisis of solvency, a fundamental inability to pay its way. Even under a pessimistic scenario, wrote Goldman analyst Dirk Schumacher, Spain's debt can be stabilized at about 90% of economic output.

But, says Daniel Gros, director of the Centre for European Policy Studies in Brussels, a liquidity problem that isn't tackled properly can quickly become a solvency problem.

One frequent criticism of the EU's bailout facility is that it can't intervene quickly enough to stem panic and prevent a solvency crisis from developing. 

Faced with this criticism and others, the euro zone has since the start of this year been awash in ideas to bolster the rescue fund's functioning and capacity. Proposals include earlier intervention that could nip an incipient crisis in the bud, lower interest rates for borrowers, and the possible financing of government bond purchases.

The crisis has also changed the EU in other ways unforeseen a year ago. For the first time, says Charles Grant of the Centre for European Reform in London, the EU has a single nation in the driving seat: Germany. Paris has taken a back seat following years of Franco-German leadership. Also, the European Commission, the EU's Brussels-based executive arm, has been weakened. 

That has imposed German thinking on the euro zone, Mr. Grant says. The Continent's weaker economies are being told that the price for aid, and the only way to escape their economic troubles, is to follow the German example of fiscal discipline and structural reform.

It may be a bitter pill. A future of more austerity and tough structural reforms won't be popular in Europe's peripheral nations. There are already recriminations in Ireland over the tough terms for its bailout, while voters in Germany and other creditor countries rail at having to support their profligate or careless neighbors. 

One year after Mr. Papandreou's ultimately futile campaign to stave off a bailout, the spotlight has moved on from Greece. But perhaps not forever.

Many analysts argue that, with a ratio of debt to economic output expected to exceed 150% by the year's end, Athens will be unable to service its debts. If holders of Greek bonds are forced to take losses in a debt restructuring, says Mr. Gros, the risk is that a second round of market nervousness could strike the euro zone. Whether that happens or not, he says, "is more psychology than hard economics."

 Write to  Stephen Fidler at stephen.fidler@wsj.com 