HONG KONG—Shenyang Yuanda Aluminium Industry Engineering Co. is planning to seek listing approval from the Hong Kong stock exchange's listing committee April 7 for its planned US$400 million-US$500 million Hong Kong initial public offering, a person familiar with the situation said Monday. 

The listing plan of the Chinese company comes as Tokyo-listed  SBI Holdings Inc.
8473


-0.35
%




 is seeking to raise up to US$328 million in an IPO before listing in Hong Kong on April 14, according to a term sheet seen by The Wall Street Journal on Monday, in the first listing by a Japanese company in Hong Kong. 

Yuanda Aluminium, established in 1993, makes curtain walls, a type of outer covering for buildings,as well as metal roofs, shading systems and glass skylights. 

The company, which has a total annual production capability of 12 million square meters, built the membrane structure for China's National Stadium, also known as the Bird's Nest, and the National Olympic Swimming Center in Beijing, and has international branches in more than a dozen countries. 

  J.P. Morgan Chase & Co.
JPM


-0.04
%




 and  Deutsche Bank AG are the joint bookrunners for Yuanda Aluminium IPO. 

Meanwhile,  SBI Holdings
8473


-0.35
%




 plans to sell 17.5 million shares in the form of Hong Kong depositary receipts, or HDRs, at a maximum price of 145.52 Hong Kong dollars each, (US$18.66) the term sheet said. 

The final price of the HDRs will be equivalent to a 4%-7% discount to the closing price of the company's Tokyo-listed shares on April 6, 7 or 8, a person familiar with the situation said Monday. 

The Tokyo-based financial-to-property conglomerate is set to be the only Japanese company to be listed in Hong Kong, and will be only the second company after Brazil's  Vale SA to issue HDRs. But unlike Vale, which in December listed by introduction, SBI will raise funds from its listing. HDRs, structured like American Depositary Receipts, allow foreign firms to list in the city from jurisdictions that prohibit share issues or the maintenance of share register overseas. 

CCB International (Holdings) Ltd. and Daiwa Securities Capital Markets Co. are joint bookrunners, the term sheet said. 

SBI Holdings and Dow Jones & Co. operate a joint venture, Wall Street Journal Japan KK, which publishes the Japanese-language version of the online edition of The Wall Street Journal. Dow Jones publishes The Wall Street Journal and its international and online editions. 

 Write to  Prudence Ho at prudence.ho@dowjones.com 