The Obama administration next week will embark on a fresh pitch for the health-care overhaul, seeking to boost public support for the law on its one-year anniversary.

But lawmakers and some policy experts say the next phase of the overhaul will be more difficult to sell. Between now and the 2012 presidential election, few consumer-oriented changes kick in. That gives the administration few tools to break a deadlock in public opinion over President Barack Obama's top domestic achievement, which he signed March 23, 2010.

A multipronged assault led by Republicans could alter the law's contours. By next year, the Supreme Court is expected to decide the constitutionality of the law's requirement that most Americans carry insurance or pay a fee. 

Republicans in Congress are trying to choke off funding to implement the law, though it appears increasingly unlikely that they will be able to do so in a significant way.

Next week, nearly a half dozen cabinet secretaries will fan out across the country to promote the law's early benefits: tax credits that offset the cost of insurance for small businesses, rebate checks for seniors with high prescription costs that fall into a drug insurance coverage gap and rules that let parents keep their children on their insurance plan until their 26th birthdays. 

Democrats intentionally scheduled these changes to go into effect in the early months after enactment, hoping they would help win over a skeptical public. Polling data suggest that while the early steps might have chipped away at some negative views of the law, they haven't measurably boosted its popularity.

According to a Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll from January, 39% of respondents described the law as a good idea, while another 39% described it as a bad idea. By comparison, the same poll last March showed 36% thought it was a good idea and 48% said it was a bad one.

"For a lot of people, the changes aren't personal yet," Kathleen Sebelius, secretary of health and human services, said in an interview. "We're not going to see a dramatic change in those rates until we see the new market," she said. Under the law, those changes will occur in 2014, when consumers get tax credits and new exchanges to shop for health-insurance policies.

The next phase of the law will focus on arcane policy changes designed to gradually lower the cost of health care. Among the changes are new rules that encourage health-care providers treating Medicare patients to collaborate by allowing them to pocket some of the cost savings from the increased efficiency.

"We do a pretty bad job, frankly, when people are in the hospital of making sure they don't get an infection while they are there that keeps them there longer, or that actually causes a more serious illness or death," Ms. Sebelius said. "We have delivery systems where doctors get paid for the number of tests they do, not necessarily whether or not that test is going to add to someone's health results."

To help counter Republican criticisms of the law, the Obama administration is trying to signal that states will get more flexibility to carry out the law's mandates. Last month, Mr. Obama endorsed a bipartisan Senate proposal that would move up by three years a piece of the law that allows states to design an alternate health-insurance expansion so long as it achieves the same goals as the federal law. 

But Ms. Sebelius is showing no signs she will bend the rules when it comes to states' biggest concerns, such as their ability to reduce enrollment in Medicaid, the state-federal health care program for the poor. The administration hopes that by telling Americans that Republicans want to take away the law's new benefits, and go back to the old system, they will win over voters in 2012.

The Republican-led House passed a bill to repeal the entire health law earlier this year, though that measure died in the Democratic-led Senate. Now Republicans hope that the court challenges, along with a string of unintended consequences from the law, will keep voters cool on the overhaul.

"The contents of the health care bill are even worse than anyone expected," Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell said Thursday.

 Write to  Janet Adamy at janet.adamy@wsj.com 