The militant political group Hezbollah and its allies forced the collapse of Lebanon's government while its prime minister sat in the White House, dealing a blow to Washington in its battle with Iran and Syria for influence in the Mideast.

Eleven ministers from Hezbollah and their allies pulled out of the 30-member coalition cabinet Wednesday after Prime Minister Saad Hariri refused to discredit a United Nations-backed court investigating the 2005 assassination of his father, former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri.

The Hariri tribunal is expected as soon as next week to indict two to five members of Hezbollah for roles in the assassination, according to officials briefed on the court's work.

Mr. Hariri, in the interest of national unity, has said he won't push for the arrest or prosecution of any Hezbollah members indicted. But he refused to back away from the tribunal before it releases indictments.

The disagreement had crippled Lebanon's government for months and prompted an effort by Syria and Saudi Arabia to broker a deal. Those talks collapsed Tuesday night, opposition members said.

When Syrian President Basher Assad was informed that the talks had failed he asked his allies in Beirut to demand an emergency cabinet meeting or resign, according to Lebanon's main daily newspaper, An Nahar.

The announcement of the resignations coincided with Prime Minister Hariri's meeting with President Barack Obama in Washington. An opposition minister said they wanted Mr. Hariri to "meet Obama as the former prime minister of Lebanon."

Successive U.S. governments have supported Mr. Hariri and his father in a bid to build a secular Western-leaning government on Israel's northern border. The Obama administration had viewed the White House meeting as an important symbol of support for the Lebanese leader.

At the meeting, Mr. Obama stressed the importance of the Hariri tribunal's work as a way of helping to end "the era of political assassinations with impunity in Lebanon," the White House said. The White House said it was coordinating with Saudi Arabia and France about events in Beirut. 

Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, in Doha, Qatar, said Hezbollah was clearly trying to prevent the U.N. court from delivering justice. 

Qatar's foreign minister, Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim Al Thani, said his government was ready to work with Riyadh to try to mediate a compromise between Lebanese factions. Doha performed a similar mediating role in 2008 that was credited with ending a military conflict between Hezbollah and Mr. Hariri's forces.

"We have to think of how to solve this crisis peacefully through peaceful dialogue," Mr. Al-Thani said alongside Mrs. Clinton.



The new developments underscore the re-emergence of Syria as a formidable power broker in Lebanon and its crucial role—along with Iran—in steering Hezbollah, a political and militant party on the U.S. State Department's list of terrorist groups.

"On big regional and strategic matters Iran has the first word but in Lebanon's internal affairs, Syria calls the shots," said Okab Sakr, a parliamentarian for Mr. Hariri's bloc.

In the short term, it is unlikely that Hezbollah, will resort to violence, as it did in 2008, in a dispute over security and the use of the movement's telecom network, analysts say. 

Hezbollah has sought instead to establish a legitimate political presence. Hezbollah's ministers on Wednesday stressed that withdrawing from the government was within their democratic rights.

Mr. Hariri's office said he was cutting his visit to Washington short and heading home, where he would meet with President Michel Suleiman to discuss the next steps.

The establishment of a new Lebanese government could take months, during which time Mr. Hariri will remain the caretaker prime minister and his cabinet will function as an interim government. However, its functions, including major state decisions, will be impaired.

The release of indictments by the tribunal, if it comes in the coming weeks as expected, will make it more difficult for political blocs to come to a consensus.

"Forming a new government in the current situation is virtually impossible," said  Paul Salem, the director of the Middle East Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.

Hezbollah's chief, Hassan Nasrallah, accuses the tribunal of being politically motivated and influenced by the U.S. and Israel. He has denied the allegations and said he would "cut the hand" of anyone who attempts to arrest a members of his movement. 

In Lebanon, where much of the population is armed and political mistrust and hatred run deep, the government's collapse heightened the risk of street clashes. The streets of Beirut, however, were quiet after the announcement. 

—Nada Raad in Beirut contributed to this article.

 Write to  Farnaz Fassihi at farnaz.fassihi@wsj.com and Jay Solomon at jay.solomon@wsj.com 