NEW DELHI – Robust manufacturing activity drove a sharp rise in India's industrial output in March, adding to expectations that the central bank will tighten monetary policy further to control inflation. 

Factory output rose 7.3% in March from a year earlier, a much bigger increase than February's 3.65% rise, government data showed Thursday. 

The reading was nearly double the median estimate of a 3.80% rise in a poll of 16 economists. 

The strong industrial output print shows Asia's third-largest economy has held up strongly even as the Reserve Bank of India has aggressively tightened policy over the past year. It also could reinforce expectations that the RBI will raise interest rates further as it seeks to cool price pressures. 

Finance Minister Pranab Mukherjee said the sharp rise in output signaled the beginning of a sustained upturn in industrial activity. 

"Some improvement has taken place, but I expected a little more," Mr. Mukherjee told reporters. 

Indian government bonds came off their early highs as expectations of more rate hikes grew. The 7.80% bond due in 2021 fell to 96.85 rupees ($2.17), from 97 rupees before the data. 

Economists said a comparison with a relatively high level of production in the year-earlier period is also masking the true level of industrial activity. Indeed, sequential data showed a 17% rise in industrial output from February. 

Manufacturing output, which has an 80% weight in the industrial production index, rose 7.9% in March from a year earlier, after a 3.6% rise in February. 

However, some economists say industrial production growth could ease as credit becomes more expensive. The RBI quickened its tightening pace May 3, raising the lending rate by a larger-than-expected 0.50 percentage point after eight increases of 0.25 percentage point since March 2010. 

Jay Shankar, chief economist at Religare Capital Markets, said the central bank may increase its key lending rate by 0.25 percentage point at next month's policy review, though a 0.50 percentage point move can't be ruled out if the April inflation data, due Monday, throws up any "nasty" surprises. 

Inflation was at 8.98% in March, far above the RBI's 8% forecast. High global commodity prices, especially of crude oil, could further stoke domestic price pressures. 

Chief Economic Advisor Kaushik Basu said he expects April inflation at 8.5%-8.6%, but stopped short of projecting industrial output growth due to the volatility in the data. 

However, there's little evidence that pricing pressures eased in the past month, with data released separately by the government earlier Thursday showing that headline inflation for food and non-food articles for the week ended April 30 rose 0.1% from the previous week. 

Raging inflationary pressures have been a common problem plaguing emerging economies such as India and add to the risk of the South Asian economy missing its full-year growth estimates. 

"As inflation increases it will compel emerging markets to tighten monetary policy. That will have an impact on growth and investment," federal Commerce Secretary Rahul Khullar said. He expects that India's exports may touch $275 billion in the fiscal year that began on April 1, lower than the $300 billion estimated by Commerce and Industry Minister Anand Sharma. 

April merchandise exports grew 34.5% from a year earlier to $23.9 billion, the pace slowing from 43.8% growth in March. 

—Mukesh Jagota and Prasanta Sahu in New Delhi contributed to this article.

