LONDON—European Central Bank President  Jean-Claude Trichet came home from Friday's summit of euro-zone leaders in Brussels effectively empty-handed, as the leaders again refused to relieve his institution of the burden of keeping struggling banks and member states afloat. 

Mr. Trichet had gone into a meeting that was billed as a halfway house to a more important summit on March 24-25 with two aims. 

The first was a thorough reform of the way the euro zone is governed in the long term. The second was a major enhancement of the European Financial Stability Facility, the vehicle through which euro-zone members help other member states in financial trouble. He returned with virtually nothing to show on either front. 

Analysts have argued that, with inflation pressures starting to emerge in the healthier "core" economies of the euro zone, the ECB is likely to take a harder line on interest rates and on the nonstandard liquidity measures if euro-zone governments continue to shirk their share of the "heavy lifting" in getting the region out of its debt problems. 

Mr. Trichet hinted heavily at his regular press conference this month that the bank may raise official interest rates next month, for the first time since the 2008 financial crisis. 

Emerging from a fractious and inconclusive meeting, the central-bank chief damned its results with faint praise, saying only that the outcome "goes in the right direction." 

As expected, EU leaders agreed to increase the effective lending capacity of the EFSF to the €500 billion originally envisaged last year, but refused to allow it the "maximum flexibility" that the ECB had called for. 

Trichet had hoped that the EFSF would take off its hands some of the €77.5 billion in government bonds that it has bought over the last 10 months to stop the debt markets of Greece, Ireland and Portugal seizing up. 

At the summit, the ECB chief had also pleaded with governments to allow the EFSF to buy bonds on the open market, effectively removing the need for the ECB to do so itself. The region's richer countries, led by Germany, refused, fearing that this would lead to open-ended subsidies to less disciplined members. 

A rare concession offered by the leaders was that the EFSF could buy bonds directly from countries, but only once they had accepted a conditional package for external aid, and again only if the financial stability of the whole euro zone were threatened. 

There was little in the official declaration after the meeting to change analysts' view that the EFSF is, at best, a stopgap measure. 

Harvard University Professor  Niall Ferguson, in a recent interview, compared it to "a giant Ponzi scheme" which puts the burden of supporting weaker states on an ever-shrinking number of healthy ones. 

The concession offers no help to Portugal as it tries to soldier on without the EFSF's help. Portugal announced extra measures to reduce its budget deficit Friday, in the tacit hope of securing help without onerous new conditions. But, having helped to finance the Greek and Irish rescue deals last year, the country is still seen as likely to become a recipient of aid later this year. 

The tweak to the EFSF's rules may, however, help Greece, which has said it wants to return to the debt markets this year, despite having a rescue deal which in theory shelters it from the markets for another two years. The leaders agreed to shave one percentage point off the cost of the loans made to Greece under its rescue deal, and to extend the maturity of the loans under that deal to seven years. Greece's creditors—not least the ECB, which holds tens of billions of euros of Greek government debt—have a major vested interest in keeping Greece afloat and avoiding a default. 

But if Mr. Trichet got encouragement on the Greek front at the summit, he will have been dismayed at the bad-tempered standoff between the new Irish government and its creditors. 

The ECB and its national-member central banks had over €136 billion in loans outstanding to Irish banks at the end of January, plus billions more in emergency lending assistance, not to mention its growing portfolio of Irish government bonds. 

The new Irish Prime Minister  Enda Kenny has vowed to reduce the interest burden on the country's rescue package, and some fear he may resort to the threat of default to wring concessions out of Germany and France, the country's largest creditors after the U.K. 

 Write to  Geoffrey T. Smith at geoffrey.smith@dowjones.com 