With attendance figures exceeding 100,000, Baselworld rightly claims to be the planet's largest watch fair. Held in the spring, this high-point in the Swiss watch industry's calendar showcases collections for the following season.

Read the complete  Watches and Jewelry report.  

Judging by the sneak previews, oversized and all-black watches, gem encrustation and bling continue as dominant trends in, respectively: The men's market, the high-end sector, and so-called 'Chav-land'. But ultra-thin models, the ultimate in discretion, continue to appear. Perhaps classicism is making a comeback? If the following half-dozen are any indication of what is on offer in 2011- 2012, variety certainly will not be in short supply.

When the initials of founder  Louis-Ulysse Chopard forms part of a Chopard wristwatch's model name, it will be powered by a superb movement produced entirely in-house. For the L.U.C XP Tonneau, the movement is the ultra-slim, self-winding and chronometer-certified L.U.C. Calibre 3.97, which is visible through the watch's sapphire glass case back. 

A mere 3.3mm thick, it will run for over 65 hours when fully-wound. 

Offered in 18 carat rose or white gold, the L.U.C. XP Tonneau shows hours, minutes, seconds and date. The dial indicates three, six, nine and 12 o'clock with Arabic numerals, while slim indices mark the hours in between. It is fitted with a hand-sewn alligator leather strap.

If one of the perennial debates amongst watch lovers is analogue versus digital, why not offer a détente? De Grisogono's daring Meccanico dG does just that: Its dial includes analogue in the upper half, with hands pointing to hour markers, while the lower half shows the time with digits. Two-watches-in-one also means the user can set one for a second time zone.

It's not just any digital display either. De Grisogono devised a mechanical method of creating each number, employing a complex ballet of 23 cams, gears and a synchronization device. A prize winner at the 2009 Geneva International Grand Prix, the 2011 version is an exclusive new edition in a black titanium case, accented by a matte black alligator leather strap. 



Rare are the occasions when watchmakers downsize their wares, but Glycine has done just that for the Lagunare Automatic L1000. This diving watch has been available for 10 years in a 46mm case. 

By reducing it to 44mm, Glycine has broadened its appeal. You may think that 2mm is a tiny amount about which to be concerned, but it can mean the difference between comfort and discomfort on any wrist smaller than that of a body builder.

It remains blessedly purposeful, wholly functional and unmistakably butch, in spite of its reduced dimensions. The Lagunare is available with a choice of dial colors. Price is anticipated to be under £1500.

Heralding a new family of watches, Omega's Ladymatic addresses a significant change in the marketplace: Women now buy watches for reasons other than as jewelry. As Omega's president,  Stephen Urqhuart, notes, women "are increasingly more interested in the technical side of watches … a watch like this is only a ladies' watch … it can never be worn by a man. It's not like a scaled-down version of a man's watch."

Women no longer want to wear watches the size of a small fingernail. The Ladymatic measures 34mm – what would once have been perfectly acceptable as a men's mid-size model. Most important of all, Omega has a created a new automatic movement for the Ladymatic. And only for the Ladymatic.



Zenith, thanks to a change in management, is on a roll and destined to be one of the hottest brands. It is still decidedly high-end and aimed at luxury buyers. But, with a price tag of £4100, its watches are not heart-stoppingly nor ludicrously expensive like so many of its rivals' offerings. 

Part of the classically-styled Captain line-up is the exquisite 40mm diameter Grand Date Moonphase, an automatic wrist watch with 50-hour power reserve. It is available with a silver "Clou de Paris" guilloché dial, in a steel or 18-carat rose gold case. It displays minutes and seconds, an easy-to-read 'big date' indication as well as moon-phase. Its sibling models offer power reserve display or dual time-zones.

As iconic as a watch can be, Hermès' witty 'H-our' has exploited the brand's initial to great effect.  Philippe Mouquet's H-shaped case has been revised for its 15th birthday. Its numerals are presented in a more legible, graphic style, while the jewelry versions use diamond hour-markers instead of hour numerals. Hermès has addressed the vexing issue of color co-ordination by allowing the wearer to change the straps with a minimum of fuss. The straps will be available in sets of two, including traditional alligator and calfskin and a range of colored silk straps. Perhaps the biggest news is that, for the very first time, a large men's model is available.