No one would accuse the executive given the task of salvaging Bank of America Corp.'s troubled mortgages of being a smooth operator.

During his first public appearance after being named to the job in February,  Terry Laughlin mispronounced the name of one executive and was blamed for not giving a customary introduction to one of the most powerful women on Wall Street, wealth-management head  Sallie Krawcheck.

"Thanks for that kind introduction, Terry," Ms. Krawcheck quipped.

A subdued but focused executive with nearly three decades of banking experience, Mr. Laughlin has rarely showed patience for the social niceties of office politics, according to people close to him. In his new position, the 56-year-old is responsible for curing a mountain of mortgage headaches Bank of America inherited with its 2008 purchase of Countrywide Financial Corp.

That makes Mr. Laughlin arguably the most important person in the political survival of Bank of America Chief Executive  Brian Moynihan. How well Mr. Laughlin does his job, some observers said, may help determine how long Mr. Moynihan can keep his.

"Brian's legacy is very much dependent on Terry's ability to put Bank of America's mortgage problems behind it," said  John McDonald, analyst at Sanford Bernstein & Co. Mr. Moynihan declined to comment.

No shotgun wedding during the housing crisis was as problematic for its acquirer as the $4 billion Countrywide deal was for Bank of America. The acquisition ballooned the size of the Charlotte, N.C., bank's mortgage portfolio to 14 million loans from four million, just as the housing market was about to collapse.

That saddled the bank with hundreds of thousands of delinquent borrowers and thrust it into the middle of the foreclosure-paperwork crisis last fall. It also exposed the bank to the largest number of requests from investors demanding that the bank buy back poor performing mortgages.

The mortgage woes largely explain why the nation's largest bank by assets is lagging behind U.S. rivals  J.P. Morgan Chase
JPM


-0.01
%




 & Co. and even  Citigroup Inc.,
C


1.02
%




 which received more in U.S. aid during the financial crisis. When Mr. Laughlin took over the group during the first quarter this year, it was on its way to losing $2.5 billion, the worst performance among any Bank of America division.

Mr. Laughlin declined to comment.

Just as the futures of Mr. Laughlin and Mr. Moynihan are intertwined, so are their pasts. The two have known each other for two decades and have similar upbringings. Both spent their childhoods in Ohio River towns roughly 100 miles apart, Mr. Laughlin in southwestern Pennsylvania and Mr. Moynihan in southeast Ohio. Both also are products of middle-class, manufacturing-belt families.

The son of an accountant for a Pittsburgh-area coking factory, Mr. Laughlin held odd jobs to earn extra money, from caddying to working at the coking oven, said his boyhood friend  Steve Rynn. After working for a local bank, Mr. Laughlin left Pittsburgh for a banking job at Fleet Financial Group Inc. in Providence, R.I.

It didn't take long for him to meet Mr. Moynihan, a lawyer in the same city. But their first interaction as co-workers appeared to begin awkwardly. When Fleet hired the younger Mr. Moynihan and named him Mr. Laughlin's boss in 1994, Mr. Laughlin left the bank because he thought the job should have been his, said two people close to him. "He was miffed," one said.

Several months later, Fleet executives persuaded Mr. Laughlin to come back from Cleveland's KeyCorp and work for Mr. Moynihan. The two handled dozens of acquisitions together, and Mr. Laughlin developed a reputation as a focused problem solver who would recommend tough solutions without regard to political sensitivities.

But his brand of pragmatism didn't work in his favor after he left Fleet when Bank of America acquired it in 2004. He went to work at Merrill Lynch & Co., where top executives rejected his calls for severe write-downs on banking assets purchased just before the U.S. housing market collapsed.

"He was recommending tough medicine," said former Fleet Vice Chairman  Jay Sarles, and "Merrill did not want to take it."

Merrill's unwillingness to take action frustrated Mr. Laughlin, said people close to him. "He has a view of how things should go," said one. "Massaging people and bringing them along isn't the way he plays it."

Mr. Laughlin left Merrill in May 2008, not wanting to take the blame if the securities firm went down, these people said. Four months later, Merrill agreed to sell itself to Bank of America as a way of avoiding a possible collapse.

Though Mr. Laughlin took a turn as top boss in 2009 when he became CEO of OneWest Bank, the successor to the failed IndyMac Bank, a reunion with Mr. Moynihan was inevitable, Mr. Laughlin told friends at the time.

By the middle of last year, Mr. Moynihan needed someone who would plow through the Countrywide mess quickly. His pitch: "'I have this big problem; would you come help me?'" said one person close to both executives.

Mr. Moynihan "wanted someone he could trust," said Mr. Sarles, the former Fleet vice chairman.

In trying to heal the Countrywide wound, Mr. Laughlin is emphasizing speed and telling colleagues his goal is to be "fair, fast and final." The lender still trails many of its rivals in converting trial loan modifications to permanent fixes, and it takes Bank of America longer to resolve problems and answer calls, according to government data.

Mr. Laughlin is tripling the number of local mortgage-assistance centers across the U.S. to improve customer contact. His group also added about 3,000 people in the first quarter to deal with problems.

Every day Mr. Laughlin gets updates on the performance of delinquent properties so he can make quick decisions about whether to fix or liquidate some of the seven million loans in his portfolio. He set up a separate team to decide whether to fight or pay new claims from mortgage investors.

Though Mr. Moynihan vowed last fall to engage in "hand-to-hand combat" against mortgage investors, Mr. Laughlin is quick to settle valid claims. Last month, he engineered a $1.6 billion settlement of soured mortgages with Bermuda bond insurer  Assured Guaranty Ltd.
AGO


-1.25
%






Mr. Laughlin occupies a Calabasas, Calif., office down the hall from  Barbara Desoer, the executive originally asked to fix Countrywide after Bank of America bought it. While Mr. Laughlin oversees the problems, Ms. Desoer is responsible for servicing loans in good standing and finding new business. 

At the bank's March investor conference, Mr. Laughlin mispronounced the name of his new colleague as "Barbara Desoer-O" and later attributed the gaffe to nerves, said a person close to him. 

But before leaving the stage he had the presence to stress the urgency of his task to resolve the mortgage problem.

"We are going to get after this," he said, and "put it to bed over the next 36 months."

 Write to  Dan Fitzpatrick at dan.fitzpatrick@wsj.com 