A few weeks before the release of the Feelies' new album, the group reconvened on a March weekend to practice in the basement of singer-guitarist Glenn Mercer's house in Haledon, N.J. "Here Before" is the group's fifth studio album, but it's their first release in more than 17 years. 

Waiting is to be expected when it comes to the Feelies. Hailed by the Village Voice as "Best Underground Band in New York" back in 1978, it still took two years for their tightly wound debut, "Crazy Rhythms," to emerge. Live performances even then were usually relegated to national holidays such as Independence Day and Halloween. And it took six years for them to finish the follow-up, "The Good Earth." 

Mr. Mercer's basement has been the site of band rehearsals since 1988, when the Feelies were still signed to a major label, touring with the likes of  Lou Reed (an influence on the band) and R.E.M. (who have in turn cited them as an influence). The band has inspired beyond music as well: fans like director  Jonathan Demme put them in his film "Something Wild" and author Rick Moody's first novel, "Garden State," cites their lyrics at length. They received much critical acclaim and had a small but fervent fan base, but by the early 1990s Mr. Mercer felt that the major-label demands were overshadowing the music: "We were pressured to go to 'the next level.' We'd need a lights guy, monitor guy, guitar guy, sound guy, to where there would more people in the crew than in the band." 

After playing the 4th of July at Maxwell's in 1991, percussionist Dave Weckerman recalled: "We thought we'd take a break. And it just turned out to be a long break." Singer-guitarist Bill Million wound up relocating to Florida in 1992, where he still resides. "We tend to move slow," he said, sliding his glasses up his nose. "It probably doesn't seem that way to us, but a long period of time goes by. It just doesn't seem that way to us."

After a decade had passed, Mr. Mercer called up Mr. Million to discuss an old song of theirs that was being licensed for a TNT commercial. He extended an open invitation for Mr. Million to come over and jam, so Mr. Million drove up from central Florida. At the behest of the longtime fans in the rock band Sonic Youth, the Feelies regrouped to play a successful show in Battery Park in 2008. "It just happened," remembered bassist  Brenda Souter. "It was like putting on an old coat and realizing that it still fits." Mr. Mercer and the band decided to play some more: "We didn't want to just do it for the money, though. Or even for the fun. We wanted to have the option to pursue it on a regular basis, writing new stuff and recording another record."

The opening line on the new album has Mr. Mercer ask over a pristine guitar jangle: "Is it too late to do it again? Or should we wait another 10?" Yet if anything, "Here Before" feels prescient. The cover features a photograph of the flooded parking lot of the studio at which they recorded the album and it's a particularly apt image, as the nearby Passaic River rose above its banks last weekend. "Half of New Jersey is flooded and our album cover shows the water creeping up to the window of a house," said Mr. Weckerman. "We're right on time with the times!" Thankfully, Mr. Mercer's house is situated near the top of a hill. 

Around the rehearsal room entrance hang no less than seven portraits of Elvis Presley. Further down the wood-paneled wall are framed photos of icons ranging from  Little Richard to  Buddy Holly. Mood lighting abounds. For a run-through of the new song "On and On," Mr. Weckerman shakes both a rainstick and castanets before switching to a pitch pipe, while the band's other drummer, Stan Demeski, strikes a tambourine, the song slowly cresting.

After an upbeat take of "Time is Right," which features Mr. Mercer and Mr. Million's interlocking guitar lines and recalls the velocity of their first album, Mr. Million gives pause. He thinks that Mr. Weckerman's cowbell sounded different than it did on the record. On "Crazy Rhythms," the legend goes that the band had their first drummer remove all of his cymbals from the kit so that it wouldn't interfere with the guitars' higher frequencies, so even the cowbell is to be considered. 

While Mr. Mercer gently strums the power chords of  Link Wray's "Rumble," Messrs. Million and Weckerman soon conclude that the cowbell just sounds louder within the confines of the room and the quintet works through the song's chorus again. Their last song for the day comes from "Crazy Rhythms." It's the frenetic "Original Love," as sharp and thrilling as it was when they first finished it 33 years ago. 

A day of rehearsal done, the band quietly packs up and hits the road. Ms. Sauter lives three hours away in Pennsylvania, while Messrs. Weckerman and Demeski live nearby. Mr. Million has a two-day drive back to Florida, while Mr. Mercer counts 15 steps back upstairs.