A friend of mine attending the keynote address at an industry conference a few years ago noticed that others in the audience were growing restless, daydreaming, studying their cellphones. He checked the Twitter feed for the event and found an entire back-channel conversation. 

"OMG I AM TRAPPED," said one tweet. "Audience revolt," said another. 

"We need a T-shirt, 'I survived the keynote disaster of 09.'" By the end of the talk, someone had actually designed a commemorative keynote T-shirt (100% cotton!) and put it up for sale online.

Presentations have become the dominant genre of business communication, but few people are trained in the visual thinking that they require. When the right visuals and words are used together, they create a third kind of experience, one that operates by unifying mind and emotion. That's why advertising works, or drama, or film—or the best presentations. 

But they have to be the right pictures. Keep slides simple. Use the glance test: A slide's message should come across in two or three seconds. An audience can only process one stream of information at a time, and you want them to hear what you're saying. If they have to "read" the slide like a technical manual while you're talking, it's time to go back to the un-drawing board and break up complex slides into component ideas. 

"But wait," you say, "the ideas I need to convey are genuinely complex. They can't be conveyed in a simple, airily conceptual image." 

That's right, they can't. But complex ideas can be broken down into individual units of information. Think of each slide as a single word in a sentence. Move through them as fast as you like. I've delivered 30-minute presentations that used 150 slides.

Cisco Systems hired my company to develop a presentation for one of their product lines. To start, they handed us typical technology-industry slides: dense diagrams of computers and phones and products connected by a hairball of lines. Fortunately, they knew that these images didn't really convey how much their products could help the owner of a small business.

Our solution was to unpack those original technical slides and deliver the information through a story. The narrative featured a fictional microbrewer named Dave, whose special hops were delayed from his supplier, threatening to keep him out of an important beer competition. 

Each slide showed a photo of Dave using Cisco products at different stages of his work: identifying an alternate supplier, communicating the variety and quantity needed, arranging in-time shipping and ultimately winning the beer competition. The slides worked like scenes in a movie, each one layering on top of the previous ones to show the full range of the products' features.

Slides should serve as a mnemonic device, reminding the audience how your message matters to real people. A presentation filled with rainbow-colored bar charts might be overwhelmingly visual, but it doesn't make an emotional impression—and may well inspire your bored listeners to create a mocking T-shirt. 

—Ms. Duarte is the author of "Resonate: Present Visual Stories that Transform Audiences" and the chief executive of Duarte Design.