BANGALORE --Marico Ltd., the Indian consumer goods maker, is in early talks to buy companies both in India and abroad, and may raise funds through equity or debt offerings to finance a potential buy.

The company, which is looking for ways to propel its growth, can fund an acquisition in the $20 million to $25 million range through debt, said Chaitanya Deshpande, who heads mergers and acquisitions and investor relations at Marico. 

"We may not fight shy of evaluating deals that are larger [than $20 million-$25 million]," he said. "In which case, depending on the size, there'd be a need to maybe fund part of it through an equity raising." 

He, however, doesn't expect any deals to go through in the short term. 

Marico is among Indian consumer goods makers that have recently been very active in snapping up assets around the globe as increased competition at home leads them to seek growth opportunities elsewhere. Godrej Consumer Products Ltd. also said Monday that it is evaluating acquisitions and that inorganic growth could contribute about 10% of the projected compounded annual growth of 25%-30% in sales in the next five years. 

Marico sells the popular Parachute coconut oil and Saffola cooking oil brands in India and some overseas markets. It has operations in Bangladesh, the Middle East and North Africa region, South Africa and Southeast Asia. 

Mr. Deshpande said besides India, Marico is looking at targets in the developing markets of Africa, Southeast Asia and the Middle East. 

But he didn't name any potential targets. 

The company, in February, acquired a majority stake in Vietnam's International Consumer Products Corp., a company that sells men's shampoo, deodorants and shower gels and even sauces and condiments, for an undisclosed amount. The acquisition was funded entirely through debt. 

Last year, Marico acquired a hair-styling brand, Code 10, in Malaysia from U.S.-based Colgate-Palmolive Co. and the skin care business of Singapore-based Derma Rx Asia Pacific Pte. Ltd. Marico bought the consumer products unit of South Africa's Enaleni Pharmaceuticals Ltd. in October 2007 and acquired the Fiancee and HairCode brands in Egypt in 2006. 

Thanks to the acquisitions, Marico's international consumer goods business contributed almost a quarter of its sales of 31.28 billion rupees ($706.1 million) for the fiscal year ended March 31. Its net debt stood at 5 billion rupees ($113 million) as of March 31, with the debt-to-equity ratio at 0.78. 