NEW DELHI -- India's competition regulator, the Competition Commission of India further relaxed rules relating to mergers and acquisitions after two months of extensive lobbying by industry and corporate law firms. 

While many of the terms contained in the March draft norms were retained in the final regulations posted on the watchdog's Web site, some significant changes have been introduced. 

These include a reduction in the filing fee to 50,000 rupees ($1,115) to 1 million rupees ($22,309) from the earlier range of 1 million ($22,309) to 4 million rupees ($89,236); exempting certain kinds of transactions from being notified to the Commission; and allowing companies to modify deals to include them in the category of transactions that can be cleared in 30 days vs. those that require longer approval periods of 180 days. 

"Only cases made (through board resolutions, binding documents, etc.) on and after June 1 will need the Commission's approval," said CCI chairman  Dhanendra Kumar. "A large number of business transactions have been given exemption, multiple filings in interconnected deals will not be required, besides elaborate safeguards have been built to protect deal confidentiality." 

Extensive consultation with industry, lawyers and competition agencies globally helped bring about clarity in the regulations, he said. 

In the March draft, the Commission had lowered the maximum time it will take to approve mergers and acquisitions over a certain size from 210 days to 180 days. Besides that, it raised threshold limits (in terms of turnovers and assets) of companies by 50%. 

Two merging Indian firms that have a combined turnover of 45 billion rupees ($1 billion) and two groups of companies going for such a deal with a combined turnover of 180 billion rupees ($4 billion) will need the Commission's prior approval before any merger, as per the limits notified in March and retained in the current version.

The revised norms remove some ambiguities such as listing the transactions that have been made exempt from being reported to CCI, said  Samir Gandhi, partner at Economic Laws Practice. 

These include "acquisitions made by way of investments, acquisitions where the acquirer already holds over 50% of shares, acquisitions of assets in the ordinary course, acquisition of stock in trade, acquisitions through bonus issues or stock splits not leading to a change in control, are a welcome move", he said. 