 Col. Moammar Gadhafi's government suffered a series of diplomatic setbacks—with France formally recognizing Libya's main opposition group, the U.S. saying it will hold talks with the rebels, and European nations extending sanctions on the Libyan government and its banks. 

Forces loyal to Gadhafi appeared to significantly increase the intensity of their offensive against rebel fighters in Libya's east. Rebels retreated from their positions in the strategic oil-refinery city of Ras Lanuf as pro-Gadhafi forces dropped bombs from fighter jets and fired salvoes of rockets on the town.

 Another top London academic institution, University College London, has admitted connections to Libya, joining a growing list of British universities with links to the country under Gadhafi.  

 Protesters are pressing for the release or civilian retrial of Egypt's remaining political prisoners—including, to the alarm of U.S. officials, militants involved in scores of terror attacks. 

 Yemen's President Ali Abdullah Saleh proposed a new constitution that would strengthen the powers of the country's parliament, but his offer was swiftly rejected by the thousands of demonstrators seeking his resignation. 

Police in Saudi Arabia fired rubber bullets to disperse about 200 Shiite protesters in Qatif, a town in the oil-rich Eastern Province, a human-rights activist said.

 The bank that was launched to help fix economies blighted by decades of Communist rule in Eastern Europe believes it can play a role in giving North Africa a fresh start. Many of the 61 governments which are shareholders in the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development want it to start investing in North Africa, beginning with Egypt.  

A prominent Palestinian engineer from the Gaza Strip turned up in an Israeli prison shortly after his disappearance from a train in Ukraine last month, according to a United Nations official and an Israeli legal defense group.

Israeli officials declined to comment on the case, which appeared to fit a decades-old pattern of abduction-style arrests by Israeli agents operating abroad.

 Spain's central bank said the country's lenders will need €15.15 billion ($21.07 billion) in new capital, but Moody's published a far higher estimate that spooked markets and called into question the credibility of Spain's figures. 

The Bank of Spain's disclosure was overshadowed as Moody's downgraded its rating on Spanish government debt to Aa2 with a negative outlook, from Aa1 previously. 

The European Central Bank maintained its stark anti-inflation rhetoric, warning that "strong vigilance is warranted" to contain inflation risks, echoing remarks by ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet, who indicated at a news conference last week that the central bank may raise its benchmark rate as early as next month. 

 Most European governments agreed to move ahead with plans to create a common patent, in spite of strong opposition from Spain and Italy, which are considering legal action to challenge the decision.  

 Industrial-production data in the euro zone suggest the region's largest economies are recovering at different paces, a divide that may prove a major headache for the European Central Bank. 

 European authorities believe the euro-zone's wage-bargaining systems desperately need an overhaul, but they can't seem to decide what that should be.  

U.K. manufacturing output rebounded in January, growing at its fastest annual rate in 16 years. The data are an early indication that the economy may have recovered in the first quarter of the year after a surprise contraction at the end of 2010. 

U.K. unions threatened widespread industrial action if the government implements recommendations in a new report that advises making millions of public-sector employees work longer for lower pensions. 

 The Bank of England left its key interest rate unchanged at a record low of 0.5%, although that decision is likely to have been a very close call. 

A security alert that prompted a partial evacuation of London's Heathrow Airport was resolved, police said. A section of the departures area in Heathrow's Terminal Five had been evacuated while police spoke to an individual and investigated an item at Europe's busiest airport.

Ireland's new prime minister, Enda Kenny, said he will push for flexibility in talks with European Commission President José Manuel Barroso on his country's debt crisis. 

Germany's current-account surplus shrank in January, falling short of economists' expectations amid a surge in imports, in a sign that Europe's largest economy is rebalancing towards internal demand. 

A Spanish judicial official said the investigation into the death of a U.S. exchange student whose body was found in a river in Madrid suggests it was an accident.

 A senior official in Hungary's finance ministry, Andras Karman, said he is confident that new government budget plans will boost the country's drooping credit ratings and revive investor confidence ahead of a planned bond offering later this year. 

 Greece's finance minister fired the country's top tax official for failing to boost revenue collections that have bedeviled the country's efforts to close its gaping budget deficit.  

 U.S. Vice President Joe Biden told a university audience in Moscow that "only bold and genuine change" on corruption, the rule of law and democracy will guarantee improved economic relations between the former Cold War superpowers. 

 On Friday, Biden will become the highest-ranking American ever to travel to independent Moldova in a significant show of support from Washington for Moldovan Prime Minister Vlad Filat. 

 The net worth of Americans rose 3.9% in the fourth quarter of last year as stock-market portfolios surged, and overall household debt declined as mortgage liabilities waned. 

 Exports rose to a record level in January as foreign buyers bought up U.S. energy products, industrial goods and autos, but even faster import growth meant that the nation's trade deficit rose 15% to a seven-month high. 

The federal government in February ran a one-month deficit of $222.5 billion—the biggest in U.S. history, a development that could fuel the intensifying debate on Capitol Hill about government spending. 

China reported a trade deficit for February, its first in 11 months, as export growth slowed sharply and import growth remained strong in part on rising commodity prices. 

An earthquake toppled more than 1,000 houses and apartment buildings in China's southwest near the border with Myanmar, killing at least 24 people and injuring more than 200, officials and state media said.

A 6.5-magnitude earthquake off Indonesia rattled the popular resort island of Bali, but there were no immediate reports of damage or injuries, officials said. 

Vietnam is cracking down on unauthorized trading in U.S. dollars in an effort to bolster the country's dwindling foreign reserves and restore confidence in the local currency, in the latest attempt to bring some stability to the economy.

 An American-led special-forces team killed one of Afghan President Hamid Karzai's cousins, in a night raid that aggravates tensions between Afghanistan's leader and the U.S. 

 The Dalai Lama will step down as political leader of the India-based Tibetan government-in-exile to further democratize the Tibetan refugee community and combat potential efforts by China to hijack the succession process. 