  John Olguin, a gnarled and bushy-bearded tracker of leviathans, helped introduce whale watching to generations of Southern Californians.

Mr. Olguin, who died New Year's Day at age 89, was former director of the Cabrillo Marine Aquarium. He helped build that Los Angeles institution from its origin as a seashell exhibit by lifeguards at Venice Beach in the 1930s.

Resembling in his later years an old Ernest Hemingway, Mr. Olguin was also a beloved educator. His trademark "Do It! Do It!" presentations impressed visiting schoolchildren with the diversity of local marine life. He took them to tidal pools and on midnight expeditions to stalk wild grunions, tiny fish that spawn by night on beaches at high tide.

Starting in 1972, Mr. Olguin chartered off-season fishing boats to take passengers to watch the annual migration of gray whales, which pass San Pedro en route from the Arctic to their winter feeding grounds around Baja California. It was among the first regularly scheduled whale-watching programs in the nation. 

Mr. Olguin served as a combination of nature guide and cheerleader, using the boat's public-address system to broadcast clicking and hissing noises to imitate whale calls.

The son of a Mexican immigrant baker, Mr. Olguin was born near the San Pedro waterfront where Cabrillo Beach was created by the City of Los Angeles in the mid-1920s. He liked to say he was "born with sand between his toes," and spent his whole life in the area. At age 14 he began working as a lifeguard for the L.A. Department of Recreation and Parks. He met his future wife, the granddaughter of a whaling captain, while giving rowing lessons at the beach.

It was as a lifeguard that he got involved with the collection that was at first known as "the Mayonnaise Jar Museum," because of the way some of its early sea creatures were presented. He helped relocate the museum to a disused Cabrillo Beach bathhouse in 1935.

In 1949, by then captain of the lifeguards, Mr. Olguin was appointed temporary director of the museum, a job he kept for nearly 40 years. He expanded the exhibits and made the museum a popular destination for school outings. By 1960, a half-million visitors came annually to goggle at the life-size model of a 312-pound sea bass, scrimshaw, a model of HMS Bounty and 40,000 other objects.

Over time, Mr. Olguin pointed the museum in a more ecological direction. He started the whale watch and added other educational programs that spotlighted his showman's panache. He learned to greet visitors in Tagalog, Fijian and Vietnamese. Even after he retired, former visitors would ask him to do his famous jellyfish dance.

In his spare time, Mr. Olguin liked to paddle his rowboat, with his wife and his dog aboard, up and down the California coast and on trips abroad, watching whales and other marine life. The couple insisted on sleeping out of doors, using rented rowboats to bivouac when at sea.

Mr. Olguin retired in 1986, but stayed involved in the museum, which was renamed Cabrillo Marine Aquarium in 1993. He also led whale watches around Santa Catalina Island under the auspices of the American Cetacean Society, which he helped found in 1967.

For decades, Mr. Olguin was a dedicated member of the Polar Bears swimming club and once reigned as Polar Bear King. 

He was a stalwart of San Pedro philanthropy, and in 2009 the San Pedro Rotary Club named him its Citizen of the Millennium.

—Email remembrances@wsj.com

 Write to  Stephen Miller at stephen.miller@wsj.com 