CHICAGO—Federal regulators appeared divided Thursday over what to reveal about how they would decide which nonbank financial firms should get the "systemically important" label for being big enough to threaten the financial system. 

Firms with such a designation would be subject to stricter capital standards and regulations.

Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. Chairman Sheila Bair said in a speech at a conference here that regulators needed to "move forward and develop some hard metrics to guide" the designation process. She told reporters that "the more public information we can provide on this, the better."

However, Mark Van Der Weide, a senior associate director at the Federal Reserve, stressed the need for regulators to retain discretion in the process and warned: "Don't expect perfectly clear numerical guidelines from us." 

The Financial Stability Oversight Council, set up by Congress last year in revamping financial-oversight laws, is deciding which nonbank financial firms will get the label. The Fed and the FDIC are both members of the council.

It is in dispute whether a financial firm labeled systemically important would be less or more likely to be bailed out by the government if it ran into trouble. The Dodd-Frank law aims to prevent future government bailouts by imposing stricter rules on such firms and giving regulators tools to dismantle them in an orderly way in a crisis. 

The law's authors wanted to prevent a repeat of the government's experience with American International Group Inc., the loosely regulated insurance firm that needed a bailout in 2008 after its risky bets threatened to imperil the entire financial system. 

But Republican lawmakers have criticized the systemically important label, saying it would indeed lead to government bailouts of firms so designated.

Nonbank financial firms themselves don't want to be labeled systemically important and are working to convince regulators and lawmakers that they don't qualify. "It's viewed by the market as a bad thing, not a good thing" Ms. Bair said.

Insurers, private-equity shops, asset managers, hedge funds and other nonbank financial firms are eager to figure out what criteria the council plans to use so they can determine how likely they are to get the label. They want advance notice, too, so they will have time to refine their arguments on why they shouldn't be designated systemically important. 

Bank holding companies with $50 billion or more in assets are automatically designated systemically important. For financial firms that aren't banks, a draft rule approved by regulators in January provided only broad conceptual factors they would consider. Those factors include a firm's size, interconnectedness, lack of substitutes in the system, and the extent of a firm's leverage, but no specifics. 

Congress has become involved in the debate, with many lawmakers responding to complaints from firms in their home districts. "Such a designation will be consequential to affected firms. Thus it is crucial that principled and transparent procedures be put in place to determine which companies should receive this designation," Reps. Randy Neugebauer (R., Texas) and Michael Capuano (D., Mass.) said in a letter to council members Wednesday. The letter asked regulators to issue more detailed decision-making criteria and give the industry another opportunity to comment. 

But Mr. Van Der Weide suggested regulators didn't plan to do much more to spell out their criteria. "We are exploring kind of the extent to which we can provide additional information," but picking which firms to label is a complex and qualitative decision, he said. Regulators must retain a "significant amount of discretion in the FSOC on how to make these decisions," he said.

Ms. Bair acknowledged that not all the specifics of the criteria can be made public, "but I think we need clarity" beyond the January proposal, she said. Regulators shouldn't take a "we're gonna know it when we see it approach" to the designation. She said it was possible the council would allow for another comment period on the more specific-criteria.

Ms. Bair said she wanted the council to set a simple, asset-size threshold for nonbank financial firms, above which those firms would have to share additional information with regulators before a final decision was made. Ms. Bair said a key factor in the decision on whether a firm was systemically important should be how easily it could be resolved by basic bankruptcy proceedings should it fail.

The Fed is also charged with crafting the stricter requirements systemic firms must meet once designated. The central bank must finalize those enhanced regulatory requirements by January. Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke said the central bank was crafting a framework that would differentiate between banks that present different levels of risk to the system.

Banks "will be graded on a scale, so to speak, so that the largest banks will face higher capital and other requirements than those banks that are close to that $50 billion line," he said. 

Regional banks have urged regulators not to treat them the same way as globally active banks just because they happen to fall above the $50 billion line drawn by the financial-overhaul law. 

Skepticism remains. "Whenever you get to one of these lines very bad things happen" from the perspective of a bank, said Wayne Abernathy executive director for financial institutions policy and regulatory affairs for the American Bankers Association, a trade group. "They create tremendous distortions."