WASHINGTON—President Barack Obama faces the prospect of striking against Libya at a time when lawmakers are preoccupied with budget deficits and, in some cases, expressing reluctance to take part in another war.

Preparations for U.S. involvement have been carefully structured in keeping with Mr. Obama's method of seeking international agreement. The U.S. joined allies in taking the issue to the United Nations Security Council, which authorized military force Thursday night against Libyan Leader Moammar Gadhafi's forces. 

Track events day by day.

Washington wishes not to be seen taking a lead role in any strikes on Libya, which are being coordinated with European allies and may receive the backing Friday of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.

Mr. Obama's reluctance to move aggressively had become politically fraught, as he faced his first potential military conflict that he didn't inherit from his predecessor. Now, before the first shot is fired, the planned U.S. participation in strikes against Col. Gadhafi appears to be dividing both parties.

"We're discussing here on the floor almost exclusively the budget, the deficit . . . and even a modest no-fly zone operation will be a very expensive operation for our military, or for whoever is involved in it," said Sen. Richard Lugar (R., Ind.), the top Republican on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.

By contrast, Democratic Sen. John Kerry of Massachusetts, Republican Sen. John McCain of Arizona and independent Sen. Joe Lieberman of Connecticut quickly released a joint statement calling for the U.N. resolution to be acted on immediately. Mr. Kerry leads the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, and Mr. McCain is a leading Republican on the Armed Services Committee.

"It is in our national interest to make sure that Moammar Gadhafi does not come back into power by murdering his own people,'' Sen. Lindsey Graham (R., S.C.) said on CNN. Failure to act, he said, would show Iran that it wouldn't have to fear consequences from the U.S. for pressing ahead with its nuclear program.

Lawmakers are also debating whether Mr. Obama is required by law to ask Congress for a declaration of war before intervening in Libya.

Sen. Carl Levin (D., Mich.), chairman of the Armed Services Committee, told reporters that "if there's going to be combat, if possible there has to be a notice to Congress." Mr. Lugar said the president should ask for a declaration of war.



The White House appeared to win the support of one key member of the president's own party: Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D., Nev.). Mr. Reid told reporters that "Gadhafi is a person who has no standing basically any place in the world. He's slaughtering his own people. And I think that there needs to be something done. I think it will be done."

Mr. Reid didn't respond directly when asked Thursday if Congress needed to vote on action in Libya.

Some lawmakers argued that U.S. taxpayers shouldn't have to pay for military intervention. "The Arab League should be approached to pay for that war," Mr. Lugar told reporters.

Added Sen. Bob Casey (D., Pa.): "I'd love to have them help us pay for it—have everybody pay for it—because we have very little revenue here."

Recent U.S. comments on military intervention in Libya 

 March 2, Defense Secretary Robert Gates:   "Let's just call a spade a spade. A no-fly zone begins with an attack on Libya."

 March 11.,  President Barack Obama : "When it comes to U.S. military actions, whether it's a no-fly zone or other options, you've got to balance costs versus benefits. And, you know, I don't take those decisions lightly."

 March 15,  Secretary of State Hillary Clinton: The U.S. "understands the urgency ... We are looking for ways to increase our support for the opposition."

 March 16,  U.S. Ambassador Susan Rice:"A no-fly zone has inherent limitations in terms of protection of civilians,. . . [Washington is] interested in a broad range of actions that would effectively protect civilians and increase the pressure on the Gadhafi regime to halt the killing."

 March 17, White House statement:Mr. Obama and other leaders agreed Libya "must immediately comply with all terms of the [U.N.] resolution and that violence against the civilian population of Libya must cease."