Do we really need another book of kitchen war stories? The past few years have seen plenty of tales depicting the grueling life in a professional kitchen: the fast pace, the long hours, the burns and the cuts, the grunt work, and the grease, all in the name of producing a good meal. We've read about it in Anthony Bourdain's "Kitchen Confidential," in Bill Buford's "Heat" and, more recently, in Grant Achatz's "Life on the Line." The Culinary Institute of America, moreover, has already been well-documented by Michael Ruhlman in "The Making of a Chef." 

No matter. "Beaten, Seared, and Sauced," Jonathan Dixon's account of his chef-training at the CIA's, is funny, gripping and immensely enjoyable. It reads like a picaresque novel, wherein we follow the fortunes and misfortunes of the author on his odyssey through cooking school. After working for years in a series of odd jobs (among them janitor in a coffin factory, nanny, staff writer at Martha Stewart Living), Mr. Dixon decides to indulge his life-long passion for cooking and enroll in the CIA's two-year degree program. He is on the cusp of 38—old enough to be called "Grandpa" in the kitchen—and has no intention of becoming a professional chef. To his surprise, he is given a full scholarship. He doesn't tell us why, but perhaps his stint at Martha Stewart Living helped.

The culinary school, hard by the Hudson River in Hyde Park, N.Y., has a reputation for being the toughest in the country. On his first day, Mr. Dixon arrives early—around 6 a.m.—to check in. But he has second thoughts and remains in his car for an hour, listening to the Grateful Dead, before he summons up the courage to enter the building. The lobby is filled with kids whose faces are still puffy with baby fat and pitted with acne; among these newly admitted students he sees only two who might be over 30.

The president's welcoming speech gives Mr. Dixon further pause. When "CPA" lights up on a monitor in the auditorium, the president tells the newcomers that the letters stand for "carrot peeling attitude. . . . Try and see how many carrots you can peel in a day. And then the next day, try and break that record." Each time they break their record, he says, students are to put a gold star on a chart above their station. "The journey is the destination, people, the journey is the destination."

The rules and regulations posted around the buildings make Mr. Dixon think of West Point, the military academy a few miles down-river. The dress code requires white undergarments for men and women. Hair must be of "natural color, no sneakers, jeans or facial hair." He watches as one of the chef-instructors stops a student in a hallway, measures the young man's sideburns with a ruler—and orders him to leave the building.

 By Jonathan Dixon  (Clarkson Potter, 266 pages, $24)

It is 2½ months before Mr. Dixon gets a chance to do some actual cooking. On that day, the students march confidently, "like a bunch of invading Pattons," into the course known as Skills 1. The pace is frantic as they work against the clock to prepare vegetables for a classic French stock. But Mr. Dixon's performance is less like Patton on the offensive than Charlie Chaplin in "Modern Times." The potatoes he cuts into julienne "looked like wooden toothpicks soaked in water for too long." As for dicing an onion, "within a minute it looked as though I'd tossed it into a wood chipper."

You find yourself rooting for Mr. Dixon and his determination to stick it out. Early on, the students are taken to a chicken farm. He slaughters a chicken for the first time as the farmer's teenage daughter watches silently, tears streaming down her cheeks. The students keep on working until dusk, not stopping until the hundredth bird has had its throat cut.

The most challenging course, on a different level, is the three-week wine class, which has the highest failure rate: 30%. Mr. Dixon was accustomed to buying wine according to price ($10 a bottle, and red). Now he is required to memorize, among other things, all the major growing regions and vineyards. At the first wine-tasting, the students sniff a Napa Valley sauvignon blanc. "What do you get by way of the wine's nose?" asks the instructor. There is no response. After pointing out notes of citrus and green apple, he wearily asks: "Does anyone get a hint of cat pee?"

One of the requirements for all CIA students is an "externship" at a restaurant. Mr. Dixon manages to get into Danny Meyer's Tabla, a high-end Indian restaurant in Gramercy Park (it closed earlier this year), working under chef Floyd Cardoz. When Mr. Dixon arrives, Tabla is doing ground-breaking dishes using techniques that are a radical departure from the Escoffier-based methods taught at the CIA, and Mr. Dixon is keen to learn them. The experience is dismal, but his account of it is hilarious as he describes the conflicting instructions raining down on him from different chefs, whether he is searing lamb cubes or trimming asparagus.

"Beaten, Seared, and Sauced" moves along at a clip, and Mr. Dixon manages to pack in a great deal of practical information along the way—we learn, for instance, about fileting fish (keep your knife flat) and how to make classic French sauces and a good beef stew. Above all, he conveys his passion for cooking. What makes a great chef? Mr. Dixon thinks he has found the answer when he attends the American finals for the Bocuse d'Or French cooking competition, held at CIA. As he watches the winning team put together its presentation, he realizes: "Every gesture, no matter how small, was about the individual attempting to be great." Finally, "carrot peeling attitude" made sense.

 Ms. Hodgson, a former restaurant critic for the New York Observer, is the author of the memoir "It Seemed Like a Good Idea at the Time." 