He will be talked about. It's unavoidable and unfair, but that's the way it goes in this town. No fantasy is ever ruled out, no matter how ludicrous; no one is taken at their word; and to borrow the salesperson's mantra, a "no" is just a pathway to a "yes." There's always a more attractive option, even when there's something in place. It drives sane minds crazy, but this is New York, where impatience and hubris charge the oxygen. 

Phil Jackson stepped away from basketball on Sunday, and it should have been a bigger moment. Instead, the departure of one of the game's great coaches was marred by an ugly, season-ending loss by his Los Angeles Lakers. Down 3-0 to the Dallas Mavericks in the Western Conference semifinals, the Lakers couldn't summon a last stand. They couldn't summon anything, as the Mavericks buried 3-pointer after 3-pointer in a 122-86 humiliation.

Somehow it was even worse than that. Late in the game, Laker forward/reality TV subject Lamar Odom was ejected after barreling over Dallas star Dirk Nowitzki with a hard foul. Moments later, Odom's coward exit was topped by underachiever nonpareil Andrew Bynum, who leveled the Dallas guard J.J. Barea with a midair elbow. Bynum, too, was ejected, and will surely begin his 2011-12 season suspended on the bench, in whichever city he finds himself. 

Jackson seemed bemused in his postgame news conference, as if the crumbling of a championship club was now someone else's problem - a dent in a rental car.

"All my hopes and aspirations are this is the final game that I'll coach," Jackson said. "This has been a wonderful run."

Of course the words are already being parsed. "Hopes" and "aspirations?" Is the door open, a signal sent? Or is Jackson being honest, admitting that his attachment to basketball may be too strong and he could fail? He has tried to walk away twice before. 

Possible landings are already being gossiped about. There's Miami, which offers Dwyane Wade, LeBron James and a quintessential Jackson gig—motivated superstars hungry for a title. But the Heat already have Pat Riley lurking on the payroll. Plus, Jackson in Miami would infuriate the Ghost of Red Auerbach, who won nine titles as a Celtics coach and argued that Jackson cherry-picked teams.

So what about New York, where Jackson won two championship rings as a player in the early '70s? The Knicks have a young, imperfect team, with a pair of lesser but still formidable stars. Yes, there's a capable coach, Mike D'Antoni, and Carmelo and Amar'e have yet to play a complete season…but Jackson's returning to New York to build a Zen Garden?

Spike Lee has already turned to Twitter to goose the campaign. "If Jackson isn't done, where does he go?" he asked. "Only 1 place. He could come home. Home [to] Nueva York."

A short while later, Lee dialed back. "I'm not recruiting anybody," he wrote. "Knicks have Coach under contract."

The speculation isn't going to stop, silly and fruitless as it may be. Should the Knicks stumble next season, the "We Want Phil" chants will be fierce. There is an irresistible symmetry to Jackson's trying to deliver New York its first NBA title since he helped capture its last.

There will be those who argue that it won't happen, that Jackson doesn't need New York, that he's not going to get himself entangled with the current team ownership. It won't matter. His name will linger because it's the biggest name. This is how it happens in a city of comebacks, where never is never really never.