A federal prosecutor is investigating allegations that a work slowdown by sanitation workers hindered efforts to clean up after a blizzard dropped 20 inches of snow on the city beginning the day after Christmas, according to an official with knowledge of the investigation.

Numerous streets were left unplowed for days, stranding buses and motorists and preventing ambulances from getting to emergencies. 

The city's response to the blizzard has drawn widespread condemnation and put pressure on Mayor Michael Bloomberg, who said last week the cleanup "has not met our standards."

After the storm, the New York Post reported that sanitation supervisors slowed down work to protest budget cuts and demotions and to increase overtime. City and union officials have denied the reports.

The official with knowledge of the investigation said the probe by the U.S. Attorney's Office for the Eastern District of New York, which covers Brooklyn and Queens, will focus on whether there was a work slowdown, which could bring a charge of conspiring to commit a fraud.

Officials from the district attorney's offices in Queens and Brooklyn say they are also looking into slowdown allegations. 

Queens District Attorney Richard Brown said in a statement that his office is "reviewing information provided to it by City Councilman Dan Halloran, among others, with respect to last week's snowstorm and the City's response thereto." The statement said the office has "been in contact with" the city's Department of Investigation, but a decision hasn't yet been made whether to start a formal investigation.

Mr. Halloran said workers and supervisors told him there was a slowdown, a claim repeated by his spokesman Tuesday. Mr. Halloran met with the U.S. Attorney's Office Tuesday, the spokesman said. 

Brooklyn District Attorney Charles Hynes is also investigating complaints about the city's response to the blizzard. It's not yet investigating a possible conspiracy, another law-enforcement official with knowledge of the probe said, but could bring charges if it finds that intentionally unplowed streets led to deaths or injuries. 

The Department of Investigation also has launched a probe of the response, and the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's independent inspector general is working on a probe. 

 Write to  Sean Gardiner at sean.gardiner@wsj.com and Andrew Grossman at andrew.grossman@wsj.com 