NEW DELHI -- India's competition regulator has again delayed releasing a final version of rules that would govern mergers and acquisitions.

  Dhanendra Kumar, chairman of the Competition Commission of India (CCI), had said the norms would be announced on May 1, and then pushed the deadline to May 5.

The regulator has not provided a fresh deadline. Mr. Kumar was not available for comment.

A CCI official said it would take a few more days as corporate lawyers have suggested a lot of changes.

The draft guidelines on mergers and acquisitions were posted on CCI's Web site inviting public comments on March 2. 

The commission has held a series of discussions with the industry and corporate lawyers.

Mr. Kumar and D.K. Mittal, secretary at the corporate affairs ministry, also held meetings in early April with the Law Firms Working Group, a grouping comprising law firms involved in M&As.

The Corporate Affairs Ministry, which oversees CCI, is committed to enforcing norms relating to M&As above a particular size from June 1.

Two merging Indian companies that have a combined turnover of 45 billion rupees and two groups of companies going for such a deal with a combined turnover of 180 billion rupees will need to take prior approval of CCI before going for a merger.

Two global companies having presence in India will need CCI's clearance if their combined sales is $2.25 billion globally with a combined sales in India of at least 22.50 billion rupees.

Similarly, for global conglomerates, the threshold limit is $9 billion globally, with a combined sales in India of at least 22.50 billion rupees.

These thresholds were notified by the ministry in March, which had also then said that the implementation date will be June 1.

However, before CCI starts exercising powers to scrutinize these M&As, it should have a set of rules in place that will guide the competition regulator in approving such deals.

In the absence these guidelines, M&As cannot be scrutinized.

"There will be no change in the implementation date," Mr. Mittal said. "There are certain clarifications that need to be brought out along with the final version of regulations. And the same will be released by CCI shortly."

He added that after industry consultations, some concerns were raised that are being looked into.

"The law firm working group has given its recommendations. It is now up to CCI to decide," said  Samir Gandhi, partner at Economic Laws Practice.

Industry representatives, at various meetings with the commission and the ministry, have said regulations should relate only to combinations that result in a change in control and not to the acquisition of assets and intra-group reorganization.

The fee charged for filing a notification should be rationalized. And, if the CCI does not form an opinion within 30 days, the combination should be deemed to have been approved, they have said.

"Transactions such as the issuance of bonus shares should be excluded from CCI's scrutiny as bonus shares are allotted to all shareholders as a proportion of their current holdings," said  G.R. Bhatia, partner at Luthra and Luthra Law Offices. "Therefore, this does not bring about any change in shareholding of the enterprise." Bhatia was part of the law firm working group.