Crowdfunding is the latest initiative to raise capital for start-ups. It's a collective that invests small amounts to support fledgling ideas, and its popularity has created a new asset class with shared, minimal risk.

However, it will be some time though before crowdfunding, which usually takes place through the Internet, evolves into a reliable, sure-shot method of fund-raising in India.

Grow VC India, the first formal platform that promotes this, was launched in July in partnership with Springboard Ventures Pvt. Ltd. While the platform has 1,200 registered investors and 122 companies, it is yet to nurture a deal. However, more than half-a-dozen companies have received funding offers, and are said to be in advanced stages of negotiation. Similar platforms elsewhere in the world like Startnext in Germany and KickStarter in the U.S. are active. 

Entrepreneurs who have no networks or connections can get access to the right set of investors on such platforms, said  Jouko Ahvenainen, founder, Grow VC International Ltd, a global crowdfunding platform.

"In Silicon Valley, it's important to know people, (but) here everybody is allowed to make pitches," Mr. Ahvenainen said, whose platform has facilitated funding of 20 start-ups since its launch in February 2010.

While crowdfunding takes time -- it may take as much as 8 to 10 months for a deal – "it increases the pool of available capital", said  Satish Kataria, managing director, Springboard Ventures.

"A lot more people can be involved without too much risk," Mr. Kataria said. "We are looking at firing up the start-up funding scenario in this country."

The process is simple. Start-ups can use Grow VC India's platform to make a pitch that can be accessed by investors subscribing to the service. Subscription costs 1,000 rupees ($22.09) a month. The investors range from professional investors to business people. The minimum investment allowed is 1,000 rupees, with no upper limit.

The pitch includes details such as background of the entrepreneurs, the business offering and plans, financials and funding requirements. Once a pool of investors shows interest in backing the start-up, the funds raised go are directed to the company through Springboard Ventures. The platform will have members of its team on the board of the venture. The investors will have complete access to the company's financials, plans and performance on a monthly basis. The backgrounds of both investors and start-ups are verified by Springboard Ventures.

The platform also takes a minority stake in the company. Of the returns generated, 75% go to its investors and 25% are held back by Springboard.

Funding through the platform can extend to movies, and the next film by Onir Anirban (of Sorry Bhai and  Bas Ek Pal fame) will be financed through Grow VC, Mr. Kataria said.

Industry observers say establishing the credibility of companies and investors can be tricky.

All start-ups, need their initial investors to serve as mentors and connectors, said  Ashish Sinha, founder of PluGGd.in, which tracks start-ups.

He argues that such platforms need to offer speedy fund-raising process, of a month or less, as start-ups often die due to lack of capital.

Ownership and equity are also issues in crowdfunding.

"How can a promoter be sure that individual investors are not funding a competing company?," Mr. Sinha asked. "They will have access to sensitive data such as business plans, revenue and projections." 

Meanwhile, angel investors such as  Sujit Jain, managing director and chairman, Netsurf Communications Pvt. Ltd, say such platforms are relevant only from the networking point of view.

"I don't mind being a part of a platform, but I would prefer to invest independently," he said, citing the higher risk and reward. Mr. Jain was an angel investor in four companies. 