In sports, rookie seasons are fairly well defined—young players are called up to the majors and hold on as long as they can. In ballet, a new career can emerge in fits and starts. A soloist role here, a last-minute replacement for a principle there. And then gradually—or sometimes suddenly—a dancer seems to be onstage every time the curtain goes up.

This season at American Ballet Theatre, which runs from May 16 to July 9 at the Metropolitan Opera House, two dancers in particular are hitting new heights of visibility: Isabella Boylston and Daniil Simkin.

Ms. Boylston, 24 years old, has been a member of the corps de ballet since 2007, but this season she'll dance a principal role in Alexi Ratmansky's nutty Soviet-era ballet "The Bright Stream." During the company's tour to Cuba this past November, she led Balanchine's challenging "Theme and Variations" with crisp attack.

Her progression at ABT has been a gradual one. While training at the Harid Conservatory in Boca Raton, Fla., she came to New York for an ABT summer program and was asked to stay for ABT's second company. 

"My parents wouldn't let me go because I hadn't finished high school," Ms. Boylston, a native of Sun Valley, Idaho, said recently. "I went back for one semester. No one in my family is in ballet. They wanted me to be cautious, not knowing how successful I would be." 

She joined ABT II in 2005, then secured her spot in the corps of the main company in 2007. "She has a wonderful jump and solid technique," said ABT artistic director Kevin McKenzie, "[but] she needed to get her body to move through space together."

Then, after taking on classical soloist variations and landing roles in new ballets, a new cohesion emerged for the dancer. "All of a sudden it came together," said Mr. McKenzie. "Once her body started to strengthen, it just happened."

During the company's winter tour, she had been rehearsing "The Bright Stream" in the role of Zina, the charming local girl who organizes events at a collective farm. But in Washington, D.C., after injuries beset the company, Mr. McKenzie shifted her to the co-leading role of the Ballerina, who visits the collective.

"She is the one who orchestrates the entire plot," Ms. Boylston said of her character. "She's very charming so you have to bring charm to it. She's very flirtatious, but she's a good person and likes practical jokes."

The dancer has also been cast in a new ballet by choreographer Christopher Wheeldon, which makes its premiere May 24, that she described as a weighty, funereal pas de deux with principle Marcelo Gomes. 

Among the company's male dancers, Mr. Simkin, 23, is a rising star with a very different story. Born in Russia and raised in Wiesbaden, Germany, his parents are both ballet dancers. He began training with his mother at age 12. "I was ballet home-schooled," he said. "I went to regular high school. I've had ballet on my own terms."

He entered ABT as a soloist in 2008, at the invitation of Mr. McKenzie. "He did a gala at State Theater that I didn't even attend, but the next day, everybody was buzzing," he said. "I asked him to come take a class. I thought, this is not a finished talent, but what a talent!"

Mr. McKenzie suspected that after a lifetime of training individually, it would be difficult for Mr. Simkin to absorb the culture of the corps de ballet, the natural starting point. By bringing the European dancer in as a soloist, Mr. McKenzie introduced him to the new environment gently: "He needed to learn how to work in a different way."

Mr. Simkin did have some adjustments to make. "It's a different way of working in the U.S—we have a lot of time pressure," he said, adding that seven-hour rehearsals became his new normal. "When I joined, I thought, this is impossible to concentrate for seven hours. Now I enjoy it."

This season, he will make his company debut as the lead in "Don Quixote." He'll also dance a role once held by Mikhail Baryshnikov in the ABT's revival of "Shadowplay" by Antony Tudor. (Mr. Simkin will even be wearing the same costume—a skimpy mesh shirt—once worn by Mr. Baryshinkov.) Among other roles, he will also dance alongside Ms. Boylston in "The Bright Stream."

But if you really want to get to know Mr. Simkin, just go online. He's enthusiastically active on Twitter (with more than 3,000 followers), and hosts an entertaining blog at daniilsimkin.com. "I am predisposed to be drawn to technology. I have that from my father," he said, adding that his dad is usually glued to his iPhone.

"The kid is very internet savvy," Mr. McKenzie said. "He truly is the next generation of dancer."

 Write to  Pia Catton at Pia.Catton@wsj.com 