In the past few years, analysts covering Hong Kong tycoon  Li Ka-shing's Hutchison Whampoa Ltd. have tried hard to nail down the time when the conglomerate's loss-making 3G business would turn around.

Hutchison repeatedly missed its target date for achieving earnings before interest and taxes in its 3G operation, disappointing investors and analysts who relied on the Hong Kong-listed company's own forecasts. 



But since 2008, Praveen Choudhary, an executive director at Morgan Stanley Asia Ltd. who covers Asian conglomerates and gaming and lodging, has maintained the cautious view that 3G would swing to profit only in the second half of 2010. And he was right. 

Hutchison was one of his top picks last year, during which its shares rose 50%, making it the best-performing blue-chip stock of the year.

"We always knew it was one of the cheapest stocks (on the Hang Seng Index). It only needed a small catalyst to take its price higher, and this happened in the second half of 2010," said Mr. Choudhary, this year's top analyst in Hong Kong and in the industrial goods and services sector.

In 2010, Mr. Choudhary also favored conglomerates such as  Jardine Matheson Holdings Ltd., which has a strong portfolio of commercial properties in Hong Kong, as he believed that the city's office rentals would continue to soar with demand exceeding supply. Most other analysts recommended  Wharf (Holdings) Ltd.
0004


-1.80
%




, which focuses more on retail properties.

Like Hutchison, Jardine gave investors a near-50% return last year, compared with about 30% for Wharf. 

A former mergers-and-acquisitions banker, Mr. Choudhary said he enjoys the autonomy he gets as a research analyst: "Once you become an analyst, it's all your call. You don't get that kind of autonomy in banking." 

Mr. Choudhary, who started by covering technology, said moving from sector to sector is beneficial for an analyst.

"It keeps your hunger there," he said. "You are much more passionate and you add a lot more value than the people who have been doing the job for 10 years."

Mr. Choudhary named Wharf Holdings as one of his best picks for 2011, saying he expects its growth to be boosted by its plan to significantly increase its property sales in China to 14 billion yuan ($2.2 billion) from 9 billion yuan last year.

— Polly Hui 

