BEIJING—China's Premier Wen Jiabao pledged Saturday to make combating inflation the government's top priority this year, without sacrificing rapid economic growth and strong job creation that is critical to maintaining social stability. 

Delivering the government's work report at the opening of China's annual legislative session, Mr. Wen said the government aims to deliver economic growth of around 8% in 2011, maintaining for the seventh straight year in a row a largely symbolic growth target that the country has consistently exceeded. 



Some analysts had expected Mr. Wen to reduce that target slightly, after the government earlier announced a lower target for average growth over the next five years. Mr. Wen's adherence to the 8% figure indicates that the government wants to keep a stable, rapid pace of expansion even as it tried to tackle inflation and restructure its economy to promote consumption and to better distribute the benefits of growth.

Mr. Wen said the government aims to cap the rise in the consumer price index around 4% for 2011—significantly slower than the 4.9% increase in January. The consumer price index rose 3.3% in 2010, higher than the 3% target set in Mr. Wen's report last year. Surging prices of food and housing have fueled public frustration in recent months in a country where higher levels of inflation historically have been associated with unrest.

"Recently, prices have risen fairly quickly and inflation expectations have increased. This problem concerns the people's well-being, bears on overall interests and affects social stability," Mr. Wen said. "We must therefore make it our top priority in macroeconomic control to keep overall price levels stable."

Mr. Wen also vowed to "resolutely regulate the real estate market" to rein in housing prices. China's policy toward its property industry is closely watched, because the country's giant construction sector is a major factor driving China's domestic economy as well as global demand for inputs like steel, cement copper.

The premier said the government "will further implement and improve policies for regulating the real-estate market and firmly curb the excessively rapid rise of housing prices in some cities." But he didn't announce any specific new curbs, and spent much of his discussion of the property market focusing on plans to build more low-income housing.

The targeted growth rate for this year is higher than the 7% average annual growth target set for the next five years, a sign Beijing that intends to carefully calibrate its fight against inflation and pursue long-term economic restructuring gradually. The economy grew 10.3% last year, while economists widely expect the actual growth rate to be at least 9% this year. 

Elaborating on the fight against rising prices, Mr. Wen said China should take advantage of the country's ample supply of manufactured goods and grain reserves, as well as its massive foreign exchange reserves to curb imported and structural inflation. 

Mr. Wen has set a 16% growth target for M2, the broadest measure of money supply in China, for 2011. 

The government will "effectively manage market liquidity and control the monetary conditions for commodity prices rising too rapidly," Mr. Wen said. Apart from further boosting the supply of farm products and daily necessities, the government will also strengthen oversight of prices and market order through administrative means, Mr. Wen added. 

Mr. Wen signaled no change in the government's approach to managing the yuan's exchange rate, despite complaints from the U.S. and other countries that the yuan is unfairly cheap, giving an unfair advantage to its exporters.

Mr. Wen also revealed key points of China's 12th five-year plan, a socialist-style blueprint of economic and social development, reiterating Beijing's long-held promise to push ahead with structural reforms and make the world's second-largest economy driven more by domestic consumption rather than exports and government-led investment. 

Offering a glimpse into the new five-year plan, Wen said the government's official target for average gross domestic product growth between 2011 and 2015 will be 7% annually, down from a target of 7.5% in the past half decade. While official targets routinely underestimate growth, the move is nonetheless an important signal that government priorities in the world's No. 2 economy are shifting to reduce dependence on exports and capital-intensive industries in favor of creating conditions for more domestic demand. 

The previous five-year plan, announced in 2006, had a growth target of 7.5%, but the economy grew 11.1% between 2006 and 2010. 

Based on last year's price levels, China's GDP should exceed 55 trillion yuan in 2015, Mr. Wen said. He added that China aims to make the share of research and development spending in total GDP reach 2.2% in 2015, with the service industry's value-added share rising by 4 percentage points during the same period. 

 Write to  Aaron Back at aaron.back@dowjones.com 