Gov. Pat Quinn signed legislation Wednesday abolishing the death penalty in Illinois, making it the 16th state to do so for reasons ranging from erroneous convictions to the high cost of defending capital cases.

"We cannot escape history," said the governor, a Democrat. "We have abolished the death penalty in Illinois, the land of Lincoln. This is the most difficult decision I have made as governor."

Mr. Quinn said he acted largely because of 20 cases of Illinois prisoners who were sentenced to death but later exonerated.

"You cannot have a death-penalty system that kills innocent people, and unfortunately it was in grave danger of doing that 20 times," he said, noting that he acted over the objections of some families of murder victims.

"There are no words in any language to relieve that pain," Mr. Quinn said, but "anyone could see that the system was broken."

Death sentences and executions are on the wane nationwide. Thirty-four states still allow the death penalty, with legislation to eliminate it pending in Connecticut, Kansas, Maryland and Montana. States executed 46 people in 2010, down from 52 the previous year, according to the Death Penalty Information Center in Washington, D.C.

Illinois already had a moratorium on capital punishment. Former Gov. George Ryan imposed it in 2000 after a number of death-row prisoners were exonerated. Since then, 16 Illinois prisoners have been sentenced to death, with one committing suicide. Mr. Quinn said he commuted those sentences to life in prison without possible parole.

The governor was lobbied by a wide variety of people, including death-penalty opponents like South African archbishop Desmond Tutu and Helen Prejean, the New Orleans nun whose story inspired the 1995 movie "Dead Man Walking." Prosecutors and families of victims generally took the opposite side.

"Juries have become less willing to impose death sentences, and so prosecutors are seeking the death penalty less," said Richard Dieter, executive director of the Death Penalty Information Center, which has issued reports critical of how the death penalty is administered.

Connecticut state Rep. Gary Holder-Winfield, a Democrat who authored a pending bill to repeal the death penalty, said Illinois' move should have little, if any, impact in Connecticut.

"Public-opinion polls have more cachet here than anything else," Mr. Holder-Winfield said, conceding that recent polls show a majority want to preserve the death penalty. "Legislators here are concerned" that abolishing capital punishment will alienate voters.

 Write to  Thomas M. Burton at tom.burton@wsj.com and Nathan Koppel at nathan.koppel@wsj.com 