DAVOS, Switzerland—Euro-zone governments will increase the lending capacity of their bailout fund and make it more flexible, but governments won't raise its current €440 billion in guarantees, European Economics Commissioner Olli Rehn said in an interview Thursday. 

The likely decision may raise questions about whether there will be enough in the pot to ease doubts about the fund's ability to provide emergency finance for Portugal, Spain and other countries that might need it. 

Some governments had wanted €1 trillion in guarantees to reassure financial markets. If the plan is agreed to, there should be a total of close to €700 billion available, if lending from the International Monetary Fund and the European Union is included. 

The bailout funds are needed to shore up confidence in the European common currency. In a speech in Davos, French President Nicolas Sarkozy was emphatic in his defense of the euro, saying that those who were forecasting its demise "misunderstand" the nature of Europe. "The euro is Europe, and Europe is 60 years of peace on our continent," Mr. Sarkozy said, adding in his own name and that of German Chancellor Angela Merkel that "we will never turn our backs on it, we will never abandon it." 

The bailout fund—the European Financial Stability Facility—has suffered from an unexpected problem since it was created in late-night negotiations in May: To achieve a top AAA credit rating for the loans it makes, the fund must be overguaranteed by euro-zone member states. As a result, its actual lending capacity is estimated at around €250 billion. 



"Our goal is to reinforce the effective lending capacity of the EFSF and widen the scope of its activities, not to increase the headline figure," Mr. Rehn said in an interview with The Wall Street Journal on the sidelines of the World Economic Forum in Davos. These discussions aren't likely to be settled at a Feb. 4 summit of EU leaders, Mr. Rehn said. Final decisions on both the €440 billion ($603 billion) fund and a permanent fund intended to replace it in June 2013 will be taken at a summit late in March, he said. 

He said the existing fund would be altered to "reflect several though maybe not all of the general features" of the post-2013 fund. 

He said governments wished to package proposals for both funds so as avoid asking national parliaments more than once. 

The key sticking point to expanding the fund's headline size has been objections from Germany, Finland and the other stronger euro-zone nations to putting more taxpayer funding on the table. 

"I'm not ready to open a discussion on euro-bonds or increasing the size of the EFSF," Finnish Prime Minister Mari Kiviniemi said in an interview in Davos. 

Mr. Rehn said one issue being discussed was whether to use a development-bank model to finance the fund. Government shareholders of the World Bank and other multilateral development banks pledge capital to finance the banks, allowing them to borrow in the financial markets. But they only pay in a small proportion of the total, so it doesn't have a big impact on budgets. 

Discussions to increase the fund's effectiveness include proposals to allow the fund to lend early to pre-empt a crisis and to finance government bond purchases.

Euro-zone government debt is a key factor in talks on a new round of bank stress tests that are expected to begin in a matter of weeks. The new tests, scheduled to be published in June, must be more rigorous than last year's tests, which have been questioned for giving Irish banks passing grades, Mr. Rehn said. The commission wants EU national governments to have funds ready to recapitalize their banks as Spain has done, Mr. Rehn said, hinting that some banks that passed last year's tests would fail this time around. 

"We are encouraging the member states to ensure they have the necessary national financial backstops in case the stress tests reveal a weakness of capitalization," he said. 

One of the most contentious issues surrounding the tests is whether they should include an economic scenario in which one or more euro-zone sovereign governments default on their debt. Financial markets have become steadily more convinced that Greece will need to restructure its debt, despite a pledge by EU governments and institutions that no euro-zone government will be allowed to default on its debt. That could leave a major hole in the balance sheets of banks that hold the debt, requiring governments to provide more capital. 

Mr. Rehn stepped gingerly around that topic. "I am certain that we will be able to avoid default or restructuring in Europe," he said. "Those who are responsible for the bank stress tests have the ways and means to include sufficiently stressed scenarios in order to make the tests credible." 

People following the discussions say EU governments are divided on the topic. The U.K. and Scandinavian nations want to see a default scenario in the tests, while France and Germany are wary, they say. 

Another key detail is "evaluations" that regulators are planning to do of bank liquidity. The European Banking Authority, the new pan-EU bank regulator, has proposed conducting liquidity reviews separately from the stress tests. The EBA wants to publish the stress tests but not the liquidity reviews. 

"Liquidity aspects are extremely sensitive, and we have to be quite sensible how you deal with that in terms of publication of data," Mr. Rehn said. An EU official on Thursday said governments are unlikely to publish the liquidity reviews. 

—Geoffrey T. Smith and David Enrich contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Matthew Dalton at Matthew.Dalton@dowjones.com and Stephen Fidler at stephen.fidler@wsj.com 