BRUSSELS—European finance ministers were deadlocked Tuesday over whether to tighten rules on short-selling, with a number of countries complaining that the proposed restrictions could make it harder for governments to sell debt. 

France and Germany, the main proponents of the rules, argue that bets by speculators against the debt of weaker euro-zone countries have exacerbated the sovereign debt crisis. The proposal debated Tuesday would restrict short-selling of shares and sovereign debt and require investors to disclose their short positions above a certain threshold to government regulators and, in the case of equity positions, to the public. 

But the U.K., Italy and several other countries said the proposals could reduce liquidity in the sovereign debt markets, making it harder for them to finance their budgets. 

"These markets are critical to all of us in Europe right now and central to the operation of fiscal policy," said Kim Darroch, the U.K. ambassador to the EU. "We need to take care to avoid unintended costs which will be borne by European taxpayers." 

Ministers from Spain, Sweden, Slovenia and the Netherlands also voiced concerns about restricting sovereign debt short-selling. 

Short-selling is a way to bet that the price of a security will fall: Investors sell borrowed securities that they don't currently own, hoping that the price will fall and the security can be purchased and returned at a lower price. 

Tuesday's proposal would in most circumstances ban "naked" short-selling, in which investors sell borrowed securities without making arrangements to buy the underlying security. A number of governments, including the U.S., limit naked short-selling of shares, but the EU would be one of the first to do it for sovereign debt. 

A number of studies—including one by the European Commission, the EU's executive arm—have examined whether short-selling has harmed financial market stability without finding an effect. The commission, which first proposed the restrictions on short-selling last year, says governments don't have enough information on short positions to determine whether it has an impact. 

A November study by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development said evidence that unrestricted short-selling of sovereign debt is causing market instability "seems to be lacking." 

France and Germany have argued that short-selling of sovereign debt by speculators helped push yields on Greek and Irish debt so high that the governments were forced to take emergency financing from the EU and the International Monetary Fund. 

French Finance Minister Christine Lagarde, a main proponent of the tougher rules, dismissed studies finding that short-selling did not exacerbate the euro-zone sovereign debt crisis. 

"We've seen it," she said, "and we might as well be on the precautionary side rather than on the curative side." 

But other ministers said short-sellers shouldn't be blamed for the debt crisis. 

"The idea that we can regulate away problems that have more to do with public finances lacking in supervision....is problematic," said Swedish Finance Minister Anders Borg. 

The Hungarian finance minister—Hungary currently holds the rotating EU presidency—said he would work to shape an agreement for the next formal finance ministers' meeting. 