Rangers defenseman Matt Gilroy has been a healthy scratch 17 games this season. It's hockey's version of limbo—not really a full member of the team, but also not relegated to the minor leagues. He practiced but did not dress for many of the team's games. 

But when 20-year-old Michael Del Zotto was sent to the minors last week, Mr. Gilroy's place in the lineup was finally secured, setting the stage for yet another unlikely success story in a career full of them. 

And so, just as those who know Mr. Gilroy would expect, with his place in the lineup secure, he's scored three goals in the Rangers' past six games.

"He's a confident guy and he's a patient guy and he'll wait and give everyone a second to realize what he already knows," said Jack Parker, Mr. Gilroy's coach at Boston University.

Mr. Gilroy, 26, has one of hockey's greatest stories. A Long Island native who was unable to get any attention from college hockey programs, he played junior hockey until age 20. He joined Boston University as a practice defenseman and was told he would never play.

 Four years later, Mr. Gilroy was awarded the Hobey Baker Award, given to college hockey's top player. He led his team to the 2009 National Championship and, because he was too old to enter the draft, became a sought-after free agent. 

He chose the Rangers, where he would play at Madison Square Garden, the same building where his father Frank, a former St. John's basketball player, had starred. 

He played 69 games for the Blueshirts last season, but Mr. Gilroy said the key this year is that he didn't sulk when he wasn't playing and finally has his confidence back. 

"He handled himself well. He certainly wasn't running around being the social chairman,'' Rangers coach John Tortorella said. "He was upset he wasn't playing. I hope players are upset when they aren't playing, but he certainly wasn't dragging anybody down. He just kept waiting his turn…he kept himself ready."

Mr. Gilroy first became a major contributor to this year's Blueshirts when he scored two goals in a win against the Islanders on Dec. 27th. He is plus-10 in 27 games. 

Mr. Tortorella said that Mr. Gilroy was never playing poorly when he was out of the lineup—he was just a victim of a numbers game. 

Mr. Gilroy said he doesn't have expectations about how long his current stint as a regular defenseman will last. He's just glad it finally came. 

"I don't mind taking the long road," he said.

No kidding.

 Write to  Kevin Clark at kevin.clark@wsj.com 