Let us raise our coffee cups to the "promising debut." The phrase has long been used by reviewers as a means of polite dismissal, the ultimate in damning with faint praise. But the truth is that rough-hewn rookie efforts, however flawed, are sometimes dazzling as well. Case in point: Alexander Yates's plucky "Moondogs" (Doubleday, 339 pages, $25.95), which is nearly as engaging in its misfires as in its bull's-eyes.

It begins when Howard Bridgewater, an American who has made a fortune as a hotelier in the Philippines, is kidnapped by a dimwitted meth addict (and his malevolent fighting cock, Kelog). The abductor has delusions of auctioning Bridgewater to Islamic jihadists. The day after the disappearance, Bridgewater's estranged son, Benicio, arrives from the U.S. for a planned reunion, only to find himself seemingly stood up.

In time, the kidnapping becomes public and a manhunt ensues, but even then the story keeps an eye on Benicio's struggle to forgive his father's many transgressions. Bridgewater is a splendidly Falstaffian character, tubby ("more apple than pear-shaped"), big-hearted and sybaritic. Even in captivity he is almost boisterously intent on escaping and redeeming himself to his son. Benicio, in crime-ridden Manila, surrounded by Bridgewater's oily politico pals and prostitutes, comes to understand—and be tempted by—the corrupt world his father has relished. Mr. Yates's most impressive feat is to synchronize a sort of gradual reconciliation between the father and son without the two even meeting.

But that is only half of the action in "Moondogs." The rest follows the police squad eventually assigned to rescue Bridgewater. Styled the "Task Force Ka-Pow" because of the action movies based on their exploits, the cops are "bruhos," or wizards— crime-stoppers with freakish magical powers, such as limitless sniper range and the ability to morph into animals. Mr. Yates attacks this twist with shoot-'em-up verve, but it never meshes with the Bridgewaters' drama, in part because it's too reminiscent of the premise for the X-Men. In the end, the two storylines get in each other's way.

In "Moondogs," Mr. Yates's shows a kind of overzealousness, something that experience may well temper. Meanwhile, readers will be gratified by the ambition and raw energy on display in this particular promising debut.

At the opposite end of the spectrum from the eager tyro author is the complacent veteran, and that's where we find Jonathan Coe with his ninth novel, "The Terrible Privacy of Maxwell Sim" (Alfred A. Knopf, 314 pages, $26.95). Sim is a 48-year-old divorcée whose crippling loneliness is a compound of three literary clichés: the loneliness of the English Midlands (Sim lives in the dull suburb of Watford); the loneliness of the traveling salesman (he is driving to Scotland to promote a new brand of toothbrush); and the loneliness of the Facebook age (Sim has been friended by a paltry 74 people).

Mr. Coe has also structured his novel after "The Four Quartets," T.S. Eliot's ode to modern disaffection, and Sim himself evokes J. Alfred Prufrock. He doesn't consider eating a peach, but he does come home to five phone messages: "Did I dare listen to them?"

Sim's maundering about digital alienation proves to be a red herring, however, and "the riddle of his unhappiness," as his ex-wife puts it, turns out to be rooted in his broken relationship with his father. Unlike "Moondogs," which is mature and circumspect about the attempted repair of a father-son fracture, "The Terrible Privacy of Maxwell Sim" treats the quest to find the source of Sim's conflict with his father as an actual riddle. Sim manages to solve it—and thereby illuminate his own repressions—when a manuscript serendipitously appears that discloses his father's lifelong secret.

The conceit of this novel is that, because Sim is a tedious and artless character, his narration will be boring and derivative—"Sorry, I am just not very good at describing people," he cautions. But this is faux-daring, a cop-out. "The Terrible Privacy of Maxwell Sim" is a traveling-salesman novel written on cruise control.