PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla.—The package arrived at the Capuano residence in West Springfield, Mass., one day in 2001. Inside was a letter of recruitment from Morgan Stanley.

Two years into his professional career, Mets pitcher Chris Capuano had a chance to abandon baseball and take an entry-level investment banking job in New York. "I definitely would have made more than I was making in Double-A," he said.

Capuano never seriously considered taking the job, but the offer was a reminder of what makes him unique among his peers.

While other athletes indulge in excess (see: Francisco Rodriguez's Lamborghini), Capuano talks about "preservation of capital." While other athletes hang with fellow jocks, Capuano has friends at UBS and Lazard.

Now, the Mets are hoping the same sharp, analytical mind that made Capuano a Phi Beta Kappa graduate of Duke will help him keep his career alive in Flushing. Like his Princeton-educated teammate, Chris Young, Capuano offers a case study on the extent to which book smarts translate on the mound.

"There's a difference between intelligence and academic achievement," Mets general manager Sandy Alderson said. "But the academic achievement does suggest a certain level of perseverance and attention to detail. I think it's a tremendous asset for him."

Capuano, a 32-year-old left-hander, was never a particularly hard thrower. But after two reconstructive elbow surgeries, any attempt to rely on sheer power would be futile.

While pitching for the Milwaukee Brewers last season, Capuano threw his fastball at an average speed of 87.4 mph, according to FanGraphs.com. Of the 262 pitchers who threw at least 60 innings, only 20 had a slower fastball.

What will make him effective, aside from staying healthy, is in large part his ability to outsmart opposing hitters. Mixing speeds and pitch locations and knowing how to take advantage of hitters' tendencies will be essential.

"You don't have to be a genius to play this game," Capuano said. "But you have to have the courage to try to continue to get better, because you can't just stay where you are. The game adjusts to you, and you have to continue to stay ahead of it. I think in my case, my education and that analytical background has helped me."

Capuano is the rare professional baseball player who wasn't bent on playing in the big leagues from an early age. He pitched well enough in high school to be selected by the Pittsburgh Pirates in the 45th round of the 1996 draft. But baseball was largely a means to an end.

The valedictorian of his class, Capuano chose Duke over Yale and Dartmouth.

"I don't think he went there saying, well, I want to be a pro ballplayer," said Capuano's father, Frank. "The goal was to get a good education so you can fend for yourself in the world."

Even as a college junior, shortly before he was drafted in the eighth round by the Arizona Diamondbacks in 1999, Capuano left resumes with recruiters from Morgan Stanley and Lehman Brothers at a career fair. He had the genes and the grades to pursue a career in finance.

Frank Capuano is a financial planner. Chris majored in economics and finished with a 3.86 grade-point average on a 4.0 scale. But with the Diamondbacks offering a $140,000 signing bonus and a shot at the majors, he figured the white-collar world could wait.

To some teammates, Capuano's background makes him something of a curiosity. Former Brewers pitcher Derek Turnbow, seeking investment advice, used to pepper Capuano with questions when they were teammates in Milwaukee. 

But the most discernable impact of his academic background is in the way Capuano prepares for games. What worked for him in the classroom—analyzing data, retaining information, time management, discipline—works for him in the clubhouse. By the time he takes the mound, he knows each hitter's tendencies in particular counts.

Once the ball is in his hand, though, instincts take over. Catcher Josh Thole said Capuano is smart but not overly cerebral, an important distinction.

"He doesn't overanalyze," Thole said. "I've played with a lot of smart guys, and...they're constantly thinking about mechanics and 'A plus B equals C' stuff instead of just throwing the baseball."

Barring an injury or a dreadful performance in the remainder of spring training, Capuano will begin the season at the back of the Mets' starting rotation. He is by no means ready to think about life after baseball. But unlike many players, he doesn't need to fret over it.

He plans to enroll in graduate school when his baseball career is over, probably to study law, business or some combination of the two.

"When I go out there, I really feel like I have nothing to lose," he said. "I'm just going to enjoy this. If I play for another 10 years, great. If it all ends tomorrow, I've had a great run and I'm ready for the next phase."