Illinois lawmakers are considering sweeping legislation that would link teacher tenure to student test scores, make it easier to fire ineffective teachers and curb teachers' right to strike.

The measure, debated during a Senate panel hearing Monday, moves Illinois to the forefront of states' efforts to hold teachers more accountable for student performance, while taking on the powerful teacher unions, which often oppose such changes.

Last year, at least a dozen states from Maryland to Washington revamped teacher evaluations and altered tenure rules—a flurry of activity spurred by Race to the Top, President Obama's $4.35 billion initiative to reward states that overhaul education systems. Colorado passed a similar measure to the one proposed by Illinois, where leaders in both chambers of the state house appear to support it. No other state has gone as far as Colorado.

Sandi Jacobs, vice president of the National Council on Teacher Quality, said states were pushing changes even though the Race to the Top money has already been given out. 

"I think there is a real acknowledgment that teacher evaluations have been divorced from evidence of student learning for far too long," said Ms. Jacobs, whose nonprofit seeks improvement in teacher recruitment and development.

Teachers unions in some states have fought changes in teacher evaluation and tenure polices, complaining the new plans are often rushed and rely too heavily on student test scores, while those in other states have backed the moves. 

Illinois state House leaders hope to vote on the measure, dubbed Performance Counts, before Jan. 12, when the new General Assembly is sworn in. The Senate would also need to approve the measure. State Rep. Roger Eddy, a Republican who co-chairs the house education reform committee, said the proposal has been fast tracked because it could be linked with a tax increase.

He said legislative leaders don't think a tax increase could pass unless paired with major accountability measures. The legislature is also mulling reforms to Medicaid and worker's compensation.

State Sen. Kimberly Lightford, a Democrat who co-chairs the senate's education reform committee, said she did not believe the measure would pass by mid-January because she wants to sit down with union leaders and advocates behind the proposal to negotiate a better plan.

"This is too important to rush and we have a history in this state of working together," said Lightford, adding that she supports most aspects of the plan.

Illinois labor leaders offered up their own plan Monday, dubbed "Accountability for All." It calls for training local school-board members so they could more effectively make budget decisions and negotiate teacher-union contracts. It also mandates that every district have a qualified teacher—not a substitute—in the classroom.

"There are aspects of the plan we flatly reject and other parts that we can possibly support," said Charles McBarron, spokesman for the Illinois Education Association, the state's largest teachers union, with 133,000 members. "But this was developed without any input from teachers and they are trying to ram it through."

Performance Counts builds on changes approved by Illinois state lawmakers last year that linked teacher evaluations to student achievement for the first time. But that legislation, adopted in an unsuccessful attempt to win Race to the Top money, did not mandate the ratings be used in tenure decisions.

Under the new plan, teachers would not earn tenure until they've been rated "proficient" or "excellent" by their principals for four years using the new evaluations. Now, public-school teachers in Illinois, like their colleagues across the U.S., get the job protection almost automatically after a few years.

Tenured teachers rated "ineffective" for two years could lose the job protection and revert back to probationary status. And the measure would streamline the firing process, making it easier to get rid of low-performing teachers. The plan also makes teacher performance—instead of seniority—the driving factor in school layoff decisions.

But most controversial, the measure would severely curb teachers' power to strike. Now, teachers can strike after negotiations fail. But the proposal would mandate that the two sides go before a mediation panel and give the local school board the final say on whether to accept the mediators' proposal or to impose its own settlement. Unions could strike only if the school board failed to make a final decision.

"The threat of a strike is so significant, it casts a very long shadow over the negotiating process," said Robin Steans, executive director of Advance Illinois, an education-advocacy group that helped craft the proposal. "If you want the other reforms to stick, you have to deal with the strike issue in state law." 

The fight in Illinois is a microcosm of the shifting sands in national education policy.

For decades, teachers unions have generally donated cash and campaign workers to Democrats, who, in turn, have supported the unions' legislative agenda. 

But as lawmakers nationwide face gaping state budget deficits—caused, in part, by teacher pension obligations—some Democrats are demurring. Some back spending cuts and others, including President Barack Obama, also support tougher teacher evaluation and tenure policies.

Illinois Speaker of the House Michael Madigan, a Chicago Democrat who had a tight relationship with teachers unions, angered them last year by backing a pension bill that trimmed benefits. The unions didn't donate to his campaign war chest during the last campaign cycle, as they had done in past years.

In December, Mr. Madigan created a bipartisan panel, the Special House Committee on Education Reform and, two weeks later, the panel held hearings on Performance Counts. Union officials said they received a copy of the document just a few days earlier.Steve Brown, spokesman for Mr. Madigan, declined to say if the speaker supported the proposal but said, "The voters of Illinois want to see some overhaul of basic systems, such as education, and we agree with that."

The Illinois battle also highlights another front in the education wars: a budding reform community that is challenging the union's political spending. Stand for Children, a national education group with eight state affiliates, dumped $600,000 into nine state races here. They also met with Mr. Madigan to talk about their ideas for change. 

Two of the four lawmakers Mr. Madigan appointed to the House committee were backed by Stand for Children.

 Write to  Stephanie Banchero at stephanie.banchero@wsj.com 