FRANKFURT—European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet on Monday signaled the ECB is likely to increase interest rates as soon as next month, saying he has "nothing to add" to the ECB's policy statement on March 3, when the central bank warned that "strong vigilance" was needed on inflation. 

Other top ECB officials echoed his remarks, suggesting that unrest in the Middle East, military strikes against Libya and the crisis in Japan haven't budged the ECB from its view that inflation risks merit a more restrictive monetary policy.

Economists interpreted the "strong vigilance" language, and Mr. Trichet's subsequent comment—that a rate increase was "possible" at the ECB's April 7 meeting—as an indication that a rise in its main policy rate was likely unless something altered the officials' views. 

Other ECB officials echoed Mr. Trichet's remarks Monday, suggesting the ECB will likely increase rates for the first time since July 2008 amid signs that inflation will accelerate further. 

Central Bank of Luxembourg Governor Yves Mersch and ECB board member Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell each repeated the "strong vigilance" language, a phrase that the ECB has used in the past to signal a near-term rise in interest rates. 

Bank of Italy Governor Mario Draghi, a frontrunner to succeed Mr. Trichet as ECB president later this year, said in a speech that ECB policy "has been expansionary for a long time" and, with inflationary pressures now emerging, "a deterioration of [inflation] expectations must be prevented." 

"For now, the signals from the ECB have been pretty clear and back up the early March 'heads up' for a hike" in April, BNP Paribas economist  Ken Wattret said in a research note. 

The ECB is following the economic effects of Japan's earthquake and nuclear crisis "very carefully," Mr. Trichet told parliamentarians. But his strident anti-inflation comments Monday suggest the ECB thinks the effect on the euro zone "will be limited," said IHS Global Insight economist  Howard Archer. 

Inflation across the 17-member euro bloc "is on the rise," Mr. Trichet said, largely reflecting higher commodity prices. Annual inflation is 2.4%, well above the ECB's target of just below 2%. 

"It is crucial at this stage to avoid that the recent rise in inflation translates into broad-based second-round effects, for instance via price-setting or higher wages," Mr. Trichet said. 

Mr. Trichet repeated his long-standing position that the euro zone's permanent rescue fund should be able to purchase bonds in the secondary markets. "The mechanism should be able to employ a range of instruments to be effective in stemming against contagion in situations of acute market instability," he said. 

Euro-zone leaders are reluctant to give the rescue fund that kind of firepower, leaving the ECB as the primary institution able to act quickly in response to financial stress. 

The ECB started buying government bonds last May in an effort to keep Greece's fiscal crisis from spreading to other countries. 

The ECB didn't purchase any government bonds last week, it said Monday, the third-straight week it has remained on the sidelines despite recent signs of strain in peripheral bond markets. 

—Alessandro Torello in Brussels contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Nina Koeppen at nina.koeppen@dowjones.com and Brian Blackstone at brian.blackstone@dowjones.com 