Community colleges are examining their safety programs as they see more mental illness in their student populations, an issue highlighted by the Arizona-shooting suspect, whose behavior on campus had alarmed school officials.

Their scrutiny comes as enrollment grows and state funding shrinks for these colleges, which serve tens of thousands of students, many of them adults, who may take just a class or two and almost never live on campus. 

In recent interviews, administrators said they were now looking for gaps in security policies they adopted following the Virginia Tech massacre in 2007.

"We feel the need to pay more attention to this subject than before," said Rolando Montoya, provost at Miami Dade College, which hired a consultant in the fall to help it formalize the procedures it uses to identify and deal with troubled students.

Schools that don't have such "threat assessment" programs are contacting consultants to develop plans, said Brett A. Sokolow, managing partner of one such firm, the National Center for Higher Education Risk Management. "They all want to know how quickly you can set this up," he said.

Months before allegedly firing on Rep. Gabrielle Giffords and 18 others on Jan. 8, Jared Loughner is said to have displayed signs of disturbance that frightened teachers and students at Tucson's Pima Community College. In reports made public after the shooting, campus police said Mr. Loughner appeared to be suffering from a mental illness. After one incident that left an instructor "visibly upset," police wrote, his "head was constantly tilted to the left and his eyes were jittery and looking up and to the left."

The final straw for the college was a YouTube video in which Mr. Loughner said, "We're examining the torture of students" at Pima, which he called a "genocide/scam."

The school used a "behavioral assessment" team of a psychiatrist and administrators to review his case and decided to require Mr. Loughner to undergo an outside mental-health evaluation, said Alice Callison, a school lawyer. Instead, Mr. Loughner withdrew from the school in October.

Many college leaders have praised Pima's dealings with Mr. Loughner for ensuring the campus was safe. But the school has also been criticized for not doing more, such as calling in outside law-enforcement or mental-health agencies.

"Pima just got him off campus but left him floating in the community without treatment," said Alan Lipman, an associate professor of psychiatry at George Washington University Medical Center. He said the school should have used its ability under Arizona law to ensure that Mr. Loughner was evaluated for psychiatric problems.

"Clearly, in retrospect, in any tragedy you are going to ask, 'What could we have done differently?' " said Paul Schwalbach, a college spokesman. "We're going to be asking, 'How could we do better? What more should we do?' "

Colleges are seeing a growing population of students with mental illness. In a 2010 survey, the American College Counseling Association found that 91% of counseling directors at all types of colleges reported greater numbers of students with severe psychological problems, including a sharp uptick in the last five years in the number requiring immediate attention.

College leaders say the reasons for the increase are unclear, but that it could be the result of changing treatments that may allow people with more severe mental illness to attend college. 

Community colleges say they are ill-equipped to handle the burden. They have one-tenth the funding for mental-health services of four-year colleges, according to the ACCA. The association found in surveying schools that only 3 out of 65 community colleges surveyed had psychiatrists on staff.

"It is not within our mission to provide the kind of therapy or long-term remediation for long-term issues," said Caroline Scott, dean of college life at the Community College of Baltimore County.

Pima Community College, which has more than 72,000 students on six campuses, is expecting a 55% cut in the money it receives from Arizona because of the state's budget crisis, said Pima Chancellor Roy Flores.

Schools say they will continue to improve their efforts. For example, Howard Community College in Columbia, Md., has an elaborate program to track troubled students, including online reporting of incidents, said Cindy Peterka, vice president of student services. She said the school will discuss "what more we could be doing" at a meeting next month with one of its consultants on behavioral intervention. 

 Write to  Alexandra Berzon at alexandra.berzon@wsj.com and Leslie Eaton at leslie.eaton@wsj.com 