The nominations for the 83rd Academy Awards will be announced on Jan. 25—an event sure to be big news, even if much of the behind-the-scenes politicking, aimed at turning a nomination into a win, is still to take place. The Oscars, for all their glamour, have always been an insular affair.

Debra Ann Pawlak's "Bringing Up Oscar" sets itself the interesting task of telling the back stories of the 34 men and two women—the gender ratio was not so unusual in 1927—who founded the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. The founding group included a smattering of industry giants whose names still have some currency today: Douglas Fairbanks, Cecil B. De Mille and MGM head Louis B. Mayer, whose basic idea it was. The group also included some unjustly forgotten talents—e.g., actor Richard Barthelmess, screenwriter Frank Woods—and industry operatives chosen because they were solid Hollywood citizens willing to wrestle with the grunt work of running the Academy itself: e.g., director Frank Lloyd, actor Milton Sills, producer Harry Warner, and screenwriter Carey Wilson.

To a great extent, the formation of the Academy was an act of aspirational pride. Within little more than 20 years, the American movie itself had morphed from a parlor amusement into an art form of subtlety, grace and astonishing commercial success. The Academy's founders wanted recognition for their life's work, and they knew they wouldn't get it from New York, whose theatrical and literary hierarchies would never admit that the movies had achieved a standing equivalent to that of the older arts. 

 By Debra Ann Pawlak  Pegasus, 384 pages, $27.95

Unfortunately, Ms. Pawlak's story of artistry, ambition and ego quickly unravels. The first 200 pages take us through potted biographies of the people who came together to create the Academy, a deadening procession of genealogical and biographical detail that never develops into a narrative. After everybody is introduced, we get a dozen or so pages about the actual formation and direction of the organization, and then the toboggan begins heading downhill: Recapitulation of the post-Academy lives of the founders, padded out with clichés ("Chaplin, Fairbanks and Pickford were no less than Hollywood royalty") and lots of extraneous detail.

Ms. Pawlak relies too much on secondary sources and the Internet, which might be the reason for some of the book's errors. (A drop of water for every fact error on the Internet Movie Database could float the Mediterranean fleet.) The Christie brothers were far more famous for comedy shorts than they were for features, as Mr. Pawlak claims; Mary Pickford had been gone from Paramount for more than 10 years when, Ms. Pawlak says, the Paramount sound supervisor said she had the best voice among the studio's actresses. And referring to female scriptwriters as "penwomen" is the grimmest locution since the days of Henry Luce's Timestyle. 

But the book's biggest problem is a glaring omission: No more than fragmentary attention is given to the underlying reason for the formation of the Academy: to subvert the growing momentum toward unionization of the movie industry.

By 1927, unions had already made headway in organizing cameramen, and were going to work on the editors too; Mayer and the rest of the studio heads hoped to stop any further advances. At its inception, the Academy set up what amounted to a labor relations board, charged with adjudicating personnel and labor matters. In other words, the founders were attempting to set up a company union.

It didn't work, for reasons that were out of their control. Sound, which arrived tentatively in 1927 and like a category-five hurricane in 1928, brought a plethora of actors, writers and journalists from the East Coast to Hollywood. All these people had been represented by one union or another in New York, and they saw no reason why they shouldn't be represented by similar unions in California. 

Within 10 years, the movie industry was on its way to collective bargaining. Pragmatic conservative studio heads (Mayer, Darryl Zanuck at 20th Century Fox) made the best deals they could and moved on, but some harsher negotiators (Walt Disney, Jack Warner) found themselves fighting hard, bitter strikes. 

The key to understanding the Academy, then or now, is its combination of sunny self-congratulation and what the founders undoubtedly saw as enlightened self-interest. In other words, the Oscars don't belong to the audience; they belong to the industry, which is why awards are handed out that seem to have little to do with either popular success or critical merit. 

To take one early example: In the first year of the Academy Awards, Louis B. Mayer lobbied hard to deny an award for "Artistic Quality of Production" (a now defunct category) to King Vidor's "The Crowd," a great film that was made by MGM—Mayer's own studio. Mayer had acquiesced to the production of the movie as a favor to Vidor, a kind of thanks for directing "The Big Parade," a mammoth hit that put the studio on the map. But "The Crowd" was the sort of movie that Mayer hated. It had poetry, yes, but it also had brutal realism. A child gets run over by a truck and dies. Worse, "The Crowd" seems to have been the first American movie to show a toilet. Mayer won his argument, and Fox's "Sunrise" got the award. 

Nothing much has changed. The Academy now nominates 10 pictures for Best Picture, even though in most years it's hard to come up with 10 really good movies. The Academy has also reduced the Honorary Awards, often the emotional backbone of the ceremony, to fragmentary clips from an earlier, off-camera event. Just as with the first Oscars ceremony more than 80 years ago, it's their party, not ours.

—Mr. Eyman's most recent book is "Empire of Dreams: The Epic Life of Cecil B. DeMille." 