LONDON—With varying degrees of success, the English National Opera has been engaging film directors, starting with the late Anthony Minghella, through Penny Woolcock, Des McAnuff and Mike Figgis. But now, triumphantly, Terry Gilliam, the sole American member of Monty Python's Flying Circus, has been entrusted with Hector Berlioz's "The Damnation of Faust." 

Berlioz, perversely, never intended the piece to be staged. He called it a "concert opera" (or "dramatic legend") and since its premiere in 1846, it has rarely had a production that won either critical or popular laurels. A succession of familiar tunes, from the "Hungarian March" through the "Song of the Flea," the ballad of "the King of Thule" to Marguerite's aria "D'amour L'ardente flame" and Faust's final "Nature immense, impénétrable et fière," the work is held together by seven or eight minutes of even more familiar plot. Mephistopheles seduces Faust; Faust seduces Marguerite; she is damned for her sin; Faust sells his soul to the devil; everybody is redeemed, sort of.

Not much drama there, but enough space and oxygen for Mr. Gilliam's fiery imagination to blaze. He proves he's not afraid of the obvious by treating Goethe's Faust story as a thematic and visual parable of German culture and society in the first half of the 20th century. Designer Hildegard Bechtler's opening set quotes an 1818 painting of Caspar David Friedrich; and the vigorous tenor, Peter Hoare, costumed by Katrina Lindsay in Faust's frock coat but with a shock of red hair, recreates the solitary figure from the German Romantic artist's painting, "The Wayfarer Above a Sea of Fog."

We proceed, with wonderful lighting effects by Peter Mumford and superb video work by Finn Ross, via the imagery of Otto Dix and George Grosz, to a Python-esque view of World War I as an attempt to divide up the world as a cake, using the swords of the crowned heads of Europe, and then another Python touch of a cavalry charge on hobby horses. Mephistopheles (the suave Christopher Purves) reveals Faust's dreams by letting him, Walter-Mitty-like, assist in battlefield surgery.

At a Bierkeller during the Weimar Republic, Brander's (Nicholas Folwell) song is anti-Bolshevik, and we suddenly see that everyone present is a Nazi Brown Shirt. The cabaret number, the "Song of the Flea," is anti-Semitic, Jews are beaten up, and Faust is revolted. Next he is at a cocktail party for the German High Command, catches sight of Marguerite (magnificently sung and acted by Christine Rice) and witnesses a hilarious Wagner-pastiche entertainment. 

Leni Riefenstahl's massed athletes celebrate the 1936 Olympic games and Kristallnacht is all the fault of demonic sprites, who round up hordes of Jews. Marguerite turns out to be Jewish herself, kinkily fantasizing about the blond Nazi on the poster she sees from her bedroom window. She's sent to a death camp. Faust burns his books. The final tableau is chilling.

As an ex-Python Mr. Gilliam surprises us by finding little humor in the jackboots and goose-stepping. His Faust is funny in places; but what impresses is his consistent, full embrace of the horrific tragedy of the failure of German culture. His success must be measured, too, not just in how profoundly and disturbingly he's marshaled the familiar imagery and vast cast, but how carefully he's listened to the music, and treated conductor Edward Gardner as a full partner in this dazzling enterprise.

 Seven performances until June 7 

  www.eno.org  

 Write to  Paul Levy at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 