TOKYO—Global fears about unsustainable government borrowing reached Japan Thursday, when a leading ratings agency issued a surprise downgrade of the country's bonds, slamming political leaders for having no "coherent strategy" to tackle the nation's fast-worsening fiscal problems. 

With investors already nervous about outsize debts in many European nations, Standard & Poor's lowered the long-term sovereign-debt rating for Japan by one notch to double-A-minus, the first downgrade for Tokyo since April 2002. That puts the country's debt on a par with China, which recently passed Japan as the world's second-largest economy, as well as with Saudi Arabia and Kuwait. 

S&P cited Japan's big deficits and aging population for its downgrade. See measures of the government's financial health.

"The downgrade reflects our appraisal that Japan's government debt ratios—already among the highest for rated sovereigns—will continue to rise further than we envisaged before the global economic recession hit the country and will peak only in the mid-2020s," the agency said.

Market reaction was swift, as the yen suddenly weakened against the dollar on the news, while interest rates on Japanese government bonds, or JGBs, ticked up, as did the cost of insuring the nation's sovereign debt against default. But the size of the moves in credit markets was relatively small—and nowhere near the investor pressures on countries such as Greece, Portugal and Ireland. 

That reality reflects Japan's unusual borrowing picture. While its outstanding debt, at nearly 200% of the size of the economy, is far bigger than the troubled European nations, its bonds are largely domestically held, insulating the country from sharp market moves. 

"This downgrade by S&P also shouldn't have any serious impact," said  Chotaro Morita, head of Japan fixed-income strategy research at Barclays Capital Japan Ltd. "Ratings haven't been such a critical factor for the market also for the major reason that money flows have simply continued to be so supportive of JGB demand." 

And while issuing the downgrade, S&P said the outlook for Japan's bonds was now stable, citing Japan's strong external balance sheet and the "flexibility" that comes from the yen's international role. Japan has the world's second-largest foreign reserves, after China, at more than $1 trillion. 

But significant uncertainty remains over how long that stability will hold. Research firm Capital Economics said the downgrade "supports our fear that 2011 could be the year when Japan's dire fiscal position finally impacts markets both at home and internationally." 

The timing of the move came as a surprise to the markets. Citigroup Global Markets Japan said it expected any downgrade wouldn't come before June, when the government had pledged it would produce a tax-reform package meant to address the worsening debt situation. 

Among other leading agencies, Fitch Ratings said it was maintaining its stable outlook on the basis that the current low interest rates would allow Japan to fund itself, although Fitch noted that the longer-term pressures from an aging population could threaten funding stability.

Moody's Investors Services said it was maintaining its own Aa2 rating, but echoed the worries over the endemic political gridlock in Japan. 

Policy makers have shown few signs they are willing to wean Japan from its debt habit. They face an unpalatable choice of drastically cutting nondiscretionary spending or raising taxes to unprecedented levels—or a combination of the two.

As a first step, Prime Minister Naoto Kan has pushed for a comprehensive tax reform expected to mean a sharp rise in Japan's consumption tax, currently at 5%—low by international standards. 

But S&P was skeptical that the government could deliver on policies that materially reduce Japan's debt load. 

Japanese Economy Minister Kaoru Yosano said that the S&P move was "regrettable" and suggested that the agency doesn't fully appreciate the government's steps toward fiscal reform. He stressed that the government is serious about tax reform to at least partly close the current budget gap. 

Unlike Greece and the other countries suffering from market runs on their sovereign borrowing, Japan has been largely immune to the dictates of global hedge funds and other demanding investors who look askance at the razor-thin yields offered for Japanese government-issued debt. 

The day of reckoning for Japan is expected only when buying from domestic investors diminishes, or is overwhelmed by even larger issuance of government bonds. Such trends appear inevitable, but not imminent.

Since the early 1990s—when Japan moved from fiscal surplus to deficits—Tokyo has been able to fund its expenditures by tapping into the country's $17 trillion in savings, much of which is channeled through currency risk-averse domestic institutional investors into JGBs. While foreign investors make up an average of 60% of trades on the Tokyo Stock Exchange, just 6.4% of Japan's government debt is held outside the country, according to Bank of Japan data. That has allowed the Japanese government to roll over its existing debt and issue new obligations without paying much heed to global demand and supply considerations. Thus, a lower credit rating is largely symbolic because it is unlikely to dissuade Japanese institutional investors from soaking up new government-issued debt. For them, JGBs remain attractive relative to investments with potentially greater risk, especially as deflation has increased the real return of the bonds, even with nominally low rates.

But Japan may not be able to count on that in the coming years. Spending is likely to soar even faster, as the rapidly aging population leads to increased outlays in the form of rising payments for pensions, health care and other government entitlements. At the same time, the country's savings pool—the funds used to buy government debt—is being drained by a combination of more retirees and fewer workers due to a low birth rate. 

In announcing its decision to lower Japan's long-term sovereign-credit ratings, S&P cited, among other issues, that "total social security-related expenses now make up 31% of the government's fiscal 2011 budget, and this ratio will rise absent reforms beyond those enacted in 2004."

Based on current trends, Japan's gross public debt load could exceed total household financial assets by as soon as 2015, according to a working paper issued last year by International Monetary Fund economist  Kiichi Tokuoka. "Although these results do not imply any specific turning point for public debt financing, they suggest that if current trends continue, domestic financing could become more difficult toward the mid-2010s, placing a premium on other sources of financing, including from overseas," the paper stated. 

Should Japan find itself in need of capital from beyond its own shores, its diminished credit rating could force it to offer higher rates of return to attract foreign investors. That would raise the government's own borrowing costs and also those of Japanese companies and individuals as local banks follow the government's lead. 

Finance Minister Yoshihiko Noda, while not commenting directly on the S&P action, said the government must act to retain investor confidence in Japanese government debt. 

"It is important to send out messages when necessary that Japan is trying to put itself on the path toward fiscal improvement; we will maintain fiscal discipline by delivering results," he said. "It is important to gain the trust of the markets."

 Write to  William Sposato at william.sposato@dowjones.com 