With all the heavy breathing inflating the latest technology bubble, Harlan Steinbaum's "Tough Calls From the Corner Office" is a reminder that there are still executives who take years, rather than months, to build their careers and still businesses where value is still tethered to earnings. 

There are even people, as Dickensian as they may seem, who make their money without the help of social-media-driven, peer-to-peer payment systems. They build machinery rent cars, run banks, sell insurance and make chocolate. Mr. Steinbaum, who made his own fortune in pharmacies and fulfilling prescriptions, went around talking to these kinds of business people, asking them about the defining moments of their careers. He has structured his book around the arc of their professional lives, starting with their earliest career choices and then moving on to the balances they struck between risk and opportunity, the changes they made to their businesses, and the ways in which they stepped aside when the time came to retire.

The risk in most such retrospectives is the tendency to platitudes, and while there are some of them in "Tough Calls From the Corner Office"—a leader, we are told at one point, "needs to be ready, adaptable, and open-minded"—Mr. Steinbaum has elicited useful stories of life in the entrepreneurial and management trenches. 

 By Harlan Steinbaum  (HarperBusiness, 271 pages, $25.99)

Joseph Plumeri, the Italian-American chairman of chief executive of Willis Group Holdings, an insurance broker, says that when he took over the very proper British company, it was "sort of like Fonzie showing up." Mr. Plumeri recalls looking for an afternoon job when he was a law student in New York. He was wandering through lower Manhattan and saw a plaque that read Carter, Berlind and Weill. Assuming it was a law firm, he walked in. He was shown into the office of Sandy Weill, who explained that the company was a brokerage firm, not a law firm. Weill, who built his brokerage into Citigroup, nonetheless gave Mr. Plumeri a job, at a desk inserted into a closet. Mr. Plumeri rose to be CEO of Citibank North America.

Shelly Lazarus, the chairman and CEO of Ogilvy & Mather Worldwide, describes how she volunteered to go and run Ogilvy Direct, the unglamorous direct marketing arm of the advertising giant. Ogilvy Direct grew through acquisitions to become the largest direct-response company in the world, which in turn led to Ms. Lazarus running the whole show. By taking on a job no one else wanted, she created the platform for her ascent.

Albert Suter, a former chief operating officer of Emerson Electric, recounts Emerson's decision to take on low-cost emerging market rivals by moving production to markets with lower costs. "That was the only way we could lower our prices and survive." Moving production to Mexico and China meant closing plants in North America. It was ugly and unpleasant, but as the CEO at the time said: "We moved jobs to save jobs."

One story deals a blow to notions of American meritocracy. George Herbert Walker, a former bank executive, describes his transition out of retirement into public service. In 2001, he goes to see his first cousin, George H.W. Bush, the 41st president, and says that he'd like to work abroad, in government service. Any thoughts? Mr. Bush advises him to write to his own son, the recently elected 43rd president, and promises to put in a word. A few months later, George W. Bush invites Mr. Walker to become the U.S. ambassador to Hungary. Mr. Walker says: "My wife and I were not even sure where Hungary was on a map. You can imagine how exciting that was for us!" And, indeed, how widely that excitement must have been shared by the veteran diplomats at the State Department.

 By Hank Gilman  (Portfolio, 216 pages, $25.95)

Hank Gilman comes at the subject of business from a very different perspective in "You Can't Fire Everyone—And Other Lessons From an Accidental Manager." Mr. Gilman currently serves as deputy managing editor at Fortune magazine, and his lessons are culled from his experiences ascending to this role and occupying it. His book is a pooterish ramble through newspaper and magazine middle management. Mr. Gilman is amusing enough ("One of the great mysteries of management: why do the least talented folks complain the most?"), but the problems he has managed lack dramatic heft. 

He has sections with titles like "Face It: We're Slaves to E-Mail." "Large Meetings in Small Doses Only" and "Show Up Ready to Work." You get the gist in the first chapter, "Friendless," which begins with a quote from Ernest Shackleton: "Loneliness is the penalty of leadership." When Mr. Gilman goes on to describe the agonies of running Fortune Small Business magazine—rather than a doomed mission across polar ice—you can't help feeling that he is being a bit melodramatic.

As for the cruel fact that "you can't fire everyone," you certainly can fire some people, and you should, Mr. Gilman says. He notes that you do no service to an incompetent worker by avoiding the moment of reckoning and letting him linger in a purgatory of nonadvancement and secret ridicule. And when the firing moment comes, Mr. Gilman advises, do the task yourself instead of handing it off to a subordinate, as some managers do. Your workers will respect you for your willingness to perform an unpleasant deed—as long as they themselves have a job when you are done.

 Mr. Delves Broughton is the author of "Ahead of the Curve: Two Years at Harvard Business School." 