  Steve Jobs's latest medical leave from  Apple Inc.
AAPL


0.41
%




 renews questions about the depth of the company's executive bench.

In the near term, there's little doubt the Cupertino, Calif., company can be run ably by Chief Operating Officer  Tim Cook, who has successfully filled in for Mr. Jobs twice during the Apple CEO's prior medical leaves in 2004 and 2009.

As the executive in charge of running Apple day to day, the 50-year-old Mr. Cook, already plays a critical role in the company's operations. Mr. Jobs hired the executive, a veteran of  International Business Machines Corp.
IBM


0.03
%




 and Compaq Computer Corp., to run manufacturing in 1998, at a time when Apple was on the brink of insolvency due to weak products and operational woes. 

Mr. Cook helped stabilize Apple by wringing out inefficiencies in Apple's manufacturing, eventually assuming broader responsibilities for the company's sales and operations.

But Mr. Cook's stints during Mr. Jobs's absence were each a half-year or less. It isn't clear how well Apple would fare for longer periods of time without Mr. Jobs, a star CEO whose grasp of product design and marketing makes him irreplaceable in the eyes of many people. Mr. Cook isn't regarded as a product visionary, an area where Mr. Jobs has excelled at over the past decade with products like the iPhone, iPad and iPod.

  Jim Bethmann, head of the technology practice at executive recruiters  Caldwell Partners International
CWL


0.00
%




 in Dallas, doubts that Mr. Cook is capable of filling Mr. Jobs's oversized shoes.

"I don't think he is strategic enough," the recruiter said. Mr. Jobs "has a good solid team in place, but I doubt he has given them any authority to make any strategic decisions" while he is away, Mr. Bethmann said. During Mr. Jobs's 2009 leave, he added, the company didn't release as many major products as it did in the years before and after.

Neither an Apple spokesman nor Mr. Cook responded to requests for comment.

Mr. Jobs's bench at Apple extends beyond Mr. Cook. He has well-regarded lieutenants in place to handle other key functions, such as  Philip Schiller, senior vice president of world-wide product marketing. Apple's advertising and product introductions have been effective tools for establishing itself in new categories, like mobile phones and tablet computer.Playing a key role in Apple's products is  Jonathan Ive, senior vice president of industrial design, a long-serving Apple executive responsible for the eye-catching appearance of the company's gadgets.

  Eddy Cue, Apple's vice president of Internet services, is regarded as an all-purpose fixer, who has helped Mr. Jobs negotiate tricky relationships with music companies, movie studios and publishers.

The software and hardware innards of Apple devices are guided by executives including senior vice president of iPhone software  Scott Forstall, senior vice president of Mac hardware engineering  Bob Mansfield and senior vice president of software engineers  Bertrand Serlet.

While those executives are all regarded as highly skilled in their respective areas, Mr. Jobs has played an outsize role in key decisions—likened by former executives to an editor-in-chief with an intuitive grasp of features to drop from products to make them simpler, or products to delay until markets have more time to mature.

  Channing Smith, who runs the Capital Advisors fund and owns a stake in Apple, said Apple needs to do more to highlight other key players within the company. While he believes Apple will report impressive quarterly results Tuesday, the health issues will overshadow the results in the near term.