Facebook Inc.'s business is growing faster than it forecast several months ago, raising the stakes for an initial public offering as early as spring of next year, said people who have seen Facebook's recent financial information.

One of these people said the company is on track to exceed $2 billion in earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda, in 2011. That is above the numbers from Facebook that circulated several months ago when  Goldman Sachs Group 
GS


-0.19
%




Inc. and Russian investment firm Digital Sky Technologies invested in the closely held Internet company. 

This person wouldn't say by how much Facebook might beat that earnings guidance.

Goldman's and Digital Sky Technologies' investment reported early this year was at a share price that implied a $50 billion valuation for Facebook. The people familiar with the company's recent finances said they thought its profit was growing at a fast-enough clip to justify a valuation of $100 billion or more when it goes public.

 That would make Facebook one of the largest technology companies, and eclipsing  Amazon.com Inc.
AMZN


-1.07
%




 and  Cisco Systems Inc.,
CSCO


0.21
%




 among others.

Those citing this big number cautioned that assessing Facebook's value is difficult because, besides objective matters such as earnings potential, much depends on market sentiment and the overall economic mood at the time of a public offering. 

There is scant public information on Facebook's financials. Given that, some venture capitalists, investors and bankers privately express surprise at what they perceive as astronomical valuations.

The valuation frenzy was particularly triggered by the $1.5 billion investment from Goldman and Digital Sky Technologies. Since then, investors have competed to buy shares of the still-private company on the secondary market. On that market, Facebook valuations have fluctuated wildly, but have recently traded at around $70 billion.

A spokesman for the Palo Alto, Calif., company said, "We're not going to participate in IPO-related speculation."

 Facebook has yet to set a schedule or target price for its IPO with banks, although many large banks are in contact with the company about providing a host of investment-banking services.

Facebook's accelerating financial momentum is another sign of how the seven-year-old social network, run by founder and Chief Executive  Mark Zuckerberg, is affecting online businesses such as advertising. Facebook has more than 600 million users, who frequently share photos, Web links and tastes—stoking advertisers to try to claim a slice of the online conversation.

 The company has grown organically, not only selling advertising but developing its own payments system, called Credits, which people use to pay for things on the site. Facebook also could step up its growth through deal making because, should it need financing, the company has ready access to $1 billion in bank credit, according to people familiar with the matter.

 EMarketer estimates Facebook will have ad revenue this year of $4.05 billion, up from $1.86 billion last year. 

Wedbush Securities Inc. analyst  Lou Kerner said Facebook warrants a bullish view because it is eventually going to take a much larger share of the Internet ad market, while its other lines of business are poised to grow quickly. 

 He pegged Facebook's profit margin—in earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization—at about 50%. He said Ebitda should be $1.95 billion this year, and he estimated the company's value in the public market would be $112.9 billion.

"Part of our bullishness for Facebook is our belief that it is still in the embryonic stages of advertising," Mr. Kerner said. 

Mr. Kerner cautioned that in the longer term, Facebook could face risks from increased government scrutiny world-wide and from its dependency on the Android mobile-operating system created by rival  Google Inc.

In the first quarter, 31% of all online display ads in the U.S. appeared on Facebook, almost double the share from a year ago, according to comScore Inc., a firm that measures how people use the Web. 

Facebook has found success with advertisers such as small and local businesses and social gaming companies that seek a direct response from the Web user, and more recently with larger brands seeking to get consumers to indicate they "like" the brand on the site.

Its ad prices, which have long lagged behind major rivals, appear to be rising quickly. In the first quarter, ads on Facebook cost 40% more per click than in the previous three months, according to Efficient Frontier, an online ad performance firm. 

 While some large brand marketers say they are impressed with the results of their experiments with Facebook, a few analysts caution that how well Facebook drives e-commerce is unproven. 

In a recent study of online retailers, Forrester Research analyst  Sucharita Mulpuru said she found that marketing on Facebook was significantly less effective for acquiring and retaining customers than email and search sites such as Google. 

Since the beginning of this year, Facebook has pushed into new types of online advertising. In January, it unveiled an ad format called sponsored stories, which allows advertisers to pay to republish user messages that mention companies to their Facebook friends.

Facebook has also aggressively expanded into nonadvertising revenue streams. Last week, it began selling local deals in five cities, putting it in direct competition with Groupon Inc. and others in one of the Web's fastest-growing marketing sectors.

Earlier this year, Facebook began requiring all companies that sell virtual goods on the site to use its Credits payments system, for which Facebook takes a 30% commission. Credits can be used to pay for such things as online games and movie rentals. 

 Write to  Geoffrey A. Fowler at geoffrey.fowler@wsj.com and Anupreeta Das at anupreeta.das@wsj.com 