New details emerged about  Sony Corp.'s investigation into one of the biggest data breaches in history, as the company attempts to piece together who stole personal information from more than 100 million accounts on its online game networks. 

At least some of the attacks came from a Malaysia-based server, a person familiar with the matter said, though it wasn't clear if any of the hacking was actually done from there, or whether only the server there was used. 

On Tuesday, a U.S. spokesman for Sony confirmed some of the companies helping to investigate the breach and secure its network against further intrusions. The security firms named are Protiviti Inc.,  Guidance Software Inc.
GUID


-0.61
%




 and Data Forté Corp., which specialize variously in forensic computer investigations and security consulting. 

The company has also retained the services of the law firm Baker & McKenzie in connection with the matter. Representatives of the law firm and two of the security firms didn't respond to requests for comment. Guidance Software declined to comment.

Political pressure on Sony for a more complete accounting of its handling of the data breach has been increasing. Sen. Richard Blumenthal (D., Conn.) on Tuesday sent a letter to Sony executives saying he is "deeply concerned about the egregious inadequacy of Sony's efforts thus far to notify its customers of these breaches or to provide adequate protections for users whose personal and financial information may have been compromised." 

Mr. Blumenthal, who sent an earlier letter to Sony asking about the timing of its notification of customers about the data intrusion, said he will ask Attorney General Eric Holder to investigate Sony's handling of the crisis at a Senate judiciary committee hearing on Wednesday. The House Committee on Energy and Commerce has asked Sony about the matter, and has scheduled its own hearing Wednesday.

Separately, the head ombudsman at the data-privacy office in the northern-German state of Schleswig-Holstein on Tuesday said German privacy officials will query Sony about the breach, including what steps the company has taken to notify its clients about the risks.

A Sony spokesman couldn't be reached for comment on the letter from Mr Blumenthal or the statements in Germany.

The attack on Sony involved the theft of personal data that include names, passwords and addresses from accounts on its PlayStation Network and Sony Online Entertainment gaming services. Sony said last week that 10 million credit-card numbers may also have been taken from the PlayStation network.

Sony says it's working with the Federal Bureau of Investigation in San Diego, where the data center housing the company's game network was based. 

The company shut down its PlayStation Network on April 20 and Sony Online Entertainment service on May 1 after discovering the intrusions. 

Sony says it is in the process of moving its data center to a new "more secure location" that it declines to disclose. The company says it hopes to restore at least portions of its PlayStation Network service this week.

No details have emerged on the identities of suspects. Speculation about attackers often focuses on countries in Eastern Europe, some of which have large numbers of skilled programmers and computer technicians.

Last month, for example, U.K. police announced arrests that included a Latvian and a Lithuanian living in Briton in connection with malicious software called SpyEye that is designed to steal victims' personal data.  Dave Jevans, chairman of a security firm called IronKey, says he is aware of more than 100 arrests in such cases, with most alleged perpetrators identified as Eastern European.

But the world of online crime is evolving quickly, including multiple layers of perpetrators and paid partners—some of which may be unwitting participants. The FBI last week cited 20 incidents between March 2010 and April 2011 in which the online banking credentials of small-to-medium-sized U.S. businesses were compromised and used to initiate wire transfers to Chinese companies near the border with Russia. It put total attempted fraud amounts to approximately $20 million, which actual losses of $11 million.



Details about how the hackers breached Sony's defenses remain sketchy. Company officials over the weekend said attackers exploited a vulnerability in a variety of software known as a Web application server, which was used to attack databases containing customer records.

  Derek Manky, a senior strategist with the security-technology firm Fortinet Inc., said high-profile companies like Sony that store valuable data online frequently run afoul of such security flaws. "It's just a matter of time until hackers find a way in," he said.

Data stolen in such breaches is often sold in shadowy online marketplaces where fraudsters dwell. Some investigators, though, say they haven't seen credible offers of data from the Sony intrusion in those forums.

  E.J. Hilbert, a former FBI agent who is now at security consulting firm Arixmar, said he's not sure the Sony intrusion was a "monetary hack" because he would expect to see a meaningful uptick in the amount of personal data being brokered online. Mr. Hilbert said the intrusion feels more like a "slap in the face" aimed at Sony. 

A spokeswoman for  American Express Co.
AXP


-0.54
%




 said the company is working with Sony and has seen no uptick in fraudulent purchases following the intrusion. A spokesman for  MasterCard Inc.
MA


-0.16
%




 said itis working with Sony to confirm if any of its customers are at risk.  Visa Inc.
V


-0.16
%




 said it is aware of the Sony incident but declined further comment. 

Prior to the intrusion, Sony was the target of online mischief-makers, including a loosely associated band of Internet vigilantes known as Anonymous, who sought to disable some of the company's online properties. Anonymous has denied involvement in the data breach. A Sony spokesman said the companydoesn't have any evidence that Anonymous was involved.

—Daisuke Wakabayashi  and Don Clark  contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Nick Wingfield at nick.wingfield@wsj.com 