Any book lover knows that it can be easy to have your collection overwhelm your décor. Just ask Nancy Bass Wyden, co-owner of the Strand Bookstore in New York City, who has a personal collection that numbers more than 2,000.

In her Manhattan home, Ms. Wyden allows herself to display 500 books, which include antique leather-bound books from the 1800s and works of contemporary fiction and nonfiction. Ms. Wyden houses the books in a dark-wood, built-in structure with adjustable shelving, which allows her to change up the display. Generally, larger coffee-table and art books go on the lower shelves so they're accessible to guests. Antique books go on the highest shelves, because she doesn't want them to get manhandled. 

"I try to put at eye level what's extraordinary," says Ms. Wyden. "A person's library is a reflection of the person's taste and interests." Ms. Wyden, who is married to Sen. Ron Wyden of Oregon, is interested in politics and is an avid collector of autographed books. Her eye-level shelves include signed books by the likes of President Barack Obama and Eleanor Roosevelt. This is where she displays books that are potential conversation-starters—a book signed by the late novelist David Foster Wallace, for example. 

Ms. Wyden also displays a few "meaningful mementos," such as her grandfather's pocket watch and a collection of antique wooden eggs, on the shelves in front of the books. "It's nice to break it up," she says.

Ms. Wyden, whose store is often hired to design book collections for film sets or private homes, says she sometimes gets requests to create shelves around certain looks. "They might say, 'We want something pastel,' " she says. 

In her home, however, Ms. Wyden organizes her books by category so that she and her guests can find them easily. Within those categories, she organizes books alphabetically by author name. Ms. Wyden likes to tuck bits of relevant memorabilia into her books. A personal note written by Bill Clinton is tucked into a book that he signed, for example. 

Ms. Wyden puts Mylar jacket covers on her older books to keep dust away. "What you don't want to do is encapsulate [a book] fully in plastic—it traps moisture in," she says. "But a dust jacket helps to preserve it."

For her leather-bound books, Ms. Wyden buys Triple Crown Leather Formula, a wax that preserves leather, and applies a light coating once a year, "just to give it a little bit of protection from drying." 

She gives her entire bookshelf a good dusting at least once a year. If water spills on a book, she tries to sponge it up with paper towels, then lightly dries the pages with a hair dryer. "The pages might get buckled, even if you have it on a low setting," she says, so she presses the book under a heavier one for at least a day afterward. (If your book suffers greater damage, Ms. Wyden recommends taking it to a book restorer right away or consulting "The Care and Feeding of Books Old and New: A Simple Repair Manual for Book Lovers.")

Ms. Wyden makes sure her shelves are away from damaging direct sunlight. She also makes sure the area isn't too moist. "If you get mold on your books, you can't really get it out," she says, cautioning that people in humid places such as Florida may need a dehumidifier for rooms with valuable books. Ms. Wyden says it breaks her heart to see people store books in the basement or the attic. "The basement is too damp and the attic might be too dry," she says. 

She generally prefers to store books standing upright, "as that's the way they're meant to be stored." The weight of the pile can damage the bottom books. Sometimes, however, she'll display coffee-table books in a small pile of no more than four, making sure that the books on top are smaller and lighter than those at the bottom. She'll typically place a decorative object such as a paperweight or magnifying glass on top to create an inviting display. 

The key to a healthy book collection, Ms. Wyden says, is constant editing. When she adds a book, she tries to take something out. "If it keeps getting tweaked, what you have is more meaningful," she says. "It keeps your library fresh, and you feel more engaged with what's in there."

 Write to  Cheryl Lu-Lien Tan at cheryl.tan@wsj.com 