There has been a lot of speculation about whether Jared Lee Loughner, the man arrested for the Arizona shooting, has a severe mental illness. But is mental illness a sufficient explanation for his actions? Recent research has found that mental illness is, in fact, tied to an increased risk of violence—but it is not a simple relationship. 

Most experts before the 1990s argued that violence perpetrated by the mentally ill was no more common than violence by the non-mentally ill, once socioeconomic factors were taken into account. This view was advocated by several generations of clinicians and mental health workers—perhaps in part to counter the stigma that psychiatric patients were dangerous—but it lacked any consistent evidence. 

We now know that there is an increased risk of violence in individuals suffering from severe mental illness. This conclusion has been confirmed by large-scale historical studies drawing on routinely collected national data in Sweden, Denmark, Australia and Finland. These have consistently found an increased risk of violence in individuals with schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and some forms of severe brain injury. 

With the advent of new research tools over the past 20 years, more sophisticated summaries of existing studies have also been possible. The most recent systematic review on this subject, published in the journal PLoS Medicine in 2009 and involving over 18,000 subjects in 11 countries, found that individuals with schizophrenia were more likely, as compared to the general public, to commit acts of violence, regardless of how violence was measured. This increase was typically two to five times higher in men with schizophrenia and over four-fold higher in women with schizophrenia. As one expert commented, clinicians have to face up to this "unpalatable" evidence "for the sake of our patients." A similar review on bipolar disorder and violence from 2010 found similar increases in risk. 

These investigations also found, however, that only 3% to 10% of all violence in society is committed by individuals with severe mental illness. In other words, at least 90% of all violent crime in Western countries is committed by people who are not suffering from such conditions. In Sweden, for example, from 1988 to 2000, there were 45 violent crimes per 1,000 persons, of which two to three were attributable to persons with severe mental illness. 

Moreover, the vast majority of patients with severe mental illness are not violent during their lifetimes. The largest and longest study of schizophrenia and violence, conducted in Sweden over the course of 30 years, found that only 13% of patients had violent convictions after receiving their diagnoses. For most patients, the risk of becoming a victim of violence is higher than the risk that they will commit violence. 

Nor should we make the mistake of assuming that a correlation between mental illness and violence somehow establishes a causal connection between them. It may be that schizophrenia is simply a marker for other factors that increase the risk of violence. Of these factors, one of the strongest is alcohol and drug abuse. Estimates from the U.S. indicate that around half of patients with schizophrenia also have problems with substance abuse. One study in American urban centers found that nearly a third of patients who were discharged from the hospital and also diagnosed with substance abuse were violent within one year. 

It is not entirely clear how substance abuse increases the risk of violence in these patients. It may make them less inhibited, prompt them to criminality in order to fund their habits, or increase the likelihood of their mixing with an antisocial peer group. It may discourage them from taking their medication regularly and thus controlling their symptoms. And it may be a marker or trigger of destructive personality traits that are inherited or determined by early childhood and family experiences. 

Three other factors consistently increase the risk of violence in mentally ill patients. The first is the overall extent of their psychotic symptoms—the worse the symptoms, the more likely the risk of violence. Another is a history of antisocial behavior, usually manifested in problems at school, previous arrests or fighting. A final risk factor is a family history of criminality, suggesting possible genetic and early environmental contributions to violence. 

What can be done to reduce violence in the mentally ill? Several kinds of interventions should be considered. Targeting high-risk patients needs to play a role, albeit small, particularly if clinicians can be persuaded to avoid turning away the most difficult of them. 

Improvements in the psychiatric care of all patients, irrespective of their risk of violence, would have a large impact, also reducing suicide, victimization and premature death and enhancing their quality of life. On admission to a hospital, for example, a stay of more than a few days is necessary for adequate assessment, treatment of symptoms and the establishment of a good therapeutic relationship to ensure effective follow-up care. Fostering clinical research is integral to improving and maintaining high-quality care.

More controversially, there should be a role for social policy. Increasing taxes on alcohol, especially the cheaper forms, is one simple measure. Restricting access to firearms is another. But the most urgent policy area is to improve the mental health care of prisoners, most of whom rejoin their local communities and are at a high risk of violence. On any given day in the U.S., the number of people with severe mental illness in prisons is estimated to be three times higher than the number in hospitals, according to a new report from the Treatment Advocacy Center and the National Sheriffs' Association. Interestingly, they found that Arizona and Nevada had the highest ratio of prisoners with mental illness, with 10 times more mentally ill people in jails and prisons than in hospitals. 

None of these strategies would necessarily have prevented the Arizona shooting, and they certainly will not eliminate the possibility of similar occurrences in the future. But they would reduce their likelihood and, at the same time, substantially improve the lives of one of the most disadvantaged and misunderstood patient groups. 

—Dr. Fazel is a clinical senior lecturer in forensic psychiatry at the University of Oxford in England. 