MUMBAI – Chennai Petroleum Corp. Monday said it plans to invest 123.4 billion rupees ($2.75 billion) over the next five years to expand its flagship Manali refinery, as the state-run company seeks to take advantage of rising refining margins worldwide and India's growing demand for energy. 

India is emerging as a major refining hub in Asia as state-run and private refiners such as Essar Oil Ltd. add significant capacity through brownfield as well as new projects because of government incentives and lower building costs. 

Refiners in India are also recording higher margins on processing crude oil as a revival in the global economy and rising domestic consumption boost demand for petroleum products. 

Chennai Petroleum saw its gross refining margin improve to $5.3 in the third quarter ended Dec. 31, from $1.8 per barrel in the first quarter. The company sells the bulk of its products through its parent Indian Oil Corp. and not at state-mandated prices through fuel retailing outlets like the other state-run refiners. 

Chennai Petroleum plans to increase the refining capacity at Manali near Chennai to 17 million tons a year by 2016 from 10.5 million tons now, finance director N. C. Sridharan said Monday. 

The company, which is majority-owned by Indian Oil, operates two refineries in southern India's Tamil Nadu state. Apart from the one at Manali, it also operates the Cauvery basin refinery at Nagapattinam with a capacity of one million tons. 

Iran's state-controlled Naftiran Intertrade Co. holds a 15.40% stake in the refiner. 

Mr. Sridharan said the company initially plans to expand only the capacity of the Manali refinery to 11.1 million tons by September. 

"The short-term capacity increase will be done through debottlenecking and increasing the efficiency of old operating units," Mr. Sridharan said, adding that the short-term expansion is expected to cost about 3.4 billion rupees. 

The expansion of the Manali refinery to 17 million tons will include replacing an old three million ton refining unit with a new nine million ton refining unit. 

"The old unit was first set up in the 1970s and needs to be upgraded. The new refinery will have much higher complexity levels," Mr. Sridharan said. Higher complexity levels of a refinery let it increase its margins on refining a barrel of crude. 

Chennai Petroleum's investment also includes installing single-point mooring--an offshore crude oil loading terminal--at a cost of 14 billion rupees and is expected to be completed in March 2013, Mr. Sridharan said.

In the financial year ended March 31, 2010, Chennai Petroleum's Manali refinery processed 9.5 million tons of crude with a capacity utilization rate of 100.4%, while its Cauvery basin refinery processed 516,600 tons of crude, according to its annual report. 

After the expansion projects are completed, the company will have a total refining capacity of more than 18 million tons and a refining complexity of over nine, Mr. Sridharan added. 

 Write to  Eric Yep at eric.yep@dowjones.com 