SYDNEY—Air New Zealand Ltd. said Thursday it has bought a stake in Australian carrier  Virgin Blue Holdings Ltd. in a challenge to dominant domestic airline  Qantas Airways Ltd.
QAN


-0.28
%




 

New Zealand's flag carrier said it plans to increase its holding in Virgin to 15% and has already secured approval from the Australian Foreign Investment Review Board. Neither airline would disclose the exact size of the current stake. Both recently received conditional approval from Australia's competition watchdog to form an alliance that both hope will increase their ability to compete with Qantas on the trans Tasman Sea route between Australia and New Zealand. 

"The investment in Virgin Blue is part of Air New Zealand's strategy to develop scale and reach in this region," said  Rob Fyfe, chief executive of Air New Zealand in a statement. 

A spokeswoman for Virgin Blue declined to comment on the deal. The company's shares traded in Sydney rose 10% Thursday to 44 Australian cents, valuing it at 972.5 million Australian dollars (US$966.3 million) and giving a 15% stake a current market value of A$144.9 million. 

  Richard Branson's Virgin Group owns 26% of Virgin Blue, leaving little room for either the British billionaire or Air New Zealand to increase their holdings, which will total just over 40.9% combined if the kiwi carrier takes the full 15% stake. Australian law limits foreign ownership of airlines flying international routes to 49%. 

"It's been such a logical thing that these two get together and effectively try to combat the might of Qantas," said  Peter Harbison, the executive chairman for the Centre for Asia Pacific Aviation. "It equalizes the whole Australasian scene to some extent." 

Airlines around the world are experiencing increasing traffic volumes as economic conditions improve, particularly in Asia. Mr. Harbison said it would be wrong to interpret Air New Zealand's decision to increase its stake as a sign of increasing deals activity in the local aviation industry. 

"It's very much a creature of this particular market and to extrapolate that to the wider market I don't think would be appropriate," he said. 

Virgin Blue, Australia's second-biggest carrier, recently hired John Borghetti, a long-serving Qantas executive, to be chief executive as it attempts to wrest market share from its larger rival by expanding its international offerings and attracting more business travelers. 

Virgin Blue and Abu Dhabi-based Etihad Airways were given draft approval last month by the Australian Competition & Consumer Commission for an alliance. The regulator has also approved the carriers plans to work more closely with U.S.-based  Delta Air Lines Inc.,
DAL


-1.76
%




 which still requires U.S. sanction.

 Write to  Ross Kelly at ross.kelly@dowjones.com 