SEOUL—A South Korean court rejected Hyundai Group's attempt to salvage its bid for a controlling stake in Hyundai Engineering & Construction Co., paving the way for Hyundai Motor Group to acquire the shares. 

The ruling brings Hyundai E&C's creditors-turned-shareholders closer to finishing a fractious process that could end up raising 5.1 trillion won ($4.53 billion), which people familiar with the situation said was Hyundai Motor's offer. The creditors now aim to sign a memorandum of understanding with Hyundai Motor and sign a final sale agreement by mid-February, according to lead creditor Korea Exchange Bank. 

The Seoul Central District Court on Tuesday rejected Hyundai Group's request for a preliminary injunction that would stop the creditors from opening talks with Hyundai Motor and acknowledge that Hyundai Group retains rights as the preferred bidder. 

Hyundai Group said it plans to appeal the decision. 

Hyundai E&C creditors last month scrapped a memorandum of understanding to sell the shares to Hyundai Group, which the court said bid 5.51 trillion won, citing a lack of sufficient information for a 1.2 trillion won loan the conglomerate was using to finance the deal. Hyundai Group, which was named the preferred bidder in mid-November, submitted two letters of guarantee from French bank  Natixis
NTXFY


6.08
%




 but refused to produce the loan contract, which creditors had requested. 

The court on Tuesday said the creditors were within their rights to walk away from the deal, saying Hyundai Group didn't fulfill its obligation to resolve doubts on financing. 

"Hyundai Motor will take steps to follow up on a deal in cooperation with the creditors," said the auto maker, South Korea's largest by sales. "We are determined to transform Hyundai Engineering into a world-class company." 

Hyundai Group and Hyundai Motor each has said acquiring Hyundai E&C makes good business sense. But their battle has been widely perceived as a dispute over a piece of family history. 

Hyundai E&C, founded by Chung Ju-yung in 1947, was the founding component of the Hyundai Group. Hyundai E&C once was the country's largest conglomerate, but lost many of its affiliates in the wake of the 1997-1998 Asian financial crisis because its business model relied heavily on debt and focused on sales growth rather than profit. E&C came under the control of nine creditors in 2001 after a multitrillion-won bailout package that included a 2.9 trillion won debt-for-equity swap. The creditors have been trying to offload their stake since 2006 when Hyundai E&C exited completed a bankruptcy restructuring. 

  Chung Mong-koo, the second son of Hyundai's founder, is chairman of Hyundai Motor, which had been spun off from the original conglomerate. Hyundai Group Chairwoman  Hyun Jeong-eun is the founder's daughter-in-law. While the three companies share a name and history, they have no direct links.

 Corrections & Amplifications  Hyundai Group Chairwoman's name is Hyun Jeong-eun. A previous version incorrectly stated it was Hyun Jeong.

 Write to  Se Young Lee at vincent.lee@dowjones.com 