BEIJING—China will cap its energy use at 4 billion metric tons of coal equivalent by 2015 and raise the share of nonfossil fuels in the energy mix to 11.4% under plans due for approval at the National People's Congress, China's parliament, which gets under way Saturday, the state-run Xinhua news agency reported Friday.

Zhang Guobao, the former head of the country's National Energy Administration, said in the report that the figures are in the draft of China's 12th five-year plan, which will set the country's economic priorities for 2011-2015.

China is the world's top energy producer and user: Its energy consumption totaled 3.25 billion tons of coal equivalent last year, up 5.9% from 2009, the agency said.

Mr. Zhang said that under the new plan, overall energy consumption growth would average an annual 4.24% during the coming five years.

The previous five-year plan had a renewables target of 10%, which wasn't met. Now, nonfossil fuels account for 8% of China's total energy use; the country intends to increase it to 15% by 2020, Mr. Zhang said in the report.

Coal supplies around 70% of China's energy needs, 30 percentage points higher than the world average, he noted.

Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao said Feb. 27 that China would set its annual economic growth target at 7% during the five years to 2015, lower than the 7.5% goal set for the previous five years.

Mr. Wen added that China would try to cut the amount of energy and carbon-dioxide emissions needed for every unit of gross domestic product, or energy intensity, by 16%-17% from this year to the end of 2015.

China will push ahead with reinforcing energy security by increasing strategic reserves of oil and gas, and building storage bases for natural gas and coal under the new plan, Mr. Zhang said in the Xinhua report.

"Oil security is the most important part of achieving energy security," he said. "Preparations for alternative energies should be made as soon as possible."

The development of clean energy, such as nuclear power, wind, solar and biomass energy is needed, Mr. Zhang said. 

By the end of 2010, China's installed wind-power capacity exceeded 41 million kilowatts, and was the world's largest.

China also is building a further 28.71 million kilowatts of nuclear-power capacity, and later this year will start work on its first inland nuclear-power plant this year, Mr. Zhang said.

In January, Mr. Zhang had said China will approve 10 additional nuclear-power projects as part of its new five-year plan, and that the aim was to have an installed nuclear power capacity of 86 gigawatts by 2020.

China currently has 13 reactors in commercial operation with a combined annual capacity of 10.8 gigawatts, providing just over 1% of China's approximately 900 gigawatts of power generating capacity.

By 2020, more than half of the 15% nonfossil fuel share of the energy mix will come from hydropower, Mr. Zhang said Friday.

China is home to the world's biggest hydroelectric project, the $23 billion Three Gorges Dam on the Yangtze River, completed in 2006, and in recent months several other major projects have been given the go-ahead,

These include a controversial $1.2 billion project to build the world's highest dam, in Tibet, on the Yarlung Zangbo River, which is due to be completed in 2014.

Another project with recent government approval is the $3.3 billion Changheba Hydropower plant in Sichuan province, to be built by  Datang International Power Generation Co. 

 Write to  Simon Hall at simon.hall@dowjones.com 