NEW DELHI –Heavy pre-monsoon showers are likely to lash India's southern state of Kerala between May 16 and May 22, according to weather officials in the state-run Indian Meteorological Department, a positive sign regarding the arrival of this year's monsoon. 

An official also said that another positive sign has been good rains over India's Andaman and Nicobar Islands in the past three to four days. 

Monsoon rains are expected to arrive over the Andaman and Nicobar Islands around May 20, according to another weather official, and then enter India's mainland through the southern state of Kerala by the end of May or the first week of June, gradually progressing to cover most of central and northern India by July. 

Thunderstorms and some patchy rains usually precede the monsoon's arrival, after which the long rainy season sets in and usually extends until September. Sowing of most summer crops, including staples such as rice, oilseeds and types of pulses, starts with the onset of the monsoon. 

"Our models show that pre-monsoon showers over Kerala will be more than normal," the first official said, cautioning that the movement of rain clouds from the sea towards the Kerala coast until the middle of the month will be crucial to the timely arrival of the monsoon. 

"We will also have to keep judging whether the moisture in the area is increasing or not," he said. "So far there are no abnormal signs." 

He also ruled out the possibility of any cyclones striking the Indian subcontinent before the monsoon's onset. 

Cyclones usually strike between April and June before the onset of the monsoon, or between October and December, just after it ends. Once the monsoon clouds set in, they prevent cyclones from developing beyond the initial stage of a deep depression. 

The timing and spread of the monsoon rains are as important as the amount of rainfall, which has been forecast at 98% of the 50-year average this year. The rains are crucial to the majority of India's rain-dependent farmlands. 

India produced a record food grain output of 235.9 million tons in the crop year ending June 30 after last year's above-average monsoon rainfall. 

 Write to  Biman Mukherji at biman.mukherji@dowjones.com 