Director Hal Ashby (1929-88) is remembered mostly for his boundary pushing, California-set films, such as "Shampoo" and "Harold and Maude." But his 1970 debut feature, "The Landlord," about a Manhattanite (Beau Bridges) who buys a Brooklyn brownstone with the intention of evicting its tenants and turning it into a posh home, takes place primarily in pre-gentrification Park Slope. 

The filmmaker's emotionally perceptive satire of race, class, gender and generational divides screens Thursday evening as part of BAMcinématek's ongoing "Movies By Hal Ashby" retrospective. Following the 6:50 p.m. screening, actress Lee Grant, who plays Mr. Bridges's mother in the film, and writer-director Robert Downey Sr. will participate in a question-and-answer session. 

Mr. Downey's own New York-set take on race relations, 1969's "Putney Swope," was screened by Ashby and the cast and crew of "The Landlord" during the latter film's production. The two directors remained friends until Ashby's death from pancreatic cancer at age 59. Mr. Downey spoke with the Journal recently from his Manhattan home about Ashby and "The Landlord." 



How did you meet Hal Ashby? 

I knew him before he was a filmmaker and he was an editor. He was beginning to think about making "The Landlord." This would've been '68. I had a stepsister who was going with him at the time and she said, "You have to meet this guy. You're going to love him," and blah-blah-blah and I said "OK, great." I met him and she was right. He was very funny and a real sweetheart. 



"The Landlord" began as Norman Jewison project?

Norman Jewison was supposed to make that movie, yeah. Hal was his editor and I'm not quite sure why but Jewison didn't have time [to make the film], and he said to Hal, "Would you like to direct this?" and Hal said "yes" and he took it over. I think because of Norman, United Artists was happy to do it knowing that Norman would shepherd it. 



I gather they didn't stay very happy? 

Hal wanted to use Sly and the Family Stone to do the music and cut to them in the studio recording the music and then cut back to the film. The studio said, "You've gotta be kidding!" 



"The Landlord" is still a pretty unusual film. 

I thought it was an interesting movie. Different than what you'd expect from Norman Jewison, and I thought it was a great first film for Hal. [Brooklyn] has been gentrified so much now, it's prophetic. 



Were you on set during shooting?

I visited the set a couple of times. Hal shot the film here so he asked me to come by and say hello. He took his cast to see "Putney Swope" and he had a get-together and I met Beau Bridges and some of his cast members. Hal also used some people from "Putney Swope" in small parts. 



Was there influence at work in the famous walking on water ending of Ashby's "Being There"? There's a similar scene in your 1972 film "Greaser's Palace."

Hal called me up when he was making "Being There" to ask my permission. He said, "I want to have Peter Sellers walk on water at the end of the movie." I told him, "Hal, it's OK, it's in the Bible." Hal said, "Then who do I call?" Like I said, he was a funny guy. 