DUBLIN—Embattled Irish Prime Minister Brian Cowen on Sunday announced he will remain in office for the next general election and said that, on Tuesday, he will place a motion of confidence in his own leadership to his colleagues in the Fianna Fail party.

He said the vote will be a secret ballot, but said he was confident of a positive outcome and said his duty was to maintain stability for the country and the government. "I am again heartened by the strong commitment by all of my colleagues and I am proud to serve alongside them," he said.

Mr. Cowen, 51 years old, has spent four days consulting colleagues on his leadership, initially resisting pressure to resign following revelations last weekend about his previously undisclosed golf game and dinner with the now-nationalized Anglo Irish Bank's former chairman, Sean FitzPatrick.

However, Fianna Fail will almost certainly lose the general election due in March, according to all recent public opinion polls which suggest the next government will likely comprise a coalition between the Christian Democratic Fine Gael and left-of-center Labour parties.

The general election is due to take place in March after the passing of the Finance Bill to bring into law the remaining measures from December's budget, which Cowen said must remain the priority for the government. "There's important work to be done," Mr. Cowen said.

Flanked by Deputy Prime Minister Mary Coughlan and government chief whip John Curran, Mr. Cowen told a news conference: "The party is important but the interests of the country are paramount." He said there wasn't "an ounce" of difficulty between him and any of his colleagues.

Minister of Foreign Affairs Micheal Martin is among the three front-runners to succeed Mr. Cowen in the event that he loses the motion of confidence in his leadership. Finance Minister Brian Lenihan and Tourism Minister Mary Hanafin are also tipped as future leaders of the party.

Mr. Cowen's Fianna Fail party colleagues are divided over whether he should lead the party into the next election, with some believing that it would fare better with a new leader. Mr. Lenihan said last week that some members were even worried about the very survival of Fianna Fail.

Over the weekend, Fianna Fail lawmaker Noel O'Flynn called on Mr. Cowen to step down as prime minister in order to allow Mr. Martin to succeed him. "I think it is time for Brian Cowen to consider his position and to resign as leader of Fianna Fail," he said.

But the minister for social protection, Eamon O'Cuiv, is among those to support Mr. Cowen. "As far as I'm concerned he has my full support as leader. … If I didn't have confidence in Brian Cowen, obviously it would be invidious for me to stay as a cabinet minister in this government."

John Gormley, leader of the Green Party, Mr. Cowen's junior coalition partner, described the latest controversy as "golfgate," but said the current question of leadership was one for Fianna Fail, and said the government needed to focus on passing the Finance Bill.

 Write to  Quentin Fottrell at quentin.fottrell@dowjones.com 