Saddled with vacant units, retirement communities across the country are adding a new tactic to lure buyers: the "test drive."

Retirement communities in Arizona, California, Florida and other vacation destinations are pitching so-called retirement getaways, a few nights in a model home with access to all the luxury amenities. Their hope is that you never want to check out.

The Trilogy at Monarch Dunes near San Luis Obispo, Calif., a beachfront community for those 55 and older, is promoting the two-night "test drive" package for $299 per person or couple. Valencia Reserve, a 55+ community near Palm Beach, is busy marketing their two-night, three-day "stay and play" getaway program for $99 a night.

And on top of the dozens more communities offering such deals, there are plenty others that will gladly arrange your very own test drive if you ask, says  Andrew Carle, the founding director of the senior housing administration program at George Mason University.

But for consumers, these plans aren't all fun and sun. Few of the programs are free. And with meals and transportation typically not included in the price, consumers should be prepared to shell out hundreds more, experts say.

Potential buyers can also expect to sit through at least one sales pitch. To test drive Pebble Creek in Phoenix, for example, you will spend about an hour with a sales associate, who talks about the community and gives you a tour and a personalized itinerary, including dinner with a resident couple, says a spokesperson for Robson Communities.

On top of that, some communities require that you meet specific criteria -- such as showing you can afford the home.

Still, for those retirees or soon-to-be retirees who are already researching where to spend the next phase of their lives, these programs may be worth the cost and hassle.

"You'll learn whether the people are friendly, what the food is like, if you'll like the climate," says  Sandra Timmermann, executive director of the  MetLife
MET


0.75
%




 Mature Market Institute.

--Catey Hill  SmartMoney.com  



It's not your imagination: College students really are getting younger. A lot younger. This summer, kids as young as four will head for summer programs on college campuses -- the latest trend for cash-strapped schools and for parents eager to give Junior an academic push.

While these programs may offer a stimulating environment for the preternaturally academic, they may not fulfill parents' ultimate expectation: an advantage down the road, when it's time to apply to college for real.

"The programs aren't harmful, but it's not clear to me that a kid can't spend the summer reading" and be as well off, says  Jon Reider, director of college counseling at San Francisco University High School and a former admissions officer at Stanford University.

The programs -- and the price tags -- vary widely from school to school. Day programs are cheaper than overnight sessions, and art and language programs tend to cost less than those with a science focus.

During a week-long science program offered by Boston University and other colleges in the Boston area, sixth- through eighth-grade girls engage in hands-on science and engineering activities like bridge building and developing computer games, for $150. At the University of Pennsylvania, a similar program runs $625. Spending a week living in the dorms at Brown University and studying science will run families $2,255.

Colleges offering these programs say their aim is primarily academic: They want to enlighten the next generation of college-bound kids. "Money is helpful for the college, but it's also about exposing young people to science," says a spokesman at Brown University.

But critics warn parents to manage their expectations. A summer college program during elementary and middle school is more summer camp than college prep, says Mr. Reider. Admissions officers are more focused on grade-point averages, SAT scores and a student's overall academic acumen, he says.

--AnnaMaria Andriotis  SmartMoney.com  

Six weeks after the earthquake and tsunami in Japan, most factories are back in operation. But even the brief disruption will keep prices high on autos and electronics through the summer.

Would-be car buyers are the most likely to notice higher prices -- if they can find the model they're looking for, says  Jesse Toprak, the vice president of industry trends and analysis at TrueCar.com. Factories are still struggling to get parts and finished cars off the assembly line.

  Toyota Motor, Lexus and  Honda Motor
HMC


0.53
%




 have said plants in Japan and the U.S. are working at 50% capacity at best.  General Motors
GM


-1.38
%




 has said it will close more U.S. plants temporarily, as it deals with a parts shortage.

Already, individual auto dealerships have cut cash-back offers and other incentives. Some even are charging more than the manufacturer's sticker price for in-demand cars, which analysts attribute to shortages.

Electronics shoppers will just have to be patient.  Sony pushed the launch of its 3D camcorder to mid-May from mid-April. Sony Ericsson said it's expecting short supply of two Android phones (Xperia Acr and Xperia Play), and will delay the official launch of a third (Xperia Neo) until the third quarter. Nokia has said it expects shortages of some phones.

--Kelli B. Grant  SmartMoney.com 