VIENNA—The International Atomic Energy Agency's failure to quickly and accurately assess the potential danger posed by Japan's nuclear disaster is raising questions about the United Nations organization's ability to respond to such crises.

Teams of nuclear experts from the U.S. and elsewhere rushed to Japan after this past Friday's earthquake there, but the IAEA is only Thursday sending its director general, Yukiya Amano, with a team. IAEA officials say the agency is doing everything that it can and that it has been frustrated by a lack of cooperation from Japan.

The agency's inability to quickly dispatch a team of experts has made it almost entirely reliant on the Japanese government for information at a time when much of the world is looking to the IAEA for an impartial analysis of the risks and likely outcome of the nuclear emergency.

Without access to timely reports, IAEA officials have struggled at times to provide the public with accurate information. On Monday, for example, a senior IAEA official told reporters that the agency had no indications of melting fuel at the Fukushima plant—an event that could preface a complete reactor meltdown—even though Japanese officials had publicly reported such signs on Saturday.

The IAEA's one-step-behind position in Japan's nuclear crisis underscores the disconnect between its actual, limited capabilities and its public image as safety watchdog that agency officials themselves have promoted. In the days since the Japan earthquake and tsunami, the agency has produced a Youtube video of Mr. Amano on deck in what it calls its Incident and Emergency Center at its Vienna headquarters, and emphasized emergency support the IAEA could provide, including radiation testing and decontamination assistance as well as help in picking up and transporting radioactive material. 

It is an image some nuclear experts say is misleading. Though the IAEA employs legions of experts on nuclear safety, it is less prepared to handle a nuclear disaster, critics say.

Though the IAEA is best known for the role it plays in monitoring whether countries such as Iran are complying with international nuclear weapons treaties, most of its resources are dedicated to promoting the peaceful use of nuclear energy, a mandate it has had since its founding in 1957.

Countries have no obligation to follow the IAEA's advice. "The IAEA is not a nuclear watchdog; it is an arbitrator," says Robert Kelley, a recently retired IAEA analyst.

"The IAEA doesn't have specialists trained to deal with a nuclear catastrophe," says Iouli Andreev, who headed a team of Soviet specialists that responded to the world's worst nuclear accident at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant in Ukraine. 

An IAEA spokesman declined to comment

Mr. Andreev says the IAEA was similarly dependent on Soviet information during the Chernobyl crisis in 1986. Then, the IAEA received data provided in part by Mr. Andreev's team, "but much of that information was false," Mr. Andreev says. In the immediate aftermath of the accident, Soviet officials took pains to convince the international community that the accident wasn't as dire as many feared.

The IAEA's difficulty in engaging in Japan has been particularly surprising given that its director general, Mr. Amano, is a former Japanese government official with deep knowledge of his country's nuclear infrastructure. 

Mr. Amano said on Wednesday that he expects to fly to Japan Thursday. "I will seek first-hand information on the situation and show the Japanese authorities that IAEA is working with Japan," he said. "I want to explore opportunities for further help from IAEA to Japan, and to improve the communication." 

Mr. Amano said the plans for his trip, which will be a one-day stay, were made quickly, and that no high-ranking meetings have yet been set up.

"I don't know who I'll be meeting, but I'm aiming for the highest level," he said., adding he will try to fit in a visit to the site of the troubled nuclear plant, and hopes to meet officials of the operator to "discuss the situation with them face to face and exchange views."

He said he is looking to explore possibilities of increased engagement by the agency in the accident-containment effort., and will also urge Japanese authorities to improve the communication with the IAEA.

So far, IAEA officials have been monitoring the unfolding nuclear drama from a crisis room in Vienna, often with outdated information. After the initial explosion Saturday at one of the Fukushima Daiichi reactors, for instance, the agency could only confirm it five hours later, long after dozens of media organizations had.

A worried international public flocked to the IAEA's website seeking information on the blast but the site wasn't designed to cope with so much traffic and collapsed. The IAEA sent an email to journalists directing them to a page it set up on social-networking site Facebook.

 Write to  David Crawford at david.crawford@wsj.com 