After two years of subpar IPO activity in most of the world, 2010 saw the biggest offering come forth as the pace began to pick up—and there is optimism the trend will continue into 2011.

Read the complete  Year-End Review report .

A total of 1,376 companies launched initial public offerings that raised a combined $269.4 billion world-wide last year, more than double what was seen in either 2009 or 2008, according to data from Dealogic. In fact, the final three months of 2010 ended up setting a quarterly record for dollar volume raised by IPOs globally, beating the previous high seen in the final quarter of 2007, by Dealogic's count. 

"When I try to characterize 2010 compared to 2009, I like to think of it as a year of recovery versus rescue. We moved into more of a recovery phase, and we saw that in the pickup in the IPO market globally. I'd expect a continuation of that into 2011," said  Jeff Bunzel, head of equity capital markets for the Americas at Credit Suisse.

Bankers caution that the IPO market isn't out of the woods yet. Investors remain concerned about the economy, sovereign-debt issues and the potential for market volatility. The market isn't expected to follow a steady upward trajectory throughout 2011; it is more likely to experience fits and starts.

"We can already see from the U.S. filings that there are some very sizable deals coming down the transom, and the IPO market looks healthy in Europe and Asia, too," said  Matthew Westerman, global head of equity capital markets at Goldman Sachs Group Inc. "But I believe that the window will continue to be volatile in the IPO markets globally next year, in line with the likely mixed macro environment."

China continued to be the dominant force in the IPO market in 2010, a position it took on in 2009. A total of 471 offerings raised $104.4 billion during last year, more than Europe and the U.S. combined, according to Dealogic. In terms of number of deals priced, China accounted for 34% during the year; by amount of money raised, it racked up 39%. The largest deal in the world—and, indeed, ever—was  Agricultural Bank of China Ltd.'s $22.1 billion offering in July. The second-largest deal of the year,  AIA Group Ltd.
AAGIY


-1.05
%




's $20.5 billion deal in October, hailed from Hong Kong. Bankers believe China will continue to be a major force in 2011, even though a spate of IPOs were postponed toward the end of the year in Hong Kong. 

China also left a big imprint on the U.S. in 2010, racking up the largest number of listings on American exchanges ever, and generating the best first-day performance since 2005 when Internet television company  Youku.com Inc.
YOKU


1.43
%




 rose 161% in December. Nearly 30% of the companies that listed in the U.S. came from other parts of the world, and China was the most common source of foreign listings. 

"The better companies coming out of China carry valuations that look relatively cheap for the amount of growth they can produce. As a general rule, investors are paying less for a dollar of growth for China-based companies than for U.S.-based companies listing on the U.S.," said  William B. Buchanan Jr., chief executive of Lazard Capital Markets.

Even excluding Chinese companies, the U.S. saw improvement in the number of IPOs issued domestically, with 110 new stocks hitting the market, double what was seen in 2009, Dealogic said. Although nowhere near the 178 American companies that went public in 2007, it is a definite improvement, and one that should continue into 2011. 

"If the valuations hold up and market volatility remains muted, IPO activity should continue to be robust. Strong corporate earnings coupled with an improving economic environment, along with a growing backlog, will provide a solid backdrop," said  Joe Morea, head of U.S. equity capital markets at RBC Capital Markets.

In terms of dollars raised, U.S. results were skewed significantly by the $18.1 billion common-stock offering of  General Motors Co.
GM


0.28
%




 in November, which accounted for slightly more than half the total dollar volume of American-based deals. The rest of the year's $17.6 billion raised was dominated by smaller offerings of less than $250 million. In the year ahead, bankers expect more billion-dollar deals to debut in the U.S., and they think there will be a wide variety of sectors generating new offerings. 

"The pipeline is very well diversified across sectors. It looks well-balanced, which helps in assessing the overall health of the IPO market. When you have issuers lining up across categories, that's another indicator that confidence has returned," said  Liz Myers, co-head of equity capital markets for the Americas at J.P. Morgan Chase.

There also is hope on the horizon for other markets around the world to step up their activity.

"We expect Asia will continue at a reasonably robust pace, with Europe and Asia Pacific, specifically Japan and Australia, also becoming increasingly more active," said  Dan Cummings, global head of equity capital markets at Bank of America Merrill Lynch.

While the number of IPOs issued in Japan still haven't returned to their levels seen pre-slowdown in 2006 and 2007, the amount of money raised by 22 deals in 2010—$14.6 billion—topped its annual totals preglobal downturn, thanks to the $11.1 billion offering by Dai-ichi Life Insurance Co. Ltd. in March. 

Europe actually didn't fare too badly in 2010, considering the market upheaval caused by sovereign-debt concerns on the continent. It generated 208 IPOs valued at $35.6 billion, according to Dealogic. While still nowhere near the 487 offerings that raised $102.1 billion in 2007, it was a meaningful increase from the 73 deals that raised just $7.2 billion in 2009. 

Looking ahead, there still is uncertainty concerning the financial health of some EU nations going into 2011. But bankers say that issuers are eager to come public, and to some extent investors will likely adapt to the continuing backdrop of credit troubles.

"There's a pent-up supply of companies that need to go public at some point. And like, anything else, I think the markets there will adjust to the uncertainty," said  Mark Hantho, global co-head of equity capital markets at Deutsche Bank.

In Latin America, 23 companies came public, up from 9 in 2009; $8.6 billion was raised, down from $13.2, Dealogic said. Most of the issuance was concentrated in Brazil. 

"What we mostly saw from Brazil in 2010 were export-oriented industries—materials, energy and other intermediates. Next year, we expect more from domestic-oriented growth sectors that reflect the spending power of Brazil's rising middle classes," said  John Moore, co-head of equity capital markets for the Americas at Morgan Stanley.

While Brazil will continue to be a major force, other countries in the region will step up their pace in 2011, said  Frank Maturo, co-head of Americas equity capital markets at Bank of America Merrill Lynch.

"Mexico, Argentina and Chile are regions where we see potential for increased activity," Mr. Maturo said. 

 Write to  Lynn Cowan at lynn.cowan@dowjones.com 