Former California Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger is grappling with the fallout from his last-minute reduction of a prison sentence being served by the son of a political ally, a decision that has stirred efforts to curb gubernatorial pardons.

Before leaving office on Jan. 3, Mr. Schwarzenegger shortened to seven years the 16-year sentence of Esteban Nunez, who was convicted of manslaughter and related charges. He is the son of former state Assembly Speaker Fabian Nunez.

Mr. Schwarzenegger has since been sued by the victim's parents, who want to reverse the commutation. Meanwhile, lawmakers and the San Diego district attorney are working to restrict commutations by future governors.

Other governors' use of their broad pardoning powers have also drawn criticism.

Outgoing New York Gov. David Paterson drew fire last month when he reduced the sentence of a man convicted of a racially charged shooting death by more than half, to less than a year of time served, while New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie recently was criticized for commuting the sentence of a man convicted of illegal possession of firearms, from seven years to less than a year of time served.

"There's a potential for backlash in any state" after a governor commutes a sentence, said Lawrence Levy, dean at Hofstra University's National Center for Suburban Studies in Hempstead, N.Y.

Messrs. Schwarzenegger and Nunez were close political allies despite the governor being a Republican and the lawmaker a Democrat. One of their biggest collaborations resulted in passage of a landmark climate-change bill in 2006.

The teenage Mr. Nunez and three friends were charged after an Oct. 4, 2008, fight in San Diego that resulted in the knifing death of Luis Santos, a 22-year-old college student. Mr. Nunez, now 21, admitted to participating in the fight but not to killing anyone, according to court records. Under California law, though, criminals can be equally culpable even if they don't commit the actual murder.

He was sentenced in June and is incarcerated at Mule Creek State Prison near Sacramento; his manslaughter co-defendant also got 16 years, while the other two received three years' probation for lesser convictions. 

A person close to the elder Mr. Nunez said the ex-lawmaker, who was speaker between 2004 and 2008, felt his son was punished more harshly because of his father's status. A spokesman said Mr. Schwarzenegger wouldn't comment beyond his Jan. 2 commutation order, in which he concluded that the penalty was excessive because Mr. Nunez got the same sentence as the man who commited the killing. 

Mr. Santos's parents say they learned of the commutation through the media. Mr. Schwarzenegger sent a letter on Jan. 5 apologizing for not having notified them in advance.

The victim's father, Fred Santos, said in an interview that Mr. Schwarzenegger's apology meant little. "This is not like adding salt to the wound. It's like adding a lit cigarette to the wound that already has salt in it," said the 53-year-old software engineer from Concord, Calif., who along with his wife Kathy filed a lawsuit in state court seeking to reverse the commutation.

Orange County Assemblyman Allan Mansoor this month introduced language for a state constitutional amendment to require advance notification of people involved in a case that a commutation was coming.

Meanwhile, San Diego County District Attorney Bonnie Dumanis, whose office prosecuted Mr. Nunez, said her staff has drafted a bill to require more notification and have a state prison board review any pardons or commutations. Ms. Dumanis said her office will decide within two weeks whether to sue to overturn the commutation, in part on grounds that it didn't meet certain procedural requirements.

She noted that Mr. Nunez had admitted to the manslaughter charge as part of a plea bargain. 

"I think it diminishes justice when this kind of thing happens, and it re-victimizes the family," Ms. Dumanis said. 

Chuck Sevilla, a San Diego attorney for the younger Mr. Nunez, said his client declined to comment. "I can understand people raising their eyebrows, but I think the governor felt it was unfair and he acted," he said.

 Write to  Jim Carlton at jim.carlton@wsj.com 