In the debate over energy policy, the efforts in Washington get most of the attention. But states have just as much of a role to play.

Read the full  ECO:nomics report .

For insight into how states deal with these complex questions, The Wall Street Journal's Kimberley A. Strassel spoke with Mississippi Gov.  Haley Barbour. Here are edited excerpts of the discussion.

  MS. STRASSEL: Republicans have attempted to craft an energy policy in Washington for years. Tell me what your own energy philosophy is, for yourself, and for the state of Mississippi.  

 GOV. BARBOUR: Our energy policy is: more American energy. I think in 10 or 15 years, when companies come to Mississippi to consider our state, what they are going to ask about energy is not, "What does it cost?" They're going to ask, "How do we get it?" And we want to be seen as a reliable-energy state. 

That's why we're an oil- and gas-producing state; have been for many years. Twenty percent of the electricity of my state is provided by nuclear power. We make solar panels in my state. We have a very, very diverse portfolio of energy in our manufacturing sector, and that's what we want. We want more American energy, and then, of course, we're involved in conservation and efficiency, too.



  MS. STRASSEL: Do you make distinctions between the kinds of energy that you think are going to be most important to America's energy stability going forward?  

 GOV. BARBOUR: If people want to come to our state, we treat them like we treat any other kind of business. We give them incentives like we would give other manufacturers. But we have to believe, and they have to prove that they believe, that they can actually make money in the marketplace.



  MS. STRASSEL: What has made you decide that putting effort into getting renewable companies in is a better bet than, say, an auto company, or some other kind of job creator?  

 GOV. BARBOUR: Well, it's not as good as an auto company, because an assembly plant throws off scads of suppliers and the plant has got 2,500 jobs or 5,000 jobs. But it is very good. We're looking for advanced manufacturing with advanced materials that really improves the skills of our work force so that they can get higher pay. Per capita income of my state went up 27% in six years, and this is one of the reasons. We have been replacing low-skill, lower-paying jobs, with higher-skill, higher-paying jobs.



  MS. STRASSEL: Venture capitalists have talked about how they have come to view these industries differently over the past few years. It's not the same as funding a Silicon Valley start-up. These are often very expensive projects, there can be very long lead times, it's not for certain that these processes will pan out. That is a much bigger risk the state is making with taxpayer dollars than it would be luring an automotive company.  

 GOV. BARBOUR: We are taking risks just like these VC people are taking risks or other investors or bank lenders. We just have to make sure that we align our risk appropriately. Most of our renewable-energy projects, what we are doing for them is debt. We are lending them money to build their building, buy their equipment. 

I keep telling my people, never forget we are not investment bankers. So who else has got skin in the game and how much? Who has got as much to lose as we do? And we walk away from deals because there are people who want to have no equity in the deal, who don't want to put up anything. That's not fair to our taxpayers.

  MS. STRASSEL: Are you a fan of President Obama's investment in green energy and stimulus dollars?  

 GOV. BARBOUR: Really not. I think the federal government too often is picking winners and losers. I don't think we should be saying we are willing to fund this kind of energy but not that kind of energy.

My biggest concern is that the Obama energy policy seems very clear. It's to increase the cost of energy so Americans will use less of it. Their goal there is to reduce pollution and to make alternatives more cost-competitive. I think we should recognize that America has had abundant, affordable American energy for 400 years. It's been part of our comparative advantage, and we should not be driving up the cost of energy for other reasons.

I don't have an objection to the federal government investing in things that are going to generate great benefits. I do have an objection to a government policy that in my opinion is anti-job creation. I see the jobs that we lose if we drive up energy costs.



  MS. STRASSEL: Would you get rid of wind subsidies and solar subsidies or keep them at the federal level?  

 MR. BARBOUR: I'm not a big believer in wind and solar subsidies. If there's a lot of wind in North Dakota and out on the high plains and we generate electricity there, then you've got to have a transmission system to get it to where they need it, because they are not going to use that electricity in North Dakota generally once you get to a significant scale. 

What I don't think is right is to socialize the cost. The guy that owns the wind terminal and the person that gets the electricity on the other end, they ought to pay the cost.