When the Knicks traded four players to the Denver Nuggets last month in exchange for Carmelo Anthony, conventional wisdom said that all of the Knicks' 3-point shooting talent was going away, too. 

Three of the departed players—Danilo Gallinari, Wilson Chandler and Raymond Felton— were the top three on the team in 3-point attempts, combining for nearly 15 per game. 

But nearly a month into the Anthony experiment, one major theme has emerged. Against all odds, the Knicks are even better at shooting the three.

This month the Knicks have had their best 3-point output of any month this season, making 41% of their attempts. Last week in a win over the Memphis Grizzlies, the Knicks' perimeter prowess was historic. They made 20 3-pointers, the most in franchise history. Point guard Toney Douglas tied a franchise record with nine 3-pointers.

Douglas is the ringleader of the new group of Knicks' bombardiers. He's shooting six a game since the trade as opposed to four before it, and his 3-point shooting percentage has improved from 34% before the trade to 44% after it.

The surprise member of the group is Anthony himself. All of the talk that he hasn't bought into the system aside, he's apparently bought into the 3-point aspect of Knicks coach Mike D'Antoni's attack. He's making 42% of his 3-pointers and is taking 3.7 per game, up from 2.5 in Denver. "We knew Chauncey could shoot it," D'Antoni said. "The emergence of Toney really helps. Then 'Melo shooting 40% for threes, if that's something he can add to his game that would be great."

D'Anthoni said that with the makeup of this team, the Knicks will need to understand that to be a good team they will have to look to cut to the basket first and foremost, as both of their superstars, Anthony and Amar'e Stoudemire, are skilled one-on-one specialists. He also said Anthony and Stoudemire must be major contributors near the basket—if only to get the other team in foul trouble. 

Stoudemire, for his part, is still averaging a 3-point attempt every three games—the same number as before the trade. But the overall 3-point success is surprising since Billups, who leads the team in attempts with six per game since the trade, is making only 30% of his 3-pointers. The Knicks are still second in the NBA with 24.9 attempts per game.

Players say that the depletion of 3-point shooting talent caused by the trade wasn't a problem in their eyes. "I can't say we've gotten more open looks," said guard Roger Mason Jr. "With [D'Antoni's] system, the open looks will be there."

Mason, the sharpshooter who was signed last summer, saw his spot as 3-point specialist filled by Shawne Williams, among others, before the trade. But since the deal, he has seen his minutes double from eight to 16 per game. He's making 40% of his 3-pointers.

 Write to  Kevin Clark at kevin.clark@wsj.com 