Composer Michael "Mickey" Leonard is one of those gloriously unique New York characters who make the city what it is. For his "day job," he's labored for 50 years in the commercial-music industry, writing and orchestrating for films and TV (and, on two memorable occasions, for Broadway). But he has spent his nights in the city's jazz clubs and cabarets, where he and his songs are always a welcome presence. 

You might say that Mr. Leonard, whose music was celebrated in a show on Saturday at the Metropolitan Room (there will be a second performance on Feb. 10), is a quintessential New York songwriter—except that his music is too unique and too beautiful for him to be an archetypal anything.

Mr. Leonard is best known for the 1965 Broadway show "The Yearling," based on the classic 1938 book and 1946 film, and he is the first to admit that the musical "was a total disaster," as he said in an interview last week. "We opened on Friday and closed on Saturday." Yet two of the songs—"I'm All Smiles" and "Why Did I Choose You," with music by Mr. Leonard and lyrics by his longtime partner, Herb Martin—were immediately picked up by jazz and pop singers, starting with Barbra Streisand. The online All Music Guide lists more than 300 albums containing either of these two songs, by artists as disparate as Mabel Mercer, Marvin Gaye and Vijay Iyer. Perhaps the most celebrated interpretations of the two "Yearling" standards are by legendary jazz pianist Bill Evans, on a 1969 album titled "From Left to Right," with orchestral arrangements by the composer himself. 

Mr. Leonard, who remains coy about his age, was born in Rockville Centre, Long Island, but grew up on the Upper West Side and has resided in Manhattan ever since. He studied classical music at Juilliard and the Handel Conservatory in Munich, and learned to arrange for big bands and singers from the great Sy Oliver. He infiltrated the pop music world with the aid of his brother, who was a professional song plugger and worked as a delivery boy for a music publisher.

Around 1960, Mr. Leonard conducted for the crooner Dick Haymes (who had been a rival to Frank Sinatra a generation earlier) before serving as musical director for the younger pop star Tommy Sands, who was then married to Nancy Sinatra. That marriage didn't last, but Mr. Leonard and Ms. Sinatra have been close ever since. In a recent email, Ms. Sinatra said: "We have been friends for almost 50 years. I have had the pleasure of recording and performing several of his achingly beautiful, emotional melodies."

"The highlight of my life, I think, was Bill Evans," Mr. Leonard said. In 1969, he was recruited by the pianist's manager "to arrange an album for him that would get played on the easy-listening stations." A harsh critic of his own work, Mr. Leonard dismisses "From Left to Right" as "mostly elevator music"—except for one track, "The Dolpin." "When we heard the playback, I had the idea to add a woodwind part based on Bill's solo line. That's why on the CD there's a 'Dolphin-Before' and a 'Dolphin-After.'"

At Saturday's show, which was produced and hosted by singer Karen Oberlin, the songs were by turns upbeat and contemplative, depicting the blossoming of love (Ms. Oberlin's rendition of "Don't Let a Good Thing Get Away") and its end ("Where Do The Lonely Go?" as sung by Ellen Bullinger), as well as themes of innocence (Marissa Mulder doing "Spring Is a New Beginning") and disillusionment (Maud Hixson doing "Childhood's End"). It was a measure of what Mr. Leonard means to the cabaret community that two singers, Ms. Hixson and Barbara Brussell, had flown in at their own expense from, respectively, St. Paul and Los Angeles, to be there.

The concert reached its own highlight with Mr. Leonard's contemporary cabaret perennial "Not Exactly Paris," delivered as an intimately autobiographical communication by the veteran Joyce Breach. Earlier in the evening, another long-distance runner, vocalist Mark Murphy, brought the packed room to its feet with Mr. Leonard's swinging waltz "I'm All Smiles." For 90 minutes, some 150 New Yorkers were, indeed, all smiles.