The first major online art fair opened last weekend, but it got off to a troubled start. In the VIP Art Fair's first days, its website slowed to a crawl, shut down temporarily and lost a key interactive feature. One online critic renamed VIP: "Very Inactive Page."

The problems started at the opening last Saturday. Some collectors had trouble logging in. Dealers complained that they lost changes they made to their online inventory, couldn't show artworks to clients in virtual "back rooms" and had trouble reaching new collectors because of delays in the fair's instant-messaging system.

The site began to run more smoothly Monday after going offline briefly for repairs. To increase speed, the fair's messaging feature was permanently disabled. Fair organizers say the problems were a result of intense traffic over the chat system. 

On Friday, the fair reported that its artworks had been viewed 6.2 million times. The fair, with work from nearly 140 international galleries, ends Sunday. "We're looking forward to a strong finish," said Jane Cohan, one of the event's organizers. No total sales figures were available for VIP.

 On opening morning, New York gallery David Zwirner quickly sold "Mary Magdalene (Infinity)," a bronze abstract sculpture by Chris Ofili priced at $375,000. Gallery marketing director Julia Joern said technical delays soon hit, threatening to break the gallery's momentum. By Friday, the Ofili sculpture was still the only work the gallery had sold; typically the gallery sells upwards of $1 million in art at a traditional fair. But Ms. Joern said the gallery was still accomplishing its goal for the fair, which was to woo new clients rather than to make immediate sales. 

New York's Lehmann Maupin Gallery had not sold any artwork at VIP by Friday. Rachel Lehmann, the gallery's cofounder, wants the fair to offer a partial refund, a free booth in the future or some other accommodation to make up for the tech problems. "The viewers are disappointed, the galleries are disappointed," she said. "I think [the fair has] to come out by the end of this week and say, 'This is how we're going to compensate you.' " 

Ms. Cohan declined to say whether the fair would compensate disgruntled dealers, calling those confidential conversations. But she said there has been "a great deal of good will" from galleries and that the VIP staff has been in regular contact with dealers to answer questions and offer help. Ms. Cohan said dealers have praised the site as simple to navigate and sophisticated. "This has proven to be a catalyst in the art market," she said.

London-based contemporary art collector Tiqui Atencio called the issues "teething problems." "It took me two days to log on," she said by email. Though she called the start of the fair "frustrating," she added: "Once I managed to enter, I thought it was very interesting and had good works for sale."

Seasoned fairgoer Dennis Scholl said the echo chamber of the Internet allowed complaints about the virtual fair to resonate louder than they might at a physical fair, where a massive online audience isn't privy to world-weary collectors rolling their eyes and griping in the aisles. The Miami collector added that he liked the fair's selection: He's considering buying 15 artworks showcased at the event.

—Ellen Gamerman and Kelly Crow