 The former SAS soldier and mercenary talks to The Wall Street Journal Europe about how he spends his weekend. 



In October, Simon Mann published "Cry Havoc" (John Blake Publishing), a memoir of his solitary confinement in two African prisons for his 2004 role in a failed coup d'état, which sought to install an exiled opposition leader in Equatorial Guinea. He spent three years in prison in Zimbabwe, and served 2 ½ years of a 34-year sentence in Equatorial Guinea before being pardoned on humanitarian grounds in 2009 by President Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, the man he had intended to oust.

"I started the book while I was in prison as a love letter to Amanda, my wife, but also to have something to do. It occurred to me at the time the Zimbabwean authorities were asking for the death sentence against me and there was a very strong possibility that I would be sent off to Equatorial Guinea." 

He says he wrote his diaries in code over a period of about three years in prison and had them smuggled out of Zimbabwe back to London. When he got back to the U.K. in 2009, he turned his diaries from Harare into a book and now hopes it will be made into a film. 

 "We have gone to Hollywood and met with Ridley Scott's company and he has attached [his] name to the project. He wants to direct it....It's a huge endeavor. To raise $100 million to make one of these movies takes a lot of time and it's quite a complicated process," he says of the potential deal. Ridley Scott's company declined to comment.

 Today, Mr. Mann, 59 years old, lives in the U.K, where he works as a security consultant.

 On the weekends, he likes to spend time with his family. "We have four children and all together I have seven. I have three elder children by my first marriage and they are 31, 29 and 27 years old. We live with Freddy, Lilly, Bess, and Arthur, all between 7 and 15." He only met Arthur, the youngest, when he was released.

 How do you spend your free time with your children? 

I have two little girls who have ponies. That's a full-time business. We live near Lymington, which is on the south coast in England. It is also part of the New Forest, which is famous for its pony [breed]. It's a very beautiful place.... I got back from prison having left a pony-free house to find two ponies. My wife, who had never been near a pony or a horse in her life, was quite an expert at putting the ponies into the trailer and all the rest of it. 

 What other pastimes do you have as a family? 

We also have a boat. We are right by the sea and there is a yacht marina nearby. We quite often go to the Isle of Wight in our 22-foot motorboat for lunch. It takes half an hour to get to the other side. It's not serious yachting but just a family day out, though it rarely works out that we all are together because somebody has something going on.

 Is there a place you enjoy going to in the Isle of Wight? 

Yes. We go to Yarmouth, just opposite Lymington. There is a restaurant called Salty's that's a fish-and-chip-shop-cum-wine-bar. It's right by the harbor, which is very picturesque—like a postcard. 

 Do you exercise? 

I try to keep fit.... I don't regard fitness as leisure. I regard it as essential. I just have a very quick exercise routine and then I row on a rowing machine for 15 minutes to get warmed up and then I run on a running machine for another 15 minutes. It helps keep my weight under control but I also get very angry with myself if I am not fit. But most importantly...it refuels me mentally. I exercised every day while in prison even if I was in handcuffs. I did press ups and sit ups....You have to make yourself very disciplined. Here I laugh when people say I am spending too much time exercising. If I could exercise every day for 5 ½ years in prison, then I can certainly keep it going here. 

 Do you go for walks? 

Yes. More often we walk by the sea. We have stunning views. You couldn't ask for better. 

 Was it weird to return to the U.K.? 

Yes. I have been back exactly two years and I tried not to forget where I came from. I really appreciate it. Cervantes's Don Quixote spent a few years in prison and he calls it a moment of rebirth. I can't say it better than that.

—Mr. Mann was speaking with Javier Espinoza. 

 Write to  Javier Espinoza at javier.espinoza@wsj.com  