LONDON—Higher gas bills and record fuel prices helped push the annual rate of inflation in the U.K. to its highest level in more than two years in February, adding to pressure on the Bank of England to raise interest rates despite a still-fragile economy. 

The Office for National Statistics said the consumer prices index rose 4.4% in the 12 months to February—its highest year-on-year increase since October 2008. Core CPI inflation, which excludes items including energy, food, alcohol and tobacco, was the highest since records began in January 1997, at 3.4%. 

Inflation has now been more than a percentage point above the bank's 2% annual target for more than a year and its own forecasts anticipate inflation remaining above target until 2012. 

The bank believes the rise in prices can be attributed to temporary factors, like a jump in commodity prices and a rise in a U.K. sales tax, and that these influences will eventually wane. 

Policy makers have so far resisted raising the bank's benchmark interest rate from an emergency low of 0.5% introduced two years ago in an effort to nurture recovery. 

Many economists point to May as the likely month for the first rise in U.K. interest rates, assuming that first-quarter gross domestic product figures, due in April, are reassuring about the U.K.'s economic prospects. 

Sterling strengthened slightly Tuesday following the release of the inflation data, earlier rising to a fresh 14-month high of $1.6375 before falling back to trade at $1.6370 recently. 

The minutes of the Bank of England's Monetary Policy Committee's March meeting will be published Wednesday and will be closely watched by investors looking for clues to the likely path of monetary policy. 

Although the MPC voted to keep rates steady in March, there are divisions among its nine policy makers. In February, although six voted for rates to remain on hold, three advocated a rise—one more than in January. 

Separately, an industry survey indicated that U.K. industrial output is expected to pick up further in the three months from March—the brightest outlook in more than four years—and ONS lending data showed the public sector borrowed more last month than it has done in any February on record. 

While the survey's results will bolster government hopes of a private-sector recovery fueling the economy, the borrowing figures are a dire piece of news for Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne just a day before his crucial budget announcement Wednesday. 

The Confederation of British Industry said its industrial output balance rose to +27 in March from +23 in February, marking its highest level since February 2007, before the financial crisis erupted. 

The balance measures the percentage of firms that expect stronger output over the next three months minus the percentage that expect weaker output. 

"The manufacturing recovery is picking up pace," said the CBI's chief economic adviser  Ian McCafferty. "Firms [are] predicting robust output growth over the next quarter." 

Current order books strengthened sharply, with the balance of current orders rising into positive territory for the first time since June 2008, at +5. 

The survey also showed inflation forces growing further. The balance of companies expecting to raise rather than lower their prices in the coming three months edged up to +33 in March, its highest since July 2008, from +32 in February. 

"Inflation pressures in the manufacturing sector remain very acute as firms look to pass on sharply increased raw material costs," Mr. McCafferty said. 

The CBI polled 441 companies between Feb. 25 and March 16. 

The ONS lending figures showed that public-sector net borrowing was £11.8 billion ($19.25 billion) in February, the highest for that month since records began in 1993 and well above analysts' forecasts of £6.9 billion. The figure excludes the government's interventions in the financial sector. 

In the first 11 months of the current fiscal year, which began in April 2010, borrowing stood at £123.5 billion, meaning Mr. Osborne remains on track to beat his full-year target. 

The official government forecast for the year, published by the Office forBudget Responsibility, is for borrowing to total about £149 billion. 

Economists had been predicting that total borrowing for 2010-2011 was likely to undershoot the borrowing target by between £8 billion and £10 billion, but that margin could now be considerably smaller. 

The chancellor is expected to use the extra money to build a buffer against slower growth and potentially higher borrowing needs in the future, rather than indulging in any substantial giveaways. 

The budget comes at a time when Osborne is steering an ambitious five-year £111 billion austerity plan that seeks to curb U.K. borrowing and result in overall debt beginning to fall as a percentage of gross domestic product. 

That plan depends in part on a private-sector recovery boosting the economy and fueling tax receipts, allowing the government to bear down on the public deficit. 

—Ainsley Thomson contributed to this article. 









