Maybe the difference between success and failure really is as simple as a bounce in your step and a smile on your face. Last season, when Leonardo was coaching A.C. Milan, he said his approach was more "hugs and love" than "carrot and stick," adding that "Gandhi liberated India without raising his voice."

But Leonardo was relieved of duty after just one season, and Milan's owner, Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, pegged the Brazilian coach as a "stubborn idealist." It's a description that Leonardo may well have taken as a compliment.

It hasn't taken long for the hugs-and-love approach to get a second chance. On Christmas Eve, Leonardo was appointed manager of crosstown rival Inter, taking over from Rafa Benitez, who had himself been in the job just over six months.

It was something of a surprising choice, partly because of his relative lack of experience—Leonardo's year at Milan had been his only stint as manager—and partly because of his 11-year association with Inter's nemesis, first as a player, then in a variety of front-office roles and, finally, as coach. Yet the way he left Milan—standing up to Mr. Berlusconi, a man used to getting his way, while citing irreconcilable differences—makes him more than amenable to Inter fans. So do his boyish good looks and quick smile, making him one of those guys who's difficult to dislike. 

Leonardo is a former Brazilian international player, part of the nation's winning side in the 1994 World Cup. (His elbow to the face of the United States's Tab Ramos was a rare blip to his nice-guy persona.) Leonardo's globe-trotting career took him to Spain, France, Japan and Italy. He represents a certain type of sharply dressed, cosmopolitan, camera-friendly players' coach. England boss Sven-Göran Eriksson was a precursor, and José Mourinho the epitome that transcends the genre. Mr. Benitez, his immediate predecessor at Inter, was distinctly different: introverted and sometimes awkward when facing the media, wonkish when it came to tactics and training, distant from his players. 

It's no secret that, in Leonardo, Inter sees some of the same qualities it saw in Mr. Mourinho, who left for Real Madrid after delivering the treble—Italian Serie A title, Italian Cup and Champions League—last season. The Portuguese manager's deep and public bond with his players is unquestioned, and it was evident in hours after winning the Champions League. 

To some, the tight relationship between Mr. Mourinho and his players offered a convenient pop psychological explanation to Inter's success. After all, Mr. Benitez is by no means inferior in terms of tactics and training techniques. Mr. Mourinho himself appeared to take a shot at Mr. Benitez, with whom he's had a frosty public relationship dating back to their time in the Premier League, in an interview with Italian broadcaster Sky Italia.

"The players are now happy," he said, referring to Inter. "When your players are happy, you're half-way there. Leonardo understands what a team needs."

For his part, Leonardo seemed to pay homage to Mr. Mourinho after Inter's 4-1 win over Bologna on Saturday night, his fourth consecutive victory since taking the helm. "We have a clear idea of what we're trying to do. We're simply continuing the work that began years ago," he said.

Mr. Mourinho and Leonardo may share a hugs-and-love approach when it comes to their own players, but their brand of soccer and public personas differ. Leonardo is the more offensively-oriented manager with frissons of New Age, as you would expect from someone who cites Gandhi. At Milan, for example, he didn't describe his tactical formation as 4-4-2 or 4-2-3-1, but rather as 4-2-imagination.

His challenge is to motivate a veteran team that started the season badly, both because of injuries and because it looked satiated after last year's trophy haul. Inter is currently nine points behind league-leading Milan but has played two games fewer. There's plenty of time to make up the deficit. Odds are, though, it will take more than just hugs and love. 

When Bayern Munich signed Arjen Robben for $30 million in the summer of 2009, fans salivated over the prospect of the Dutchman forming a lethal left-right wing combination with Franck Ribéry, the Bundesliga's player of the year in 2008. Two speedy, creative wingers like that would be virtually unplayable for anyone, or so Bayern's fans thought.

Since then, though, we've seen very little of the Robben-Ribéry combination, largely because one or the other has been hurt for much of the past 18 months. Since Mr. Robben's arrival, Bayern has played 77 games. The pair has lasted the full 90 minutes together just five times.

On Saturday, when Bayern took on Wolfsburg, there were high hopes that Mr. Robben would return to full fitness and that the dream team would be reunited. Mr. Robben did return, coming on as a substitute after 25 minutes. Alas, it was for Mr. Ribéry, who suffered a knee injury that's expected to sideline him for several weeks. The curse—if it is, indeed, a curse—continues.

—Gabriele Marcotti is the world football columnist for the Times of London and a regular broadcaster for the BBC