A Long Island couple who invented a device that protects students from being crushed by gymnasium partitions is alleging that schools are exposing children to potentially fatal accidents.

The couple also said in a lawsuit against the city and state that when they publicly complained about lax safety standards, officials retaliated by denying them contracts in an attempt to squeeze them out of work.

Representatives for the city and state education departments denied the claims, saying that the doors comply with safety codes and that other vendors are qualified to do the work. Officials said they believe Stephen and  Kathleen Cole, who filed the suit last week in Manhattan Supreme Court, are simply trying to generate more business. The Coles of Huntington Station, Long Island, said they are worried that children could die.

In autumn 2009, when their business, Gym Door Repairs, was faltering, Stephen and Kathleen Cole hired a family friend to be the company's new public face.

They had met Patrick Dello Russo in 2007 at the Cedar Beach Marina in Babylon. Two years later, they hired Mr. Dello Russo as the CEO of a new company, Safe Path Systems, hoping he could help secure city and state contracts installing and maintaining safety systems on school gym partitions.

They believed they had provoked government officials and thought a fresh face could revive their reputation.

They did not know at the time, they said in an interview, that Mr. Dello Russo had pleaded guilty to racketeering in 1994 and had served 10 years in prison. Federal court papers in connection with that case described him as a corrupt freight company executive who ran labor rackets at Kennedy Airport for the Luchese crime family.

Mr. Dello Russo said in an interview he never concealed his criminal history and time in prison. "I was just trying to repair their battered image," he said. Asked about alleged former connections to the Luchese crime family, Mr. Dello Russo said, "I don't want to talk about that."

The Coles said Mr. Dello Russo encouraged them to enter a revenue-sharing agreement with an emerging competitor, Young Equipment Sales, based in Hauppauge, N.Y., which would pay Safe Path a fee for the right to sell and maintain its system.

The deal did not work out as planned for the Coles, they said.

Mr. Dello Russo was able to get meetings with city and state facility supervisors. The Coles said they fired him in April 2010 after their accountant alerted them to his past.

Young Equipment is now poised to get the business they sought, the Coles said. Young Equipment is in talks with city education officials about installing safety systems on hundreds of doors, according to the company and city officials.

Mr. Dello Russo said he quit working for the Coles in April 2010 because he believed the Coles were trying unfairly to limit rivals by insisting that they determine who was qualified to install and maintain their system. The couple denies the allegation.

Rich Young, the CEO of Young Equipment, and Mr. Dello Russo said they stopped working with each other when Mr. Dello Russo's relationship with the Coles ended.

 --Jacob Gershman 

Their suit revolves around a niche in school construction—the lumbering steel panels that slide back and forth across hundreds of gyms throughout the state every day, dividing space into separate classes.

Concerns about partitions flared up a decade ago after a 12-year-old student from Ithaca died when he was pinned between a sliding door and a block wall. A nine-year-old Long Island girl was crushed in a similar accident in 1991 and died days later in a hospital.

The deaths prompted Gov.  George Pataki to sign a law in 2001 that forced schools to equip the doors with more rigorous safety systems to freeze the partitions when a student walks in the way. The state gave schools $26 million to install motion sensors and reimbursed districts millions of more dollars each year for maintenance.

The Coles had a patent on an infrared device for gyms. Almost overnight, they said in an interview, they were flooded with contracts. In court papers, they said schools installed 4,000 of their devices, the majority of the door safety systems operating in gyms.

But business began to slow down, and the Coles said in their complaint they had "substantial concerns" that their systems weren't being inspected and maintained and that some schools never installed safety systems. State law mandates regular inspections and upkeep according to the manufacturer's instructions, which in the case of the Coles' device, should have been once a year.

Starting in 2008, the Coles unleashed a series of letters to elected officials in Albany and City Hall.

Their effort generated resentment among some education officials, who say they thought the Coles were driven by greedier motives and spreading false alarm.

"It is the opinion of the state Education Department—which drafted these regulations—that any qualified person can maintain the partitions," state Education Department spokesman  Tom Dunn said in statement.

"The vendor claims we are interpreting our own regulation incorrectly and that the original manufacturer must maintain the partition. They therefore claim that any district which uses their partitions and does not hire them for maintenance is out of compliance with the regulations," Mr. Dunn said. "We disagree with the vendor's self-interested interpretation of our regulation."

The Coles said in court papers and interviews they believe in many schools, safety systems aren't being properly maintained or were never installed at all. "The devastation to our business pales in comparison to the thought of another child dying," said Mr. Cole.

Last Thursday, the couple filed court papers alleging education officials have ignored the law and retaliated against the couple. They are asking a judge to compel the city and state to prove they are complying with the safety law and to pay the Coles an unspecified amount of money for the alleged retaliation.

Mr. Dunn said after the couple first raised the allegations, the agency sought and received assurances from most schools in 2009 that their partitions were operating safely.

  Gerald Couse, a career code compliance specialist who retired from the state Education Department in September, said the Education Department doesn't go into schools and inspect the doors and their safety systems. "My best guess is that at least 25% don't operate properly, and that's conservative," Mr. Couse told The Wall Street Journal. "I truly hope I'm wrong, but I don't think I am."

Last week, the assistant state commissioner in charge of school operations for the state Education Department, made a special trip to an Orange-Ulster school after he was notified that the Journal had a video of a door that appeared to have faulty motion sensors installed by another company. The video was shot at the end of January by an employee of the Coles' company and appeared to show the door unresponsive to a person walking in front of it. 

The door was working properly when he visited, said  Charles Szuberla, head of school operations.

The chief operating officer for Orange-Ulster Boces,  Terrence Olivo, said the school's door is working "exactly as designed" and the Coles are upset they didn't get a $3,000 contract to install the system. The Coles confirmed they lost the bid but said that wasn't their motivation for taking the video.

Mr. Szuberla said that in November he was told by the office of the Special Commissioner of Investigation for New York City schools that the office is looking into the Coles' allegations in the city. The Coles had met with school investigators in August. The investigative office declined to comment.

Mr. Szuberla said the couple's allegations prompted the city to inspect all of its doors late last year. A spokeswoman for the city Education Department said city custodians conducted a citywide survey in November. Any doors without working safety systems were disabled or locked into a permanently locked position, said spokeswoman  Natalie Ravitz.

The Coles, in their lawsuit, claim the office of  John Shea, head of facilities for city schools, retaliated against them in January by instructing general contractors to stop hiring them as subcontractors. Mr. Shea isn't named in the suit. One general contractor confirmed to the Journal that borough contract managers told him directly earlier this year not to hire the Coles.

Mr. Shea referred calls to Ms. Ravitz. "To say that we shut down their business is false," Ms. Ravitz said. "Because of the volume of routine repair work...we need to use more than one qualified vendor."

 Write to  Jacob Gershman at jacob.gershman@wsj.com 