Chinese investors sure don't like too-strong economic growth.

Stocks in mainland China dove nearly 3% Thursday after Beijing announced the economy accelerated in the fourth quarter. Investors worried that strong growth would exacerbate inflation, and prompt new tightening measures that would be unfavorable for stocks.

The Shanghai Composite Index fell 2.9% to 2677.65, near a four-month low and down 4.6% so far this year. The latest decline leaves China's stocks in solid "bear" territory, down 23% since the post-crisis high in August 2009. Over the same period, the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index has risen 27.5%.

The better-than-expected numbers, which include growth in gross domestic product of 9.8% for the fourth quarter and 10.3% for all of 2010, contrast sharply with weakness in the developed world. But they also mean the world's second-largest economy is overheating. 

Inflation came in at 4.6% in December compared with a year earlier, higher than the government would prefer, as food prices rose. Excluding food prices, inflation accelerated from the month before.

"Inflation is the major cue for investors," says  Oscar Leung, senior investment manager for ING Investment Management in Hong Kong. A turnaround in the market won't come, he says, until we see "more concrete signals of the peaking of inflation," especially for food and commodity prices.

Mainland Chinese stocks, which foreign investors are mostly banned from trading, were the first to rebound after the financial crisis. After bottoming out in October 2008. Chinese markets rose quickly through the first half of 2009 as the government implemented a massive stimulus program, much of which was delivered through permissive bank lending.

The market peaked in August 2009, the same time that investors in China sensed the government would begin to pull back on the lending spree. Since then, China has implemented a slew of anti-inflation measures, including seven increases to reserve requirements for banks, which govern the amount of money banks have to keep aside relative to their loans.

Other actions include restrictions on real-estate borrowing; a 3.7% appreciation in the Chinese currency against the dollar; tightening of some capital inflows and loosening of capital outflows; price controls on food; and two interest- rate increases.

Thursday's economic news raised expectations for more tightening than previously thought.

"Given this stronger-than-expected inflation trend, we see a growing likelihood of more aggressive policy responses," says  Jun Ma, China chief economist for Deutsche Bank in Hong Kong. He figures the government will be under pressure to extend price controls to energy products and raw materials.

Fears of price controls pushed shares of coal miners lower Thursday. Earlier expectations that coal would be scarcer due to floods in Australia failed to boost coal prices, Shanghai Securities analyst Peng Yunliang said. Shanxi Xishan Coal & Electricity Power ended 5.5% lower at 25.10 yuan after rising 6.5% in the previous 12 sessions, and  China Shenhua Energy fell 3.9% to 23.15 yuan, after rising 0.4% during the same period.

Property developers, who bear the brunt of the tighter bank-l lending environment, fell as well.  China Vanke,
000002


1.10
%




 the country's largest property developer by market share, fell 4.7% to 8.14 yuan, and  Poly Real Estate Group
600048


-0.85
%




 declined 6.3% to 13.03 yuan.

Valuations for Chinese companies are relatively attractive, at roughly 12 times 2011 forecast earnings. But investors seem unwilling to commit until the inflation warning sirens stop blaring.

"You can't wait for the inflation to come down to below 4%," says ING's Mr. Leung. "Once we see commodity, energy and food prices peak out, then the market correction will stabilize, and then probably we can start to think about some quality stocks to accumulate." 

 Write to  Alex Frangos at alex.frangos@wsj.com 