For international companies, the health and safety of overseas employees can be a significant cost and worry. Just ask any of the dozens of firms that have evacuated staff from current global hotspots in Japan or the Middle East. 



In cases like this, about 70% of Fortune 500 companies turn to International SOS, according to Chief Executive  Arnaud Vaissié. International SOS is a Singapore-based firm that operates medical clinics and alarm centers in 70 countries, and also provides clients with security and logistical services, including evacuation assistance.

Amid the crises in the Middle East, the company said it supported more than 2,700 evacuations from Libya and Egypt combined. Its security and logistics providers secured seats on outbound flights and ferries. Reception teams met evacuees at ports with food and water and helped with visas as well as accommodation.

International SOS launched an information website for customers after the Japan quake and tsunami, updated by teams of medical and security experts.

The firm was founded in Singapore in 1985 by Mr. Vaissié, 56 years old, and his childhood friend, Pascal Rey-Herme, a doctor. Then known as AEA International, the firm had 15 employees. The privately held company, renamed International SOS in 1999, now has 7,000 employees including 1,000 doctors, and said it had sales of $1 billion in 2010.

 Career: Compass Inc. chief in San Francisco; co-founded International SOS in 1985

 Education: Graduated in 1978 from Institute of Political Science of Paris

 Extracurricular: Runs a think tank comparing France and U.K. policies.

 On expertise: "What we've developed is a western expertise — medicine outside of the hospital and security. We brought this expertise into Asia. Now it has evolved into also an Asian expertise."

The company has provided medical services for events such as the 2010 Asian Games in Guangzhou, China, and manages health-care information of all active-duty U.S. military personnel outside the U.S. 

Mr. Vaissie spoke with Emily Veach in Hong Kong about the challenges of helping clients around the world. 

 WSJ: What can executives and doctors learn from each other?

 Mr. Vaissié: The training of a physician is to meet with a patient, to do an instant analysis and execute instantly. It's a one-on-one relationship. Whereas business is all about group decision. The diagnosis is slow and the execution is even slower. Physicians are absolutely convinced that executives are incompetent because where a physician sees a problem, he finds a solution, instantly proposes a solution, and executes a solution. Whereas an executive...three months later it's still not fixed and it's a very complex dynamic. It explains why you have such antagonism between executives and physicians and also such waste in health care. 

 WSJ: How was the experience developing the company with your childhood friend?

 Mr. Vaissié: I'm always very impressed by people who have started a business on their own. It's incredibly easier if you do it with a minimum of two people because you can talk. There are more tough times than good times in the beginning. The relationship had been the reason for the development of the company. He clearly is in charge of the medical delivery of services. We divided up the responsibilities but at the end of the day for anything which is significant we do it together.

 WSJ: What qualities do you look for in potential employees?

 Mr. Vaissié: For physicians, what we're asking them to do is much more complicated than the usual practice because they are outside their home environment, or even in a hostile environment. We recruit people with at least five to 10 years of experience because of the complexity of the job. We see thousands of physicians every year. 

Alarm-center staff have to understand the world and they need to have a knack at coming up with the questions. They receive a call, they don't ask to be questioned. They need to figure out what needs to be done. They must like working as a team. We need executives who value the network above their direct team. It's not easy. It's a fairly complex mindset to understand that really our value is this global network. 

 WSJ: What is the key to growing in Asia?

 Mr. Vaissié: It's hard to create partnerships in developing countries, for example China and Indonesia. We have to create strong and stable partnerships. What we've realized in Asia is when you need a partner, if you make the wrong choice, you can never go back—you're doomed. There's no way to fix it. Finding the right partner then managing the partnership is absolutely fundamental. In China we have a senior director who is in charge of managing partnerships. We believe that it is a must—if you don't master this one, all else will collapse. 

 WSJ: What is new in the field of information security?

 Mr. Vaissié: Clients want data to stay in the country of origin, so that no other country could claim access to the data. So we are now putting servers in different countries so as to ensure that access is going to be limited to the country of origin.

 WSJ: When companies started requesting that service, did you think it made sense?

 Mr. Vaissié: Health care is the only area where data have value that does not diminish with time. In business, data can be extremely valued but within three to six months it's gone. The impact of data linkage in health care has the potential to be lifelong or even more so, which is not the case in business. To me, it's obvious that data privacy, data confidentiality is at the heart of health care, like medical confidentiality is at the heart of health care. In today's digital world, I think no cost should be spared to achieve this. 

 WSJ: What does the outsourcing of medical services entail?

Mr. Vaissié: In Indonesia, for a U.S. company called Freeport [McMoRan Copper & Gold Inc.], we are managing provision of health care for 100,000 people. We established a hospital, clinics, transportation, everything has been outsourced to us for 13 or 14 years. In Papua New Guinea, for Exxon [Mobile Corp.] now we have a massive project where health care has been outsourced to us.

 WSJ: How much do costs vary by region?

 Mr. Vaissié: We operate 27 alarm centers around the world. It's completely integrated. U.S. clients are going to be managed by our center in Philadelphia. If the case happens in mainland China, Hong Kong is going to be called and Beijing is going to be called. If it is in West China, we'll have our local correspondent involved. Everybody's together, so it's difficult to break costs down. In developing countries what is most expensive is the [cost of hiring] expatriates. We have more than 1,500 expatriates for whom we're paying benefits. In developed countries the cost of expertise is higher. 

 Write to  Emily Veach at Emily.Veach@wsj.com 