MUMBAI -- Reliance Industries Ltd. will look to its petrochemicals, consumer retail and telecommunications businesses to drive growth in the next few years, Chairman  Mukesh Ambani said in a letter to shareholders.

"We will augment our commitment to Indian markets by investing in new petrochemical capacity, organized retailing and digital services," Mr. Ambani, also the managing director, said in the company's latest annual report.

Reliance said it has "embarked on a major capacity creation initiative in petrochemicals," encouraged by strong demand forecasts for petrochemicals and fibers, to become "the world's largest integrated polyester producer."

Mr. Ambani said the company's new projects "represent the largest-ever investment by Reliance in a sector" and the biggest capital commitment in the global petrochemicals segment as well.

"Our investments in organized retailing are anticipated to be significant and will transform the Indian market," he added.

On telecom, Mr. Ambani said: "We envisage that significant value will be created for consumers as well as operators with new services and connectivity."

Last year, Reliance paid about 48.00 billion rupees to buy 95% of Infotel Broadband, which had won a government auction of radio waves to offer wireless broadband services in the entire country, marking the energy major's foray into telecommunications.

Reliance had cash and cash equivalents of 423.93 billion rupees ($9.48 billion) as of March 31.

It said cash reserves rose mainly due to $2 billion received as part of a recent deal to sell a 30% stake in 23 oil and gas blocks to U.K.-based  BP PLC.

Analysts have said Reliance lacks any immediate growth plans despite large unused cash reserves.

"...in the absence of further triggers, earnings are likely to be flat for the next several quarters until the new petrochemical capacity comes online over a two- to three-year time [frame]," analyst  Kumar Manish of HSBC Securities and Capital Markets India said in a note last month.

"With a cash balance of about $10 billion, the problem of deployment of cash is further accentuated, as we believe existing projects will require only $3 billion capex during fiscal year 2012," Mr. Manish added.

 Write to  Eric Yep at eric.yep@dowjones.com 