New York City drew a record 48.7 million visitors last year, marking a 6.8% increase from 2009 and the strongest signal yet that the tourism industry is rebounding from the downturn caused by the global recession, Mayor Michael Bloomberg said Tuesday.

Of those visitors, 39 million were from the U.S. and 9.7 million from abroad, both records. The city remains on pace to meet its goal of attracting 50 million visitors a year by 2012, the mayor said.

"We are glad to extend our hospitality to every visitor," Mr. Bloomberg said at a news conference at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden. "But we certainly love international visitors because they spend, on average, 3½ times what domestic visitors do."

In 2010, tourists spent an estimated $31 billion in the city, a nearly 10% jump from 2009. The hospitality industry added 6,600 jobs in the past year, employing more New Yorkers than at any point in history, officials said.

New York City is the destination for roughly one third of overseas visitors to the U.S., making the city by far the most popular destination in the country for travelers from abroad, Mr. Bloomberg said. Miami and Los Angeles, by comparison, were tied as the second most popular destination for international visitors, each attracting about 11% of the market share.

The preliminary numbers represent a turnaround for the tourism industry in New York City, which has suffered recently because of the dramatic downturn in the economy. In 2009, the number of tourists declined 2.9%, to 45.6 million, and visitor spending plunged 12%, to $28.2 billion, compared with 2008.

This past year, though, 25.7 million room nights were sold, a new record, exceeding the previous high by two million.

"The strength of our tourism industry is one of the reasons New York City was less impacted by the national recession than other cities, and it continues to be one of the reasons we're growing faster than other cities," Mr. Bloomberg said.

For Mr. Bloomberg, the record-breaking tourism numbers come at an opportune time. New Yorkers have spent the past week heaping criticism on the mayor for the city's sluggish response to the post-Christmas snow storm.

When most visitors think about New York City, they picture Manhattan's skyline, or Broadway or the shops on Fifth Avenue. But Brooklyn Borough President Marty Markowitz boasted that his borough is a popular destination in its own right. He heralded Coney Island, the new Brooklyn Bridge Park and the borough's diverse neighborhoods as key attractions.

"I know it's easy to get caught up in all that Brooklyn has to offer," he said with a smile, "but spare a thought for our brethren across the river: Remember Manhattan is still perfect for a day trip."

 Write to  Michael Howard Saul at michael.saul@wsj.com 