Pinnacle Group, which bought thousands of apartments in low-income neighborhoods during the real-estate boom, faces losing one of its more prominent holdings to lenders. 

Lender Lehman Brothers Holdings has scheduled a foreclosure auction for Friday in an effort to seize control of the block-long 550-unit Dunbar apartment complex in Harlem, along with a set of smaller properties. 

Pinnacle, with investment funds controlled by Praedium Group, paid aggressive prices to become among the city's most active buyers of walk-up apartment buildings throughout 2005 and 2006. 

Pinnacle has been criticized by elected officials who allege improper eviction practices. The company has denied wrongdoing. 

Amid a tough lending market and lower market prices for the properties, Pinnacle failed to repay Lehman about $51 million in junior debt that came due in September. 

The firm is still in talks with Lehman in an attempt to maintain control of some of its portfolio, a person familiar with the matter said. However, that doesn't include holding on to the Dunbar complex, this person said. 

"There are a lot of opportunities and a lot of challenges in this financial environment, but we're very comfortable that we're navigating both successfully," said  Kenneth Fisher, an attorney for Pinnacle.

A spokesman for Praedium declined to comment. A spokeswoman for Lehman Brothers Holdings, A spokeswoman for Lehman, which still holds real-estate assets while in bankruptcy, didn't respond to requests for comment. 

Built in the 1920s, the red-brick Dunbar apartment complex occupies a full block in Harlem, bounded by 149th and 150th streets and Seventh and Eighth avenues. 

Pinnacle bought the property for $94 million in 2005 from landlord  Baruch Singer, at a time when real-estate values were significantly higher throughout the city. 

Pinnacle was among investors during the boom that looked to Manhattan north of 125th Street as well as to other boroughs in order to amass large portfolios of multifamily housing. Many of those investors are now are facing financial crunches. 

Because of the high prices they paid for such buildings, some owners found they needed to step up evictions and try to quickly deregulate rents they charged for their apartments in an effort to boost revenue from the properties.

Some elected officials have accused Pinnacle of employing such tactics. In 2007, a group of tenants sued the company in federal court alleging that the company had improperly forced out tenants. That lawsuit hasn't yet been resolved. 

Pinnacle has fought the charges, saying it has acted properly. 

"Pinnacle is proud of its record of providing safe and affordable housing," Mr. Fisher said. "The controversy over its operations is greatly overblown." 

 Write to  Eliot Brown at eliot.brown@wsj.com 