ROME—Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi went on television for the second time in less than a week to deny prosecutors' allegations that he abused his powers in an attempt to cover up alleged sexual relations with an underage woman.

"It's so absurd that allegations are being made…asserting that I had sexual relations with a girl under the age of 18 years," he said.

The speech came as the Italian Parliament pores over a 389-page document filled with details of wiretaps and interrogations that describe Mr. Berlusconi's links to Karima El Mahroug, a Moroccan teenager who met the premier when she was a minor, and several other women the premier allegedly housed near his villa in Milan.

Prosecutors have placed Mr. Berlusconi under investigation for allegedly having sexual encounters with Ms. El Mahroug. Prosecutors also allege he abused his powers by pressing for the woman's release from police custody last year in an alleged attempt to prevent her from disclosing their relationship. On Wednesday, Mr. Berlusconi acknowledged making the call, but he dismissed the allegation of a coverup as "so absurd."

Parliament now has to decide whether to authorize prosecutors to search the premier's Milan offices, which are shielded from the probe under Italian law because of the premier's state role.



  More photos and interactive graphics  

The lengthy documents, prepared by prosecutors and seen by The Wall Street Journal, are the latest chapter in the escalating scandal in Italy over Mr. Berlusconi's private life. So far, Mr. Berlusconi has rejected calls from opposition lawmakers to resign, and his allies have rushed to his defense.

Ms. El Mahroug also took to the airwaves late Wednesday evening to defend Mr. Berlusconi. In an interview broadcast on a TV network owned by Mr. Berlusconi, Ms. El Mahroug said she was introduced to Mr. Berlusconi in February by a friend who described her to the premier as a 24-year-old in need of financial help. The premier, she said, brought her into his office and handed her an envelope containing €7,000 ($9,350). Mr. Berlusconi has acknowledged providing Ms. El Mahroug with financial support, though he hasn't provided details on how much.

"He didn't put one finger on me," Ms. El Mahroug said.

In one wiretapped phone conversation contained in the documents, Ms. El Mahroug told a friend in October that the premier had been coaching her on how to respond to scrutiny. "Silvio is constantly calling me. He told me act like I'm crazy," the court documents quote her as saying.

The documents contain new details on how Mr. Berlusconi intervened on Ms. El Mahroug's behalf on May 27-28, when she was detained for allegedly stealing cash from an acquaintance.

According to the documents, when Ms. El Mahroug was detained late on May 27, Judge Annamaria Fiorillo, who was called to rule on the detention, ordered that police keep Ms. El Mahroug in custody until a place was found for her in social services.

"We must take care of this girl," Judge Fiorillo told police that night, according to the court documents.

Hours later, however, Pietro Ostuni, chief of staff at the Milan police station, received a phone call from a member of the premier's security detail who passed the phone to Mr. Berlusconi. The documents say Ms. El Mahroug's acquaintance had called a prostitute she knew and told her of the detention. The prostitute then called Mr. Berlusconi's associates. 

"The premier immediately came on the phone and told me there was a North African girl at the police station that he knew as the granddaughter of Egyptian President [Hosni] Mubarak," Mr. Ostuni told prosecutors, according to the court documents.

The premier then told Mr. Ostuni he was sending a regional politician to pick up Ms. El Mahroug, according to the documents. At 2 a.m. on May 28, police placed Ms. El Mahroug in the custody of the politician, Nicole Minetti. The teenager then stayed at the apartment of the prostitute, according to the court documents.

A week later, Ms. El Mahroug and the prostitute got into a fight and the teenager was hospitalized, according to the documents.

Judge Fiorillo didn't return phone calls seeking comment on the matter. A spokesman for Mr. Ostuni and a lawyer for Ms. Minetti declined to comment. The Egyptian Embassy has denied Ms. El Mahroug is related to Mr. Mubarak. Mr. Berlusconi's lawyers didn't return phone calls seeking comment on the matter. 

—Nathania Zevi contributed to this article.