WASHINGTON—President Barack Obama said publicly for the first time that Libyan leader Col. Moammar Gadhafi must give up power, but didn't specify what the U.S. planned to do to make that happen.

"The U.S. and the entire world continue to be outraged by the appalling violence against the Libyan people," Mr. Obama said in a news conference Thursday. "Moammar Gadhafi has lost the legitimacy to lead, and he must leave."



Mr. Obama said he was positioning U.S. military assets near Libya to ensure he had the "full capacity to act" if the situation there deteriorates further, reinforcing the White House's stance that all options are open. 

Administration officials later said Mr. Obama was outlining scenarios in which a humanitarian relief mission—not a military intervention—became necessary.

U.S. officials have played down the likelihood of the option of establishing an international no-fly zone over Libya, a move that Defense Secretary Robert Gates said would require pre-emptive strikes on Libyan air defenses.

Mr. Obama said a no-fly zone was "one option" under consideration, but stressed that it was important to act with American allies. U.S. officials said allied support hadn't coalesced around such a plan. 

Some North Atlantic Treaty Organization members remain skeptical—meaning it could be difficult for the U.S. to use air bases in Italy and other locations to strike Libya.

On Monday, after an expression of support for the idea from British Prime Minister David Cameron, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, meeting with European allies in Geneva, said the no-fly zone was under consideration. But she modified that Tuesday by telling the Senate such a decision was a long way off, and U.K. officials eased back on their enthusiasm.

Mr. Gates, testifying before Congress on Wednesday, sounded dubious about the option as he emphasized that setting up a no-fly zone would require a pre-emptive attack on Libyan air defenses.

Defense and administration officials denied Thursday there was any disagreement among the Pentagon, White House and State Department on the matter. Officials said any variation in tone from the administration from day to day reflected changing views among American allies rather than divisions within the U.S. government.

"We are not saying it's not doable—we are not saying a decision has been made," said Col. David Lapan, the Pentagon spokesman. "We are talking about putting it in perspective that a no-fly zone is a challenging undertaking were that decision to be made."

On Thursday, Mr. Obama said he had authorized the use of U.S. military aircraft and U.S. government-chartered civilian planes to help return Egyptians who have fled Libya to Tunisia. The military plans to use C-130 cargo planes, which can be configured to carry passengers, to help evacuate the refugees.

The U.S. has ordered two Navy ships and 1,200 Marines to the Mediterranean Sea. But military officials said there were no current plans to send the troops into Libya for humanitarian relief missions. 

Mr. Obama said he had ordered military equipment to the region because he wanted the U.S. to be prepared in case a humanitarian relief mission is necessary.

Opinion on Capitol Hill appeared split on the question of establishing a no-fly zone, with some lawmakers calling on the administration Thursday to establish one, while others—including top House Republicans—gave the president more room to maneuver in his response to the upheaval in Libya.

Sen. John McCain, the Arizona Republican, said simply announcing the intention of a no-fly zone could have a deterrent effect on Col. Gadhafi. Sen. Frank Lautenberg (D., N.J.), said a no-fly zone is needed "to get this killing stopped as quickly as we can."

House Speaker John Boehner declined to call for a no-fly zone, saying he wanted to allow Mr. Obama to make such a decision. But Mr. Boehner, an Ohio Republican, said he agrees with the president that "it is time" for the Libyan leader to leave.

U.S. officials had indicated that if there were evidence Col. Gadhafi's forces were carrying out airstrikes, particurlary on civilians, international support for a no-fly zone could grow. 

On Thursday, Col. Lapan, the Pentagon spokesman, said the U.S. government had seen clear evidence of air strikes on rebel positions. But he said that hadn't changed the Pentagon's thinking regarding a no-fly zone.

One military official noted that many pilots appeared to have intentionally missed their targets.

—Devlin Barrett, Alistair MacDonald and Gerald F. Seib contributed to this article.

 Write to  Julian Barnes at julian.barnes@wsj.com and Adam Entous at adam.entous@wsj.com 