 U.S. oil futures held above $100 a barrel as fighting raged in Libya and the IEA said the conflict there had shut down more oil production than originally forecast. The IEA said between 850,000 and one million barrels a day of output had gone offline, but that European refiners, the main users of Libyan oil, have ample supplies.  

 U.S. stocks struggled as crude oil rose amid a potential flareup in Libyan tensions. Gold rose as well, but Asian stocks fell, led by a 2.4% drop in Japan's Nikkei. 

 South Korean consumer prices surged in February, prompting the government to convene another price-stability meeting and raising pressure on the Bank of Korea to increase its policy interest rate.  

 Australia posted solid fourth-quarter growth, but gains are expected to slow in the current quarter as the country grapples with the effects of flooding.  

 New Zealand's prime minister offered a glum outlook for the economy, forecasting an $11.1 billion blow to GDP from earthquakes in Christchurch.  

 U.S. Fed Chairman Bernanke said Congress should draft a plan to lower the ratio of debt to GDP as a way to tackle mounting deficit problems.  

 Standard Chartered posted a record annual net profit and forecast continued double-digit income growth for 2011.  

 Tata Steel raised its stake in Riversdale Mining to 27.1% amid Rio Tinto's takeover offer for the Africa-focused coal company.  

 Bombardier received an order from NetJets for as many as 120 business jets, in a deal that could be valued at over $6.7 billion.  

 A unit of AVIC signed an agreement to buy U.S.-based personal aircraft maker Cirrus.  

 Hong Kong Exchanges & Clearing's net rose 7% in 2010, boosted by rising turnover and a record year for IPOs. Unlike its rivals, the exchange operator isn't in talks about potential tie-ups. 

 Children's clothing maker Dadida aims to raise up to $500 million from a Hong Kong IPO.  

 Sina said it will boost investment in its microblog product this year as China's biggest Internet portal reported a loss for the fourth quarter.  

 Petronas's profit rose 74% in the fiscal-third-quarter from a year earlier, helped by higher oil prices and one-time gains.  

 Coda expects to start selling its first all-electric car in the U.S. in the second half, as the California start-up uses Chinese technology to make market inroads.  

 Lachlan Murdoch named a successor for himself just a week after he took over as interim CEO of Australian broadcaster Ten.  

 A gunman killed two U.S. servicemen and wounded at least two others on a U.S. military bus outside Frankfurt's main airport.  

 A top U.S. official said the U.S. sees no need to deploy nuclear weapons to South Korea, despite increasing pressure from some ruling-party politicians in Seoul.  

NATO's top commander in Afghanistan apologized for the accidental killing of nine Afghan boys and ordered helicopter crews to be briefed again on his directive for preventing civilian deaths.

Bangladesh's government ordered Nobel laureate Muhammad Yunus out of his post as head of his microfinance bank, capping a string of problems that faced the outspoken government critic. 

 Taiwan said it plans to open an additional 42 sectors to Chinese investors.  