NEW YORK—Residential mortgage real-estate investment trust  Two Harbors Investment Corp.'s
TWO


-0.58
%




 shares are on a tear, and a cluster of buying by management suggests the stock's all-time highs and similarly high yields haven't yet hit a peak.

Last month, the chief executive, chief financial and co-chief investment officers as well as the general counsel of Two Harbors bought more than 70,000 shares combined for between $10.55 and $11 a share. The Minnetonka, Minn., company invests in, finances and manages residential mortgage-backed securities. In addition, three directors for Two Harbors bought a total of 23,209 shares in February.

CEO and President  Thomas Siering bought the biggest new stake, of 30,000 shares, increasing his investment in the company by 24%. Finance chief  Jeffrey Stolt bought 3,500 shares. Two Harbors spokesman  Patrick Clifforddeclined to comment on the purchases.

Since the company went public on Oct. 29, 2009, its shares have gained 20% to a closing high of $11.19 on Friday. Clusters of insider purchases in a stock read as a group endorsement of the company, said  Jonathan Moreland, director of research for InsiderInsights.com. Because this particular cluster of purchases occurred when Two Harbors' stock was on an upward tear makes an even stronger bull case, Mr. Moreland said, as it means management believes shares aren't only going to stay at all-time highs but will continue to move up.

Unlike portfolio managers who buy and sell securities daily, Two Harbors' strategy is more long term in nature. Because of this, analysts say the executives have a better picture of what the company's earnings will look like for the next several quarters than any outside observer.

Investors and analysts "know what types of bonds they're buying, but we don't know day-to-day exactly what they're doing," said  Doug Harter, a Credit Suisse analyst. The company's executives "clearly have a better sense of it."

The environment for investing in residential mortgage-backed securities is currently very attractive, as low interest rates allow companies such as Two Harbors to borrow at low rates and receive much higher yields from their mortgage-debt investments. Taking advantage of that, Two Harbors already put to work the $128.4 million of net proceeds from a common-share offering in December.

But Mr. Siering and the other executives at Two Harbors who have bought stock don't need the shares to climb higher for their purchases to pay off. A company must distribute at least 90% of its taxable income to its shareholders each year to qualify as a REIT, and one way REITs pay out their earnings is by dividends. So a continued high dividend rate also could make their investments more profitable.

The company on Wednesday issued a 40-cent-a-share dividend for the first quarter, with a yield of 14.3% on the day's closing stock price. The prior quarter, the yield for its dividend, also 40 cents, was 16.3%, which Mr. Moreland of InsiderInsights.com called a good level. Credit Suisse's Mr. Harter estimates the REIT's second-quarter dividend will be 42 cents a share.

Executive purchases read as a strong endorsement, Mr. Harter said. But 2011 is likely the peak of returns for the company unless the Federal Reserve doesn't raise interest rates this year, he said. Returns likely would decline once the Fed raises rates, though Mr. Harter believes Two Harbors' dividend yields should remain in the low teens.

Two Harbors is managed by PRCM Advisers LLC, a subsidiary of Pine River Capital Management LP. Two Harbors' market capitalization is about $450 million.

 Write to  Corrie Driebusch at corrie.driebusch@dowjones.com 