 (See Correction & Amplification item below.) 

Move over, stocks and bonds. Foreign currencies have a growing following among investors as a practical alternative to equities and debt issues.

Read the full  Foreign Exchange report .

While still tiny by comparison, retail foreign-exchange trading mostly consists of buying and selling a relatively few currencies, led by U.S. dollars, British pounds, euros and Japanese yen. The market is open 24 hours a day, five days a week, for those who want to make their own decisions, based on international economic trends, politics and individual country fundamentals.

Online trading accounts can be set up with just a few hundred dollars through brokerage firms, which can provide customers with access to more capital to facilitate trading. The brokerage firms don't charge commissions. They make their money on the spreads between the offering and asking prices in each transaction.

As unlikely as it sounds, one way to get started in currency trading is through social networking. Boston-based Currensee Inc.'s online platform for retail currency trading, currensee.com, includes a Facebook-like networking community for members with active trading accounts. The site has more than 7,500 members from Beijing to Brussels who share information and trading strategies.

"The retail traders are alone in their basement," says Chief Executive  David Lemont. "People are very interested in collaborating, particularly if they trade the same pairs [of currencies]. They're looking for information and validation."

Another benefit of online platforms: transparency. On currensee.com, for example, traders can see the profits that other traders make. Taking this a step further, Currensee has created a service that allows people to follow the results of the best-performing traders and piggyback on their expertise. Called the Trade Leaders Investment Program, the service lets investors automatically and instantly copy the transactions of the traders they choose. The people who make up the Trade Leaders are selected and compensated by Currensee. The program requires a minimum $3,000 investment.

Beware, though: Currency trading isn't for everyone. Trading well requires close monitoring of rates, as well as tracking of market-moving events and changes in the macroeconomic climate. All of that can be tough even for professional traders.

Some financial professionals advise avoiding the complication of direct investments in foreign currencies and instead using other kinds of investments abroad, including equity and debt funds. These can be a useful tool if a country's currency is expected to depreciate, says Adrian Lowcock, financial adviser at Bestinvest, an independent financial advisory firm in London. 

"We like Japan but feel the currency is too high at the moment," Mr. Lowcock says. So rather than trading directly in yen, his firm prefers to invest in euro- and pound-denominated Japanese equities.

"A falling yen will make the case for investing in Japan even more attractive," he says, "as it will make Japanese exports cheaper, and Japanese companies more profitable."

Exchange-traded funds and exchange-traded notes are growing in popularity world-wide as another way to tap foreign-exchange trading without entering the futures or currency markets directly. ETFs are funds that can track the performance of one or several currencies and, like a stock, can be bought and sold throughout the trading day, making it possible to benefit from intraday prices. 

Currency ETNs, which are issued by major banks or other institutions, are senior debt notes payable based on the performance of an exchange rate. Investors should be aware that this debt is unsecured, and therefore its value in the end can hinge on the credit rating of the individual issuer.

Investors also should know that while these types of investments typically strive to minimize capital-gains tax on profits, there are situations where gains will be taxed as ordinary income, so it's important to thoroughly understand what type of income your transaction will generate. Also, unlike in the case of direct currency transactions, providers of ETFs and ETNs that deal in currencies charge commissions.

It's crucial to remember that currency trading can incur hefty losses on a very small outlay if the currency moves against you and you are investing on margin, with money borrowed through the brokerage firm.

  Richard Olsen, co-founder of the global currency-trading platform and data provider Oanda Corp., sounds another note of caution: He worries that currency trading's growing popularity may cause individual investors to get in over their heads.

"The opportunity for retail investors to profit from FX is overhyped," says Mr. Olsen, who describes the foreign-exchange market as counterintuitive, since market reactions to major macroeconomic news have become very difficult to predict.

Mr. Olsen, who is also chief executive of Swiss-based currency investment manager Olsen Ltd., says he believes that price moves in 2011 will become increasingly erratic as the European sovereign-debt crisis unfolds, and that more currency investors will seek out money managers for help.

The bottom line, Mr. Olsen says, is that any foreign-exchange investment carries substantial risk, and that prudent investors must understand the risk and implement strategies to mitigate it.

 Ms. Henshall is a reporter for Financial News and The Wall Street Journal in London. She can be reached at angela.henshall@dowjones.com. 

 Correction & Amplification:  Currensee Inc.'s website for currency trading, currensee.com, offers a program that lets investors automatically copy the trades of the site's top performers. In addition, the site has more than 7,500 members. An earlier version of this article incorrectly said that the company had created a fund tracking the trading results of top performers and that the site had more than 75,000 members.