At last, spring! It is so full of promise—everything uplifting lies ahead of us. Gone is the bracing weather and the scurrying down the street. There are people everywhere in bright colors and cheerful temperaments. For me, the beginning of spring is always marked by eating outdoors. My favorite thing is long lunches with large glasses of rosé, chatting into the afternoon with nothing more arduous to do later on than lie in a hammock with my book in the shade.

Treat your outdoor setup as you would the indoors, as a combination of dining room and living room. I like outdoor tables to be laid similarly to indoor ones, as though the dining table had literally been picked up and set back down on the terrace or under a tree in the garden. I am not that keen on garden furniture as such, and even less so on plastic glasses and plates—and I won't even comment on plastic cutlery or paper plates.

One should always drink out of glass unless on an actual picnic. But for drinking en plein air, the glasses should be heavier than fine-stemmed wine glasses. For this purpose, I have never found anything better than Henry Dean's thick, clear-glass rummer (henrydean.be). It is an excellent all-around glass for serving beer, wine, vodka tonics, water and soda, all with equal chic, and it makes a satisfying clink when filled with large ice cubes. Oka's textured glass goblets are also terrific.

The table itself is always prettiest when laid with a cloth, and I remain a traditionalist in my taste in fabric. White damask tablecloths look bright and clean wafting in the spring breeze. You can supplement these with antique linen sheets or vintage quilts (the less bulky the better), which are incredibly charming over tables. I find that the more things you have in your house that multitask, the more fun you are able to have with your decorating. Mixing up table and bed linens makes them far more versatile.

On round tables, square cloths hang better than round ones. Don't worry too much about size as you can always lay smaller cloths on top of larger white ones if they don't cover the whole table. Runners are another great option. Eskanda (eskanda.com) has a wonderful selection of indigo linen runners that can be slung down the center of the table.

Quilts and pillows made up in vintage fabrics are lovely on the backs of chairs. I absolutely loathe those weather-proof fabrics that remain as bright after 40 years of rain and shine as they were the day they were printed. The fading and markings are all part of what makes a garden comfortable and heavenly to be in. Bullet-like pillows with garden-appropriate patterns do not lend themselves to the soft and gentle, slightly wilting spring afternoon that you are really going to enjoy. Relaxing on a bench, you want to find a soft cushion at your back and a blanket to wrap around your knees or shoulders should there still be a nip in the air.

Finally, I love to place Ball jars or old porcelain milk jugs of cut flowers on the table. For the evening, the glass jars that French yogurts come in can double as pretty tea light holders—even nicer, you can wind wire around the mouths of the jars and hang them from a tree. Silver candlesticks are better outdoors than they are on a formal table because of their unexpectedness, and they add a little grandeur to the backyard. I rather like silver and bone-handled flatware outside too. The closest I am ever going to get to "garden" stuff is bamboo handles, but I just love the combination of silver and the trees. You can layer the table and surrounding furniture in the same haphazard way that you might layer your clothes—like putting on your father's old overcoat with a fabulous pair of new and frightfully expensive sunglasses.

The fun is in the informality of it all. You have the proper china, glasses, linens and silver of the dining room, with the soft support of the cushions of a sofa. That is the ideal.

—Ms. Konig is a decorator and journalist in New York.





