CRESCENT CITY, Calif.—Somewhere under the murky waters of this city's demolished harbor lay the remains of Marty Lopez's fishing business.

"That boat kept me alive for 27 years," said Mr. Lopez, gazing out at the harbor where his boat, the Nellie, sank in the March 11 tsunami. The Nellie, like many boats here, wasn't insured.

Japan's 9.0-magnitude earthquake triggered a tsunami that killed thousands and yielded an unfolding nuclear disaster. No one was hurt when the tsunami arrived in Crescent City, but the wave destroyed its harbor, threatening the economic future of the 157-year-old fishing village just south of Oregon. 

"We're fighting to survive," said Richard Young, the harbor master, in an interview last week. He surveyed the damage to the small but vital fishing industry: Forty-seven boats—many of them part of the commercial fishing fleet of about 100 boats—were damaged, and 16 more were sunk. 

Earlier in the day, Mr. Young told an official in another city where he had recently accepted a position as harbor master that he wouldn't be taking the job. "Things are so bad here I just can't leave," he told the city official on the phone.

The harbor's wooden docks are in pieces; chunks of broken concrete are pushed to the edges of the harbor. Masts and bows poke out of the water as divers work to map the underwater wreckage. Smashed boats are crushed against each other and the harbor wall.

The wave cracked the hull of Mr. Young's family's old fishing boat, the City of Eureka, which will have to be demolished. Its most recent owner, 26-year-old Ryan Ingles, who had lived on the boat, has been selling its parts and sleeping in his car.

Mr. Young estimated the damage to the harbor—including the docks and a boat mooring area protected by a retaining wall—at between $32 million and $36 million. City officials hope the federal government will pay for the bulk of the costs, but that would take a presidential declaration of a federal disaster.

California Gov. Jerry Brown has declared a state of emergency in six counties, including Del Norte County, which includes Crescent City.

Officials from the U.S. Coast Guard and California Department of Fish and Game say they are moving as quickly as they can to remove debris and oil pollutants. As of Tuesday, crews had pulled out one sunken boat, and removed 1,200 cubic yards of wood and concrete from the harbor and surrounding waters.

Crescent City—a cradle of shoreline ringed by redwood forests—has been hit repeatedly by tsunamis, in part because of its location on the shallow side of an underwater cliff, which directs tsunamis toward the city. A 1964 wave killed 11 people here and wiped away Crescent City's downtown, and an earthquake in 2006 caused a tsunami that damaged the harbor. 

Rich Enea, a city council member, says the latest tsunami won't be the end of the town's fishing or tourism industries. "It's beautiful here. People will still come. This is Comeback Town, U.S.A.," Mr. Enea said, referring to a nickname for the city popularized after the 1964 tsunami.

Others aren't so sure. The latest tsunami struck the city at a particularly vulnerable time. As logging and fishing have faded over the decades, many turned to the state for jobs. Pelican Bay State Prison holds about half the city's population of 7,500, and is its biggest employer. After that, fishing and tourism keep the city alive. Unemployment is 13.8% in Del Norte County.

Crescent City is the most lucrative harbor on California's northern coast, producing an average of $12.7 million in seafood sales a year—mostly Dungeness crab—between 2000 and 2009.

But the fishing industry "has been chipped away at for years" by state regulations, down seasons and rising expenses, said Charles Slert, Crescent City's mayor.

A plan to remodel the harbor to withstand larger tsunamis has been winding its way through permitting and financing for four years, Mr. Slert said. The permits and money recently came through, but not in time to protect the harbor from the latest wave.

Mr. Slert says if government agencies are slow to help the city rebuild the harbor, "it will be the death of our harbor. We don't have years."

Many here fear the ripple effect on local businesses like restaurants, fishing supply stores and the seafood processing plant. "Our community as a whole can't take it," said Richard Juneau, who fears his boat, the Debi J, may be damaged beyond repair.

Like many other fisherman, Mr. Juneau said he couldn't afford insurance on the boat after paying for fuel, employees and maintenance. With a 7-month-old baby, he and his wife face an uncertain future.

Mr. Lopez, the fisherman who lost the Nellie, said he couldn't get it, or his second boat, out of the harbor before the tsunami because of engine problems. He moved them to a corner of the harbor where he thought they would be safer. Instead, the Nellie got knocked around and pushed into debris. The Hard Rock, his back-up boat, tipped and sank.

Mr. Lopez has no insurance. His next and final paycheck for his last crab haul will go to pay for his property taxes. Mr. Lopez isn't sure what's next.

"I'm here every day just staring at the water where my boat was," he said.

 Write to  Tamara Audi at tammy.audi@wsj.com 