Are India's central bankers hawks, doves, or just chicken? 

The Reserve Bank of India's decision to raise interest rates Tuesday surprised no one. Consider the context. The bank has made it clear fighting inflation is its priority and raised its own inflation forecast for the year through March to 7%, from 5.5% earlier. Paving the way for more tightening, the central bank said there is an upward bias to its projection of 8.5% annual economic growth. 

But the RBI still chose to raise rates by only a quarter point. This despite the fact that, at 6.5% now, India's key lending rate is still one percentage point below its average level from the last time India was growing so fast. 

The size of the increase is in line with what RBI Gov. D. Subbarao has described as "calibrated" tightening that started last March. Even if this made sense then, it no longer does, with India's economy on much more solid ground. That hasn't stopped the RBI from using concern over growth as its excuse for keeping rate increases slow. 

Moreover, the moves don't seem to have worked. After slowing for just two months last year, price gains have again picked up pace. As the RBI itself notes, inflation in non-food manufactured products remains above its medium-term trend. A recent rise in global food prices will add to the pressure, given the high sensitivity of consumer prices to food inflation. India's already high consumer-price index will rise 2.1 percentage points if global food prices go up by 30%, Credit Suisse estimates. 

The central bank has argued that its role is limited to preventing gains in food and energy prices from affecting prices of other goods. This would make sense if the rise in food prices in India was likely to be a short-term phenomenon that could be resolved with an adequate rainfall, as the RBI hoped it would last year. Even now, the RBI is hoping price gains will slow within the next six months. 

But food prices have been rising at a double-digit rate for more than two years, reflecting that this is driven by growing demand, as incomes rise faster than crop yields can be increased or new farm infrastructure built. Growth in demand, a product of India's economic rise, is something the RBI can slow with more-aggressive rate increases. 

There was relief in some quarters that Tuesday's increase wasn't bigger. Bonds, in particular, rallied following the news, indicating that traders had been bracing for something more severe. That will surely come to look like a short-sighted reaction, if the central bank finds itself having to raise interest rates higher and faster later to make up for its gradualism now. 

—Harsh Joshi

 Write to  Harsh Joshi at harsh.joshi@dowjones.com 