President Barack Obama made some concessions to the business community in his State of the Union address Tuesday, saying he'd like to lower the corporate tax rate and foster U.S. job growth and innovationMany chief executives reacted skeptically to President Barack Obama's offer to lower the corporate-tax rate and foster U.S. job growth, but some said they appreciated the president's changed tone toward business during his State of the Union address.



The Obama administration has been criticized by many U.S. chief executives for being anti-business. Business leaders have complained about the 35% corporate tax rate, the administration's free trade stance and healthcare reform, all of which, they allege, make U.S. companies less globally competitive. Business leaders have also been unhappy with rhetoric coming from the White House following the financial crisis, when the president referred to "fat-cat bankers" and chided bankers for their "reckless practices."

Since the November elections, in which Democrats lost the House majority, Mr. Obama has worked to appeal to the political center—and to business. Last week, he appointed General Electric Co. CEO Jeffrey Immelt to lead a new President's Council on Jobs and Competitiveness. 

During his State of the Union address Tuesday night, Mr. Obama said the corporate-tax rate "makes no sense and it has to change." calling on both parties to lower the rate.He also said he would seek to eliminate "unnecessary burden[s] on business." 

CEOs welcomed the idea of lowering the corporate-tax rate, but many wanted more details on exactly how Mr. Obama might bring it about.

"He said it would pretty much have to be budget neutral, and I don't know how they can reconcile that," said Alan Miller, CEO of Universal Health Services Inc., a hospital-management company. Mr. Miller says he'd be more encouraged had the president specified a new, lower rate. "A lot of things he says don't ever come to pass," he says. 

"I thought it was a wonderful idea, but there's no free lunch," said John Chen, CEO of Sybase Inc., a Dublin, Calif., software developer bought by SAP AG in July. Mr. Chen said the measure would depend on what Mr. Obama meant when referring to "corporate-tax loopholes." 

Anthony Guzzi, CEO of Emcor Group Inc., a construction and facilities-services provider, agreed. 

"He gave a sound bite but should have been more specific," he said. "For two-and-a-half years now, capital has been afraid to invest in the U.S. in any substantial way."

Beyond specific proposals aired in the speech, CEOs said they detected a shift in tone from the president when it comes to the U.S. business community.

"I heard a lot more about creating the right environment for business," said Eric Spiegel, CEO of Siemens USA. "I think he got the message that business is where jobs will be created, not the government." 

Mr. Guzzi said Mr. Obama was "more moderate" in his address. 

"I think the tone of his speech was excellent," said Brent Saunders, CEO of Bausch & Lomb Inc. But, he added, "we've seen so much fighting in Washington I am skeptical of Washington's ability to execute."

Marc Benioff, chief executive of San Francisco business-software company Salesforce.com Inc., applauded Mr. Obama's call for increased government spending on basic research. 

"The No. 1 thing the government needs to do is increase its research funding.…This is where the government adds tremendous value," said Mr. Benioff, who noted that his company is based on technology—the Internet—that grew out of research commissioned by the U.S. government in the 1960s.

Greater spending on research "is critical for us in every area, in cyber-security, in computational sciences, even in health-information technologies," Mr. Benioff said.

Mr. Benioff also says he welcomed the president's call to simplify the corporate-tax system—a move the tech executive says would spur economic growth. "It's really first time that I've heard Obama start to talk about that," Mr. Benioff says. "I think it's awesome."

Bausch & Lomb's Mr. Saunders said Mr. Obama's focus on innovation resonated with him, as well. The company, which makes contact lenses and solutions, has been working to develop products for customers in Brazil, India and China, but Mr. Saunders said the industry is highly regulated.

Mr. Saunders said he would like to see the government "support and nurture" innovation. 

"Now, we're somewhere in between letting companies fend for themselves and creating barriers for free trade," he said.

The president did not mention free trade or suggest he would give corporations a tax holiday on earnings outside the U.S., two major issues for business leaders over the last two years. Mr. Obama has been criticized for not enacting free trade agreements during his term, limiting the amount of business U.S. corporations can do with other countriesMr. Chen said he wished U.S. export policies had been brought up during the president's speech. He said "outdated" restrictions to exporting certain technologies have hindered Sybase's ability to sell into China.Mr. Obama mentioned improving business conditions in the U.S. and increasing competitiveness by eliminating unnecessary burdens. Mr. Spiegel says a burden Siemens faces is regulatory red tape that delays projects. For example, he says the company was just recently awarded a contract for an offshore wind project that has been in the works for years. "A lot of the regulations in the U.S. are very burdensome," he says.

In a press release, Business Roundtable, a trade group of corporate CEOs, said it was "heartened by President Obama's focus on American competitiveness." But, it said the priorities laid out in the address "must now be analyzed closely to ensure they will promote, rather than stifle, an environment where the private sector can create jobs and expand the economy." 

—Cari Tuna contributed to this article.

 Write to  Dana Mattioli at dana.mattioli@wsj.com 