WASHINGTON—Sen. Jon Tester and a bipartisan group of U.S. senators Tuesday formally launched their legislative attack on the Federal Reserve's plan to regulate debit-card transaction fees, a move cheered by banks and credit unions but slammed by retailers. 

The bill, dubbed the Debit Interchange Fee Study Act, comes amid concerns over the Fed's proposed fee caps and calls for a two-year timeout on the regulation. 

The American Bankers Association, the Independent Community Bankers of America, the Consumer Bankers Association and the National Association of Federal Credit Unions all applauded the move by Sen. Tester (D., Mont.).

Rep. Shelley Moore Capito, the West Virginia Republican who leads a House financial services subcommittee, plans to introduce a bill that would also seek to delay the Fed's regulation of the debit-card processing fees banks charge retailers. Her bill would require a one-year delay and greater study of the issue. 

A spokeswoman for Rep. Capito said the legislation would ensure the fee cap is fair. Some consumer-advocacy groups say a deep cut in the fees could force financial firms to raise the cost of checking accounts and other services, which could push low-income consumers out of the banking system. No one wins when consumers are underbanked, Rep. Capito's spokeswoman added. 

"We are very encouraged by the actions taken by Congress today," Consumer Bankers Association President Richard Hunt said. "Only through a delay and study will we fully understand the impact this will have on American consumers." 

The Fed's plan, mandated by the Dodd-Frank financial-overhaul law that Congress passed last summer, would cap what are known as interchange fees at 12 cents per debit-card transaction, a significant cut from the average of 44 cents that has prompted consumer groups and banking regulators to voice concerns about the proposal's impact on small banks and low-income consumers. 

Retailers have fought hard for limits on the interchange fees they pay to banks every time a consumer swipes a debit card at a cash register, and they won a victory last summer when No. 2 Senate Democrat Dick Durbin of Illinois included the interchange-regulation requirement in the Dodd-Frank bill. Sen. Durbin has since vowed to "strongly oppose" legislative efforts to delay the Fed's "swipe fee" rules. 

"Every month we delay limiting the amount banks and credit-card companies charge merchants means another $1.3 billion bailout for  Visa,
V


0.07
%




 MasterCard
MA


0.31
%




 and their big bank allies," Sen. Durbin said in a statement Tuesday. "The $13 trillion banking industry doesn't need another handout--especially one paid for by small business and American consumers." 

Consumer advocates are at odds. While groups such as the National Community Reinvestment Coalition are urging the Fed to withdraw its proposal, other consumer groups such as Public Citizen and U.S. PIRG say the rule would be beneficial to consumers and are fighting efforts to delay the rule. 

Meanwhile, much is at stake for the financial industry. The Fed's fee restrictions would weigh heavily on the profits of card-issuing banks, and many financial firms have argued that they would have to start raising fees and costs in order to recoup lost interchange revenue. 

Although it would be hard for Sen. Tester to get the 60 votes he'll likely need to delay implementation of the Fed's interchange-fee law, bipartisan concerns over the Fed's proposal are growing. "The stakes are simply too high to move forward with this rule without a closer look at the impact on consumers, credit unions, community banks, and the small businesses and jobs they sustain," said Sen. Tester, a member of the Senate banking committee. 

The Fed is required to issue a final debit fee rule by April 21. On a conference call with reporters, Sen. Tester said he wants the bill passed before that. He noted "it's going to be difficult" but he remains optimistic that some senators who previously supported interchange regulation will change their vote. 

"Hopefully, we get this thing done before the April 21 deadline," he said. "We need to move with some speed on this." 

Sens. Bob Corker (R., Tenn.), Jon Kyl (R., Ariz.), Ben Nelson (D., Neb.), Tom Carper (D., Del.), Pat Roberts (R., Kan.), Chris Coons (D., Del.), Mike Lee (R., Utah), and Pat Toomey (R., Pa.) are all co-sponsors of the legislation. 

Still, retailers are urging lawmakers to support the Fed's efforts to rein in the interchange fees and are criticizing the Tester bill. 

"Merchants are ready to pass lower swipe fees along to consumers in the form of discounts and other benefits as soon as reform goes into effect in July but we can't do that if Congress lets bankers stand in the way," said National Retail Federation General Counsel Mallory Duncan. "The banks and card companies claim they want to study swipe fee reform but the truth is they want to kill it." 

Similarly, a spokeswoman for the Retail Industry Leaders Association argued that the Tester bill would give banks a bailout at the expense of retailers and consumers.

 Write to  Maya Jackson Randall at Maya.Jackson-Randall@dowjones.com 