Vice President Joe Biden arrived in Afghanistan Monday on an unannounced visit to assess the readiness of Afghan forces to begin taking over security responsibility for security from U.S. and coalition forces this year.

The visit signaled that Mr. Biden, a leading advocate within the White House of a less troop-intensive strategy and a speedier handover to the Afghans, could begin playing a more expansive role in war policy.

President Barack Obama directed the military to begin reducing force levels in July, but the size and scope of the drawdown has yet to be decided, officials say. The Obama administration aims to begin the transition to Afghan security forces in the coming months.

Mr. Biden has pushed for a substantial withdrawal of U.S. forces starting in July. Last month, Mr. Biden promised that cuts in July will "not be token." 

Detractors of a substantial pullout, including some military officials, say progress has been too uneven and tentative to warrant a major pullback so soon.

After arriving in Kabul Monday evening, Mr. Biden received a nearly two-hour update on the war effort from U.S. Ambassador Karl Eikenberry and Gen. David Petraeus, the top U.S. and North Atlantic Treaty Organization commander in Afghanistan.

Gen. Petraeus has said the war strategy is working, pointing to military gains clearing Taliban insurgents out of swaths of southern Afghanistan last year. In an assessment last month, Mr. Obama also said that the strategy was on track, but warned recent gains could be reversed and that it would be a challenge readying Afghan forces to take over security.

Mr. Biden was also set to tour an Afghan Army training center, and meet Afghan President Hamid Karzai on Tuesday. 

Relations between the two men have been strained in the past. During a February 2008 visit to Kabul as head of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Mr. Biden stormed out of a dinner meeting with Mr. Karzai when the Afghan leader refused to acknowledge widespread corruption in his administration.

In recent months, the White House has sought to smooth over differences with Mr. Karzai by toning down public calls for a crackdown on high-level corruption.

Major irritants in relations remain. Three Afghan policemen were killed in a coalition airstrike late Sunday, according to a coalition statement. Similar incidents in the past have provoked angry responses from Mr. Karzai.

Mr. Biden's visit follows the sudden death on Dec. 13 of the administration's special representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan, veteran diplomat Richard Holbrooke. Mr. Holbrooke also had testy relations with Mr. Karzai. 

Mr. Holbrooke threw his support behind the military's counterinsurgency strategy but had voiced doubts in private about its chances of succeeding because of government corruption and questions about Mr. Karzai's public standing, officials say. 

On Monday, the White House said the official in charge of rooting out corruption in Afghanistan resigned, just days after firing two of his top deputies. Retired Maj. Gen. Arnold Fields' decision to step down came after powerful members of Congress urged President Barack Obama to dismiss him on ground that he failed to aggressively oversee U.S. development aid to Afghanistan. 

Afghan and coalition officials acknowledge the challenge of building reliable security forces. Efforts to train Afghan police have been particularly difficult because of rampant corruption, drug use and illiteracy.

Aides to Mr. Biden made clear the vice president believes the U.S. mission should focus on laying the ground for completing the transition between early 2011 and the end of 2014, the time frame embraced by NATO. 

"We're not here to govern Afghanistan. We're not here to nation-build. We're not here to secure Afghanistan. Those are responsibilities that belong to the Afghans," said a senior administration official traveling with Mr. Biden.

"The only purpose of our mission now is to help put the Afghans in a position where they can fully assume the responsibilities of governing the country, of securing the country. That's exactly what the President's vision is, and it's also President Karzai's vision, as I understand it," the official told reporters.

In the administration's review of war strategy in late 2009, Mr. Biden appeared to be at odds with many military leaders by advocating a hybrid approach involving fewer troops than the 40,000 sought by commanders. 

Mr. Biden wanted to put a greater emphasis on counterterrorism missions using Special Operations forces to go after Taliban and al Qaeda targets, officials said at the time. Mr. Obama opted to send 30,000 more troops to Afghanistan. 

Since then, commanders have also sharply escalated Special Operations and drone strikes.

Monday's visit to Afghanistan was Mr. Biden's first as vice president. He visited Kabul in January 2009 as vice president-elect.

Mr. Obama paid an unannounced visit to U.S. troops in Afghanistan in December but had to cancel a meeting with Mr. Karzai due to bad weather. 