Few activities are nowadays more venerated or form the subject of more involved daydreams than going traveling. Alongside love, travel lies at the heart of secular notions of happiness, though, unlike love, it is generally assumed to be a straightforward process entailing few conceptual or philosophical conundrums. To follow the travel pages of magazines, the chief hurdles center around how to identify good hotels, find things to do after dark and learn the whereabouts of small and authentic restaurants.

Religions have shown a surprising degree of sympathy for our impulse to travel. They have accepted that we cannot achieve everything by staying at home. Nevertheless, unlike secularists, the religious have singularly failed to see the business of traveling as in any way straightforward or effortless. They have insisted with alien vigor on the profound gravity of going on a trip and have channeled the raw impulse to take off into a myriad of traditions and rituals, whose examination could prompt us to reflect on our own habits and sharply alter where and how we decided to travel next. 

The differences between religious and secular attitudes to travel begin with their contrasting methods of choosing a destination. Here modern man is encouraged not to overcomplicate matters. Travel agents see themselves as responsible for negotiating discounts on trans-Atlantic flights and arranging for rooms with sea views in Rimini, rather than palpating the souls of their customers. The desire to journey is meant to bubble up of its own accord, like the appetites of the stomach. The travel industry asserts rather than explains the importance of its destinations, implying that we would be bizarre for deviating from its prescribed lists, for remaining indifferent to the call of the temples of Angkor Wat or the trails of Machu Picchu. The media presents us with a revolving array of images of foreign lands, from which we are expected to make swift and untroubled choices, concluding, for example, that the time has now come for us to see the fjords of Norway or the Terracotta army of Xi'an, the Day of the Dead in Mexico or the Sheraton Full Moon Resort & Spa on Kaafu Atoll in the Maldives—for reasons that we might stumble to account for in any detail.

Religions have felt unable to take such a lighthearted or hazy view. In so far as they have blessed the idea of travel, it has solely been in relation to its perceived capacity to usher in certain forms of cure. For the medieval Catholic church, pilgrimages were a therapeutic and medicinal activity. 

The idea was to go to the shrines of long-dead saints and, while making bodily contact with these, beg for a cure for a variety of physical and mental ailments. Though we no longer believe in the divine power of journeys to cure toothache or gall stones, though most of the problems motivating pilgrimages are now more appropriately addressed by a visit to a clinic, we can still hang on to the idea that certain parts of the world possess a power to address complaints and can effect change with a force that would be unavailable to us if we remained in our own homes. There are places that, by virtue of their remoteness, vastness, climate, chaotic energy, haunting melancholy or sheer difference from our homelands, exert a capacity to salve the wounded parts of us. These sites, valuable rather than holy, help us to recover perspective, reorder our ambitions, quell our paranoias and remind us of the interest and obliging unexpectedness of life. 

Though we intuit this at a general level, we lack, as yet, a tradition of approaching travel from a properly therapeutic perspective and so of analyzing landscapes according to their benefits to our souls. We lack atlases of destinations with which to treat our neuroses. There are as yet no psychotherapeutic travel agencies, no experts in both neurotic disorders and tourism, in the psyche and in the hotels, nature trails, museums, hot springs and bird sanctuaries of six continents.

The medieval Catholic church appreciated, with a clarity we find hard to muster, that when we want to derive value from a place, being physically there is only one part, and perhaps not the most important, of the process. What matters is also how we anticipate the journey, how we arrange ourselves internally as we approach our objective, what mode of transport we opt for and how we later structure and reinforce our memories of what we have seen. These apparently secondary matters may in the end determine as much about the psychological effectiveness of our trips as the comparatively brief amount of time we spend in the destinations themselves.

The medieval church kept a tight grip both on where pilgrims went and what they did and thought about each day as they made their way there. It appended a veritable program of education to every stop along the way. The same controlling spirit evident in the church's schedule of prayers or in its program of Holy Days of Obligation was discernible in its curation of travel liturgies. It sought to buttress otherwise fleeting and forgettable sensations by giving its pilgrims prayers and songs, it urged them regularly and publicly to rehearse their motives for traveling and equipped them with distinctive garments to help them mentally separate themselves from their ordinary lives, hoping all the while to fashion a supreme and lasting spiritual lesson out of their journeys across the physical world.

If Catholicism didn't mind leaving us on the open road for unusually long periods, it was because it identified a spiritual benefit in the very act of being away from home, in untried surroundings, disoriented, adrift, lonely and reliant on the charity of strangers. Its central figure had himself stressed that he was a pilgrim on this earth and advised all who followed him to remember the illusory nature of their apparently stable material possessions, their homes, their jobs and their status. One's only true refuge was God and all substitutes were to be recognized as fragile and unworthy. As the Letter to Diognetus described the lives of the faithful: "They live in countries of their own, but simply as strangers...every fatherland is a foreign land...They spend their existence on earth but their citizenship is in heaven."

Being on the open road helped to enforce the moral of the argument. A pilgrim walking to Santiago from his home in Sussex would have been shaken from all routines and complacent assumptions. The barbarous sounds of French and Spanish, the din of new cities, the alarming smells emanating from bowls of sopa de ajo, the gangs of griffon vultures that circled over the steep gorges outside the village of Burguete, the days spent silently walking along forest trails and along river paths, all would have had the power to rouse a pilgrim from his torpor, to make him question himself, revisit periods of his past and, as the Church fervently hoped, make him newly aware of the sincerity of his attachment to God. 

We don't have to be Christians to relate to this dynamic, we need only have occasionally sensed while on a journey the promise of change and the opportunity for self-examination opened up by a move away from familiar points of reference. Though home is honored as an anchor of identity, there are also disturbing ways in which it can fix us unhelpfully to a version of ourselves we no longer wish to side with. The familiar curtains and pictures subtly insist that we shouldn't change because they don't, our well-known rooms can anaesthetise us from a more urgent, necessary relationship with particular questions. It may not be until we have moved across an ocean, until we are in a hotel room with peculiar new furniture and a view onto a motorway and a supermarket full of products we don't recognize that we start to have the strength to probe at certain assumptions. We gain freedom from watching the takeoffs and landings of planes in a departure lounge or from following a line of distant electricity pylons from a train making its way across a barren steppe. In the middle of a foreign landscape, thoughts come to us that would have been reluctant to emerge in our own beds. We are able to take implausible but important leaps, encouraged by the changes around us, from the new light switches to the Cyrillic letters blinking in illuminated signs on awnings all around us.

Being cut loose from the habitual is the essential gift of travel, as uncomfortable as it may be psychologically fruitful. Catholicism took our feelings of dislocation and placed them at the heart of its thesis as to the spiritual benefit of pilgrimages. Without accepting the church's analysis of where our real home lies, we may nevertheless be inspired by its approach to the value of feeling like a lonely outsider. As much as any destination, it is these isolated periods in untried hotel rooms, in paleozoic canyons, in disintegrating palaces and empty service-station restaurants that facilitate the underlying point of our journeys.

 (This article has been corrected; it initially attributed to St. Augustine the quotation from the Letter to Diognetus.) 