MUMBAI–Bank of Baroda Friday registered a 28% rise in net profit for the three months through December as it benefited from robust demand for loans, and a top executive said the Indian lender is looking to raise up to $500 million by selling bonds abroad. 

Net profit for the October-December period rose to 10.69 billion rupees from 8.32 billion rupees a year earlier, state-run Bank of Baroda said. 

Banks in India benefited in the past quarter as demand for loans from companies looking at expansion and individuals aspiring for new homes and vehicles rose with the pace of growth in Asia's third-largest economy returning to the pre-financial-crisis level. But funding costs also grew for lenders as interest rates in the banking system rose and banks also faced a cash shortage. 

A grip over cost of funds helped Bank of Baroda widen its net interest margin in India to 3.82% from 3.4% a year earlier. This drove net interest income up 43% to 22.92 billion rupees, Chairman M.D. Mallya told reporters at a post-earnings conference. 

"Loan growth in the first nine months has been high, so we continue to maintain our guidance of 22%-24% growth in the full fiscal year," he said. 

According to the Reserve Bank of India, year-on-year credit growth in the system was more than 24% at the end of December, outpacing a 16% rise in deposits and contributing to the cash deficit in the system. This, combined with the central bank tightening its policies to tame inflation, is putting upward pressure on interest rates. 

"There are pressures, but we have to work within them," Mr. Mallya said. 

In a widely expected move, the central bank raised its key lending and borrowing rates by 0.25 percentage point Tuesday. Analysts believe the hardening interest rates could dampen demand for loans, especially from individual borrowers. 

For Bank of Baroda, non-interest income--including fee, commissions, and from treasury and foreign exchange transactions--grew moderately to 6.76 billion rupees from 6.60 billion rupees. 

Its asset quality remained largely unchanged with net bad loans as a percentage of total loans standing at 0.36%. Provisions for bad loans and contingencies jumped 26% to 3.04 billion rupees. 

The bank is looking to sell medium-term bonds to overseas investors as early as next month to raise up to $500 million, said A.D.M. Chavali, general manager of treasury operations. 

"We have not yet firmed up our plans, but we are looking at raising something like $500 million in the February-March period," Mr. Chavali told Dow Jones Newswires on the sidelines of the bank's press conference. 

The bonds will likely have a tenure of five-and-a-half years, he added. 

 Write to  Raghavendra Upadhyaya at raghavendra.upadhyaya@dowjones.com and Nupur Acharya at nupur.acharya@dowjones.com 