U.S. officials are beginning to talk about the possibility of keeping some troops in Iraq beyond 2011, complicating the Pentagon's plans to rein in military spending.

Under a U.S.-Iraqi security agreement, all troops are to be withdrawn by the end of the year, leaving only 157 uniformed and civilian military personnel and several hundred contractors to oversee arms sales. At present, almost 50,000 U.S. troops are in Iraq.

In a recent congressional hearing, Secretary of Defense Robert Gates said the U.S. government was "very open to a continuing presence that would be larger where we could help the Iraqis for a period of time." The Iraqis have not made such a request, but Mr. Gates said that Iraqi forces will not be completely self-sufficient by year's end and may need help in defending their air space and running intelligence and logistics.

The Pentagon did not provide details about how many troops Mr. Gates believes should remain. "There have been a number of informal conversations with the Iraqis about this," he said.

The administration's budget request assumed a full military withdrawal. For the fiscal year that begins Oct. 1, the president is seeking just $11 billion for military operations in Iraq, out of total war funding of around $118 billion, most of which is for operations in Afghanistan.

That reflects a sharp reduction from previous years. At the height of the U.S. military "surge" that began in 2007, the annual budget for the Iraq war alone was around $148 billion. 

As U.S. troops withdraw from Iraq, the administration plans to hire a large private security force to protect around 1,000 diplomats and civil servants stationed at the U.S. embassy in Baghdad and in regional offices around the country. A senior State Department official said last month that the cost of hiring those guards represented a "large portion" of an anticipated $5.2 billion budget for diplomatic operations in Iraq in fiscal 2012.

Questions remain, however, about whether the State Department and its contracted guard force are capable of taking on the full range of security missions previously handled by the military, including such specialized tasks as clearing roadside bombs and driving armored vehicles. A House panel held a hearing Wednesday on whether the State Department is prepared for this new role. 

The Commission on Wartime Contracting, a bipartisan legislative commission, issued a report for the hearing that questioned whether the State Department had enough personnel and resources to manage those contracts. "Inadequate support risks waste of funds and failure for U.S. policy objectives in Iraq and the region," the report said. 

Politically, the issue of remaining in Iraq is a sensitive one for both Americans and Iraqis. President Barack Obama campaigned on a pledge to end the war, and has presided over a major scaling back of U.S. involvement there. Jamie Fly, executive director of the Foreign Policy Initiative, a conservative think tank, said the administration was "sending mixed signals" about U.S. plans. "If they do end up in a negotiation process with the Iraqis, they are going to have a lot of explaining to do on Capitol Hill," he said.

The Pentagon is already under pressure to arrest growth in military spending, which has doubled over the past decade. But budget experts question whether the Department of Defense can realize those savings, especially when officials are talking about a longer stay in Iraq.

At a hearing last month, Sen. Ben Nelson (D., Neb.) asked Mr. Gates if the Iraqis could help foot the bill for the U.S. presence. "As we're looking at our budget and trying to find ways to economize in the Department of Defense, is there a plan to have the Iraqis pick up more of the cost of any retention that we might have of our personnel there to provide the advice and the training that will be required?" he asked.

Charles Knight, co-director of the Project on Defense Alternatives, a group that advocates reduced military spending, said "overseas contingency operations" funds for special wartime spending are "an under-budgeted hole in the budget projections."

Mr. Knight noted that the administration's budget forecasts through 2021 include a "placeholder" war-spending figure of $50 billion per year, suggesting budget planners expect some kind of U.S. military involvement overseas for some time to come. 

"It could remain above $50 billion for quite a while, especially considering the way things are going in Afghanistan," he said. 