At work, 67-year-old Jerry Greene would sell old music and movies through his website oldies.com. At home, he and his wife, Nina, would play with trains—collecting more than 35,000 pieces over five decades.

The Greenes have just brought their collection out of its 5,400-square-foot suburban Philadelphia basement, where almost no one knew about it, and have put a fifth of their wares on display at Sotheby's New York, which is offering the collection for a private sale. A Sotheby's spokesman predicts it will bring in "well into eight figures."

"I don't know of any other collection that comes close to this, yet amazingly it has flown under the radar for so long," says Mark Boyd, who edits the Train Collectors Quarterly and has himself collected trains for his entire life. He adds, "It's astounding."

This would be the second major sale of a toy collection by Sotheby's in two months. In December, a collection of 237 toys amassed by the late publisher Malcolm Forbes and his sons went for $2.4 million, at the lower end of the estimated price range of $2.3 million to $3.8 million.

The Greenes' Jerni Collection (named for the first syllables in the collectors' first names) concentrates on the period from 1850 to the early 1930s, and on German manufacturers such as Märklin, Bing and Ernst Plank. They produced exquisitely detailed hand-painted trains, as well as models of great train stations, bridges and buildings, many of them destroyed during World Wars I and II. "Marklin made more than 150 different stations, and we have them all," Mr. Greene says.

The windup clocks on the train station façades still work. Many of the older engines still run; alcohol burners in the car behind the engine heat water, which fires up the pistons. "In the beginning we collected American trains, but German trains are so beautiful, so intricate," says Ms. Greene, who is 66. The collection includes thousands of other toy models, ranging from ferris wheels to tiny soldiers, many of them made by the train manufacturers.

Why would the Greenes want to sell? "We started going to train shows where there was nothing worth buying"; they already had all the pieces on sale, Mr. Greene says.

No one is sure how to value the collection. Mr. Boyd says he has heard estimates ranging from $10 million to $50 million. A private sale doesn't work like an art auction. The Greenes want the collection to go to a single buyer who will leave it intact. They can also reject a bid in favor of someone who pledges to build a museum for the collection, which they say is their preference. Ms. Greene adds, "We would not want a museum with our names on it. That's not the kind of people we are."

—Stan Sesser