Banks, in an attempt to wring more revenue out of customer accounts, are conjuring up new ways to raise fees on basic products like debit cards, cash machines and checking accounts.

As regulation curtailing the financial institutions from levying certain charges on consumers has mounted over the past year, banks have had to dream up new fees to replace those now trimmed by laws.

Banks are considering additional fees on credit cards and checking accounts. But they also are looking at new ways to make money on cash machines and especially debit cards as regulators pinch the cards' conventional revenue streams.

Banks are thinking about imposing annual fees of $25 or $30 on debit cards, according to people familiar with bank strategies. Some also are considering limiting the number of debit-card transactions that a customer can make each month, these people say. Another idea circulating in the industry: limiting the size of a purchase that a customer could make with a debit card.

New debit-card fees are "definitely a 2011 issue," says  Robert Hammer, who runs a banking-industry consulting firm in Thousand Oaks, Calif. "The question is which quarter it will be and which bank will go first."

People familiar with banks' thinking say several companies also are considering raising fees on automated-teller machines for noncustomers, which currently average $1.63 per transaction.

Banks also are continuing to add fees to checking accounts, a trend that began last year. Next month, for example, customers of the former Washington Mutual will see their free checking accounts replaced by fee-based accounts from  J.P. Morgan Chase,
JPM


1.40
%




 which bought WaMu in 2008. Customers can avoid the fees if they meet certain criteria such as maintaining balances.

  Bank of America
BAC


0.65
%




 will soon begin testing fees of $6 to $9 a month on its most basic checking account, according to a person familiar with the plan. Customers will have no options to waive that monthly fee.

Accounts with more features can have monthly fees ranging from $8.95 to $25. Those can be waived if customers maintain certain balances, use credit cards, do their banking online or have a mortgage with the bank.

—Robin Sidel  Dan Fitzpatrick  The Wall Street Journal 

Taking care of an aging or ailing relative can be stressful and confusing.

But a growing number of free or cheap smartphone apps aim to help caregivers keep track of medication dosages, nutritional requirements and other daily health-care needs. Here are some to consider:

Tell My Geo (Android, $9.95 per month per phone). This personal health-record app allows any health provider, including emergency responders, to access a person's medical history via his or her smartphone.

The app combines that function with a GPS locator that enables caregivers who also have the app loaded onto their smartphone to track a lost loved one.

Another safety feature allows a person to call a loved one simply by touching a photo image, rather than having to remember a name.

Personal Caregiver (iPhone, free). This app lets a caregiver schedule and track medications and doses for one person and indicates when it's time to order refills.

A premium edition of the app, for a onetime fee of $9.99, allows you to schedule and track the medications for up to three people, get more detailed medication information and receive recall alerts from the Food and Drug Administration.

Pain Care (iPhone/Android/soon available on Blackberry, free). A visual pain scale has long been accepted as a way for patients to communicate changes in chronic pain, but it can also help caregivers understand a loved one who cannot speak, says  Joseph Kim, a physician and founder of MedicalSmartphones.com.

Pain Care translates the pain scale into an electronic journal, where a patient can indicate pain levels by touching frowning or smiling faces, as well as pain location, duration, characteristics, mood and triggers. That data can then be shared instantly with a physician, who can adjust medications and treatments accordingly.

iBiomed (iPhone/iPod Touch, free). This app's features include a mobile treatment log book for prescriptions, supplements, therapies, diets, allergies and tests; a portable medical record; a time-stamped journal, which is easily searchable for such items as foods, behaviors, side effects and reactions; treatment and prescription-refill reminders; and customizable graphs.

—Anya Martin  MarketWatch.com 

A report by the Institute of Medicine estimates that 90 million Americans can't fully understand and act upon health information.

The U.S. Pharmacopeial Convention, which sets drug standards, last week proposed changes to chip away at some of that confusion -- at least when it comes to the labels that pharmacists put on prescriptions.

The USP is offering standards that it says will make label information and instructions more comprehensible.

For example, instructions to "Take two tablets twice daily" can raise confusion; saying "Take two tablets in the morning and two tablets in the evening" makes the numbers more explicit and also specifies exactly when to take the medications.

—Katherine Hobson  Health Blog, WSJ.com 

—The Aggregator features news and commentary from The Wall Street Journal and other publications. Email: cristina.lourosa@wsj.com 