Mohanjit Jolly is a seasoned investor with a portfolio of 20 companies under his watch, and who sees managing people as a way of life. But there's one front where he concedes defeat: Dealing with domestic help.

Maintaining a personal staff has been nothing short of a reality TV show, says the Ludhiana-born Mr. Jolly, who returned to India in 2006 after 23 years in the U.S. 

The saga started with the first driver -- a married man with two children -- who had an affair with a neighbor's maid. Another driver preferred driving under the influence. Then, there was the driver who adopted all religions and regions as his own and declared it a personal holiday for every festival from Id to Mahashivratri. Mr. Jolly had to let go all three drivers.

His car, a Toyota Innova, tells the story of his troubles. 

"My car looks as if it has come straight out of a demolition derby," he said.

Returning non-resident Indians say the challenge with domestic help can take away all the joy and excitement of returning "home." It's not just the housewives and software engineers who find their talents a poor match when pitted against the ways of ayahs and drivers of India. Deal-makers and money managers with management degrees, who decide the fate of billion-dollar companies, find grappling with personal staff a challenge that all their experience leaves them unprepared for.

"I have realized that if you are too much of a 'thanks' and 'please' person, you can end up being taken for granted," Mr. Jolly said. "You have to get the point across with whoever it is."

And, sometimes others may be making a point that makes one understand and appreciate their perspective.

  Sandeep Singhal, the Mumbai-based managing partner of Nexus Capital India, learned a lesson in people management from his cook. 

Mr. Singhal, a foodie who developed a fondness for Mexican cuisine during his 17-year stay in the U.S., decided to make them at home here and took over the kitchen one weekend. 

"The cook asked my wife if we were unhappy with her, and if her job was in any danger," he said. 

It was a clear message that while do-it-yourself is a much-needed survival skill elsewhere, it literally may cost someone their job here in India. 

"Now, whenever I prepare anything, I have her assist me," Mr. Singhal said.

The driver, though, is a recurring theme of hardship for non-resident Indians.

  Mukul Gulati, usually doesn't take the wheels, and has a driver here.

While it reduces his stress, the managing director at Zephyr Peacock India in Delhi, resents the loss of his independence The former resident of New York City also misses the Big Apple – its restaurants, independent films and intellectual energy. Mr. Gulati's weekends are a lot tamer now, and he typically spends it with his wife and daughter.

But the biggest challenge is getting used to the feeling of living in a petri dish, returnees said. The driver, the cook and the maid are watching constantly, observing one's every move and taking the privacy out of daily routines.

"In the U.S., life seemed more independent and anonymous relative to India,"said Bejual Somaia, managing director at Lightspeed Advisory Services India in New Delhi. 

But like all things Indian, there's not an easy solution to the problem.

One option: "India teaches you to just laugh and go with the flow, since crying is not an option," said Mr. Jolly of  Draper Fisher.