The wives of Washington Mutual Inc.'s two top executives when the nation's largest thrift collapsed in 2008 were accused by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. of illegally moving cash and houses into trusts in an effort to shield the assets from legal claims.

The allegations, made in a federal-court lawsuit filed Wednesday in Seattle, are the latest sign of how the FDIC is ratcheting up the pressure on executives and directors at financial institutions that failed during the crisis. The suit is the sixth filed by the FDIC stemming from 350 bank failures since the start of 2007.

The collapse of WaMu under a mountain of bad mortgages was the biggest bank failure in U.S. history. The suit accused former Washington Mutual Chief Executive  Kerry Killinger, President and Chief Operating Officer  Stephen Rotella and  David Schneider, the company's former home-loans president, of negligently going on a "lending spree, knowing that the real-estate market was in a 'bubble.' "

The three executives allegedly gambled billions of dollars on high-risk home loans, a strategy that maximized their own compensation, said the FDIC. Messrs. Killinger, Rotella and Schneider denied the allegations. 

In a statement, Mr. Killinger said the suit is "baseless and unworthy of the government." The wives of Mr. Killinger and Mr. Rotella declined to comment through spokesmen.

The suit didn't specify the damages being sought in the wake of WaMu's demise, but a person familiar with the matter said the FDIC wants $900 million. The main source of payment for any damages would likely be the former executives' professional liability insurance.

Also named as defendants in the suit were  Linda Killinger and  Esther Rotella. Mr. and Mrs. Killinger allegedly transferred homes in Palm Desert, Calif., and Shoreline, Wash., into trusts in a bid to protect the assets.

The FDIC also accused Mr. Rotella of transferring more than $1 million to Mrs. Rotella after Seattle-based WaMu was seized in September 2008. The couple allegedly put their home in Orient, N.Y., into trusts to protect it from future claims.

Mr. Rotella said he and his wife acquired the home about 10 years ago, before Mr. Rotella joined WaMu, and it "was put into the family trust for typical financial planning purposes and continues to be jointly owned." 

Lawyers not connected to the suit said naming spouses in such cases is rare but not unprecedented for the FDIC. "From a former executive's point of view, suing your wife is the definition of hardball. But from the FDIC's perception, there's precedent for it and they have the authority," said  Thomas Vartanian, a partner at Dechert LLP.

In a statement, Mr. Rotella said it is "almost beyond belief that the FDIC would take action against an effective, hard working bank manager who performed well under extraordinary conditions in an effort to save an important financial institution."

Mr. Rotella said FDIC officials had rejected his "offer to meet, answer their questions, and explain his role as chief operating officer at the company."

Mr. Killinger also criticized banking regulators, saying they had reviewed WaMu's financial position and "had offices on the premises '24/7"' in the months leading up to the financial institution's collapse.

Mr. Schneider declined to comment. He now works for  J.P. Morgan Chase
JPM


0.23
%




 & Co., which acquired WaMu's banking operations. A J.P. Morgan spokeswoman declined to comment.

The FDIC declined to comment on the suit. In a statement, FDIC spokesman  Andrew Gray said the agency "will initiate lawsuits against former officers, directors and other professionals of failed institutions when the case has merit and is expected to be cost effective."

As of March 15, the FDIC's board had authorized the filing of lawsuits seeking to recover $3.57 billion from 158 officers and directors of failed banks. Lawsuits were filed against former directors and officers of about one-fourth of the 1,800 institutions that died in the savings-and-loan crisis of the 1980s and 1990s.

 Write to  Dan Fitzpatrick at dan.fitzpatrick@wsj.com 