NEW DELHI – Monsoon rains will likely hit mainland India on time, arriving over the southern state of Kerala on May 31, the state-run Indian Meteorological Department said Friday, brightening prospects of a bumper foodgrain output for a second straight year. 

The timing and spread of monsoon rains are as important as the amount of rainfall, which has been forecast at 98% of the 50-year average this year. The rains are crucial to the majority of India's rain-dependent farmlands. 

The seasonal rains are also expected to arrive on time over the country's Andaman and Nicobar Islands on May 20, a statement by the department said, adding that the forecast has an error margin of up to four days. 

After arriving over Kerala, the monsoon gradually covers most of the central and northern grain and oilseed producing regions by July. 

India likely produced a record food grain output of 235.9 million metric tons in the crop year ending June 30 after last year's above-average monsoon rainfall. 

Normal monsoon rains are likely to bring cheer to the economy, as they not only lift foodgrain output and improve supplies, but also drive up rural spending on consumer goods. 

Thunderstorms and some patchy rains usually precede the monsoon's arrival, after which the long rainy season sets in and usually extends until September. Sowing of most summer crops, including staples such as rice, oilseeds and pulses, starts with the onset of the monsoon. 

"We have received isolated rainfall in the last three to four days and we are anticipating a slight increase in rainfall from tomorrow," said a weather official based in Kerala's Thiruvananthapuram. 

He expects these intermittent rains to continue in the southern state until May 31. 

"There are no apprehensions about this year's monsoon rainfall," said another weather official, based in the department's Pune office, which gives the long-range monsoon forecast. 

The Indian Meteorological Department also ruled out the possibility of any cyclones striking the Indian subcontinent before the monsoon's onset. 

"There is no such threat," said B.P. Yadav, spokesman of the Indian Meteorological Department. 

Cyclones usually strike between April and June before the onset of the monsoon, or between October and December, just after it ends. Once the monsoon clouds set in, they prevent cyclones from developing beyond the initial stage of a deep depression. 

 Write to  Rajesh Roy at rajesh.roy@dowjones.com 