Population growth in the Bay Area slowed sharply over the past decade, according to 2010 census data released this month. But beneath this change there were other big shifts, and few communities exemplify them more dramatically than Cupertino.

The South Bay city best known as home of  Apple Inc.
AAPL


0.80
%




 saw a 64% surge in its Asian population over the decade to become a decisive majority of the city's roughly 58,000 residents. People in Cupertino who described their race as Asian rose to about 63% last year from about 44% in 2000, while the percentage of whites fell to about 29% from nearly 48%.

Other Bay Area enclaves have gone through similar shifts. Fremont's Asian population also topped 50% for the first time, according to the preliminary census data.

There are some singular dimensions to Cupertino's story, demographers and residents say. For one thing, the influx has multiple sources. 

While immigrants from Taiwan led the change in the 1990s, transplants from China have arrived in large numbers lately, city officials say. Many U.S.-born people of Chinese ancestry also have moved to Cupertino from elsewhere in the country. And immigrants from India appear to be the fastest-growing group in recent years.

The multicultural mix is reflected in the city's ethnic festivals, specialty shops and restaurants. In its parks, there are badminton courts that cater largely to Chinese residents and a cricket pitch sought by South Asians.

"It's a model of diversity," said Mahesh Nihalani, an Indian immigrant who helped lead the push for the pitch.

Perhaps the No. 1 reason for the Asian influx: the city's schools. While technology jobs attract migrants from around the globe, Cupertino's highly rated public schools are repeatedly cited as a reason for choosing the city over others in the Valley.

Gilbert Wong, the city's mayor, is one of three Asians on Cupertino's five-member city council. But he and the other members are quick to point to their differences and discount the notion of an Asian political bloc. 

Mr. Wong was born in San Jose and later moved to Cupertino. Council member Barry Chang, by contrast, is a Taiwan native who came to the U.S. to study engineering and later moved into real estate. 

Concluding that his English wasn't good enough to serve a U.S.-born clientele, Mr. Chang said he gravitated to the South Bay because immigrants from Taiwan tend to speak Mandarin, his native language; residents of San Francisco's Chinatown, by contrast, generally speak Cantonese. In real-estate transactions over the years, the buyers he represented were usually Chinese and the sellers Caucasian, he said.

Though the number of white residents declined 29% between 2000 and 2010, Mayor Wong disputes traditional notions of white flight. Rather, he sees economic and generational forces: Caucasian empty-nester couples have been cashing in the value of their homes by selling to Asians with school-age children. The trend is positive "for both the Caucasian and the Asian community," he said.

 Write to  Don Clark at don.clark@wsj.com 