WASHINGTON—The cost of rebuilding from Japan's devastating earthquake and tsunami could reach $235 billion, the World Bank said in a report Sunday.



Citing outside estimates, the report said damage was expected to range from 2.5% to 4% of Japan's gross domestic product— or $122 billion to $235 billion. That compares with $100 billion in damages, or about 2% of gross domestic product, from the 1995 Kobe earthquake.

Of the damages, between $14 billion and $33 billion are likely to be covered by private insurance, the report said. 

The report also said the country's economy would temporarily slow, but growth would likely accelerate in the second half of the year. 

"We expect the economic impact of this disaster on the East Asian region to be fairly short-lived," said Vikram Nehru, the World Bank's chief economist for the region, in a statement. "We expect growth in Japan will pick up as reconstruction efforts accelerate." 

It added that a temporary slowdown in Japan's economy will have a modest impact on the economies of other Asian nations, which are large trading partners of Japan. 

If growth in the Japanese gross domestic product were to slow by 0.25 to 0.50 percentage points, the report said, exports from developing East Asian nations such as Indonesia and The Philippines would slow by up to 1.5%, the report said. 

Japan's economy is the world's third largest. It is a major producer of parts for the automotive and electronics industry, and shortages of key components have emerged since the earthquake and tsunami, causing prices to rise for such items as memory chips. 

The report forecasts that, adjusted for inflation, the region's economy will grow by around 8% in both 2011 and 2012, after 9.6% growth last year. 

The World Bank also noted that about 25% of East Asian governments' external debt is denominated in Japanese yen, with the highest at 60% in Thailand. If the Japanese yen appreciates, those countries have to pay more to service their debts. 

Last week, leaders of the world's largest economies launched an attempt to tame an increase in the value of the Japanese currency. Economists say the coordinated efforts to weaken the value of the Japanese yen are likely designed more to temper panicked markets than target a specific currency level. 