Silicon Valley is known for its risk-taking entrepreneurs, who upon striking gold frequently wind up lavishing some of their riches on safe architecture—McMansion-sized replicas of Mediterranean villas or French châteaux. 

Hidden at the end of a long driveway next to a French villa, the approximately 8,000-square-foot, six-bedroom home of ex-Google executives Olana and  Zain Khan and their two young boys is unabashedly contemporary. There's no shortage of drama: a flat-roofed, L-shaped exterior is fronted by a geometric pool of water with fountains coming from travertine walls. At the entry, glass walls give a view inside to a main living area and then all the way through the back of the house, where a large glass sliding door can open the room to a rectangular limestone patio and swimming pool outside. 

The vast, main living room, where mother-of-pearl speckled terrazzo floors sit 19 feet below a mahogany-sided ceiling, is crossed by a frosted glass bridge with see-through railings that floats overhead, connecting two wings of bedrooms. It feels a little like an airy hotel lobby—inspired by the couple's request for a casual, resort feel, said architect Bob Swatt of Bay Area firm Swatt Miers. "The idea was those gorgeous hotels in Hawaii with great furnishings, where you take your shoes off and have a Mai Tai," he says. 

The couple met working in the early days of Google, back when they recall the company being small and casual. Mr. Khan, 37, started at Google in 1999. Known simply as the "Ops Guy," he graduated to managing a global team of IT people before leaving in 2006. He now works for a hedge fund and as an IT consultant. Ms. Khan, 35, joined the company in 2000 after a stint at Netscape. The manager of a global sales support team, she also left around 2006 and now works as chief operating officer of ProFounder Financial, a company designed to help entrepreneurs get access to capital from their communities.

The couple initially bought a 1924 Spanish-style house on University Avenue in Palo Alto and hired an architect to design a new, similar-style house on the property. But as they went through the design process they realized they wanted lots of windows and big open spaces. 

After spending a lot of time looking at magazines and researching on—where else—the Internet, the couple decided to hire Swatt Miers, which specializes in contemporary homes. "We were really excited about being able to build modern," said Ms. Khan, who is expecting her third child. "We like big, open spaces where the kids as they grow up can feel independent but can still be within hearing distance." 

Since a modern house wouldn't fit into the context of their Palo Alto neighborhood, they looked around for more suitable property. They bought their current lot five years ago and tore down the dilapidated 1950s Art Deco home that was there. Located on a hill, with no other homes visible, the property allowed them to build a dramatic house with minimal landscaping. 

The couple, who moved in September, declined to comment on the cost of the land or construction. The property was listed for $7.2 million, and the value of the land was assessed at $7 million by the county. Contractors estimate an upscale modern home that size in the area would cost about $800 per square foot.

The artwork is exotic: gold flecked Buddhas from Thailand and carved African figures; a camel on wheels is from India. But much of the inspiration is from close to home. Mr. Khan modeled the dining-room chandelier, with milk bottles hanging from metal cords, on a piece at Calafia, a Palo Alto restaurant owned by the former chef at Google. The idea for the terrazzo floor comes from a recycled glass counter at Equinox in Palo Alto, where Ms. Khan exercises. A red-and-black bamboo patterned mural on a wall in the master bathroom is similar to a design Mr. Khan saw on a poster at Café Epi in Palo Alto. Ms. Khan had long wanted a floating glass bridge like the one at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art. 

The audio-visual room downstairs rivals those in some commercial buildings; it controls the advanced wireless system, all the satellite and sound system equipment and the 60 solar panels on the roof. The lights, TVs, blinds, pool, security cameras, alarms and climate controls can be adjusted from an iPad anywhere in the world. Mr. Khan elected not to do the wiring. "I didn't want to be the IT guy at home," he said. Ms. Khan added: "He didn't want me yelling at him when the Internet went down." 

Such advances can have their drawbacks. During a recent stay, Ms. Khan's father, David Hirsch, was in the guest bedroom when suddenly all the lights went out. It turned out that his daughter and son-in-law, assuming he and his wife were asleep, "turned off the house for the night," with the iPad. "It's a very exciting house," he said. 

 Write to  Nancy Keates at nancy.keates@wsj.com 