Before he made "The Fighter," which tells the true story of two pugilist brothers from Lowell, Mass., filmmaker David O. Russell was in serious need of a title shot. The New York native hadn't directed a Hollywood film in six years, and he'd lost his way personally and professionally. "I got divorced. I went through a lot of personal stuff. And I approached a lot of movies where I wasn't sure about the material," he said. "It was not a very pleasant period."

Meanwhile, Mark Wahlberg, who would eventually produce and star in "The Fighter" as boxer Micky Ward, and who had worked with Mr. Russell twice before, was trying to get the film off the ground; its original director, Darren Aronofsky, had departed to work on other projects, and several cast members had dropped in and out of the production. Mr. Russell, 52, got the job, and the success of the film has reinvigorated him. "This movie was the perfect palliative," he said. "Keep it raw, keep it simple, keep it human."

The filmmaker spoke with the Journal last week at a lunch held in his honor at Manhattan's 21 Club. 

 Given the film's long history before you were hired to direct, how did you add your stamp?  

The respect and the heart that Mark had carried from his own personal experience— that's what I inherited. The rest of it, what can I tell you? I do my thing. That's the only way I know how to work. So when I come into the room and meet with everybody, I'm saying, "This is how I see the picture. And if you don't see the picture this way, I guess we're not going to do it." 

 So how did you see the picture? 

I came in and said I don't think the women are being brought to the fore. I think you have an amazing romance in the center of the picture, which wasn't there. And I want that to be a real role—a role that has enough in it to get an actress like Amy Adams. And the sisters—people thought it was a distraction. But that's what makes this so special. I haven't seen a boxing movie that has women that are so involved. 



 How did Conan O'Brien's sister, Kate O'Brien, come to be cast as one of the seven Ward sisters?  

She showed up in a casting call. We had a Boston casting call. I didn't even know who she was until after we cast her. She's a good-hearted person and this is her first movie. 

 Christian Bale won a Golden Globe for his role as Dickie Eklund, a former boxer and drug addict. Did you help him shape the performance? 

The first thing we agreed on is that we loved Dickie and Dickie needed to be a lovable person. In life, he's lovable. In the previous drafts, he was a very sinister guy and that's only one aspect of his personality under certain circumstances. The other thing was in calibrating the size of the performance. Christian did it so big and indecipherably—at times you couldn't understand what he was saying. I said, you have to enunciate and you have to pull it back a little bit. Sometimes less is more.

 "Mystic River." "Gone Baby Gone." "Southie." "The Fighter." The Boston area seems to be Hollywood's de facto setting for blue-collar stories.  

I think that's random. I think it can be anywhere. I have relatives from Brooklyn and the Bronx that I've known my whole life, and that's why I know that world. The line from the film—"You owe me $200"—that level of arguing is from my own family. I think it's universal. 

 The Museum of the Moving Image is hosting a retrospective of your work. Do you ever go back and watch your early films like "Spanking the Monkey?"  

"Spanking the Monkey," I don't like to watch. It's torture not only because that movie is what I call a feel-bad movie—it's a very uncomfortable movie—but, also, you're watching your first film so all you're seeing is every clumsy, ham-handed, cinematic thing. My teenage son, who I dreaded ever having to watch that film, snuck and watched it and loved it. He made me watch it. I said, this is going to be like putting needles in my eyes. But halfway through it, I was absorbed and hooked in. 