Osama bin Laden never made it to Guantanamo Bay, but his arrival in hell appears to have been hastened by information gathered from the terrorists who are detained there. The Associated Press has the story:

A senior administration official told a White House briefing that "for years, we were unable to identify [the courier's] true name or his location":

Finally, last August, they found the compound in Abbottabad, Pakistan. ABC News's Jake Tapper reports that in March, President Obama authorized "the development of a plan" to bomb the compound with 2,000-pound Joint Direct Attack Munitions carried by B2 "stealth" bombers. "But when the president heard the compound would be reduced to rubble he chose not to pursue that option. . . . The president wanted proof" that bin Laden was dead. So he assembled a small death panel, which went to the compound in Pakistan and shot him.

That was surely wise. Perhaps the persistence of "birthers" led the president to anticipate that "deathers" would deny bin Laden is really inanimate. Sure enough, the Jakarta Globe reports that Luthfi Hasan, head of Indonesia's Islamist Prosperous Justice Party, "told journalists on Monday afternoon that there was a 'fifty-fifty' chance that Osama bin Laden had actually been killed by U.S. security forces. He said he needed evidence, including DNA tests, to be completely convinced that it was bin Laden." 

 Entertainment Weekly, meanwhile, reports that NBC cut away from Donald Trump's "The Celebrity Apprentice" for live coverage of Obama's speech announcing the kill. As far as we know, however, Trump has not yet demanded to see the death certificate.

"His death does not mark the end of our effort," Obama noted in his speech. "There's no doubt that al Qaeda will continue to pursue attacks against us. We must--and we will--remain vigilant at home and abroad."

But there's no question that bin Laden's death is of enormous symbolic importance. As the New York Times notes in a lengthy obituary, bin Laden aimed to fundamentally transform the Muslim world:

Bin Laden's death was a long time coming--it's been more than 9½ years since the Sept. 11 attacks--but perhaps it is fortuitous that it occurred amid the "Arab spring." Bin Laden was right that these countries don't belong to the rulers, some of whom by now are ex-rulers. But he'll never be emir, now that he's an ex-human.

The killing of bin Laden raises two interesting questions for the U.S. First, what does it mean for our involvement in Afghanistan? Public support for that war has been declining, and it isn't hard to imagine that there will be a push, as blogger Tom Maguire puts it, "to implement . . . the much-discussed but never implemented strategy in Vietnam--declare victory and leave."

Second, how does this affect President Obama's political fortunes? In the short term, there's very little doubt it will be beneficial. The president suddenly looks highly competent, belying the Jimmy Carter comparisons that had become ubiquitous by last week. Here's Glenn Reynolds in yesterday's Washington Examiner:

As it turned out, he was able to do considerably more than wish. On the other hand, those now declaring Obama unbeatable surely are engaged in wishful thinking. A foreign-policy success does not preclude a one-term presidency: Just ask George H.W. Bush. Even Carter had the Israel-Egypt peace treaty.

One thing that does seem unlikely is that Obama will pay a political price for his jejune posturing against Guanantamo Bay. In fact, this may turn out to be a skillful example of triangulation. His promises to shutter the detention facility and bring Khalid Sheik Mohammed and other terrorists to New York for trial made his hard-left base happy; his failure to carry it out satisfied almost everyone else. And the anti-antiterror left is happy to blame others for Obama's broken promise, as evidenced by any New York Times editorial on the subject.

And now that bin Laden is dead, Obama is relieved of the headache of deciding where to put him on trial.

  Our Friends the Pakistanis   Last month the New York Times reported that relations between Washington and Islamabad were near the breaking point:

But yesterday Americans killed Osama bin Laden in Pakistan. How involved were the Pakistanis in the successful operation? "It's important to note that our counterterrorism cooperation with Pakistan helped lead us to bin Laden and the compound where he was hiding," President Obama said in his speech last night.

The Times reports today that "an American official said the Pakistani government was not informed about the strike in advance." A statement from Pakistan's Ministry of Foreign Affairs takes no direct credit for the raid:

The ministry does proclaim that al Qaeda "had declared war on Pakistan," echoing President Obama's statement. Meanwhile, the Atlantic's Jeffrey Goldberg reports that Husain Haqqani, Pakistan's ambassador to Washington, struck a defensive tone in a phone interview:

As John Fund notes in today's Political Diary (subscribe here):

Note that when Obama gave credit to the Pakistanis for having "helped lead" the U.S. to the bin Laden compound, he was completely vague about the timing. The help could have come years ago. It looks to us as though Obama is offering Islamabad a chance to save face--and to judge by Haqqani's comments to Goldberg, they are taking it. In private, though, the Pakistanis may be getting a much sterner message.

  Too Good to Be Happy   In his address last night, President Obama evoked "the sense of unity that prevailed on 9/11." It's hard to blame him: A president whose policies have been divisively ideological had accomplished something everyone could celebrate. Well, not everyone. Over at Salon, they're not happy, and they want you to know it's because they're better than you.

David Sirota scolds Americans for not responding with "somber relief":

Sirota has unwittingly done a public service here. He has killed off the worst post-9/11 cliché by reducing it to complete absurdity: If the terrorists lose and we're happy, the terrorists have won. Brilliant!

Also at Salon, Glenn Greenwald preens that he isn't happy:

Oh well, to each his own. We personally find that Greenwald's colicky mood enhances our elation.

It also reminds us of how terribly wrong Salon has been over the years. Way back in 2001, we made a note of a piece that ran there on Sept. 14 of that year, planning to use it when bin Laden was captured or killed. It's titled "An Afghan-American Speaks" and is written by Tamim Ansary:

He was right about the need for ground troops, but somehow we managed to do it without conquering Pakistan, going to war with Islam, or wreaking a holocaust. Then there's this piece from 1998, after the bombing of the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania:

The author: Loren Jenkins, then and still senior foreign editor of NPR. Your tax dollars at work!

 Another Broken Campaign Promise 

 Two House Minority Leaders in One! 

(Hat tip: PowerLineBlog.com.)

 Appeal to Authority 

 Life Imitates the Onion 

 Out on a Limb 

  The Other Remains Were Buried at Sea   "Commander-in-Chief Keeps Cool Head"--headline, Financial Times, May 2

  Hey, Kids! What Time Is It?   "Not the Right Moment to Talk About Aid to Pakistan"--headline, Commentary website, May 2

 Questions Nobody Is Asking 

  Answers to Questions Nobody Is Asking   "How Contractors Are Affected by bin Laden's Death"--headline, WFED-AM website (Washington), May 2

  We Blame George W. Bush   "Peru Leader Credits Pope for bin Laden Death"--headline, Associated Press, May 2

  It's Always in the Last Place You Look   "Bin Laden Was Found at Luxury Pakistan Compound"--headline, Reuters, May 2

  Everything Seemingly Is Spinning Out of Control   "Typo: MSNBC Correspondent Accidentally Reports on Twitter That 'Obama' Killed"--headline, DailyCaller.com, May 2

  Breaking News From 1945   "Hitler Is Dead. Hitlerism Lives On"--headline, Jeff Jacoby syndicated column, May 2

  News You Can Use   "Now That We've Killed Osama bin Laden, Let's Kill Oil"--headline, Grist.org, May 2

 Bottom Stories of the Day 

  The Wrath of Science   It's been a bad tornado season across the Southeastern United States, and the guys at the Center for American Project Action Fund, a left-liberal 501(c)4 corporation, blame global warming. In a much-discussed post on the fund's site ThinkProgress.org, titled "Storms Kill Over 250 Americans In States Represented By Climate Pollution Deniers," CAPAF's Brad Johnson makes an appeal to authority:

Trenberth's is a fringe view even among so-called climate scientists. FoxNews.com quotes the delightfully named Greg Carbin, a "warning coordination meteorologist" at the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration, as saying that "there really is no scientific consensus or connection" between global warming and tornadoes. "Jumping from a large-scale event like global warming to relatively small-scale events like tornadoes is a huge leap across a variety of scales."

Here in New York, yesterday was a beautiful day, sunny with temperatures in the 60s. By Trenberth's logic, we should credit global warming. Of course, lovely weather is not the kind of "event" he has in mind. "Weather Is Not Climate Unless People Die," quips Roger Pielke, a professor of "environmental studies" and self-described progressive, in the headline of a blog post. Pielke, like Carbin, accepts the theory of global warming. But he is scornful of global warmists "who are engaged in misrepresentation and trickery."

This is another way in which global warmism resembles a religion. Although a particularly devout believer might say a prayer of gratitude for a nice day, no one ever describes it as an "act of God." That term is reserved for natural disasters.

In a "South Park" episode a few years ago, Cartman travels in time to the 26th century, when he finds a world ruled by atheists. They all revere Richard Dawkins but have divided into three sects--the United Atheist Alliance, the Allied Atheist Alliance and the Unified Atheist League--who wage brutal wars over the answer to "the Great Question."

"Science" has supplanted God, so that people go around saying things like "Science damn it" and "in the name of almighty Science." Johnson and Trenberth are essentially calling the tornadoes an act of Science.

Actually, Johnson goes a step further. He ends his post with this observation:

 Snopes.com reports that in 1998 televangelist Pat Robertson "addressed comments at participants of the Orlando, Florida, Gay Pride Festival, stating: 'I would warn Orlando that you're right in the way of some serious hurricanes, and I don't think I'd be waving those flags in God's face if I were you.' " Now, according to ThinkProgress, people elsewhere in the South are facing the wrath of an angry Science!

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Abe Beyda, Ed Lasky, Mordecai Bobrowsky, Judah Spetner, Hillel Markowitz, Jeffrey Spiegel, Brian O'Rourke, Ray Girouard, Gary Pomeroy, Lewis Sckolnick, Rosanna Klass, James Foster, Rod Pennington, Nathan Wirtschafter, Michael Segal, Kenneth Killiany, Mark King, Ethel Fenig, Michele Schiesser, Clifton Chadwick, David Gerstman, Storrs Warinner, Daniel Mullen, Rene Lajous, Andrew Koenig, Steve Obeda, Richard Zak, Ken Hennesay, Josh Yuter, Diana Shulman, Gregory Taylor, Pat Rowe, John Bobek, Peter Shalen, Peter Huntsman, John Williamson, Zack Russ, Ed Thompson, Richard Belzer, Avram Shacham, Chris Hayes, Bart Borkosky, Steve Prestegard and Chris Papouras. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)