RIYADH, Saudi Arabia—Hundreds of protesters demonstrated Friday in two eastern Saudi Arabian cities, a day after police broke up a march in that region.

But despite calls for protest in Riyadh, no demonstrators could be seen amid a stepped-up police presence here.

While mostly avoiding a direct confrontation with protesters in those Eastern Province cities, the Sunni Saudi monarchy appeared to be taking no chances in its effort to keep antigovernment wave from spreading to the world's largest exporter of crude oil. 

About 500 protesters, mainly Shiite Muslims who make up a large part of the population in the region, demonstrated in Al-Hofuf, in the Eastern Province alongside the country's major oil field Ghawar. 

They called for the release of prisoners held without charges, said Ibrahim al-Mugaiteeb, president of Human Rights First Society. There was no gunfire or clashes with police who stood by, Mr. al-Mugaiteeb said. At least 10 people were arrested, witnesses said.

Separately, in another Eastern Province locale, several hundred other protesters staged demonstrated in the town of Awamiya, near the Shia center of Qatif on the Gulf coast, witnesses said. 

Eastern Province is the home of vast reserves of Saudi oil, and a majority of the country's minority Shiite community live there. The Shiites complain of discrimination in jobs and resources but the Saudi government denies it and says all citizens are treated equally.

The country's wealth has guaranteed Saudis with relatively higher living standards compared with neighboring countries like Egypt and Yemen. 

In Riyadh, Saudi Arabia's capital, Friday prayers ended calmly, as none of the protests activists had called for materialized, and by nightfall rain and thunderstorms flooded the city.

At the Grievances Bureau in Riyadh, where protesters were urged to gather on Facebook, only one person showed up. He approached foreign journalists and described the kingdom as a corrupt police state. The man was shortly taken away by policemen who surrounded the area. It was unclear if he was arrested or what happened to him. 

Dozens of antiriot police cars and at least two helicopters waited quietly in the capital where activists had called for the demonstrations after Muslim prayers. No protesters could be seen in the area. 

Hundreds of security and antiriot police were deployed in the city. Police blocked a number of roads and sat up random checkpoints. In Olaya, a main commercial street in the center of the capital, police searched cars of residents driving by.

Activists had used Facebook pages to call for demonstrations to demand political reforms. The calls for protests came as demonstrations have broken out across the Arab world, toppling governments in Tunisia and Egypt, and prompting a bloody conflict in Libya. 

Some are now calling for another day of rage on March 18. But analysts said it was unclear whether protests would emerge. 

"It was disappointing for many that no attempts to protest took place in the city, but people are scared and police beefed up its presence to send them a clear and loud warning," said a Riyadh-based political analyst. "But it is premature to make a judgment and consider what happened today a failure," the analyst said. 

"There are still protests in the Eastern Province, and I doubt Saudis elsewhere will be silent, if they don't see political reforms in the kingdom." 

Saudi Arabia's government has taken a harsh line on protests. On Thursday, Saudi police fired live ammunition to disperse about 200 Shiite protesters in Qatif, the most significant escalation of unrest in the kingdom since popular demands for change began to sweep through the region late last year, local human-rights activists said.

The gunshots were fired above protesters, after some attacked a policeman, said Interior Ministry spokesman Maj. Gen. Mansour al-Turki. He said the policeman was injured, and two people were injured by gunshots. He said the police were investigating to find out the source of the gunshots. 

 Write to  Summer Said at summer.said@dowjones.com 