No cents made no sense at all to one diner.

After a Manhattan attorney finished a recent meal at Jebon Sushi & Noodle in the East Village, his bill came out to a perfectly round $24. Something didn't add up. Closer inspection revealed his $22 worth of food had mysteriously become $22.04 on the receipt, so along with $1.96 in sales tax, the bill was an even $24.

When he questioned the bill, the wait staff offered to adjust it. The diner declined, but he still decided to file a complaint with the city's Department of Consumer Affairs, saying he wanted to prevent other diners from having to deal with the same fate. His name was redacted in the complaint and couldn't be confirmed.

In the furiously fast-paced restaurant industry, coins can be a nuisance and pennies passé. Solutions are varied. There are "take a penny, leave a penny" jars, tip jars and charity collections. But some eateries simply round bills for logistical and practical reasons. 

Rounding a bill up violates the city's consumer-protection law, according to a spokeswoman for the agency. 

The consumer agency receives complaints about restaurant overcharging every few months and mediates to get the consumer back the amount they are due. 

Indeed, most restaurants—including Jebon—said they usually round in the customer's favor, though lapses do occur.

  Anthony Tse, a manager at Jebon, said the diner's bill was a "system error."

"It wasn't intentional," he said. "We fixed it that day."

What the restaurant does commonly do, he said, is round down by the nickel. "Nobody likes to carry pennies anymore," said Mr. Tse. "We just round down and give them a nickel instead. That's normally what we do because we don't want to deal with pennies. We don't even carry pennies."

At 5 Napkin Burger restaurants, servers are trained to round down to the nearest quarter, said  Robert Guarino, a partner in the restaurant, which has three locations in New York. But he acknowledged that mistakes are sometimes made.

One woman recently was witnessed grumbling when she was slighted 11 cents at the 5 Napkin Burger in Hell's Kitchen after the bartender rounded up to the nearest quarter. 

Mr. Guarino said the restaurant rounds bills only in cash transactions, to avoid forcing the wait staff to carry change. Because the restaurant doesn't have a cashier, servers carry coins or go to the bartender to get change. 

"It's really about trying to process the transaction quickly for the guest," he said.

Some restaurants are taking rounding one step further. 

At  Hung Ry, a new Manhattan restaurant receiving a lot of buzz for its hand-pulled noodles, bills for those who pay in cash are rounded up or down to the nearest dollar. 

Owner Weilan Mark said the restaurant has been rounding bills because it doesn't have a computerized cash register. But she said staffers ask for customer approval before rounding in favor of the restaurant. Most don't mind, she said (though one recent diner complained on the food blog Eater.com, sparking a long thread of debate).

The system has proved so efficient and smooth that Ms. Mark said the restaurant plans to continue it even when it gets a computerized register. 

For the Jebon diner, it wasn't the lost pennies that bothered him but the principle. 

"What further outraged me is nowadays most people pay by credit card, so having an odd number doesn't matter," he said.

He ended up paying his bill at Jebon by credit card. 

Consumer Affairs mediated the complaint and determined that the customer was owed four cents, though he had requested a full refund. 

"They wouldn't have them issue a check for the four cents," the diner said. "They called me up and said I could go pick up the four cents. But it's really not worth my time at all."

—Amber Benham and Rob Bennett contributed to this article.

 Write to  Sumathi Reddy at sumathi.reddy@wsj.com 