NEW YORK—A Canadian man has been charged with helping three men accused in a 2009 plot to bomb New York City's subway system receive military-style training overseas, U.S. prosecutors said Tuesday.

Ferid Ahmed Imam, 30 years old, was charged, along with another man, by Canadian authorities on Tuesday with terrorism-related charges. Mr. Imam, a former Winnipeg, Canada, resident and a Canadian citizen, is a fugitive and is believed to be in Pakistan.

On Tuesday, federal prosecutors in Brooklyn alleged that Mr. Imam aided and abetted the terrorism training of Najibullah Zazi and two other men, who traveled to Pakistan in 2008. Mr. Zazi, an Afghan native who worked as an airport-shuttle driver in Colorado, pleaded guilty last year along with Zarein Ahmedzay in a failed scheme to carry out suicide bombings on Manhattan subway lines.

"As today's charges demonstrate, we will not rest in our pursuit of those responsible for plotting terrorist attacks," U.S. Attorney Loretta Lynch said in a statement.

Mr. Imam, who is also known as "Yousef," has been charged by U.S. authorities with conspiracy, providing material support to al Qaeda and other charges. He faces 30 years to life in prison if convicted. 

Last year, U.S. prosecutors said the plot to detonate homemade explosives in the subway was directed by three senior members of al Qaeda, including Adnan el Shukrijumah, one of the U.S.'s most wanted terrorists. U.S. authorities said the plot was part of a broader scheme to use Western operatives to attack a target in the U.K.

The U.S. has been searching for Mr. Shukrijumah, a Saudi Arabia native, for several years and is offering a $5 million reward for information leading to his capture.

Mr. Zazi pleaded guilty to conspiracy to use weapons of mass destruction and other charges in February 2010. Mr. Ahmedzay, a former Queens cab driver, pleaded guilty to conspiracy and providing material support to al Qaeda in April 2010.

Adis Medunjanin, a Queens part-time building superintendent, also has been charged criminally in the case. He is awaiting trial and has denied wrongdoing.

At his plea, Mr. Zazi said he drove to New York with explosives and other bomb-making materials in September 2009, but threw them away after he learned he was being investigated by law enforcement.

Separately, Mr. Medunjanin has asked a judge to not allow prosecutors to use statements he made following his arrest in January following a car crash on the Whitestone Expressway. Mr. Medunjanin claims he was improperly pressured to sign a waiver of his right to counsel and that he was denied access to his lawyer for more than 36 hours after his arrest. 

Prosecutors have alleged Mr. Medunjanin crashed his car into another vehicle as a last-ditch attempt to carry out a suicide attack on American soil. Just before crashing his car, Mr. Medunjanin allegedly called 911 to identify himself and announce his intentions, prosecutors said.

Mr. Zazi's father has been separately charged with obstruction of justice, conspiracy and other charges for allegedly conspiring with others to alter, destroy, mutilate or conceal "glasses, masks, liquid chemicals and containers." 

 Write to  Chad Bray at chad.bray@wsj.com 