Farmland values in much of the U.S. Midwest rose 20% in the first quarter of the year, though prices are expected to stabilize and ease concerns over an asset bubble, according to a regional Federal Reserve report Friday. 

A surge in grain prices has fueled a sharp rise in farmland prices, which are approaching record levels seen in 2008. The majority of farmland deals have been between farmers, yet interest from institutional investors is increasing, since the sector is seen as one of the few asset classes with a strong outlook. 

During the first three months of the year, Nebraska and Kansas saw the largest jump in values, with nonirrigated land values up 24% from a year ago, according to the quarterly report from the Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank. 

All other areas covered in the report including Oklahoma, Colorado, Wyoming and parts of New Mexico and Missouri saw increases in the quarter. 

Values also have been rising farther east in the heart of the U.S. corn belt. The Chicago Federal Reserve Bank in February reported farmland values were up 6% in the fourth quarter of last year and 12% for the full year, the second-biggest jump in the past 30 years. The bank is expected to release first quarter data later this month. 

The Kansas City report said bankers see prices stabilizing over the next three months. Yet others, including Kansas City Fed President Thomas Hoenig, have warned farmland values could fall by a third when the Fed tightens monetary policy and ends near-zero interest rates. The timing of this is much debated, but many expect a change in policy in the first half of next year. 

Farm lenders in interviews ahead of Friday's report said they are preparing for likely fallout from tightening monetary policy. 

Lenders, for example, have typically loaned up to 65% of the appraised value of farmland, but some are now reducing that to 60% or even 50%, said  Ross Anderson, senior vice president and chief credit officer for AgriBank, a St. Paul, Minn.-based wholesale lender to rural lending associations from Wyoming to Ohio. 

In a recent interview, he said banks also are reducing loan repayment periods or no longer lending to riskier applicants. 

Farm Credit Services of Mid-America, a Louisville, Ky.-based lending cooperative that serves the eastern corn belt, recently decided to increase collateral requirements as a precaution. Senior Vice President  Philip Kimmel said he doesn't think there is a bubble, which would indicate a decline of more than 20%, but said farmland values could drop 10% to 15%. 

"We don't make loans based on what we think is going to happen, we make loans based on what may happen," he said in a recent interview. 

Anderson doesn't expect land values to decline in the short term. "There's a potential for them to remain strong, and maybe even strengthen further," he said. 

The Kansas City Fed said most bankers in its quarterly survey expect farmland values to stabilize during the next three months. Overall, farm credit conditions in the district were stable, with strong loan repayment rates and few loan renewals or extensions, the Fed said. 

Most bankers in the survey expect farm incomes to remain "at elevated levels" and added that demand for loans has been low as farmers pay for fertilizer, fuel and land with cash. 

Ranch land values in the Kansas City district were up 11% from the prior year, driven by strong profits for livestock operators as well as a boom in energy exploration, which lifted land values in Oklahoma and the mountain states. 

The biggest concern among bankers surveyed was in Oklahoma, where a drought is hurting the wheat crop. That could hurt farm revenues and loan repayments rates, the Fed said. 

 Write to  Ian Berry at ian.berry@dowjones.com 