CAIRO—Egypt's government has arrested 47 officials from the state security agency and charged them with destroying documents in a bid to cover up crimes committed under the rule of deposed President Hosni Mubarak.

Egypt's public prosecutor's office disclosed the move Monday, the same day Egypt's military rulers swore in a new cabinet that includes new faces in key ministries. The arrests came after protesters stormed at least three state security buildings over the weekend to prevent officials from destroying the paperwork and seized boxes of documents. Protest leaders began posting the documents online.

It wasn't possible to independently verify the validity of the documents, some of which Egyptian newspapers and websites reprinted. Among the recovered documents were surveillance reports on several prominent Egyptian public figures, including television celebrities, political activists and religious leaders.

The documents also contained reports on foreign diplomats and the visiting Turkish president, a sign that the domestic security agency was still monitoring people weeks after Mr. Mubarak left power, said protest leaders who saw the documents.

The state security agency, known as Amn al Dawla in Arabic, was the main tool of political repression by the Mubarak government, spying on citizens and using a network of thousands of informants.

Human-rights activists say it abused the country's emergency law, which allowed the state to arrest anyone without a judicial warrant, to detain and torture anyone who represented a threat to the government's political or economic interests. Leaders of Egypt's protest movement want it scrapped.

Attempts to reach state security were unsuccessful Monday.

Separately, Tunisia's interim authorities on Monday disbanded that country's state security agency, notorious for human-rights abuses under ousted President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali. The documents allegedly taken from Egypt's state-security agency could increase calls for it to be disbanded as well, analysts said.

One of the documents with authentic-looking seals and annotations and burned edges posted online was clearly a fake. It discussed how Mr. Mubarak was plotting a comeback from his palace in the resort of Sharm-el-Sheikh and was in touch with Genghis Khan.

Ahmed Abdel Gowaz, a youth member of the Muslim Brotherhood, participated in the seizure of the state security office in downtown Cairo early Monday morning. He said the volume of shredded paper was enough to fill "three floors" of the office building.

Mr. Abdel Gowaz said he saw documents that tracked a visit by Abdullah Gul, the president of Turkey, to Cairo last week. State security kept records of Mr. Gul's visits with politicians and prominent leaders of the revolution.

"We thought they only followed Egyptian citizens, but to watch an ambassador and the Turkish president in Egypt was surprising for us," said Mr. Abdel Gowaz.

Some of the published memos are from the height of the protest movement that toppled Mr. Mubarak, and paint a picture of growing alarm within the state security agency. One memo, published by Egyptian newspapers, blamed the protests on a conspiracy between Western governments and Zionist agents.

Another document mentions that the protesters were calling for the dissolution of state security. The suggested solution: Egyptian state media should announce that the agency was being disbanded. In reality, the agency would continue to operate but under a different name.

"The current climate means we have to make changes," the memo says.

 Write to  David Luhnow at david.luhnow@wsj.com 