After suffering a bad gash to his lip in a basketball game in November, President Barack Obama hurried to the medical office on the ground floor of the White House. Doctors applied a local anesthetic to the cut and closed it with a dozen stitches of a thin filament that is supposed to minimize scarring. The press office explained it all, even producing a statement from Rey Decerega, the poor hoopster who had delivered the inadvertent elbow jab.

As presidential injuries go, this one was minor. For White House correspondents, however, Mr. Obama's accident enlivened a Thanksgiving weekend, and they covered it with gusto. One angle they didn't bother to raise was the possibility of a conspiracy to conceal the facts. When a president so much as swallows a pretzel the wrong way, as George W. Bush did in 2002, a full public disclosure usually isn't far behind.

Yet this wasn't always the practice. Franklin Delano Roosevelt hid a severe physical handicap from the public. Woodrow Wilson tried to disguise a stroke that arguably rendered him unfit to finish the 18 months remaining in his term. Roosevelt and Wilson more or less got away with it, too. So did Grover Cleveland, as Matthew Algeo shows in "The President Is a Sick Man," a colorful account of "a brazen and elaborate cover-up on behalf of a president whose reputation for honesty was unquestioned."

Shortly after the 1893 inauguration that made Cleveland the only U.S. president to serve a second nonconsecutive term, he detected a rough spot on the roof of his mouth. It was on the left side—the cigar-chomping one. Within a few weeks, the spot had grown into something Cleveland couldn't ignore. The family doctor, Joseph Decatur Bryant, urged immediate removal.

 By Matthew Algeo   Chicago Review Press, 255 pages, $24.95

Memories of Ulysses S. Grant were still fresh in people's minds. Just eight years earlier, Grant had died from a cancer that had spread from his throat to his mouth. As the end neared for the former general and president, reporters began what Mr. Algeo calls "a morbid deathwatch." Cleveland didn't want his own surgery to create a similar spectacle.

He also loathed the media. Ten days after Cleveland received the Democratic nomination for president in 1884, the Buffalo Telegraph revealed that the candidate—a 47-year-old bachelor at the time—had fathered a child out of wedlock a decade earlier. This led to a taunting Republican campaign ditty: "Ma! Ma! Where's my pa?" As reporters dug deeper into the candidate's background, Cleveland admitted the affair and issued a simple command to his old friends: "Tell the truth." His forthrightness helped him win a close election. Yet Cleveland nursed a grudge. He berated reporters as "keyhole correspondents" and "ghouls." Cleveland felt no qualms about lying to the press about his secret surgery.

On June 30, 1893, the president left Washington ostensibly for a rest at his summer home in Massachusetts. When he reached New York, Cleveland boarded a friend's yacht—reporters were told that he was sailing the rest of the way. Dr. Bryant and five other doctors joined him. The next day, on Long Island Sound, they gave the president laughing gas and began the operation. Ferdinand Hasbrouck yanked out a couple of teeth with dental pliers. Dr. Bryant pulled back Cleveland's cheek. With a scalpel, he removed a chunk of the upper-left jawbone, a piece of the palate and three more teeth. The procedure took about 90 minutes. Cleveland sailed on to Massachusetts.

The surgery was kept so quiet that even Vice President Adlai Stevenson (the grandfather of the future presidential contender) didn't know about it. But a few reporters grew suspicious because Cleveland was at sea longer than expected. Then he was kept out of sight. Ultimately, however, they bought the administration line. "Cleveland was given the benefit of the doubt—a benefit that modern presidents rarely enjoy," writes Mr. Algeo.

Yet there was a leak. Dr. Hasbrouck blabbed to a colleague. Almost two months later, the tale found its way to E.J. Edwards, who printed a full and accurate account in the Philadelphia Press. It was a sympathetic treatment—hardly a piece of scandal-mongering journalism, even though Edwards was a Republican. Worried about the fallout, the president's allies responded by branding the reporter a fabulist. "The policy here has been to deny and discredit his story," wrote Cleveland to a friend. In public, he never owned up to more than a toothache.

The controversy soon waned. Cleveland served out his second term and lived, cancer free, until 1908. Edwards went on to write for The Wall Street Journal. The writer's vindication came in 1917, when William Keen, one of Cleveland's surgeons, published a tell-all magazine article.

Mr. Algeo occasionally pads his narrative with needless tangents and makes more of his story than he should. Edwards did not have "the scoop of the century." (What about James Callender, who wrote of Thomas Jefferson's relationship with the slave Sally Hemings?) A claim that the lingering effects of Cleveland's surgery influenced the president's judgment during a railroad strike in 1894 is sheer conjecture. Yet "The President Is a Sick Man" is a lively, cautionary tale—and one with a lesson for leaders that recalls Cleveland's own words of wisdom: Tell the truth.

 Mr. Miller is the author of "The Big Scrum: How Teddy Roosevelt Saved Football," just published by Harper. 