MOSCOW—Russia's former ambassador to Libya said Col. Moammar Gadhafi is surrounded by aides willing to fight with him to the end but can't hold off Western-led forces for more than a few months because of dwindling supplies of food and fuel.

  Vladimir Chamov, whose dismissal last week reflects a split over Moscow's response to the conflict, told a Moscow newspaper that Russia had hurt its economic interests in Libya by backing international sanctions and allowing military intervention there. 

The former envoy's assessment of Col. Gadhafi's position is significant because of his frequent meetings with the Libyan leader in recent weeks. He spoke to Russian news media Wednesday upon his return to Moscow.

"Gadhafi can run long enough to escape the Americans. He's a man of experience. He knows his country. He still has support among the people," Mr. Chamov said in remarks aired by Ekho Moskvy radio Wednesday. "He has said many times, 'I will fight to the end.' I think he's absolutely truthful, and his entourage is in the same mood."

But the former envoy said Libya has food for no more than four months and, because of an air and sea blockade, "there are practically no new supplies. They also cannot get oil products. This will escalate. Perhaps there will be famine." For Col. Gadhafi, he added, "all this will come to nothing."

Russia backed United Nations sanctions against Libya earlier this month and chose not to exercise its veto last week in a U.N. Security Council vote that authorized a no-fly zone, which allowed for a Western-led military intervention. Mr. Chamov denied Internet media reports that he had provoked his dismissal, on the eve of that vote, by calling President Dmitry Medvedev a traitor.

But the newspaper Moskovsky Komsomolets quoted Mr. Chamov on Thursday as saying he had told the president in a recent telegram that it wasn't in Russia's interest to sacrifice its economic stakes in Libya, which include weapons deals, oil and gas exploration ventures, and a railway construction project.

"Russian companies concluded contracts for several years ahead worth tens of billions of euros, which we could lose and we have lost," he was quoted as saying. "This in a certain sense can be considered a betrayal of Russia's interests."

Speaking on Ekho Moskvy, Mr. Chamov denied using the word "betrayal," adding: "Western companies were doing very well in Libya, as well as Russian companies...and then the war started and everything ended."

The former envoy's comments come in the wake of tensions over Libya between Mr. Medvedev and his mentor, Prime Minister Vladimir Putin. Mr. Medvedev appeared to scold Mr. Putin on Tuesday for publicly criticizing the military action in Libya. The two leaders have since moved to play down their differences.

Mr. Chamov, a veteran diplomat who has also worked in Iraq, said the hostilities could turn Libya into a hotbed of instability resembling Iraq or Somalia.

 Write to  Richard Boudreaux at richard.boudreaux@wsj.com 