SEOUL—South Korea's factory output increased at a slower pace than expected in March due mainly to tepid production of semiconductors and chip components, preliminary government data showed on Friday. 

Treasury bond futures shot up 16 ticks after the data release, with market participants seeing signs in the figures of a weaker-than-expected economy, pointing to diminished probability of an imminent policy interest rate hike by the Bank of Korea. 

Some economists say rising oil prices and local inflation, along with households' increased interest burdens, are eating into domestic consumption power, but that the Bank of Korea is still likely raise its policy rate by 0.25% to 3.25% in May. 

In March, industrial production rose a seasonally adjusted 1.4% from a month earlier, as automobile output grew 2.5%, but that of semiconductors and chip components slid 1.8%, data released by Statistics Korea showed. The headline result was short of the median 3.2% on-month gain forecast by 10 economists polled by Dow Jones Newswires, but was a reverse of February's revised 2.5% decline. 

Output grew 8.7% compared with the same month a year earlier, as the production of two key contributors to exports, namely semiconductors and vehicles, increased 13.4% and 11.6%, respectively. Economists had forecast a median 11.2% overall expansion, following a 9.2% on-year rise in February. 

The 12-month average leading index - a key indicator for predicting the local economy's performance in the coming months - rose 1.6% in March from a year earlier, compared with a revised 2.4% on-year increase in the preceding month. 

"Exports are still doing very well, but the wealth they generate has yet to be distributed to households. Domestic consumption is not as strong as expected," HI Investment & Securities economist Park Sang-hyun said. 

He noted that the Korean economy is especially sensitive to oil prices, which have been above $100 a barrel for the past three months. "In those three months, Korea may have run out of its oil inventories (built up when prices were lower) and started shipping in oil at more expensive prices." 

The weaker-than-expected production data, however, is unlikely to change the broader picture of the BOK's rate decision, economists say.

Tong Yang Securities economist Lee Chul-hee said exports are likely to continue supporting the overall economy, and that inflation is still above the BOK's target band for the year of 2% to 4%. "The BOK may hike in May and wait for a few months to assess how the economy performs during the summer," which is traditionally a slow season for the economy, as production slackens while employees take their summer vacations. 

Asia's fourth-largest economy will release trade data for April at 9am on Sunday and its consumer price index for April at 8am on Monday.

 Write to  Kanga Kong at kanga.kong@dowjones.com 