PARIS—French President Nicolas Sarkozy is likely to make a provocative suggestion when he visits U.S. President Barack Obama Monday: Give the dollar a less-prominent role in the world economy.

France has the rotating presidency of the Group of 20 industrialized and emerging nations this year, and Mr. Sarkozy wants to use the platform to urge a rethinking of the international monetary system, with the aim of reducing the consequences of excessive currency volatility on global growth.

Key to Mr. Sarkozy's goal is re-examining the role of the U.S. dollar and the Chinese yuan. Last year, Mr. Sarkozy secured a commitment from China's President Hu Jintao that Beijing would participate in discussions over currency issues. To get the initially reticent Chinese leader to the table, Mr. Sarkozy sidestepped the touchy issue of the yuan's valuation.

On Monday, Mr. Sarkozy hopes to snag a similar commitment from Mr. Obama that he will participate in multilateral currency talks. The argument Mr. Sarkozy will make is that overdependence on the dollar as the de facto global reserve currency leaves nations exposed to policy decisions by the U.S. Federal Reserve over which they don't have control, said an official close to the French president.

"To talk about currencies, we need China and we need the U.S. around the table," another senior French official said.

Economists and analysts say Mr. Sarkozy may be able to make small changes in the international monetary system by highlighting the issue among G-20 states and by encouraging greater oversight over capital flows by the International Monetary Fund. But they say it is highly unlikely he will be able to budge the dollar from its global throne.

After World War II, when countries started moving away from the gold standard, the dollar gradually became the reserve currency because the U.S. emerged as the dominant world power and its economy was strong.

Since then, international trade has been in dollars, boosting the currency's use. The development of deep, liquid financial markets in the U.S. and Washington's strong appetite for cheap debt have helped to cement the currency in its pre-eminent role.

Mr. Sarkozy believes that fostering a more "multipolar" currency system will also help address the increasing thirst of fast-growing emerging nations for reserve assets, which the dollar alone can't quench.

"We need to assess the relevance of a system that is based on the accumulation of currency reserves in U.S. dollars," Mr. Sarkozy said at a conference in Paris last month. The French leader said he wouldn't challenge the dollar's role, "which will no matter what remain prominent." But, he added, "prominent doesn't mean exclusive."

A group of more than a dozen leading international economists led by a former French IMF chief is working on recommendations to turn the president's thinking into an actual strategy.

The U.S. view is that it is merelysupplying what the world demands; Washington sees little space for other currencies to gain significant traction. Countries could choose another currency to stock their reserves, but only at a cost. And there may not be enough supply of other currencies to meet some countries' needs.

Bluntly advocating a diminished role for the dollar would be a no-go for the U.S. administration, said  Agnés Benassy-Quere, director of the Paris-based think tank CEPII. That is why Mr. Sarkozy "has to outline the potential benefits for the U.S. of a world in which economic and monetary powers are better aligned."

"Better alignment could help unwind imbalances at the same pace in surplus countries and in deficit countries," she added.

Former senior U.S. Treasury and Fed official Ted Truman said the tension for France is between "doing something that is constructive, for which there might be some possibility, and a grand scheme."

A senior fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics in Washington, Mr. Truman said the latter has little hope of success, but there could be some small adjustments to the international monetary system such as a greater role for the IMF in overseeing capital flows. Just days ahead of Mr. Sarkozy's visit, the IMF has proposed taking on such a role.

In G-20 meetings over the past year, leaders have been trying to use the issue of global imbalances and how to curb them as a proxy to address currency misalignments.

The U.S. is adamant that countries with current-account surpluses, such as China and Germany, should work on reducing imbalances just as Washington needs to address its deficit. While China has repeatedly argued that it is curtailing its current-account surplus by allowing the yuan's effective exchange rate to rise through higher prices and salaries, the U.S. counters that the fastest way to reduce imbalances is to let the yuan appreciate.

The Fed's recent decision to buy $600 billion of U.S. bonds to boost the U.S. economy triggered ire in many emerging countries as it accelerated flows of "hot money" into their economies. Those angry reactions to the move could help Mr. Sarkozy advance the cause of a more multipolar currency system when he meets Mr. Obama.

The Fed's decision pushed down the dollar as well as yields on U.S. Treasuries, prompting flows of capital in search of higher yields into emerging countries, inflating the value of their currencies. Countries such as Brazil, South Korea and Thailand have since slapped levies on capital crossing their borders.

Ms. Benassy-Quere said the resentment of emerging economies at the Fed's move was so strong that it overshadowed China's repeated refusal to revalue the yuan. That may help France push another item on its G-20 agenda: how to set up a coordinated framework to better regulate capital flows and prevent them from disrupting the monetary policy of individual countries.

Mr. Sarkozy has repeatedly dismissed the long-held idea that total deregulation of capital flows is conducive to growth. Much as the idea may smack of French interventionism to some, it may provide the basis for a minimum consensus among G-20 members and even win the backing of the U.S. as a measure of last resort, several people close to G-20 leaders say.

However, deciding who gets to be the "referee" on capital controls could prove contentious.

—David Gauthier-Villars contributed to this article.