The head of Highbridge Capital Management's Asia investments is leaving the multibillion-dollar hedge-fund firm owned by  J.P. Morgan Chase
JPM


-0.12
%




 & Co., say people familiar with the matter. 

  Carl Huttenlocher, a senior manager who joined Highbridge in 2002 and serves on its investment committee, has told colleagues that he plans to start his own hedge fund, the people say. He oversees about $2 billion in assets, including the Highbridge Asia Opportunities Fund, which is run out of Hong Kong, as well as roughly 8% of Highbridge's main multistrategy hedge fund based in New York, the people say. That fund has around $7 billion in assets. 

Highbridge started winding down the Asia equities portfolio overseen by Mr. Huttenlocher late last week after he told executives in New York of his decision to leave, say people familiar with the matter. The wind-down of the Asia Opportunities Fund represents the closure of one of Asia's largest hedge funds. 

Mr. Huttenlocher referred questions to a Highbridge spokeswoman, who declined to comment. His departure was earlier reported by the website Dealbreaker. 

Highbridge founder and Chief Executive  Glenn Dubin is in Hong Kong this week to meet with employees as the selloff of assets continued, the people say.  Todd Builione, Highbridge's chief operating officer, has also been in Hong Kong and plans to remain there until the end of this week, said one person familiar with the matter. 

Highbridge sold about $1.4 billion in holdings in recent days, as it sought to get the best price for those assets before telling investors of Mr. Huttenlocher's departure, say people familiar with the matter. Executives were planning Tuesday to send clients a letter with the news. 

Mr. Huttenlocher's exit has surprised people both inside and outside of Highbridge, in part because he and his team raised several hundred million dollars from Highbridge clients since 2009, boosting expectations that the Asia team would stay in place. 

Now, the Hong Kong office, which has about two dozen employees including five senior analysts, will oversee a smaller chunk of Highbridge assets—around $300 million—in the near term. Two veteran Highbridge managers in New York,  Alec McAree and  Mark Vanacore, will take on additional responsibilities overseeing the Hong Kong office's equities and convertible investments, said a person familiar with the matter. 

Highbridge is telling clients that the Hong Kong team is expected to stay in place to continue overseeing Asia investments in the multistrategy fund, as well as possibly to gain additional assets managed by Highbridge, the person said. 

Mr. Huttenlocher is prohibited from hiring from his old Highbridge team, the person said. Previously, he oversaw Asia investments in convertibles and derivatives for Long-Term Capital Management, the hedge fund that famously lost billions of dollars in 1998, spurring a $3.5 billion Wall Street bailout. Prior to that, he traded European convertible bonds for Chicago-based hedge fund Citadel. 



 Write to  Jenny Strasburg at jenny.strasburg@wsj.com 