 Editor's note: Thinking about living—or just traveling—abroad? This is part of a series of travel stories in which we ask Americans living overseas, full time or part time, to profile their adopted locales and guide would-be visitors through the best the areas have to offer. Send us your suggestions at next@wsj.com. 

A language class brought me to the city of Dijon, about 160 miles southeast of Paris.

Read the complete  Next: Planning & Living the New Retirement report .

In 2004, at the age of 54, I retired from my job as a business-systems analyst. The work had been all-consuming, with continuing education a constant necessity, and I had little opportunity for travel. I often felt there must be something more to life.

I settled on a 10-acre piece of land (with a pond and barn) in southern Illinois, near Carbondale in the Shawnee National Forest. Looking for a way to keep my mind and spirit active, I enrolled in a French class. There, a professor urged me to study French in France, as part of a program offered by a group of Illinois schools.

In August 2006, I found myself in a one-month class at the University of Burgundy in Dijon.

Today, I spend just over half the year in Dijon (usually spring through fall) and the balance in the U.S. My decision to live overseas was a gradual one. After the initial one-month program, I returned for a semester—and then another. Eventually, I realized that Dijon—for its culture and entertainment, opportunities for exercise, reasonable cost of living and excellent transport—is a wonderful place to live.

In two important ways, a move for a retired person to France can be simple. To start, a visa isn't necessary for extended visits; an American can stay in the country without a visa for three months. But I soon found three months too constricting. So, I obtained a residency visa—with no rights to work. That's perfect for retirees. Now I can stay as long as I wish.

Second, there aren't any prohibitions to renting or purchasing property. In fact, French villages, with their historical charm and architecture, present great opportunities for real estate—especially if you find one with a direct link to Paris or other large metropolitan area.

For my part, I now rent a small flat (about 410 square feet) in a 17th-century building for about €650 (roughly $950) a month. That includes utilities, taxes, television, high-speed Internet, and world phone service (no variable call charges).

I have no daily routine in Dijon—nor do I desire one. One of the benefits of retirement is being free to choose from any number of wonderful ways to spend the day or evening. When I walk out the door, there are people walking, biking, talking, laughing—and it is not unusual to hear music or singing. Green spaces are plentiful, park benches inviting. Fountains and flowers and little street-side cafes and specialty shops are everywhere. Most days, I try to jog on the city's running paths, or take a walk around Lake Kir.

At least once a week I visit the enormous fresh market in the center of town—and oh, such beautiful food!

If you plan to visit Dijon and Burgundy, take time for:

 Centre Ville. Dijon's old town. Stroll the pedestrian streets and see churches and homes dating to the 16th century.

 Les Halles de Dijon. The city's historic market. Almost every food imaginable. Open four mornings each week.   burgundytoday.com/towns/dijon.htm  

 Jardin Darcy. Among Dijon's most popular gardens. Grab a baguette sandwich and have lunch with the locals.   visitdijon.com/en/dijon-nature-jardin_darcy.htm  

 Palace of the Dukes of Burgundy. Houses the renowned Museum of Fine Arts. Climb the tower for a panoramic view.   visitdijon.com/en/dijon-culture-musee_des_beaux_arts.htm  

 International Gastronomy Fair. One of the most celebrated food fairs in France. Takes place in early November.   burgundytoday.com/grapevine/dijon-gastronomy-fair.htm  

 Beaune. A 20-minute train ride from Dijon, this colorful town is Burgundy's wine capital.   burgundytoday.com/towns/beaune.htm  

 Route des Grands Crus. The "Road of the Great Wines" winds through some of the finest vineyards in Burgundy.   us.franceguide.com  (search on "Route des Grands Crus")

And...for a comprehensive look at Dijon and Burgundy goings-on, go to  visitdijon.com/en/  and  burgundyeye.com . (Parts of each site are in French.)

You can buy some things that might surprise an American, like snails (escargot), frogs, horse, rabbit and various imported items from North Africa. Among the expected items, the fresh seafood usually sells out. There is fresh milk, both pasteurized and unpasteurized (Louis Pasteur was born just down the road in Dole), hundreds of cheeses and yogurt from happy cows, chickens from nearby Bresse, fresh herbs, honey, local meats, vegetables and fruits. Gustave Eiffel, builder of the Eiffel Tower and designer of the Statue of Liberty's metal framework, was born in Dijon and designed its market. 

A number of cultural centers offer group activities for just about any pursuit. I am in one group for hiking on Sundays, another for language study on Tuesdays. Lately I have been taking a cooking class in a professional kitchen. We eat what we cook, and the chef chooses the wine. Evenings I walk to the opera, or see a film, or listen to live music.

Dijon is centrally located for European travel. I am usually in the process of planning my next trip, or unpacking from my latest one. Paris is one hour and 40 minutes away by train, and much of Western Europe is within hours, affording easy visits to Venice, Rome, Amsterdam, Monte Carlo, London, Brussels, Barcelona, Geneva and so forth.

The biggest surprise was how easy it is to live without an automobile. Public transportation is clean, efficient, reliable and affordable. Life without a car is less stressful and better for your health (again, I walk most places), and it places you in the thick of a community.

Making new friends has been the best part of my time in France. I haven't been friends with anyone in Europe for as long as I have with friends from high school or college. Yet several solid, trustworthy and interesting friendships have evolved, providing rewarding insights to French and European culture.

When I first arrived in Dijon, I was invited to a dinner party of French speakers and couldn't understand a word, a dreadful experience. My French has since improved to the point where I can engage in conversations, tell a few jokes, and discuss politics and current events, too.

Finding an apartment, of course, also made a big difference in getting comfortable. I settled in and started developing relationships. Today, I have made Dijon my second home.

One challenge: At times, a euro has cost as much $1.60. If that figure ever hits $2, I may need to make some lifestyle adjustments. I find myself thinking of ways to support myself so that I can live abroad regardless of the exchange rate.

Ill health also could limit my ability to manage two homes, although I haven't had any problems to date. I currently use a health-insurance policy I have in the U.S., which costs around $1,000 per month. A French policy, which would cost me about €800 ($1,185) a year, is somewhat more comprehensive. It would cover 100% of hospital and prescription costs and 70% of doctor's visits, which are around €40.

My advice for someone considering a move to another country? Learn the language and speak softly, move slowly and keep a sense of humor.