Of all the things  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
GS


0.97
%




 can crow about in the unusual deal to help wealthy clients invest in Facebook Inc., it wasn't the first securities firm to open a back door into the closely held social-networking site.

In September, small Atlanta brokerage firm J.P. Turner & Co. started pitching a $25 million fund that was set up to buy and hold Facebook shares until the Palo Alto, Calif., company goes public or is acquired.

Felix Investments LLC in late 2009 launched two funds to snap up Facebook shares. The names of the deals: Facie Libre I and Facie Libre II, a rough Latin morphing of "face" and "book."

The deals and their creators are now in the spotlight as regulators scrutinize how Wall Street is scurrying to satisfy demand for shares in closely held Internet companies such as Facebook, Twitter Inc. and LinkedIn Corp. The Securities and Exchange Commission wants to know if the offerings and a patchwork of secondary exchanges are helping companies evade the agency's 500-shareholder limit for private firms. SEC officials also are worried about the valuation of shares that change hands in such deals.

"There is a level of murkiness," said  Jay Ritter, a finance professor at the University of Florida and an authority on initial public offerings.

The overall market for closely held shares has swelled to about $2.5 billion in trades a year from $250 million a few years ago, estimates  Hans Swildens, founder and principal of Industry Ventures LLC, a venture-capital firm that invests in such companies.

While the market is dominated by funds that appeal to institutional investors, more than 10 funds for wealthy individuals have popped up in the past year or two, according to analysts.

J.P. Turner won't say if it has been contacted by the SEC, how the firm got the idea to sell "membership units" in Facebook to clients, or how much of its $25 million private offering has been completed.

"J.P. Turner takes compliance very seriously," said  Heidi Wheatley, a J.P. Turner spokeswoman. Felix Investments has said it welcomes the SEC's probe.

The closely held Atlanta firm, with about 100 employees at its headquarters in the city's Buckhead district and 185 branch offices in the U.S., is a pipsqueak compared with Goldman, which agreed to raise as much as $1.5 billion from clients who want a piece of Facebook.

Shortly after J.P. Turner started in 1997, the company landed a deal to raise money for a small go-kart maker. The brokerage firm had revenue of about $60 million in 2009, according to the company.

In 2006, New Jersey securities regulators banned some of the company's brokers from the state for two years, claiming they "engaged in high pressure sales tactics."

Last June, the SEC fined the firm $65,000 after regulators discovered that account records of more than 5,000 brokerage customers were left abandoned "for several weeks at curbside outside of the former home" of a J.P. Turner broker, according to regulatory records.

Ms. Wheatley, the J.P. Turner spokeswoman, said the incidents "were largely procedural and clients were not harmed. When necessary, corrective actions were taken to strengthen our firm."

While the Facebook deal helps put J.P. Turner on the map as more investors clamor for shares of hot private companies, it also is a potential fee bonanza. The firm collects fees of 12% of the fund's assets, according to a copy of a private offering memorandum reviewed by VentureWire, a newsletter owned by Dow Jones & Co., which publishes The Wall Street Journal.

In comparison, Goldman will collect from new Facebook investors upfront fees of 4%, plus 5% of any gains, according to people familiar with the matter. Goldman also is likely to get a private-placement fee for arranging the deal. Such fees typically range from roughly 2% to more than 4%.

Goldman's deal unleashed a surge of investor interest in other private offerings for Facebook shares, according to people familiar with the matter. But the Goldman deal could shrink the inventory of shares that J.P. Turner and other small firms usually tap to sell the stock to clients through their private offerings.

Felix, of New York, lost access several months ago to an important pipeline of Facebook shares. SecondMarket Inc., which helps match buyers and sellers of pre-IPO companies, has stopped Felix from buying Facebook shares on its website, citing problems with payments for the stock, according to people familiar with the situation.

The snarls left some sellers scrambling to find another buyer before their stock options expired, these people said. 

EB Exchange Funds LLC, a San Francisco firm that helps entrepreneurs sell illiquid holdings, has formed funds for Facebook and is working to start funds for other private tech companies.

Last summer, a Facebook-focused fund amassed $15 million in assets, said  Larry Albukerk, EB founder and managing director.

—Scott Austin and Pui-Wing Tam contributed to this article.

 Write to  Aaron Lucchetti at aaron.lucchetti@wsj.com and Tomio Geron at tomio.geron@dowjones.com 