Philosopher Bernard-Henri Lévy and novelist Michel Houellebecq both earn their keep by assaulting the pieties of the French intellectual class. Mr. Lévy provokes with his unabashed Zionism and his criticism of anti-Americanism. Mr. Houellebecq is more of an all-round disturber of the peace, with his sexual frankness in novels such as "Platform" and "The Elementary Particles," his caustic comments on Islam and his embrace of French President Nicolas Sarkozy. The prospect of these writers engaging in an exchange of letters on weighty topics, to be gathered in a book, no doubt suggested to their publisher an intellectual brawl that would entertain more than mere intellectual elites.

The resulting book is called "Public Enemies," implying that Messrs. Houellebecq and Lévy are not merely thinkers and writers; they are threats to the complacent order of the republic of letters. The title is more than an amusing allusion to the most-wanted posters of yore—the idea of a productive enmity is at the heart of this book. Its success as a project depends on Messrs. Houellebecq and Lévy joining battle with their deepest intellectual commitments at stake.

"We have, as they say, nothing in common," Mr. Houellebecq writes in his opening letter, "except for one essential trait: we are both rather contemptible individuals." (This will not be the last of the bad-boy self-infatuation on display.) He goes on to wonder what precisely they might have to discuss. Mr. Lévy proposes investigating a brilliantly ambiguous question: "Why is there so much hatred?" And with that, we are off to the races. The political barbarism of the 20th century, modern sexual mores, the hypocrisies of the left and right, Islamic terror, Catholic reaction, Jewish philosophy, fatherhood and filial duty, the fate of the novel, Pascal, Baudelaire, Proust, Sartre, Camus—Messrs. Houellebecq and Lévy treat of all these in their attempt to unearth an answer.

It is a dizzying array of subjects and, happily, both men address them with erudition and command. The thematic threads that bind these disparate topics, more than the idea of hatred itself, are questions of politics considered broadly. Mr. Lévy's political outlook is complex but familiar—he is a European leftist, although at times an unpredictable one, as in his support of Israel. Mr. Houellebecq's politics are harder to pin down, perhaps because of his caginess and detachment and perhaps because he is indeed the nihilist he is often accused of being.

 By Bernard-Henri Lévy and Michel Houellebecq  Random House, 309 pages, $17

A discussion of European malaise, for example, leads to an exchange on contemporary Russia. Mr. Houellebecq writes that "coming back to Western Europe" for him after a trip to Moscow was like "coming back to the dead"—for him, Russian life, despite its vicissitudes, is real, vivid, authentic. Mr. Lévy quite properly recoils, citing the racist and repressive policies of the Putin government, its assassinations and punitive wars, and making cutting reference to the "Russia that has the nerve to explain to the world that it has nothing to do with human rights and democracy since [Russia] has its own democracy."

The conflict of viewpoints arises again and again, with Mr. Lévy arguing for, broadly speaking, a passionate and responsible other-directed political commitment on the part of intellectuals and humanity generally and Mr. Houellebecq turning a far more skeptical eye on the feasibility and value of such self-imposed obligations. But the clashes are gentle ones. Barbs are thrown, then retracted; nothing irretrievably wounding is said.

The correspondents don't get close to arriving at an answer to the original question about human hatred, in part because they stray from the philosophical side of their inquiry and take up its more earthly aspect: Why, they wonder, is there so much hatred of Bernard-Henri Lévy and Michel Houellebecq? Mutually flattering and self-dramatizing as it may seem, the question is not in itself a bad one. If the goal of these men is to explode entrenched ideas, why shouldn't they be hated? (Mr. Houellebecq, it should be noted, would appear to beat Mr. Lévy by a wide margin in this department.) Wouldn't public antipathy be a sign that the writers are doing their jobs? So one would imagine—and consequently hope that the two would display a certain stoicism in response to the social slanders, bad reviews and other petty sniping practiced by the cultural elite of any nation.

Alas, our correspondents do not display any such forbearance. Mr. Houellebecq describes those who accuse him of racism as "no better than those who officiated during the Nazi dictatorship"; Mr. Lévy professes indifference to insults but discusses them obsessively. It's hard to blame either man for this—they are, after all, only human, and they work in a chronically thin-skinned trade. It is easier to blame them for failing to fully address their main subject. Admittedly, its impersonal, historical component—namely, why has the victory of rationalism brought forth political cruelties more baroque than an un-Enlightened world could have imagined?—is one of the central mysteries of contemporary existence. And two thinkers, no matter how clever, are unlikely to resolve it with 28 letters exchanged over seven months. 

Messrs. Houellebecq and Lévy, to their credit, do seem aware of this improbability. Toward the book's close, Mr. Houellebecq remarks that he has "lifted a corner of the rug" and advises Mr. Lévy to "go for it." There are many such corners to be lifted, Mr. Houellebecq says—in fact, he adds, "it's a circular rug," suggesting an infinitude of interrelated questions.

The circular rug captures in one image the problem of "Public Enemies": too many subjects taken up at too breakneck a pace, and a lack of genuine contention, of the near-rancor that high-stakes philosophical argument can inspire. Michel de Montaigne, in his essay on the subject of friendship, famously quoted Aristotle's apothegm: "O my friend, there is no friend." It seems that in the case of Messrs. Houellebecq and Lévy there is no enemy either.

 Mr. Munson is the author of the novel "The November Criminals." 