There is a mood of cautious optimism among travelers and tour companies this year, as the market shows signs of improvement following a difficult few years. 

Value, even within the luxury market, will remain at the forefront of people's decisions when it comes to choosing their holiday—not just in a monetary sense, but in a physical and educational sense as well. 

"People are not flaunting their wealth; it is all about having out-of-the-world experiences," says Simon Mayle of International Luxury Travel Market, an annual trade event in Europe and Asia. Deprivation vacations and luxury boot camps look set to rise in popularity, as does cultural tourism, with a particular focus on art and literature. 

Michelle Grant of Euromonitor International, the market-research group whose key trends for 2011 include stargazing in Africa and off-the-beaten-track Latin America, adds that people are now looking to meet personal goals and accomplishments while on holiday. "It is the search for a unique experience where you reap benefits as well, such as climbing Kilimanjaro," says Ms. Grant. "People this year are looking to take their bucket-list holidays." 

There is also a yearning for old-fashioned exploration. "We have seen the need for retro holidays that involve slowly retracing the steps of the great explorers," says Tom Marchant of luxury travel specialists Black Tomato. "It is a backlash against the culture of immediacy." 

Ethical concerns are also influencing travel decisions, as people seek out new and inventive forms of eco-tourism that combine a modern sense of luxury with a green ideology. 

Technological advances are hot on the agenda for travel companies, as consumers increasingly look toward apps and social media for their travel needs. Meanwhile, many hotels are coming up with new ways of enticing guests in an increasingly competitive market, from sensory experiences to innovative forms of retail. 

As people pursue more experiential holidays, stargazing safaris in Africa, where some of the clearest skies in the world are to be found, are on the rise. At the Sossusvlei Desert Lodge in the heart of Namibia's Namib Desert, an observatory comes complete with a Meade LX200 computerized GPS telescope so guests can learn about the night skies. Surrounded by wilderness and with over 330 days of sunshine a year, the skies are perfect for stargazing. "It is so dark and quiet," says resident astrologer Kate Lee. "You hear the call of wild animals like jackals and some will come right up to the observatory, look in shock and run away. There are more stars than most people think existed." Guests can expect to see with twinkling clarity the Milky Way, as well as the Magellanic Clouds and Southern Cross constellation. "People get really excited and like to sleep with the skylight open at night and watch the shooting stars," says Ms. Lee. At the boutique Sanctuary Baines' Camp in Botswana's Okavango Delta, guests are given an educational "cosmic safari" of the skies around the boma (bonfire) by the camp manager. After the lesson, they can take a star bath: A vast zinc bubble bath under the open sky, where they can revise what they learned. 

Consumers are also set to broaden their horizons with vacations focused on culture, in particular on art. A collaboration between luxury travel company Cox & Kings and London's Royal Academy offers trips ranging from the pictures and palaces of St. Petersburg, led by RA lecturer Colin Bailey, to Peruvian treasures, led by David Drew. The tours will give clients access to hidden art collections and talks by curators. Art in Japan, meanwhile, is the focus of new venture Artclusive Japan, which tailor-makes trips, including tours of the Tokyo art scene, visits to artists' studios and advice on how to buy art. Black Tomato will be offering literary trips that focus on how a region has inspired literature, drawing on the experiences of top authors. "A lot of people are increasingly tying day-to-day passions with travel," says Mr. Marchant. 

Latin America has been identified as a top destination this year across the industry, with Euromonitor predicting at November's World Trade Market that adventure holidays would be particularly popular. 

"Flight searches for Chile have doubled over the last 12 months, while year-on-year searches to Argentina have increased by a massive 162%," says Gareth Williams, chief executive of flight-comparison website Skyscanner. "We would expect the popularity of these destinations to continue well into 2011." 

Travelers are looking for out-of-the-way destinations, with Brazil's Pantanal, northern Colombia, Pueblos Mágicos in Mexico, the salt flats of Bolivia's Salar de Uyuni and the Atacama Desert all high on the intrepid traveler's agenda. A crop of new hidden luxury resorts includes Relais & Châteaux's Ponta dos Ganchos near Florianópolis, Brazil.

Eco-tourism is a sector that continues to grow, as consumers become increasingly conscious about the environmental impact of travel. Large companies are investing in green initiatives and the industry is developing new ways for travelers to vacation in style while remaining ecologically aware. Six Senses, the original "barefoot luxury" company, which started 16 years ago in the Maldives and now has 14 resorts, is aiming to become carbon neutral by 2020. Some of its latest initiatives include an eco-villa in Thailand, powered entirely by solar energy and water. 

At the Baros resort in the Maldives, the destination's first eco-diving resort has just opened. Here, guests can enroll in a course to gain a certificate that qualifies them to help EcoDive teams monitor reefs across the globe. Other imaginative options include ecological river cruises in Peru offered by luxury group Aqua. Spas are also entering the green market. The U.K.'s first certified eco spa, Titanic Spa in Huddersfield, is housed in a carbon-neutral mill, the pool is chlorine-free and salt regulated, and there are photovoltaic solar panels for energy. In France, La Gree des Landes eco spa was designed using "bioclimatic" architecture, with roofs covered with plants, southwest-facing windows that utilize natural light and thermal solar panels to help heat water. It also plants one tree for every stay by a guest; dead trees are left as refuges for animals and insects. 

In a world increasingly dependent on smartphones, travel apps are becoming an essential tool for people on the go. According to a survey by research group Compete, 34% of travel apps are aimed at helping people find information about the local area, such as restaurants and entertainment as well as maps, while 29% help customers check reservations and 25% are used to reserve rooms. Some luxury hotel chains such as Mandarin Oriental and Four Seasons offer apps, although at the high-end, most customers are using the feature to discover the local area rather than book rooms, as face-to-face is still important in this sector, says Christoph Oberli, vice president of e-commerce at Mandarin Oriental. Applications from guidebooks like "Lonely Planet" are particularly popular, as are more unusual ones such as Tipping Tips, which tells travelers how much to tip in each country. Euromonitor predicts that 50% of Europeans will use smartphones to make travel reservations and/or find information by 2015. 

Social media such at Twitter and Facebook also continue to grow as a medium for marketing and booking holidays. Delta Air Lines Inc. launched the airline industry's first Facebook reservations page in August. Other big players in the market are Lufthansa AG and Tripadvisor, with strong Facebook presences. Resorts are also getting in on the act, with Vail Ski Resort in Colorado shifting more than 80% of its advertising spending from print media to online channels, including Twitter and Facebook. 

Extending last year's "transforcations" trend, more people are expected to seek more austere and extreme forms of self-improvement breaks this year. 

At the Ranch in Malibu, Calif., which was launched in September by ex-realtor Alex Glasscock, guests can count on a rigorous program of exercise and diet, with women expected to lose up to eight pounds and men 10 pounds during their weeklong stay. 

Guests, including Hollywood celebrities getting into shape for the red carpet and CEOs looking to let off steam, are encouraged to relinquish their computer and mobile phones, and only check in at home for emergencies. 

At $5,600 a week, the daily routine typically involves 10 hours of exercise, including a five-hour hike; a strict vegetarian diet of 1,200 calories a day; and inspirational talks in the evening to keep guests going. 

In the foothills of the Dolomites at Palace Spa Merano, guests pay from €4,170 a week to shave off the pounds through a specially designed health program that includes a punishing regime of exercise, a 36-hour detox and under 1,000 calories a day. (For the less extreme, there is a biolight option, at 1,200 calories a day.)

As hotel chains compete to shift rooms, many companies are coming up with inventive ways of branding. 

At the Shanti Maurice resort in Mauritius, owner MPS Puri worked with perfumer Tammy Frazer to create an aroma that recalled the early morning scents of the island's flora, something guests could associate with their holiday. "Scent is a hugely important part of the memories we form and we wanted to create something that associated the location to the hotel," says Mr. Puri. "There is something primordial about it." The perfume is sprayed around the hotel, in rooms and on towels, and guests are given a solid scent to take home with them. 

Le Méridien chain has also created a sensory experience in all of its hotels. Working with hip New York perfumer Le Labo, they have created a signature scent evocative of forest groves and old books. Adding to the earthy feel, the elevators play a soundtrack featuring the chirp of crickets in the morning and a crackling fire at night.

Hotel chains are also looking to increase their profile by offering new and unusual things for sale. W Hotels works with local style gurus and trendsetters, offering one-off pieces exclusively in the hotel shops. At the new W in London, opening in February, East End designer James Small has made a range of reversible belts, from £400. At the St. Petersburg W, opening in March, guests will be able to purchase oversized chain-link necklaces from Behnaz Sarafpour for $175. Morgans Hotel Group, which includes the Mondrian in Miami, Los Angeles and San Francisco, has giant vending machines in some of its hotels from which you can buy everyday essentials such as a Ferrari, a Paul Smith toothbrush or a retro Ouija board.

 Write to  Jemima Sissons at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 