  Equity Capital Management LLC., a private-equity firm focused on real estate that owns single-tenant office, retail and warehouse buildings, told the world last summer it planned to become a publicly traded company. 

This month, it changed course. Instead of selling common stock to raise $380 million as a real-estate investment trust, it sold more than 30 properties to raise $625 million. 

"I'm not so sure the timing is right" for an initial public stock offering, said  Shelby Pruett, the Chicago company's chief executive. He noted that the track record of many REIT IPOs priced last year was disappointing. "The majority of those traded below their IPO price." 

Equity Capital isn't the only real-estate company having second thoughts about going public. This month alone, two other companies delayed or abandoned plans to become publicly traded REITs. AG Financial Investment Trust Inc., based in New York, withdrew its $300 million IPO designed to make it a mortgage REIT; Verde Realty, an industrial landlord based in Houston, withdrew a $300 million IPO, citing market conditions.

"These private companies that said, 'Hey, I want to be a REIT,' and got the ball rolling 12 months ago, are now saying, 'Wait a minute'," said  Jim Sullivan, head of REIT research at Green Street Advisors, a research firm in Newport Beach, Calif. In the past 15 months, 17 real-estate firms have withdrawn or postponed $5.4 billion of IPOs, while 11 priced deals to raise a total of $2.8 billion, according to Dealogic Inc. 

The change in sentiment about going public reflects several trends. First, other avenues for raising capital are looking brighter. Closely held companies have better access to credit markets than a year ago and now are able to borrow at low interest rates to pay down or refinance debt. Rising property values and stronger demand for properties have made it easier, and more profitable, for building owners to sell.

At the same time, real-estate executives complain that going public has become more difficult. Investors are demanding that IPO candidates hold a sizable number of assets and not too much debt. And they require potential REITs to price their IPOs at a significant discount to net asset value, because the prospect for bigger returns are better. 

This year, only two REIT IPOs have priced, according to Dealogic. This includes a $648.3 million offering in January priced at $20.50 a share by  American Assets Trust, a San Diego owner of retail, office and apartment properties.

Lodging company  Summit Hotel Properties Inc. priced a $253.5 million offering in February at $9.75 a share. Both priced at discounts to the net asset values and are trading only slightly above the IPO prices. 

Closely held companies had been lining up to go public because their chances of raising debt and equity were better as a REIT. They also were under more pressure during the commercial real-estate crises to pay off loans that fell into distress. Now that capital markets have reopened for private players and the market's acquisition appetite has increased, going public isn't as much of an imperative. 

Equity Capital owns mostly investment-grade buildings that it acquired from companies under long-term sale-lease-back agreements. The company also owns a number of triple-net leased properties, where the tenant is responsible for all the maintenance, taxes and general operations of the property, with the landlord just collecting the rent. The company's major tenants include  Federal Express, Boeing Co. and  Deutsche Telekom.

Mr. Pruett declined to identify the buyers of the $625 million in properties, the deal terms or the exact number of properties sold. Mr. Pruett did say the majority of the assets went to a REIT and the rest to a joint venture formed by institutional investors. 

A person familiar with the deal said  Realty Income Corp., an Escondido, Calif., REIT, purchased $544 million of the assets totaling 33 properties. The assets were a mix of office, retail and distribution centers. Some were to be part of the planned IPO filed in August. 

Mr. Pruett says Equity Capital hasn't withdrawn the IPO filing but is uncertain when it might try to go public. "We still think the public market has a lot of merit," he said.