WASHINGTON—The chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., Sheila Bair, will step down effective July 8, the agency said Monday, concluding the five-year term of one of the most influential and controversial federal regulators. 

The departure of Ms. Bair, 57 years old, was long expected. A moderate Republican, Ms. Bair guided her agency through the financial crisis—at times attracting criticism and clashing with other regulators. 

The FDIC insures bank deposits up to $250,000, regulates banks and handles bank failures. It is also drafting numerous rules to implement the Dodd-Frank financial overhaul law enacted last year 

"It has been a privilege and honor to serve as the head of this great agency during one of the most tumultuous times in the history of our nation's financial system," Ms. Bair said in a resignation letter to President Barack Obama. A former official at the Treasury Department and Commodity Futures Trading Commission, she was appointed by former President George W. Bush in 2006. 

Ms. Bair has said she plans to write a book, serve on the boards of nonfinancial companies and spend time with her family. 

Her post is one of several top financial regulation jobs that are currently vacant or awaiting permanent nominees. Those include the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal Housing Finance Agency. 

Ms. Bair is widely expected to be succeeded by the FDIC's No. 2 official, Martin Gruenberg. That nomination would be subject to confirmation by the Senate. 

A board meeting during the first week of July will be Ms. Bair's last, the FDIC said. In recent months, Ms. Bair has been defending the Dodd-Frank financial overhaul—which gave her agency new powers to cope with teetering financial firms to a sometimes hostile audience. She was booed and hissed at a meeting of American Bankers Association members in March. 

In a speech last week, Ms. Bair said her agency and the Federal Reserve "must be willing to insist on organizational changes" to large financial institutions before a crisis occurs. While Ms. Bair didn't issue an outright call for the breakup specific of large financial firms, she said regulators should ensure that firms' activities are "rationalized and simplified." 

While she clashed at times with major financial firms, Ms. Bair has been a vocal advocate of smaller banks. At a conference held by community bankers in March, she received two standing ovations. 

Ms. Bair also was often praised by Democrats on Capitol Hill after her agency was quicker than other bank regulators to flag lax lending practices and designed programs to aid to distressed homeowners. 

 Write to  Alan Zibel at alan.zibel@dowjones.com 

