PARIS—The U.K.'s Financial Services Authority may ask the government for the power to block hostile takeovers in the banking sector to prevent aggressive acquisitions from disrupting financial stability, FSA Chairman  Adair Turner said Thursday. 

"Aggressive, contested" takeovers do not allow for as much due diligence as agreed takeovers, Lord Turner said. This may be a reasonable risk in the non-banking sector but not in the financial sector, he added. 

"Whereas you can see the primary responsibility of the board of directors of a non-banking company being to maximize shareholder value and to take risks, the fact is that for banks the downside to a society of getting it wrong is a hugely important factor," Lord Turner said. 

The FSA will publish a report in March or April on its investigation into  Royal Bank of Scotland Group PLC and the events that led to its near collapse, Lord Turner said. RBS, which reported the U.K.'s largest-ever net loss of £28 billion in 2008, executed an ill-timed hostile takeover of ABN Amro in late 2007. 

"Already we know that faced with a RBS proposing to buy an ABN Amro today we would probably take steps to stop it," Lord Turner said. "It is true to say that, philosophically, back in 2007 we didn't think it was our role as a regulator, but I think maybe we've changed," Lord Turner said. 

He said that when he writes the report on RBS he may recommend to the U.K. government it passes legislation allowing the FSA to refuse aggressive takeovers. 

The FSA can already effectively prevent takeovers by demanding high levels of capital, Lord Turner said. Last May, the FSA raised concerns over the capital of  Prudential PLC, leading the firm to delay a rights issue for the planned friendly takeover of  American International Group Inc.
AIG


0.30
%




's Asian life insurance business. That deal later fell through. 

According to a recently agreed regulatory reshuffle, most of the FSA's supervisory powers will be handed over to the Bank of England in 2012, though current FSA chief executive officer Hector Sants will oversee the transition as head of the new regulatory authority within the bank. 

Lord Turner also called for tougher European bank stress tests in 2011 after the disappointment of the ones conducted in 2010, which did not identify the possibility of the enormous recapitalization of Irish banks. 

New and tougher EU-wide stress tests should take into account the possibility of a sovereign debt restructuring, which was not countenanced by the round of tests published last year, Lord Turner said. He added the new European banking supervisor that came into being on Jan. 1 should be in charge of overseeing the tests. 

"We will have to be willing to run stresses which allow for the losses which could occur if bonds were seen on a market-to-market basis and therefore implicitly allow for the possibility that there could be default or restructuring," he said. 

The tests last year were perceived as being weak because they were not willing to take into account the possibility of a sovereign default, he said. 

"Clearly the European system wants to go through this crisis without sovereign defaults and mechanisms have been put in place to maximize the chances of that, but I think when you run a bank stress test you have to stress it for conditions that you don't think are likely to occur." 

Lord Turner said regulators will not produce a set list of which institutions are too big to fail once they have defined the criteria that qualify them as so-called global systemically important financial institutions, or SIFIs, by this spring. 

"What is not useful is having an absolute definitive list. I don't think we should be terrified if somebody manages to produce a list that's not far from what the authorities consider to be the 25 most important [banks], but we will never say what we consider to be the 25 most important because it will be clearly changing and evolving over time."