GARDENA, Calif.—Two students were hit by the same bullet Tuesday after a handgun hidden in another student's backpack apparently went off accidentally, forcing the high school to be locked down for several hours.

The two 15-year-old victims were taken to a local hospital, where the female student underwent surgery for a gunshot wound to the temple and was listed in critical condition. Dr. Gail Anderson of the Harbor UCLA Medical Center said the bullet fractured the girl's skull—but apparently didn't penetrate her brain. He told reporters it was too early to tell her prognosis.

Authorities said the second victim, a male, was in fair condition after being grazed in the neck by the bullet.

Police didn't identify any of the students. Although, investigators said it appeared to be an accidental shooting, they cautioned the investigation was ongoing. 

Monica Carazo, a spokeswoman for the school district said investigators told her a Glock semi-automatic pistol was recovered, but a Los Angeles Police Department spokesman declined to comment. 

They said it was too early to tell why the student brought the gun to school in the first place. 

Officials here have struggled to curtail gang violence on campus and to stop students from bringing guns and other weapons into schools. But Tim Anderson, a deputy chief at the Los Angeles School Police Department said there haven't been any recent incidents in which guns were discharged at Gardena High School or other Los Angeles public schools.

School district officials said Tuesday's incident was the second time since the fall of 2010 that a gun has been found on school grounds. The district spokeswoman said there were 11 instances of guns in Los Angeles schools during the previous academic year.

The incident happened shortly before 11 a.m. local time, when a 17-year-old student entered a classroom and shortly thereafter a gun fired from within his backpack, police said. 

The suspect immediately fled the classroom and ran into another room in the school, according to Steve Zipperman, police chief for the school police department. He said the student was quickly found and "there was no struggle as far as taking him into custody."

Authorities said the suspect could face charges of bringing a gun to school and illegally discharging a firearm. Depending on what happens to the victims, there could be additional charges, police said.

The incident prompted a massive police response, with at least four agencies involved and more than 100 law enforcement officers who descended on the school of 2,400 students. The campus, located in a largely residential neighborhood in a small city in the South Bay region of Los Angeles County, was locked down while authorities sorted out the scene and made sure there were no other suspects or guns involved.

Within hours of the shooting local parents flooded neighborhood streets, pacing nervously outside police cordons, trying to get information about their children. At about 2 p.m., students began leaving the school in an orderly dismissal.

The shooting raised immediate questions about how a student could bring a firearm to a high school where officials routinely use metal detectors to screen for such threats. But Mr. Zipperman said the district's policy allows individual principals to determine how and when to use these detectors."

The screenings, he said, are randomly conducted and "it is a possibility that [this] student…was not checked." The inspections are conducted by school employees, rather than the school police officers. The incident comes on the heels of the appointment of a new school superintendent, John Deasy, and only a short time after Mr. Zipperman took the reins of the large school police department.

In the wake of Tuesday's events, school district officials this week intend to start reassessing current weapons-screening procedures, which have been in place since the early 1990s. 

 Write to  Andy Pasztor at andy.pasztor@wsj.com and Peter Sanders at peter.sanders@wsj.com 