LONDON—The euro zone's private sector grew at a steady pace in December, with growth in Germany and France offsetting weakness in debt-laden Spain and Ireland, final results of a survey by Markit showed Wednesday. 

Meanwhile, factory orders in the euro zone rose in October, indicating that the recovery in industrial production is likely to continue in coming months, and factory-gate prices posted their strongest annual gain for 25 months in November, driven by the rising cost of energy and intermediate goods 

"Overall, the [private-sector] data suggest that the euro zone will have grown by around 0.5% in terms of final quarter GDP [gross domestic product],"  Chris Williamson, chief economist at Markit, said in a statement. "But the scene is set for a two-speed single currency area as we move into 2011." 

The final Markit Euro-Zone Composite Output Index, a gauge of private sector activity based on a survey of some 4,500 manufacturing and services firms, held steady at 55.5 in December. A reading above the neutral 50 level indicates expansion. 

Economists surveyed by Dow Jones Newswires last week expected no change from the preliminary survey reading of 55 released by Markit Dec. 16. The preliminary results were based on 84% of the total December survey responses. 

The euro-zone services business activity index eased to 54.2 in December from a three-month high of 55.4 in November, as strength in Germany and France contrasted with near stagnation in Italy and contractions in Spain and Ireland. Economists were expecting no change from the preliminary reading of 53.7. On Monday Markit said the manufacturing purchasing managers index rose to 57.1 from 55.3 in November—topping the preliminary estimate of 56.8.

The European Union's statistics agency said Wednesday that new industrial orders rose 1.4% from September and were up 14.8% from October 2009. Eurostat also said orders fell more sharply in September than it previously estimated, by 4.2% compared with 3.8%. 

Excluding volatile contracts for heavy transport equipment—such as aircraft—new orders rose by 0.9% from September. The figures suggest that at the start of the fourth quarter, new orders were rising at a modest pace, keeping the recovery on track but hardly strong. 

However, more recent surveys suggest activity and order books picked up significantly towards the end of 2010. According to a survey of purchasing managers issued Monday by Markit Economics, new orders in December grew at the fastest pace since April. In October, the performance of manufacturers varied widely from country to country. 

Factories in Ireland and Spain reported declines in new orders, while those in Greece reported a 9.5% increase, although that followed a 15.8% drop in September. 

German manufacturers reported a 1.4% rise in orders, while their counterparts in France reported a 2.3% rise and those in Italy a 1.4% decline. In the 27-member EU, new orders rose by 0.6% from September and 14.3% from October 2009. In the U.K., orders fell by 0.4% from September and were up just 12.0% from October 2009. The figures were for all 16 countries using the euro in 2010. Membership rose to 17 when Estonia joined on Jan. 1. 

Industrial producer prices excluding construction rose 0.3% from October and were 4.5% higher than in November 2009, the strongest year-to-year increase since October 2008, the European Union's Eurostat agency said. 

The figures suggest inflationary pressures are building as the euro-zone economy, and in particular its manufacturing sector, continues to recover from a devastating recession. In October, producer prices rose 0.4% on a monthly basis and 4.4% annually. Energy producer prices rose 0.9% in November, the strongest monthly gain since April, and increased 8.8% annually for the second consecutive month,.

Factory-gate prices for intermediate goods, such as manufactured materials like steel or tools used to make other goods, rose 5.8% in November, the sharpest annual gain since October 2006. But, in a sign that inflationary pressures are growing across the production process, producer prices excluding construction and energy were 3% higher, also the strongest annual gain for 25 months. 

On an annual basis, factory-gate prices for durable consumer goods posted their sharpest gain since mid-2009, and prices for nondurable consumer goods rose at the strongest pace since November 2008.

 Write to  Nicholas Winning at nick.winning@dowjones.com and Paul Hannon at paul.hannon@dowjones.com 