Atlanta has done a poor job of honoring the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. in the decades since his assassination in April 1968. The city that declared itself "too busy to hate" during the 1960s has, at times, seemed too busy to honor the legacy of its most famous son. The site where King and his wife, Coretta, are interred is underwhelming, in part because of years of squabbles among King family members and the National Park Service. The Atlanta-based Southern Christian Leadership Conference, which King helped found, has devolved into a small, corrupt shadow of what it was. The city only recently launched an effort to establish a civil-rights center in King's honor.

Given that sorry track record, Rebecca Burns's "Burial for a King" is a welcome reminder that Atlanta did once give the civil-rights leader a monumental tribute: a peaceful, dignified funeral attended by thousands. Outrage over the shooting in Memphis sparked riots in dozens of American cities, including the nation's capital, but not in Atlanta. 

The book recounts in close detail the days surrounding the funeral, explaining how the city's black and white establishments handled crowds, rumors, fears and world scrutiny during one of the tensest periods of the turbulent 1960s. Ms. Burns, the former editor of Atlanta magazine, shows us indelible scenes from that fraught time: We see the King family grieving in their small home; entertainer Harry Belafonte helping to powder the face of King's disfigured corpse; Black Panthers declaring King's assassination the end of compromise; and segregationists calling it a just reward.

The country itself seemed to quake in the shooting's aftermath. Fear of more assassinations and riots was rampant. The Vietnam War raged. President Lyndon Johnson had just announced that he would not seek reelection. The FBI manhunt for King's killer had gone global.

Yet Atlanta stayed calm. Tens of thousands filed past King's casket at Spelman College. His funeral at Ebenezer Baptist Church was broadcast across the world. It began with an opening prayer by an associate pastor at the church. "O God, our leader is dead," he said. "And so now the question that he posed during his life finds us in all its glaring proportions: 'Where do we go from here? Chaos or community?' " Attendees included the nation's powerful and famous, from Robert Kennedy and Richard Nixon to Sammy Davis Jr. and Black Panther Stokely Carmichael.

 By Rebecca Burns  Scribner, 208 pages, $24

Ivan Allen, Atlanta's white mayor, played a large role in keeping the city on an even keel. He closed the liquor stores. Pamphlets urging peace were distributed in black areas. Allen had been the first one to tell Coretta Scott King that her husband was dead, and he and his wife remained by her side for much of the time in the days that followed. He also worked with police and business leaders to defuse possible violence.

Ms. Burns's engaging narrative focuses tightly on the immediate aftermath of the murder; she offers little analysis about how King's death mobilized Atlanta's black leadership to seek political power, which it gained in 1973 when Maynard Jackson was elected the city's first black mayor. But "Burial for a King" shows well how a traumatized city said goodbye to a native son.

—Mr. McWhirter, a Wall Street Journal reporter based in Atlanta, is the author of the forthcoming "Red Summer: The Summer of 1919 and the Awakening of Black America."