CHICAGO—Rahm Emanuel is drawing heavy support in his mayoral bid from this city's trading and exchange community, with big donations from the financial sector helping to swell his campaign war chest to $11.8 million.

Exchange operators  CME Group Inc.
CME


0.32
%




 and  CBOE Holdings Inc.
CBOE


0.85
%




 are major backers of Mr. Emanuel's bid, alongside executives of hedge fund operator Citadel LLC and local trading firms like Getco LLC and DRW Holdings, according to documents filed with the Illinois State Board of Elections.

  Ken Griffin, founder of hedge fund giant Citadel, was among the biggest donors to Mr. Emanuel's campaign with $100,000. Electronic market-maker Getco gave $10,000. Also, $50,000 came from  Don Wilson, partner at the trading firm DRW Holdings, and another $50,000 from  Matthew Hulsizer, chief executive of Peak6 Investments.

Documents released Thursday show Mr. Emanuel, former chief of staff for President Barack Obama, with a commanding fund-raising lead in the run-up to the Feb. 22 election to succeed retiring Mayor Richard M. Daley. Counting a $1.1 million infusion from his existing federal campaign fund, Mr. Emanuel has raised $11.8 million, far ahead of the $2.3 million raised by former Daley Chief of Staff Gery Chico and the $110,000 by City Clerk Miguel del Valle.

Former U.S. Sen. Carol Moseley Braun's fund-raising figures weren't immediately available, but her campaign spokeswoman told reporters Thursday that she had about $125,000 on hand.

Mr. Emanuel has raised at least $2.2 million from the city's financial sector alone, nearly equaling total donations to Mr. Chico and far outstripping the others.

The overall financial disparity puts Mr. Emanuel at an enormous advantage. Mr. Emanuel leads in polls, with 44% of voters surveyed supporting his bid, according to a recent Chicago Tribune poll. Ms. Moseley Braun was second with 21% and Mr. Chico had 16%.

Ms. Moseley Braun's campaign couldn't be reached for comment, and Mr. Chico's declined to comment.

Mr. Emanuel has longstanding ties to Chicago's derivatives exchanges.

The CME appointed Mr. Emanuel to its board of directors in May 1998. The Chicago Board Options Exchange, now known as CBOE Holdings, was one of Mr. Emanuel's first clients after he joined investment bank Wasserstein & Co. in 1999. There he helped the oldest U.S. stock-options exchange work through thorny ownership issues tied to its spin-off from the Chicago Board of Trade.

—Howard Packowitz and Douglas Belkin contributed to this article.

 Write to  Jacob Bunge at jacob.bunge@dowjones.com 