TOKYO—Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan criticized China for the opaque expansion of its defense capabilities and maritime activities, and stressed the need to strengthen bilateral communications, using channels such as a new hotline between the national leaders and exchanges between political parties. 

Mr. Kan outlined in a speech on Thursday his government's foreign-policy and national-security stance, as he hones his policy messages ahead of the opening next week of a regular parliament session—his first as prime minister.

With a visit to the U.S. this week by Chinese President Hu Jintao grabbing headlines, Mr. Kan emphasized the importance of the U.S.-Japan security alliance, calling it the "common good" needed to maintain the stability of the East Asian region. 

Mr. Kan's criticism of China was pointed but brief. "Having grown rapidly in recent years, China is beginning to play an important role for the world and for the region," he said. 

"But at the same time, we can't help being concerned about a lack of transparency in its military expansion and increased maritime activities. The incident that occurred last year was extremely regrettable," Mr. Kan added, referring to a flare-up of bilateral tension following a boat collision in disputed waters in the East China Sea. 

Noting that the incident "temporarily shook" the bilateral relations that had otherwise been friendly in recent years, Mr. Kan said the two nations must cooperate more closely so they can solve problems that the region as a whole faces. 

"Keeping that in mind, it's important for us to build stronger ties between the people of the two nations on human and social levels, not just on political and economic levels," the prime minister said.

Citing the region's "tough" national-security environment, characterized by such challenges as North Korean nuclear development, Mr. Kan stipulated that U.S. military bases "must exist within Japan's domestic boundaries," and that Japan must continue to work hard to keep up the alliance. 

"We must always keep in mind the U.S.-Japan alliance is supported by real people, that young members of the self-defense forces and U.S. Marines who are barely 20 years old are on duty, ready to sacrifice their blood in emergencies," he said.

The prime minister, aiming to solve the lingering contention over the relocation of local U.S. bases, repeated his apologies to the people of Okinawa, and pledged increased effort to reduce their burden of hosting the troops. 

Mr. Kan also touched on the rising instances of maritime disputes in the regional waters, highlighting Japan's resolve to assert its rights and lend its leadership in drawing up rules to prevent future conflicts. "Changes taking place in the global community are simultaneously creating new opportunities and opaqueness to the world and the Asian region," the prime minister said. "That requires us to have better ability to conceptualize and respond quickly as we conduct foreign- and national-security policies."

 Write to  Yuka Hayashi at yuka.hayashi@wsj.com 