Mining companies, which posted record profits of more than $50 billion in 2010, are funneling cash into expanding their supplies of key raw materials. The expansion, though, is unlikely to be enough to meet robust demand and tame rising commodity prices. 



Companies such as  BHP Billiton, Rio Tinto
RIO


-0.79
%




 PLC and  Vale SA are boosting capital investment but running into various head winds, which are slowing their ability to greatly boost output of iron ore, coal and copper. As a result, prices of those commodities are expected to remain high, with some forecast to climb even higher over the next two years. The price of coal has risen 32% since late last year. 

One issue shaping—and limiting—investment options is the rising wave of nationalism by countries, which have signaled an intent to impose high taxes or government requirements on the businesses.  Roger Agnelli, the CEO of Brazil's Vale, which generated $26.12 billion in cash from operations in 2010, is under pressure to step down by government officials who want the mining company to invest more heavily in Brazil. They would like to see more steel-making operations that could use iron ore and coal to make steel, rather than export those raw materials to steel plants in other parts of the world. 

Rio Tinto Chief Executive  Tom Albanese says that miners have cash available but that progress in developing or expanding new mines is slowed by delays in government permits, escalating costs for labor and machinery, and limited ports and railways. Companies have already developed the most accessible reserves and now have to dig deeper, which adds costs. They also have to extract more tons and refine them more because the reserves may not be as pure. 

"Even when we do find the new resources and our engineers are ready to go, we find that it's actually taking longer than it would have 10 to 20 years ago to deliver them to the market," Mr. Albanese told investors in Hong Kong last week. "Five years ago it was hard to look at a project without spending at least $500 million. Today I would have to say it's hard to look at a project without spending at least $2-$3 billion."

In recent weeks, Rio Tinto, which posted a record $14 billion in earnings in 2010 and had $23.5 billion in cash from operations, boosted its 2011 capital expenditure budget to $13 billion from the previous $11 billion estimated last winter.  Guy Elliott, the chief financial officer of Rio Tinto, says the miner is going to focus on small to medium-sized acquisitions up to the "single-digit" billion-dollar range.

Supplies of certain minerals, copper in particular, are expected to be especially tight. Demand for copper, which is used in commercial construction and industrial piping, is outstripping supply by about 400,000 metric tons a year, according to analysts. Demand for iron ore, used to make steel, is expected to exceed supply for at least the next five years as steel mills in China increase their own production. 

"No matter how much will is out there to do these new projects, you are probably going to be in a position of under supply, with copper being the most extreme," says  Mike Elliott, who heads Ernst & Young's global mining and metals practice in Australia. Investment and development is constrained in part by the limited ports and rails, he says. 

Having spent the last two years significantly reducing debt loads, miners are expected to ramp up investment and exceed 2009's spending level of $113.7 billion for 1,123 deals, according to the latest report from Ernst & Young's mining research and consulting. 

"Most of the major miners have substantially paid down their debt over the last few years. They are now in a position to use their balance sheet to do more," says  Tim Goldsmith, a Melbourne-based global mining expert with PriceWaterhouseCoopers.

Rio Tinto slashed debt to $4.3 billion in 2010, from $18.9 billion at the end of 2009. Xstrata PLC reduced its net debt by 38% to $7.64 billion from $12.3 billion.

BHP has about $16 billion of cash on hand and an undrawn $4 billion revolving-credit facility, according to its latest financial results. The miner says that it will spend about $80 billion in growth projects over the next five years to find and develop new resource projects in order to meet the world's demand for more metals and minerals. 

"Our first priority is the commitment to invest in Tier 1, value-adding growth opportunities,"  Alex Vanselow, BHP's chief financial officer told analysts earlier this year. "Our second priority is the commitment to manage the balance sheet to a solid "A" credit rating. And our third priority is the progressive and predictable return of capital to shareholders." 

On Friday, BHP announced $12.8 billion of expansion plans for coal and iron-ore operations in Australia.

Xstrata PLC currently has about 20 major expansion and new mine projects under construction. The company is trying to further diversify, including building up its iron-ore portfolio with new assets in Mauritania and Republic of Congo. 

Mining analysts say that the world's top miners are still developing their strategies for deploying their cash.

"It takes longer than people expect and it cost more and it will be harder and harder for the supply side of the equation to come up to demand," says Mr. Goldsmith of PriceWaterhouseCoopers. "We are seeing a generation of huge amounts of cash, probably more so than we have ever seen."