It's mid-morning on a workday—time for breakfast—and the most revered chef in the world is tucked into a worn naugahyde booth in a nondescript Uptown restaurant. The place is Old John's Luncheonette, on a sleepy stretch of West 67th Street between a shoe repair shop and a French cleaners that doesn't appear to be in any way French. 

Ferran Adrià orders waffles. In the progressive gastronome's own restaurant, elBulli in Spain, waffles would be somehow abstracted, deconstructed, maybe jellified or frozen inside a balloon dipped in liquid nitrogen. They would be evoked as an idea. At Old John's, the waffles are slung out on a plate, a little powdered sugar sprinkled on top. 

Mr. Adrià loves them, or at least finds them no less worthy of contemplation than the considerably fancier fare he ate the night before at L'Atelier de Joel Robuchon on 57th Street. "All food remains the same on some level," he says. "It's you that can change it by perception. Once you understand that, you can short-circuit people's brains."

His aptitude for such short-circuiting is what has brought him to New York this week. On Tuesday, he gave a private presentation on his ambitious plans for elBulli. And on Thursday night at the 92nd Street Y, he'll join writers Lisa Abend and Adam Gopnik for "Behind the Scenes at elBulli," a discussion about a year in the life of his fabled restaurant. 

Mr. Adrià, 48, noted that New York is an entirely appropriate setting for such a topic. "I feel very at home here," he said. "It's such an alive city. I really like Americans, because I feel like they understand me. They have the closest way of thinking to mine. For a European, it's strange that an American chef in New York can make Japanese food and nobody even notices, nobody blinks. American cuisine is total freedom." 

His words, matched with a range of wild gesticulations and bright eyes that darken to underscore a point, were being translated by Ms. Abend, a journalist who spent a year at elBulli to write "The Sorcerer's Apprentices." The book focuses primarily on tales of the kitchen, where a team of chefs in training—many with experience in the some of the world's best restaurants—clamor for a chance to work unpaid for six months, simply to gain access to Mr. Adrià's methods. A number of those methods have become codified in the realm of molecular gastronomy, the rise of which is often credited to Mr. Adrià. But just as many—some involving hoses and tubes and, most of all, experimental extremes of meticulousness—remain unique to dishes that nobody else makes.

"There's no such thing as strange food," Mr. Adrià says, "only strange people." He supplements his waffles with a taste of a Ronnybrook Farm yogurt drink, supplied to him to expand the local New York offerings beyond those on the Old John's menu. He likes it, thankful that it's blackberry flavored rather than strawberry. "One of the things I hate most is strawberries with any kind of dairy," he says. "As a kid, I ate a bad Spanish prepackaged desert with strawberry puree with whipped cream in the car. There were a lot of curves. I vomited all over the place and haven't been able to eat the same thing since."

Luckily such a redux, or redux of any kind, can be avoided. "New York is a city where I don't repeat myself very often," says Mr. Adrià, who is limiting his restaurant visits while in town so as to allow time to work. "If I go out for dinner it'll be a four-hour extravaganza. But I always love to go to Chinatown for dim sum." 

At Tuesday's private presentation at the Council of the Americas on the Upper East Side, he spoke of his plans to close elBulli as a restaurant at the end of July and to transform it into an experimental workshop and "center of creativity" where chefs will work on food projects of various kinds beginning in 2014. 

"The most exciting thing for me is I don't know what's going to happen," he said of the plan. "We have all of this experience now, but we'll have to see. This is kind of a crazy idea. There's no reference for it in the world." 

As he spoke, breakfast concluded the way more morning meals should, with a smuggled-in sample of Junior's cheesecake. "Every time I order cheesecake in Spain, I'm disappointed," Mr. Adrià said, "because it's not like this."