Next month, the world's eyes will turn once again to Bordeaux, where the vignerons along the Gironde will throw open their doors for a glimpse of the new vintage. For those looking to buy world-class wines on a budget, the early signs aren't looking good. By all accounts, quality is high, some say as high as the much feted 2009 vintage, but increased demand means that prices will inevitably rise. Those collectors across Europe who have grown used to buying the pick of Bordeaux will either have to extend the reach of their wallets or look elsewhere.

The canny buyer might not have to look very far. A few hundred kilometers should do it, eastward toward Lyon and the stretch of land from Vienne to Avignon known as the Côtes du Rhône, one of France's oldest wine-growing regions. 

 Ogier, Châteauneuf-du-Pape, France  Vintage: 2008  Price: £20, or €23  Alcohol Percentage: 14.5%

Châteauneuf-du-Pape derives its name from a time when the region was under the dual papacy in the 14th century. This particular wine is named after the shrine to St. Mark, the patron saint of local wine growers, that lies within the vineyard. Although up to 13 different grape varieties can be used, Clos de l'Oratoire des Papes is a blend of predominantly Grenache, Syrah, Mourvèdre and Cinsault. Despite its youth, the wine is actually drinking well now. We drank it with a slow-cooked stew, which was a near perfect match. This is very much in the modern style, with a nose reminiscent of the smells of autumn: a little wood smoke, blackcurrants, pepper and spice. 

Long before the Bordelais grew rich on the export of Claret and began the process of building their spectacular châteaux on the banks of the Gironde, the salons of Paris were supplied with wines made from the Syrah grape in places such as Côte-Rôtie, Hermitage, Condrieu and Cornas. At their best, these wines exude a soft, plummy, silky character, with notes of violets, spices and a gentle pepperiness. They benefit from cellaring and will drink and taste much better after 10 or more years in a bottle. 

The very best wines are by no means cheap, coming in at around €50 a bottle, but compared with their counterparts in Bordeaux, they look like an absolute steal. While the top wines of Bordeaux now command figures well over €1,000 a bottle, international demand has yet to reach the Rhône, particularly the southern slopes home to the Côtes-du-Rhône and Côtes-du-Rhône Villages appellations.

Perhaps the best way to understand the region is to divide it geographically between the north, which is dominated with plantings from the Syrah grape, and the south, where the blend is made predominantly using Grenache. Undoubtedly, the great wines of the north rival any of those found in Bordeaux and Burgundy. Producers such as Jean-Louis Chave, Domaine Thierry Allemand, Chapoutier and René Rostaing are all worth looking out for. In the south, the wines can be a blend of as many as 23 different grape varieties and it is here, in appellations such as Gigondas, Rasteau and Vacqueyras, where the real bargains are to be found.

The region has been blessed with a run of good vintages of late. Like elsewhere in France, 2005 was an excellent vintage, 2007 was very good in the south and 2009 is a return to form in the north and the south. I have tasted a number of wines from the 2009 vintage, which are just being released onto the market, and the best wines have an enticing concentration, finesse and a long, mineral finish. It reminded me how good the Syrah grape can be but also of the charms of the Grenache, which when blended with Mourvèdre and Syrah in appellations such as Gigondas creates an intense black wine, with a warming, plummy character. These wines have more body than Burgundy and Bordeaux but make up an important part of the cellar. They partner well with hearty red-meat dishes.

In the north, 2009 saw a wet winter with sporadic flowering. A hot August, with low yields, helped concentration in the grapes. The result is fruit with real richness. Domaine René Rostaing in Côte-Rôtie has produced wines with supple tannins, complexity and evolved fruit. 

Like their counterparts in Burgundy, those vineyards in the south that have managed the heat either via altitude or water retention in the soil have made good wines. At Domaine La Soumade, winemaker Frédéric Romero put his success down to the high percentage of clay in his soils, which protected against drought. His Côtes du Rhône is a bargain, coming in at around €6 a bottle.

But the vintage isn't all about red wine. In the village of Condrieu, there are some spectacular whites produced from the Viognier grape. Domaine Georges Vernay's wines combine the delicate apricot aromatics characteristic of this variety with a pure, steely finish. They were some of the most charming I have ever tasted.

 Write to  Will Lyons at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 