Rescuers looking for survivors following the  Massey Energy Co. mine explosion last year felt their own safety was compromised by the company and federal safety officials, according to investigation transcripts.

Several rescuers said Massey and the Mine Safety and Health Administration both ignored protocols for having back-up teams available, among other things. The accident at the Upper Big Branch, W.Va., mine in April 2010 was the worst U.S. coal-mining disaster in 40 years.

On Monday, the MHSA, which oversaw the rescue effort, released hundreds of pages of interviews with 25 federal, state and company personnel who searched the mine in the days after the accident, in which 29 miners died. 

Jerry Cook, a member of the MSHA rescue team, said in the hours after the explosion there were 40 people searching the mine but their efforts were largely uncoordinated.

"You don't need to have people run in there—anybody could've done anything in that mine they wanted to," Mr. Cook told investigators. "They could've killed every one of us."

Rescue teams train to coordinate their actions so they don't endanger other members, by opening a door that can change airflow in the mine, for example. 

Mr. Cook also said no back-up teams were standing by. Usually, a second team will be ready to help the first if a member is injured or their oxygen fails. 

Mr. Cook said Massey Chief Operating Officer  Chris Adkins and MSHA district supervisor  Bob Hardman didn't follow certain rescue protocols.

Shane Harvey, Massey general counsel, declined to comment on that allegation. He said the company would examine the transcripts and was grateful for the "heroism, professionalism and teamwork" of the rescue teams.

An MSHA spokeswoman didn't address specific questions about following protocols. In a statement, Joe Main, head of the MSHA, said questions about the rescue were difficult to answer because "we are still in the midst of an ongoing accident investigation."

He said the agency was also conducting a review of its performance before and after the accident.

The agency had released the transcripts to the families of the deceased miners on Friday.

The interviews recall the confusion and tension in the days after the accident, when families gathered at the mine to learn the fate of 29 miners. With four miners still unaccounted for, officials did not release the names of men who had already been found dead.

The rescue effort was repeatedly halted when levels of explosive gases rose underground. After four days, rescue teams found the bodies of the four men they had previously passed over in the darkness.

 Write to  Kris Maher at kris.maher@wsj.com 