TUNIS, Tunisia—World Bank President Robert Zoellick on Wednesday raised the prospect of providing more economic aid to this small North African country as it recovers from the turmoil of revolution here and in neighboring Libya.

Tunisia's popular uprising drove its aging, autocratic president from power in January, opening the door to potential political reforms but leaving its economy reeling from a sharp drop in tourism and foreign investment and a flood of as many as 40,000 Libyan war refugees. 

The World Bank chief's visit this week underscored the high hopes of international institutions to turn Tunisia—a nation of 10 million people with annual economic output of about $40 billion a year—into a model for democratic transitions in the Arab world. Tunisia's revolution spurred revolts in Libya, Egypt and elsewhere in the Middle East.

"Tunisia is where it all began," Mr. Zoellick said, calling the revolution "a tremendous move towards freedom in a new society that has had ripple effects all across the Middle East and North Africa."

Tunisia's economy is expected to grow very little this year, if at all. That is exacerbating tensions created by already high unemployment, particularly among educated youth and people in rural areas.

The World Bank last month said it would provide Tunisia with a $500 million loan—part of more than $1.2 billion in international aid—to support new policies to allow greater freedom of association, improve delivery of basic services and train unemployed workers.

Mr. Zoellick said the bank has started discussions with the interim government about potential additional aid in future years, such as more general funding for the government's budget, lending on specific projects or support to help Tunisia borrow in private markets.

Tunisian officials say they could need as much as $4 billion in outside support before their economy recovers.

The bank plans to provide Tunisia with financial and technical assistance as the nation moves from operating under an interim government toward establishing a new government over the next year. Officials here are trying to finalize rules to hold elections on July 24 to form a national assembly, which would write a new constitution and create the framework for a lasting government.

Mr. Zoellick said he will also work with the Tunisian government to pursue more refugee assistance from international aid groups and members of the Group of Eight leading world economies "so as not to add to the stress and strain on what is already a challenging transition in Tunisia."

France has invited Egypt and Tunisia to participate in a meeting of G-8 heads of state later this month to discuss their economic and political transitions. 

The war in Libya—a key economic partner for trade, workers and tourism—erupted just as Tunisia was preparing for its tourist season starting in March. 

The head of Tunisia's central bank, Mustapha Nabli, said in a recent interview that tourism had collapsed because of the Tunisian revolution and Libyan war.

"We were expecting that as the security situation and the political situation stabilized, tourism would pick up," he said. "If we did not have this situation in Libya, we'd be in much better shape today."

Officials hope a more stable security environment and political changes will draw back tourists and foreign investors, helping revive economic growth. "The challenge in an environment after a political upheaval is trying to create an upward spiral," Mr. Zoellick said.