  (See Corrections & Amplifications item below.)  

Potential Republican presidential candidates, pressed to address Saturday's rampage in Arizona, are bringing the discussion around to such themes as the need to strengthen the family and the broader threat of Islamic fundamentalist violence they argue are being ignored.

Former Pennsylvania senator Rick Santorum, who has made many trips to states that come early in the presidential nominating process, said the post-shooting debate highlighted what he sees as a key distinction between the two parties.

"The left always looks at things through the prism of government, so they are saying: Where was the state, where was the school?" Mr. Santorum said, talking by telephone from New Hampshire. "I would say: Where were the parents, the friends, the neighbors?"

Mr. Santorum wrote a book published in 2005 called "It Takes a Family," in which he argued that the family, and not the government, is the key building block of society. In an interview Tuesday, he singled out the parents of the alleged Arizona shooter, Jared Lee Loughner, asking: "Who are the people who know this man? And what were they doing about it?"

On a conservative radio program, former House Speaker Newt Gingrich, who is also mulling a 2012 run, cited the threat of Islamic fundamentalism. He highlighted what he considers to be hypocrisy on the left, with some liberals hesitant to criticize radical Islamists for using inflammatory rhetoric and the Internet to incite violence, but are quick to link the Arizona shootings to rhetoric from conservatives and tea-party activists.

"On the left," Mr. Gingrich said, "the very people who scream if you tell the truth about American Islamists turn around and say, 'Oh, let me draw the worst possible comparison [when it comes to the Tucson shooting], because it makes me feel better.' "



Mr. Gingrich recently helped produce and narrate a documentary called "America at Risk," which asserts that the U.S. is losing the war against "radical Islamists."

Attention has turned to former Alaska governor Sarah Palin more than to any other potential GOP candidate in the aftermath of the Arizona shootings, which killed six people and wounded 14, including Arizona Rep. Gabrielle Giffords, a Democrat. 

Liberals have slammed Ms. Palin for a map she posted on the Internet last year that used cross hairs to identify 20 congressional districts in which she hoped to unseat the Democratic incumbents, one of whom was Ms. Giffords.

Despite the wide attention in recent days on her use of the cross hairs, Ms. Palin has limited her remarks to a Facebook posting in which she expressed her condolences Saturday to the shooting victims and their families.

Her potential GOP rivals, in turn, have largely jumped to her defense.

Former Minnesota Gov. Tim Palenty, who has spent months building up the foundations of a presidential bid in several early primary states, distanced himself from Ms. Palin's approach, speaking Tuesday on ABC's Good Morning America. 

"It wouldn't have been my style to put the cross hairs there," he said. But he added, "There is no evidence to suggest that that had anything to do with this mentally unstable person's rage and senseless act."

As Mr. Pawlenty opened a national book tour this week—the beginning of what many expect will be a presidential run—he faced numerous questions about the shooting and what it says about the tone of the country's politics.

"We should be passionate. We should be strong," he said. "But there is a line there as it relates to basic civility, decency and respect, and not trying to invoke violence."

Some potential candidates questioned the discussion of what constitutes proper political speech.

"No expressed opinion, liberal or conservative, was to blame for Saturday's attack," Rep. Mike Pence of Indiana told a Rotary gathering Monday in Columbus, Ind. "We must resist efforts to suggest otherwise, because to do so has the potential to inhibit freedom." Mr. Pence is mulling whether to run for the White House or for governor of Indiana in 2012.

Mr. Santorum also challenged the idea that a change is needed in political speech.

"Are we going to change the word 'campaign' because it comes from military campaigns? Are we going to say we won't have 'targeted districts' anymore?" he asked. "What about the 'battleground poll'? To me, this is merely descriptive language."

 Write to  Neil King Jr. at neil.king@wsj.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications:  The first name of Jared Lee Loughner was incorrectly given as Jason in an earlier version of this article.