 Health-Care Vote: The House plans to vote on repealing the health-care law, a test of whether partisan rhetoric will soften after the shootings in Arizona. A vote was delayed last week due to the slayings.

 Executive Pay: The Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. plans to discuss at its meeting Tuesday ways to discourage risky executive-pay practices, as well as regulations that start the process of giving the government power to seize and dismantle large troubled financial firms.

 Housing Data: Existing-home sales data for December are due Thursday.

 Earnings Roundup: Numerous companies are reporting, including  Bank of America,
BAC


2.57
%




 Capital One Financial,
COF


0.11
%




 Citigroup,
C


0.09
%




 Goldman Sachs,  Morgan Stanley,
MS


0.00
%




 Fifth Third Bancorp,
FITB


0.05
%




 Wells Fargo,
WFC


0.17
%




 Delta Air Lines,
DAL


-2.13
%




 General Electric,
GE


-0.02
%




 Google, Apple and IBM.

 Holiday: The stock market is closed tomorrow in observance of Martin Luther King Jr. Day. But bond markets are open.

 Paid Up:   American International Group
AIG


-0.25
%




 repaid $47 billion to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, including the balance outstanding on the $85 billion in bailout funds that the insurer received.

 Record Results:  Intel
INTC


0.37
%




 reported a 48% profit surge for the fourth quarter, helping the chip maker post its best quarterly and yearly results ever.

 Revving Up:  Ford Motor
F


-0.20
%




 said at the Detroit auto show that it plans to hire 7,000 workers in the U.S. this year.

 Refund Cards: On Thursday, the Treasury Department launched a pilot program to deliver income-tax refunds through prepaid debit cards.

 iPhone Sales: Verizon Wireless said it will start selling Apple's iPhone 4 next month and offer unlimited data-use plans.

 Inside Information: Goldman Sachs released a report on its business practices, seeking to beat back criticism that the investment firm put its interests ahead of clients'.