New Jersey's top Democrats on Friday proposed overhauling the management of the state's public pensions, taking the massive problem out of the hands of lawmakers and moving to a system modeled after private-sector governing boards.

The brief proposal is the Democrats' response to a raft of cuts outlined in September by New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, a Republican. 

The two branches of government said they would work this month on more changes to the overburdened system.

Michael Drewniak, spokesman for Mr. Christie, said the administration wanted to see details of the new proposals. 

"The governor has advanced significant plans for real pension reform to save the system and secure it for current and existing employees," Mr. Drewniak said. "Hopefully, these new proposals move firmly in the same direction. We'll see."

Under the Democrats' proposal, boards of labor and management would make decisions about the generosity of pensions and the investment of pension funds. 

"By moving to this model, you're taking politics out of the equation," Assembly Speaker  Sheila Oliver said.

But it was unclear how the new setup would solve many of the system's underlying issues. As of June 30, the state had available only 63% of what it had promised to its workers in retirement benefits, leaving a $54 billion gap.

"They are trying to get the monkey off the back of the legislature," said  Michael Riccards, executive director of the Hall Institute of Public Policy in Trenton. "I'm not sure it deals with the basic problem."

Democrats on Friday also said they would agree to some cuts, including rolling back a 9% increase granted in 2001 for all current workers. 

The change wouldn't be retroactive but would mean benefits accumulated in the future would be less generous.

In September, Mr. Christie said workers should pay more for pensions and benefits by working longer, paying more up front and getting less in retirement payments.

The boards proposed by the Democratic leaders would replace the New Jersey State Investment Council, which is part of the executive branch and manages the system's investment choices. As of the end of October, the council directed $71 billion.