Manchester United defeated Chelsea 2-1 at  Old Trafford on Sunday, virtually clinching the Premier League title. United would have to lose its last two games, with Chelsea winning its final two—a combined scenario which is extremely improbable. It would be United's 19th championship, putting the club one ahead of Liverpool as the most-successful domestic side in the English game. 

In soccer, winners get the same number of points—three—for beating the bottom team as they do beating a great side. But factors like emotion, confidence and momentum do matter, and as much as cold, hard arithmetic, they determine championships. On Sunday, United found the strength to halt a worrying slide and emphatically shut the door on Chelsea.

The club moved into first place in December and it generally appeared as if it wouldn't look back. Not because this is an outstanding United team—there's a strong argument that its recent predecessors were better—but simply because its main competitors stumbled their way into the spring while Sir Alex Ferguson's team showed its characteristic resilience.

"We are not the brilliant team we were in other seasons,"  Patrice Evra said in a recent interview. "But mentally, we are as strong as we have ever been."

But Chelsea, the defending champion, found a way to sneak up on United in fairly remarkable circumstances. When the two teams met on March 1, United took a 1-0 lead into the break. At that point, the gap was a whopping 15 points, and Chelsea was struggling to hang on to fourth place. Yet the Blues came back to win that game and then, without much fanfare, scaled the Premier League table back to within three points of United, setting up Sunday's title bout.

Whatever jitters or insecurities United might have had—and there may have been some, since Chelsea was the last team to win at Old Trafford—were wiped away after 36 seconds, when Javier Hernandez raced through to collect Park Ji-Sung's pinpoint pass and give United the lead. Midway through the first half,  Ryan Giggs' perfect cross found Nemanja Vidic, who headed it past Chelsea goalkeeper  Petr Cech for a two-goal advantage.

In many ways, that bolted the door shut. Even though  Frank Lampard cut the deficit with a second-half goal, there was already a sense of inevitability: Sir Alex had done it again.

And it was somehow fitting that the four men responsible for United's goals were those who proved crucial to the club this season. Park's playing time had been limited through injury and participation in the Asian Cup—he was out from late December to early April—but it was the hard-running Korean who scored the winner against Arsenal at Old Trafford, sending United to the top of the table. Vidic, the rugged defensive colossus, played more Premier League minutes than anyone else and gave an injury-plagued back four some much-needed stability. Hernandez, the newly arrived Mexican striker, went from project to super-sub to stalwart, chipping in 13 league goals—many of them late, many of them decisive.

Then there's Giggs. This is his 20th season at the club, which is all you need to know about his incredible longevity and professionalism. It's one thing for a goalkeeper or even a central defender to last this long. But for an attacking midfielder-winger hybrid like the Welshman, it's nothing short of sensational. 

And while Giggs is no longer a week-in-week out-starter—he is 37, after all—he's the man Sir Alex trusts in crunch games, as evidenced by 26 starts in all competitions, a total that includes some crucial Champions League games. We've seen him evolve from a winger with a wicked dribble who made lung-bursting runs into a more cerebral player, capable of operating across the width of the pitch and relying on guile and intelligence, not to mention his delicate touch.

Others, of course, have played key roles in United's presumably title-winning season: goalkeeper  Edwin van der Sar (another golden oldie at age 40), winger Nani and top goalscorer  Dimitar Berbatov, especially. Even Wayne Rooney, who slumped badly in the first half of the season, is ending the campaign on a high. 

But the above quartet, together with Sir Alex, sums up United's season neatly. This was a year that saw the club grind out results with sheer willpower as much as talent, and United will be rewarded—not just with an imminent Premier League title but also a Champions League final against Barcelona on May 28. 

Milan striker Zlatan Ibrahimovic is one of those players destined to divide public opinion. Part of that is because he's the biggest, strongest and (usually) best-paid guy on the pitch, and folks expect big performances from him every week. And as his detractors, especially in England, point out, he has failed to deliver on many occasions: He's scored just three measly goals in 22 Champions League knockout games.

Image-wise, Ibrahimovic often doesn't do himself any favors, either. He frequently comes across as a petulant prima donna who doesn't back up his talk with action. Sometimes, he's simply boneheaded. On March 13, he was sent off and banned for two games when he appeared to punch an opponent. He returned April 10 and promptly got himself ejected again, this time for jawing at the linesman. Then he came back after another three-game suspension in time to play in Milan's 0-0 draw at Roma, which mathematically handed the "Rossoneri" their 18th Serie A title. 

And therein lies perhaps his biggest trump card in responding to his critics. Ibrahimovic wins league championships—eight in a row, in fact, with five different clubs in three different countries.

Since the 2003-04 season, when he led Ajax Amsterdam to the Dutch crown, he was won titles at Juventus (2004-05 and 2005-06, though these were later revoked as part of a match-fixing scandal), Inter (2006-07, 2007-08 and 2008-09), Barcelona (last season) and now Milan. 

It may just be a statistical quirk, of course. And it by no means confirms Ibrahimovic's greatness. But it does suggest that, more than most, he's the kind of player that can be dropped into a starting lineup and produce instantly, without the usual adjustment period. Either that, or his agent,  Mino Raiola, has a knack for finding him the right clubs at the right time.

—Gabriele Marcotti is the world soccer columnist for The Times of London and a regular broadcaster for the BBC.