 Washington 

The prospect of surprise looms whenever Christoph Eschenbach leads an orchestra. For here is a conductor whose intense feelings sometimes undermine his interpretive mastery. That dichotomy has caused music lovers to differ widely in their assessments of Mr. Eschenbach—a 71-year-old German who has held several prestigious posts in America—and made a controversial figure of this musician, who first gained international fame as a virtuoso pianist in the 1960s.

This season marks his first as music director of both the National Symphony Orchestra and the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, in whose Concert Hall the orchestra performs. In fact, it was the joint appointment—created especially for him—that persuaded the conductor to make Washington his base in the U.S. (His three-year contract comes with an option for a two-year extension.)

"I know and the world knows the Kennedy Center as one of the greatest art institutions," Mr. Eschenbach said in his roomy but still sparsely furnished office at the center in January. "To have a say in the musical side—in programming, in counseling on everything which is musical here—is very interesting. Besides, the National Symphony is a really great orchestra. They can rise immediately to an enormous level, and that's exciting." 

Conductor and orchestra will have a chance to prove that as they embark on their first festival together, "Maximum India," a Kennedy Center-wide celebration of performing arts from the subcontinent. Because symphonic music is not indigenous to Indian culture, the orchestra's three programs will largely consist of Western works inspired by India's rich heritage. "It was very difficult, because there is not so much Indian music for orchestra," said Mr. Eschenbach.

To enrich his choices, the conductor asked the tabla virtuoso Zakir Hussain to write a new piece for the festival. The work, "Concerto for Four Soloists," will receive its premiere on Thursday, on a bill that also includes excerpts from Albert Roussel's opera "Padmâvatî." (The program will be repeated Friday and Saturday.) Mr. Eschenbach and the orchestra then perform Olivier Messiaen's massive "Turangalîla-Symphonie" (March 10 to 12). They conclude their participation in the festival the following week (March 17 to 20), with one of the conductor's specialties: Alexander Zemlinsky's "Lyric Symphony," its texts from poems by the Bengali Nobel laureate Rabindranath Tagore.

Mr. Eschenbach's bald head, small frame and omnipresent Nehru jackets may remind movie fans of Ian Fleming's fictional villain Ernst Stavro Blofeld—at least as embodied by the actor Donald Pleasence in "You Only Live Twice." But his gentle manner and delicate movements negate any menacing vibe. Indeed, his presence in Washington arises from his desire to improve the recently diminished fortunes of America's "national" orchestra, whose profile he intends to raise.

"I think the greatest need is to internationalize the National Symphony," he said in the pithy way he expresses many of his thoughts. "I want them to tour regularly. I also want them to record. We just made our first recording—from concert performances of Gershwin and Bernstein. And we're planning a big tour to South America. Then we will work on a tour to Europe. I want to get the orchestra to the point that I can show them off with pleasure."

The conductor's tenure as music director of the Houston Symphony Orchestra from 1988 to 1999 earned him a reputation as an orchestra builder, and he now refers to such work as "the exciting part of my job." But it wasn't always so. After he left Zurich's Tonhalle Orchestra in 1986, he told Herbert von Karajan—the longtime conductor of the Berlin Philharmonic and one of Mr. Eschenbach's mentors—that he was relieved to be done with organizational responsibilities. Karajan's terse response, as recalled by his protégé: "That's wrong. You are an orchestra builder."

Yet any discussion of Mr. Eschenbach's career must mention his unhappy stint as music director of the Philadelphia Orchestra from 2003 to 2008, among the shortest in the ensemble's history. Accounts of what went wrong naturally vary, but the appointment seems to have been ill starred from the beginning. 

For his part, Mr. Eschenbach puts the onus on management. "The reason I went away from Philadelphia is not, as is often said, discontent with the musicians," he maintained. "It was management—a disagreement in every part of the musical life of the orchestra." 

Regardless, his relations with the organization now seem more than civil. He toured with the ensemble in 2009, and he conducted the orchestra in Philadelphia last season and is scheduled to do so again this fall. "We have a very friendly relationship," he said.

With fresh faces occupying American music directorships in increasing numbers—following Alan Gilbert in New York and Gustavo Dudamel in Los Angeles, Ludovic Morlot ascends in Seattle next season and Yannick Nézet-Séguin in Philadelphia the season after—some question the wisdom of appointing septuagenarians to such demanding posts. And these doubts have only multiplied thanks to the Job-like health problems of Riccardo Muti in Chicago and James Levine in Boston this season.

"It does not at all bother me," Mr. Eschenbach said, addressing the issue of youth versus age on the podium. "I think it's wonderful for these people to have a chance. But I must also say that experience pays. You are leading a human instrument, playing a human instrument. As a music director, you have to play so many roles: father figure, diplomat, psychiatrist. You might be extremely talented, or even brilliant, but you cannot go around experience."

It is experience that Mr. Eschenbach brings to Washington—not just in leading the National Symphony's musicians, but also in his familiarity with the scores that are the bedrock of all such institutions. And though his long association with these works at times drives him to take unsuccessful risks, the purity of his motives cannot be doubted. 

"I've been conducting for 40 years," he said. "So I do always try to find something different or do something new, something behind these black dots on white paper. These masterpieces are unexploitable—or, rather, they are exploitable to a high degree. You can always find something in them."

 Mr. Mermelstein writes for the Journal on classical music and film. 