With her doe eyes, enigmatic smile, lofty cheekbones and serene elegance, Catherine Deneuve has reigned as the queen of French cinema with undeniable grace. But those glacially perfect features and that regal bearing belong to a supremely intelligent actress unafraid to take risks for her craft. As she's aged, the 67-year-old star has continued to project tantalizing self-containment while playing beautiful older women with complicated pasts. And her warmth, complexity and comic gifts have become more apparent. 

Given Ms. Deneuve's striking appearance and iconic status, how is it that her presence seems to fit seamlessly into the films in which she has appeared? That can be credited to her subtle approach to performing and her enthusiasm for visionary directors. The 25-film "Deneuve" retrospective—which begins a monthlong run at BAMcinématek on Friday, kicking off a national tour—includes collaborations with filmmakers ranging from New Wave luminaries Jacques Demy, François Truffaut and Agnès Varda to younger auteurs Arnaud Desplechin, François Ozon and André Téchiné. And the series represents only a sampling of the prolific actress's work. 

Following in the footsteps of her two older sisters, Ms. Deneuve first appeared on screen when she was 13 (she later took her mother's maiden name to avoid being confused with her sister, Françoise Dorléac). But it was starring in Mr. Demy's bittersweet valentine to moviemaking, "The Umbrellas of Cherbourg" ("Les parapluies de Cherbourg," 1964), overflowing with luscious color and heartrending songs by Michel Legrand, that cemented her commitment to cinema. The movie's success, she recalled in a 2008 interview with Mr. Desplechin for Film Comment, "confirmed that the most important thing was to do the things you want to do with people you trust and whose ideas don't seem too conventional to you."

Ms. Deneuve teamed up with Mr. Demy for two more pastel-hued musicals scored by Mr. Legrand: the effervescent seaside fantasy "The Young Girls of Rochefort" ("Les demoiselles de Rochefort," 1967), which Mr. Demy co-directed with Ms. Varda, and "Donkey Skin" ("Peau d'âne," 1970), a surreal confection based on the Perrault fairy tale.

She also forged a fruitful collaboration with Mr. Truffaut, playing a damaged and devious woman posing as a mail-order bride in "Mississippi Mermaid" ("La sirène du Mississipi," 1969) and a wartime theater owner torn between two men in "The Last Metro" ("Le dernier Métro," 1980). One not-to-be-missed New Wave rarity is Ms. Varda's "The Creatures" ("Les créatures," 1966), a drama dealing with fantasy and creativity, set on a small island.

Ms. Deneuve's ability to deepen a director's vision was wondrously evident in her work for directors Roman Polanski and Luis Buñuel. In Mr. Polanski's "Repulsion" (1965), where the actress portrayed a repressed girl spiraling into psychosis, her youthful freshness takes on a ghostly quality, and her huge eyes marvelously flicker to life only intermittently behind heavy bangs. She wielded her immaculate beauty with sly wit in Mr. Buñuel's "Belle de Jour" (1967), as a bourgeois wife who vanquishes her frigidity by secretly turning tricks in a brothel, but conveyed an even more supple emotional transformation in Mr. Buñuel's "Tristana" (1970), based on Benito Pérez Galdós's novel about a corrupted innocent. 

Ms. Deneuve was never more beautiful than in "Tristana," one of the rare films in which she is not a blonde. But her golden mane has helped shape her image, for better or worse. An admirer of Marilyn Monroe, she initially dyed her hair as a self-conscious gesture, and it seems to have given her a certain distance on her femininity and, perhaps, greater freedom to invent her characters. It also inspired some directors to cast her as cold or frivolous femmes fatales, but even in lesser films she suggests a magnetic mix of delicacy and degradation.

More recently, Ms. Deneuve has been a modern-day goddess for the cerebral Portuguese master Manoel de Oliveira in "A Talking Picture" ("Um Filme Falado," 2003); the courtesan Odette in Raoul Ruiz's Proust adaptation "Time Regained" ("Le temps retrouvé, d'après l'oeuvre de Marcel Proust," 1999); and the earthy yet mysterious matriarch at the center of Mr. Desplechin's richly inventive family drama "A Christmas Tale" ("Un conte de Noël," 2008).

In Mr. Ozon's latest, "Potiche" (2011), which screens as part of "Deneuve" and as the opening-night film of the annual series "Rendez-Vous with French Cinema," she deftly navigates between comedy and melodrama as a good-natured, frumpy "trophy housewife" who undergoes a reawakening after taking over her husband's umbrella factory. Ms. Deneuve herself has taken a remarkable journey from the heartbroken teen of "The Umbrellas of Cherbourg" to the liberated matron of "Potiche." Along the way she has become only more fascinating.