Osama bin Laden may be dead and gone but the Yankees say Irving Berlin's "God Bless America'' isn't going anywhere. 

In the weeks following the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, all baseball teams added the song at the seventh-inning stretch. It became a healing totem for the country as it healed.

When tenor Ronan Tynan belted it out in the first Yankee home game following the attacks on Sept. 25, it was tough to spot a dry eye. The effect in the Bronx was so profound, in fact, that even after most teams abandoned the ritual, the Yankees kept it. 

On Monday, team president Randy Levine made it official: the song has become a permanent fixture—just as George Steinbrenner would have wanted it. "That's something the Boss insisted that we do, and it's something that's a permanent part, and will continue to be," Levine said. 

Not everyone enjoys the "God Bless America'' tradition. The Minnesota Twins have complained on several occasions that the longer renditions give the Yankees a competitive advantage by forcing the opposing pitcher to wait while the six-to-seven minute break plays out. 

Bin Laden's death captivated the team as it did the rest of the nation. In the Yankee clubhouse Monday afternoon, the televisions were tuned to CNN—a rare sight—as players discussed the latest tidbits of news. Ten years ago, a few of these players became part of the larger moment—helping the city and the nation return to normalcy in the aftermath of the attacks.

 As the Yankees cruised to the World Series, there was a sense they were doing more than just playing baseball, Derek Jeter recalled. 

"We almost felt like we were representing New York at the time.… I was well aware of what it meant to New Yorkers because we had a lot of people come up to us on the streets saying they weren't necessarily baseball fans, but they found themselves pulling for us at least for that month in the postseason."

The Yankees spent much of their time that fall visiting hospitals and fire stations where they formed lasting personal connections with some of the survivors and the families of those killed. Rivera remembered visiting a large group at the Jacob Javits Center and feeling uncertain how he could help. "What came to mind was, what can we say?" Rivera remembered. "What can we possibly say that could bring peace or joy or hope to these people? But just being there and putting your arm around them, I think that was how we helped." 

So Rivera felt a certain satisfaction when he saw President Barack Obama walk to the microphone and declare bin Laden deceased. "Justice prevails," Rivera declared. "You do something like that, somewhere around the way, you're going to pay." 

The Yankees have no plans to recognize bin Laden's death at the Stadium, Levine said. They haven't yet determined what exactly they'll do for the 10th anniversary of Sept. 11. But he expects it will be significant. "We've always recognized the bravery of all the first responders—firefighters, construction workers, all of the families," Levine said. 

"We haven't finalized any plans for Sept. 11 this year, but it's something that's always on our mind, and something that we'll pay the appropriate respect to when the time comes." 