HELSINKI—The European Central Bank's concerns about inflation haven't abated since its last meeting, but uncertainties including the unfolding crisis in Japan could affect interest-rate decisions in coming months, a top ECB official said.

The remarks by Bank of Finland Governor  Erkki Liikanen, made in an interview with The Wall Street Journal, suggest an interest-rate increase in April remains a strong possibility. But he signaled the ECB isn't yet on the verge of multiple rate increases, saying these are "uncertain times" and that there is no evidence of sharply higher wages or expectations of future inflation. 

Those types of "second round" effects worry central bankers most because they amplify otherwise temporary increases in energy, food and commodity prices.

"Fundamentally the situation is the same" as it was when the ECB met March 3, Mr. Liikanen said from the Finnish central bank's headquarters in Helsinki. "There are upside risks to inflation, mainly due to the increase in commodity prices," he said. 

ECB President  Jean-Claude Trichet stunned financial markets after the bank's March 3 meeting by saying that "strong vigilance" was needed on inflation, and that a rate rise at the ECB's next policy meeting on April 7 was "possible," an unusually blunt statement that spurred many ECB-watchers to conclude that a quarter-point rate rise was certain unless something dramatic changed officials' minds. 

Many economists thought as recently as last week that at least two additional rate increases would follow by year's end, an assessment supported by comments from outgoing German Bundesbank President  Axel Weber. Inflation across the 17-member euro bloc was 2.4% in February, a 28-month high and above the ECB's target of just under 2%. Many economists expect it to move even higher as the effect of rising oil prices passes through to consumer prices.

But bond investors scaled back their April rate-rise bets after the devastation in Japan. Although Japan only accounts for 2% of euro zone exports, as the world's third-largest economy its difficulties could spill over to other regions and disrupt global trade. Even if the ECB follows through with an April rate rise to confirm its anti-inflation mettle, a rapid tightening cycle appears unlikely.

"We have not decided about a series," Mr. Liikanen said. "Inflation expectations remain well anchored," he said, while "concrete signs of second-round effects are still not there."

Mr. Liikanen, who also chairs the Finnish Red Cross, called Japan's earthquake and nuclear crisis "an enormous human tragedy."

"It's just too early to say" how it will affect the euro zone, Mr. Liikanen said, though he signaled it may be taken into account in future monetary-policy decisions. "We take decisions always based on the most recent information and data. It concerns the next meeting, maybe more so the meetings after."

Mr. Liikanen, who was recently appointed to a new seven-year term as head of Finland's central bank, is seen by many observers as a top candidate to replace Mr. Trichet when the Frenchman's eight-year term ends in October. 

He has taken a lower profile than other presumed candidates, including Italy's central-bank head  Mario Draghi—who has courted Germany in a series of high-profile interviews and speeches recently—and Dutch central-bank chief  Nout Wellink, who was candid about his interest in the job in an interview with The Wall Street Journal last month.

"I think the whole question is terribly early," Mr. Liikanen said in a small conference room surrounded by pieces from the Bank of Finland's renowned art collection. "I'm sure the heads of state and government will nominate the person who is best suited for the job, and I don't want to disturb this reflection process by any comment."

At 60 years old, Mr. Liikanen is the youngest of the current crop of unofficial candidates, a possible advantage given the eight-year mandate the ECB presidency carries and its rigorous schedule of meetings in European and global level. 

An avid runner, Mr. Liikanen completed his most recent marathon last year in Stockholm (though he admits his times are well off from when he was at his peak). 

His conservative anti-inflation philosophy, and Finland's close stance with Berlin on the debt crisis, sits well in Germany, which has an enormous say in who will replace Mr. Trichet after the unexpected departure of its own candidate, Mr. Weber. 

A former politician, finance minister and European Commission official who was elected to Finnish parliament at just 21, Mr. Liikanen, who is popular with his ECB colleagues, is also thought to have the consensus-building skills that the position demands given the disparate needs of 17 different economies.

One minus, some central bank watchers say, is a presumed preference that ECB presidents come from large countries that convey a high global profile to their central bankers. At around €180 billion, Finland's economy is smaller than Greece's, though it is one of the euro bloc's wealthiest countries.

"We can't change the size of the country," Mr. Liikanen says.



—Arild Moen contributed to this article.

 Write to  Brian Blackstone at brian.blackstone@dowjones.com 