The last set of Europe-wide bank stress tests are now widely considered a joke. In July 2010, Europe's national regulators investigated their banking systems and concluded all they needed to survive their worst-case scenario was €3.5 billion ($4.7 billion) of fresh equity spread across seven banks. Four months later, the Irish banking system imploded, triggering an €85 billion bailout of the entire economy. 

Now the European Union is having another go, promising that a new set of stress tests to be conducted this spring will learn the lessons from the past exercise, win vital credibility from the markets and help Europe finally to draw a line under its sovereign-debt crisis. 

To do this, of course, it will need to do what it so comprehensively failed to do last time: persuade a ragbag of different European institutions, national governments and regulators to sign up to a coherent, credible, demanding plan rather than settle for the lowest common denominator. What are the chances of that happening? Pretty low, I fear. 

The credibility of the tests rests on a whole range of issues on which the EU has yet to agree—and on which a sensible consensus may be hard to reach. 

First, there are the stress test scenarios. The scenarios being worked up by the European Central Bank and newly created European Banking Authority will be "plausible" rather than extreme, according to someone familiar with the situation. In other words, they will be outside the market's baseline forecast but won't necessarily exceed its gloomiest forecasts. 

That will raise fears that the stress tests will once again be insufficiently stressful and that, as with the Irish economy last year, reality turns out to be worse.

The second issue concerns the quality of capital to be tested. The last round of tests required banks to meet a hurdle of only 6% Tier 1 capital, which allows subordinated debt and other quasi-equity instruments to be included, rather than focusing on higher quality Core Tier 1 capital, which was the measure used in the U.S. stress tests in 2009. The reason given last year was that Tier 1 is the only legally defined measure of capital and that Core Tier 1 is not a useful measure for calculating the capital needs of Europe's many savings banks. But the market is likely to blow a very loud raspberry if the EU opts for the same hurdle again, particularly since Basel has introduced a 7% Core Tier 1 minimum and is likely to add a further common equity buffer for the world's largest banks.

The third issue concerns liquidity, the biggest omission of the last tests. What ultimately triggered the collapse of the Irish banking system was that it was running out of eligible collateral it could use to access ECB funding. Many European banks, particularly those from Greece, Spain and Portugal, continue to make heavy use of ECB facilities as they are denied access to market funding. But I understand any liquidity test conducted as part of the new stress test process will be a separate exercise and the results won't be disclosed. 

The fourth issue is what approach the new stress tests will take toward sovereign debt. The last tests largely ducked this issue: although it applied haircuts to sovereign bonds held on trading books, it did not do so on bonds held in banking books, which is where the vast majority of banks hold them. What's more, the haircuts assumed in some notable cases were less than the losses implied by market prices. The EBA has not yet decided what approach it will take this time but believes that the extensive disclosure of bond portfolios was one of the successes of the last stress tests, according to someone familiar with its thinking. It seems reasonable to assume it will adopt the same approach again, so it will be left to the market to give the final verdict on the results.

The fifth issue concerns the need for peer review of national results. This is crucial and was missing from the last results. But while peer review is certain to be a feature of the new process, it is unlikely to go nearly far enough. One of the key failings of the Basel capital accords is the wide degree of discretion it hands to individual banks and national regulators to calculate their own capital requirements based on their own internal models. There is widespread suspicion among investors that some regulators have colluded with their banks in the use of overly optimistic assumptions, enabling banks to overstate their regulatory capital ratios. Any credible peer review process must include detailed review of these internal models and the underlying assumptions. This one won't, I am told.

The sixth issue is disclosure. Incredible to relate, but the EU authorities are genuinely debating whether to disclose anything from the stress tests at all. At the heart of the debate is a standoff between the EBA and national governments on whether there will be credible resolution plans for banks that fail. If there isn't a credible plan, the EBA fears disclosure will simply destabilize the system further, according to someone familiar with the situation. Given the blow to confidence if the results aren't disclosed, the EBA should win this game of chicken—but it is astonishing that it has to be played at all.

This inevitably gets to the heart of the final problem with the stress tests—and the reason why the EU is finding it so hard to extricate itself from this crisis. Many of the countries with stressed banking systems do not obviously have the capacity to bail out banks that fail the tests—  or at least not without putting huge pressure on their sovereign-credit rating, which will feed back into the banking system via higher funding costs, regardless of how well capitalized are its banks.

The snag is that the only solution to this problem is to use Europe's bailout facilities such as the European Financial Stability Facility to recapitalize the banks and guarantee their debts. That of course is anathema to national governments, who do not want to saddle their taxpayers with the debts of their reckless neighbors. Besides, no government would ever sign up to it without credible stress tests—which brings the argument full circle.

 Write to  Simon Nixon at simon.nixon@wsj.com 