BEIJING—China's trade surplus swelled dramatically in April, adding pressure on Beijing to allow a faster appreciation of the yuan just as U.S. and Chinese officials met for talks focused partly on contentious issues of trade and currency. 

The trade surplus widened unexpectedly to $11.4 billion in April from a narrow $139 million in March as import growth slowed and exports powered ahead, data from the General Administration of Customs showed Tuesday. 

Market expectations had been for a surplus of just $1 billion, according to the median forecast of 14 economists polled earlier by Dow Jones Newswires. 

The U.S. and China met Tuesday for the second and last day of the annual Strategic and Economic Dialogue in Washington. The latest trade data will give ammunition to critics in the U.S. who argue that the yuan is undervalued, unfairly boosting Chinese exports.

Since China let its currency float somewhat last June, the yuan has risen about 5% against the dollar, or an average of about 0.5% a month. While there is a debate among leading Chinese economists about whether the government should pick up the pace of appreciation to fight inflation and limit the buildup of its more than $3 trillion in foreign-exchange reserves, there has been no indication that the government plans to make a significant change in exchange-rate policy anytime soon. 

"Today's trade data show that Chinese exporters continue to benefit from a supportive exchange rate," Royal Bank of Canada economist  Brian Jackson wrote in a research note. "This number will likely add to the pressure from Washington for Beijing to allow faster currency appreciation, but more importantly should persuade Chinese policy makers that a stronger yuan can be tolerated by the economy and is warranted as part of their efforts to curb price pressures."

Beijing has been reluctant to make bold moves to let the yuan appreciate because it fears losing export competitiveness and job cuts.

Exports in April rose 29.9% from a year earlier, down from March's 35.8% climb, but slightly above expectations of a 29% gain. Imports rose 21.8%, down from the 27.3% increase in March and significantly below the survey's median forecast of a 29.5% rise. 

In the first three months of the year, China posted a rare quarterly trade deficit of $1.02 billion, prompting some in China in China to argue that the country's economic rebalancing is already under way and that there is less need for more yuan appreciation. 

Most economists had already expected China to post a large trade surplus for the full year, and that view will now be reinforced by Tuesday's trade figures, ensuring the currency issue holds center stage. , ensuring the currency issue holds center stage

Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner, who has been a prominent critic of China's currency policy, didn't press the yuan issue at the talks in Washington, but he picked up the refrain in an interview late Monday with television talk-show host Charlie Rose.

"From our perspective, the Chinese economy is certainly in a position where it's strong enough, it can withstand the pressures that come from letting your currency rise," he said. If China doesn't allow the currency to rise, it will have to deal with higher inflation, he added.

China's campaign to hold inflation in check showed modest signs of success in April as the consumer price index rose 5.3% after climbing 5.4% in March for its sharpest surge in nearly three years, China's statistics bureau said Wednesday. Consumer-inflation growth was still faster than economists expected.

Food prices, the main driver of the nation's inflation of late, rose 11.5% in April after climbing 11.7% in March.

Vice Premier Wang Qishan, speaking on the same U.S. talk show Monday, acknowledged the concern over inflation, saying that it was now China's biggest problem.

The April trade figures pointed to other problems that are likely to rattle world markets. China's economic expansion is slowing as policy makers use various measures to rein in inflation, including throttling back on credit and raising interest rates while imposing curbs on the property sector.

Those efforts appear to have affected import demand, as imports of a range of commodities weakened during the month. Iron-ore imports slid 11% in April from March levels and were down 4% from a year ago, while copper imports fell 14% from March and 40% from April last year.

"The data shows exports have recovered, while imports are slowing down from last month," said HSBC economist  Ma Xiaoping. "It shows that our tightening control policies are working effectively, as imports were growing very robustly in the first quarter. Thus the sudden decline in import growth shows that our domestic demand is declining."

High inventory stocking in the preceding months may also have been a factor in the slower import growth. 

UBS Securities economist  Wang Tao said Chinese importers likely slowed their buildup of inventories of imported commodities in April after significantly increasing inventories earlier in the year.

High global prices and strong domestic supply also cut demand for imports. 

"China's imports tend to be bigger than exports in the first quarter, resulting in a small trade surplus or trade deficit," Ms. Wang said. "Meanwhile, commodities importers speeded up building up their inventories in the period, but the process was halted in April due to high inventory levels." 

—Chuin-wei Yap and Liu Li contributed to this article.

 Write to  Aaron Back at aaron.back@dowjones.com 