As if the full-body scans weren't annoying enough, travelers now face higher transaction fees and more-aggressive fraud detection systems when they use their credit and debit cards abroad. 

After he was unable to use his debit card,  Bart Narter, a senior vice president at financial-services consulting firm Celent, now travels with two, in case one of them is locked up by a fraud-detection system. "There's an increased chance that transactions are going to get flagged" in foreign countries, he says. 

How much of an increase? International transactions are 10 times more likely to be fraudulent than domestic ones, says  Bob Shiflet, Bank of America's
BAC


2.38
%




 global fraud-prevention executive. 

To minimize the disruptions and extra costs, it helps to plan ahead. Here is a checklist:

 • Figure your fees. Foreign transaction fees are now typically 3% of your credit or debit purchases, up from 1% just a few years ago, which can add up if you are traveling for a while or making big purchases. You'll need to keep an eye on them: Industry observers fear that they might creep up in the coming year as card companies look to increase revenue. 

If you are going on a big trip or if your child is studying overseas, you may want to consider a credit card from  Capital One,
COF


0.00
%




 the only major card issuer that waives the fees altogether. Some credit unions limit the fees to the 1% that  Visa
V


0.05
%




 and  MasterCard
MA


-0.17
%




 charge.

In recent months, other card companies have eliminated fees for some customers.  J.P. Morgan Chase
JPM


0.22
%




 waives the fee for its Hyatt and  British Airways cards, which carry a $75 annual fee, and for its Priority Club card, which charges $49 a year after the first year.  American Express,
AXP


0.11
%




 which charges a 2.7% foreign transaction fee, expects to begin waiving the fee in late March for its Platinum card (with a $450 annual fee) and its Centurion card (with a $2,500 annual fee).

You also should look up which automated teller machines are in your bank's network. Otherwise, you could pay a flat charge of up to $5 a transaction as well as the foreign transaction fee.

 • Beware the "chip and pin." To reduce fraud, many European countries have adopted chip-and-pin technology, which requires credit and debit cards to have an embedded chip and personal identification number in order to work. (Canada is adopting it as well.) 

Train-ticket kiosks and self-service machines may say that they only take chip-and-pin cards, so you should carry cash just in case. But try swiping your card first; it may work despite the warning.

Some card companies are studying whether to offer chip-and-pin cards to frequent U.S. travelers. Old-fashioned magnetic-stripe cards are supposed to work with a swipe on any store or restaurant machine, but they don't always. 

 • Alert your card issuers. Most card companies—with the notable exception of American Express—ask that you to tell them where and when you'll be traveling. 

With that information, they should ratchet down the fraud alerts—but the notification won't eliminate them entirely. Certain transactions, including gasoline, airline tickets, jewelry and other big-ticket items, are more likely to be flagged than restaurant charges.

When you notify your card issuers about your travels, make sure they have a way to contact you, such as your travel cellphone, email or even the hotels where you will be staying. If there are questions about charges, the sooner you can be reached, the better.

Ask, too, how quickly they will replace a card if it is lost or stolen. Many companies will get you a replacement in 24 hours, but Citibank says its international replacements usually take two to four business days, or longer if they get caught up in customs. If you need a replacement card right away and your issuer isn't helping, try calling Visa or Mastercard directly.

• Prepare for fraud. Just in case, it helps to bring the bank's international phone numbers with you, though you may be able to look them up online. When my wallet was lifted from my purse while walking down the street in Madrid last year, I was able to cancel my American Express credit card with a few clicks. But I couldn't access my Bank of America account online and had to call collect to cancel my debit card. 

No charges showed up right away, but six weeks later, a series of small debit transactions came through from Spain. It turns out that the thieves are aware that small purchases—the amount varies by country and type of merchant—don't have to be approved by the issuer and take time to make their way to the American bank for settlement. 

As each one showed up, I had to call to report it as fraudulent. They have since been refunded, and at some point, they should stop appearing. But it helps to keep an eye out for unauthorized charges and to check your credit report for unusual activity for at least a few months.

— karen.blumenthal@wsj.com 