House Republicans stepped up pressure on National Public Radio Wednesday at a meeting they called to discuss a ban on federal funding for NPR programming, setting up a vote on the proposal by the full House of Representatives on Thursday.  

"Taxpayers should not be on the hook for something that is widely available in the private market," Rep. Doug Lamborn (R., Colo), author of the bill, said in a statement. "I wish only the best for NPR. Like many Americans, I enjoy much of their programming." 

The push comes as NPR begins a search for a new chief executive. Last week, NPR's head of fund raising, Ron Schiller, resigned after a video was posted online of him making disparaging remarks about Republicans and tea-party supporters to people posing as members of a fictitious Muslim group. The next day, Chief Executive Vivian Schiller (no relation to Mr. Schiller) resigned under pressure from NPR's board. 

The controversy has intensified the scrutiny from Republican members of Congress, who have long criticized NPR for what they see as a liberal bias, and have called for cuts to its funding.  

Democrats largely oppose the Republicans' House bill and say NPR is a valuable resource, especially in rural areas.

The legislation, which was fast-tracked by House Majority Leader Eric Cantor and GOP leadership, doesn't cut any money from the federal budget. Rather, it prohibits NPR and its local affiliates from using federal dollars to produce programming or purchase content from other member stations. Affiliate stations could only use taxpayer money for administrative costs, under the bill. 

"They'll just have to keep strict accounting," said Mr. Lamborn's spokeswoman. 

NPR's member stations receive an average of about 10% of their funding from the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, which received $430 million in federal funding for fiscal 2011.

Executives at NPR have said that without federal money, some stations in smaller communities, where donations are harder to attract, could go dark. 

In the aftermath of NPR's executive departures, an unedited version of the video sting has raised questions about some of the incendiary comments made by Mr. Schiller. 

Besides posting an initial edited version of the video last Tuesday, James O'Keefe, the conservative activist behind the sting, also made available a longer, unedited version. The most significant difference involves comments Mr. Schiller made about the current Republican Party being "hijacked" by groups hostile to Muslims. The longer video showed Mr. Schiller was paraphrasing comments he said were made to him by two prominent Republicans. 

At another point in the video, however, Mr. Schiller makes other controversial comments that are his own. "The current Republican Party is fanatically involved in peoples' personal lives and very fundamentally Christian, and I wouldn't even call it Christian. It's this weird evangelical…" he said before being interrupted.] 

Mr. Schiller didn't respond to a phone message at his home Wednesday seeking comment.

An NPR spokeswoman said the organization knew right away the original video was "heavily edited" to discredit NPR but confirmed in a phone call with Mr. Schiller that he made "inappropriate statements that were not, in fact, misrepresented, and which were inexcusable." The spokeswoman said NPR wouldn't have acted differently had it waited to view the full video. 

"The shorter version indicates the relevant pieces we believed best represented the conversation," Mr. O'Keefe said in a statement. "We believe the story speaks for itself and NPR has not denied any part of the comments made by Mr. Schiller." 

The Blaze, a website backed by Fox News personality Glenn Beck, last week did an analysis of the edited and unedited versions that brought to light some differences. In the wake of the comments from the longer video, the liberal watchdog group Media Matters has been asking news organizations to correct their original reports.

NPR directors, meanwhile, stepped up a search for a new CEO and are expected to hold a competition in coming weeks to choose an executive recruiter, according to a person familiar with the matter. Debra Delman, NPR's senior vice president of strategic operations and finance, is a "very strong internal candidate," the person said.

The spokeswoman for NPR said only that the board has formed its Executive Transition Committee, which held its first meeting on Wednesday. 

—Joann S. Lublin contributed to this article.

 Write to  Russell Adams at russell.adams@wsj.com and Danny Yadron at danny.yadron@wsj.com 