QUITO—Early results from Saturday's 10-question referendum in Ecuador are showing a narrower margin between the "yes" and the "no" sides, especially for the more-controversial questions related to the judicial system, media and banks. 

According to official data from Ecuador's Electoral Council, with about 39% of ballots counted, the votes in favor of the "yes" in the referendum are in a range of between 43.84% and 49.21%, compared with 40.44% and 44.15% for the "no." 

Five of the 10 referendum questions proposed by President Rafael Correa aim to amend articles of the Constitution, and the other five will require new laws. 

The official results show that in the question that asked Ecuadorians if they want to limit banks to offering financial services only and strip them of other interests as well as to forbid media company ownership of nonmedia companies, the "yes" side had 45.98% and the "no" 43.42%. 

Asked about an overhaul of the country's judicial system 45.40% of Ecuadorians said "yes" and 43.55% said "no." 

In relation to the creation of a media council that would define media companies and the individual responsibility of journalists, the "yes" reached 43.84% of the votes and the "no" 43.55%. 

The results also showed that the "no" side has won in about 11 of the 24 Ecuador's provinces. 

Analysts said the results could be a sign that Mr. Correa strong popularity is declining. 

Fabricio Correa, the president's older brother, in a television interview on Monday asked President Correa to ensure that the proposed changes benefit all Ecuadorians. "You're not the president only for those who voted 'yes.' You are president of all Ecuadorians," Fabricio Correa said. 

A quick count of votes, conducted by Ecuador's Electoral Council on Saturday, said that President Correa won support from voters with a "yes" for all of his proposals in the referendum, with margins ranging between two percentage points to 13 percentage points. 

An early exit poll from pollster Santiago Perez said that the "yes" won with 62% against 38% for the "no." 

A private tracking poll carried out by Cedatos-Gallup Internacional said "yes" won with 51% of valid votes, against 43% for the "no" side. 

On Saturday, after the exit poll was released President Correa claimed victory and said the referendum results meet the government's three goals: to win in the 10 questions, in most of provinces in the country and by a wide margin. 

Mr. Correa, a close ally of Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez, asked Ecuadorians for changes that would allow his administration to gain more control of the media and judicial system, among others. 

 Write to  Mercedes Alvaro at mercedes.alvaro@dowjones.com 