U.S. blue-chip stocks climbed as encouraging earnings from  General Electric boosted industrial stocks, overshadowing a handful of disappointing reports.

The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 48.96 points, or 0.4%, to 11871.1. GE led the measure, soaring 7.1%, after its fourth-quarter profit jumped 51% and revenue also beat Wall Street's estimates with a pickup in orders for big-ticket equipment and services. 

The Nasdaq Composite fell 14.75, or 0.6% to 2689.54. The Standard & Poor's 500-stock index rose 3.09, or 0.24%, to 1283.35, led by the industrial sector. 

A round of largely encouraging earnings reports late Thursday and early Friday boosted market sentiment. 

"GE's earnings were phenomenal," said  Dick Del Bello, senior partner at Conifer Group, especially given the breadth of the company's business, which showed improvement across the board, he noted. "The industrials are where we have a chance for jobs and manufacturing in the U.S.," he said, so "GE earnings in particular have a very positive effect not only on the market, but also on people's outlook for the economy."

Even a small group of earnings disappointments weren't enough to undermine the market's earnings-induced giddiness.

Bank of America fell 2% after a surprise fourth-quarter loss, weighed down by charges from pre-announced settlements and write-downs related to mortgage problems.

But other banks' shares rose. "Nobody who's paying attention would expect the old Countrywide portion of Bank of America to have any positive information to present, and that's where the problems really are,"  Jamie Cox, managing partner of Harris Financial Group, said.

Regional banks led the S&P 500's financial stocks higher.  SunTrust Banks surged 5.9% after the company swung to a fourth-quarter profit, thanks to sharply lower loan-loss provisions, and earnings and revenue beat analysts' forecasts.

  BB&T, focused on the Mid-Atlantic and Southeast, climbed 4.9% after its fourth-quarter earnings rose 12%, topping analysts' estimates, as the company set aside less to cover credit losses.

Technology stocks were weaker, led lower by  Advanced Micro Devices, which fell 6% after the semiconductor company reported mostly flat revenue growth for the fourth quarter and declined to update its search for a new chief executive.

Meanwhile, concerns over the euro zone's health eased as German business sentiment soared to an all-time high, sending the euro to a two-month peak against the dollar. The dollar weakened against both the euro and the yen. The euro was trading recently at $1.3613, up from $1.3475 late Thursday in New York. 

Demand for Treasurys rose, pushing yield on the 10-year note down to 3.41%. Crude-oil prices rose, as did gold futures.

Among stocks in focus,  Google's fourth-quarter earnings jumped 29% and beat estimates, with shares down 2.4% following a surprise management reshuffle. The company said co-founder Larry Page would succeed Eric Schmidt as chief executive, with Mr. Schmidt assuming the role of chairman. 

  Hewlett-Packard rose 1% after the company said late Thursday it was replacing four board members and adding a fifth, part of sweeping changes that come less than six months after the exit of former Chief Executive  Mark Hurd. Among the new appointees was Meg Whitman, former CEO of  eBay.

Shares in  Warner Music Group jumped nearly 28% after The Wall Street Journal reported the company has enlisted  Goldman Sachs to seek buyers for part or all of its business, citing people familiar with the matter.

Hospira, the sole maker of a drug that death-penalty states use as they carry out executions, said it has decided to permanently halt production. Its shares fell 0.7%.

 Write to  Brendan Conway at brendan.conway@dowjones.com 