PARIS—A top European Central Bank official urged euro-zone governments to make their €440 billion ($602 billion) crisis fund more flexible so that it can buy bonds of fiscally distressed governments and offer them short-term credit lines, a signal that the ECB wants to reduce its role in fighting the currency bloc's debt crisis. 

Bank of France Governor Christian Noyer, who sits on the ECB's governing council, also said in an interview with The Wall Street Journal that the recent rise in euro-zone inflation should prove temporary, indicating that the ECB isn't in a rush to raise interest rates despite its tough anti-inflation rhetoric.

Mr. Noyer's call for the euro zone's main bailout fund—the European Financial Stability Facility, or EFSF—to weigh bond purchases suggests that ECB officials are anxious to wind down the central bank's own bond-buying program amid signs that economic recovery is taking hold in much of the 17-country currency zone. 

The ECB's purchases of government bonds since May have helped to protect financially weak countries such as Ireland and Portugal from an even-greater battering in bond markets. 

But the program has drawn fire from the German Bundesbank, which fears that the ECB could lose its independence if it becomes a source of funding for governments. 

Mr. Noyer expressed sympathy for proposals currently being considered by European governments to transfer some or all of the bond-buying activity from the ECB to the bailout fund. 

Giving the EFSF the power to buy bonds in financial markets "would probably be an interesting feature in some cases, if only to facilitate access to the market" for governments, Mr. Noyer said. 

The ECB has bought €76 billion of struggling euro members' bonds since May. Officials including ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet have signaled a preference for the EFSF to play a broader role in managing the debt crisis on the euro zone's periphery, without being specific. Mr. Noyer is one of the first officials to call openly for the EFSF to assume responsibility for bond purchases. 

"Another possibility would be that of precautionary programs [such as credit lines], like what the IMF is doing," Mr. Noyer said. The IMF has credit lines designed to help otherwise sound countries get through tough patches resulting from a crisis, including Mexico and Poland. Those lines, which don't have to be tapped into, send a signal of confidence to financial markets before conditions erode. In contrast, the EFSF acts only after a country is effectively shut out of credit markets as a source of funding and has no other recourse than a rescue.

Mr. Noyer argued that the euro zone has responded effectively so far to the crisis of investor confidence in its weakest members' finances, contrary to the view of critics who accuse Europe of dithering in the past year. 

But Mr. Noyer called on governments to ensure that the EFSF can use its full lending capacity. The fund is equipped with €440 billion in credit guarantees, but strict collateral rules and other restrictions mean it can lend closer to only €250 billion. The fund is the main component of a bailout mechanism that also includes aid from the European Union's executive arm and the IMF. 

So far, only Ireland has used the bailout mechanism, but the EFSF could quickly run dry if both Portugal and Spain were to need assistance. That risk has forced governments to discuss ways to boost the EFSF's capacity. 

"It is appropriate to think about [enlarging the EFSF] even if there is no immediate need," Mr. Noyer said.

The Frenchman's remarks come as European leaders are trying to respond more flexibly to the debt crisis on the euro zone's periphery. Last year, Greece and Ireland needed comprehensive bailout packages that included loans for their government budgets and banking sectors, and which came with tough fiscal austerity conditions attached. 

Now, however, Europe is looking for options for helping financially stretched countries that don't need a full-blown bailout. Many economists say that Spain, for example, has much healthier overall finances than Greece, but faces a particular challenge in ensuring that its regional banks stay solvent. Governments such as Spain's might be more willing to ask for targeted aid to address specific problems, but which don't force them to swallow extra, politically unpopular austerity measures, economists say. 

More-flexible forms of aid would also help investors differentiate between stronger and weaker euro members and thus calm bond markets, analysts say. 

Mr. Noyer cautioned that letting the stability fund come to countries' aid in more flexible ways raises questions about the conditions that should be attached to such support. Some governments fear that making aid available too easily could reduce pressure on euro members for fiscal discipline. Mr. Noyer said governments "can probably find answers to that." 

In an interview at his office at the Bank of France's headquarters in the heart of Paris, the 60-year-old Mr. Noyer took a relaxed view of inflation pressures in the euro zone. 

He noted that rising energy and food prices haven't so far seeped into other consumer prices, which economists refer to as core inflation. "Core inflation has remained relatively subdued," Mr. Noyer said, and added that "by nature, [the rise in overall inflation] should be temporary." 

Overall inflation in the euro zone is at a two-year high of 2.2%, above the ECB's target of just below 2%, but core inflation is just half that rate. 

Mr. Noyer hinted that the tough anti-inflation rhetoric that ECB head Mr. Trichet began using two weeks ago could, by itself, be enough to keep wages and prices in check. 

"I am quite confident that we will be able to keep inflation at bay," in part by "sending the message that we will never tolerate that inflation could become entrenched," Mr. Noyer said. "I am not signaling that we are going to raise interest rates," he said.

Mr. Noyer, who was the ECB's first vice president from 1998 before succeeding Mr. Trichet at the Bank of France in 2003, conceded that some inflation forces are beyond the ECB's control, particularly rising commodity prices driven by demand in fast-growing developing economies. The IMF estimates that non-oil commodity prices will climb 11% this year. 

Some emerging economies "have hesitated to have the fiscal and monetary policy in place that would have been absolutely appropriate given the state of their economies," Mr. Noyer said.

 Write to  Brian Blackstone at brian.blackstone@dowjones.com and Nathalie Boschat at nathalie.boschat@dowjones.com 