ISLAMABAD, Pakistan—The U.S. raid that killed Osama bin Laden marks a new test for relations between the U.S. and its ally Pakistan, raising uncomfortable questions for both sides about why Washington chose to go it alone in an operation that took its troops to the doorstep of the Pakistani military.

Mr. bin Laden was slain at a sprawling compound in the heavily guarded town of Abbottabad. The town is 40 miles north of Islamabad, the capital. It is home to Pakistan's military academy and thick with active and retired Pakistani military personnel. 

Pakistani officials initially claimed it was a joint raid, going so far as to say one of their helicopters had been shot down. They began backpedaling after President Barack Obama stressed in his announcement of Mr. bin Laden's death that it was solely an American operation.

 News updates and reactions from around the world. 

"It should tell you a lot that we didn't trust them to help us" take out bin Laden, one U.S. official said. "You think about where he was living, and we didn't want their help."

Nearly a decade after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, U.S. officials and analysts say there is a significant risk that the alliance spawned in its wake could fracture in the aftermath of this latest, and highest-profile, victory. 

The stakes for both sides are enormous. 

Despite the weekend's success, nuclear-armed Pakistan is still rife with Islamist militants who threaten both their own government and the West; most had only a tangential relationship with Mr. bin Laden and, strategically, are unlikely to be affected by his death.

"At best, the Pakistanis look totally incompetent," said C. Christine Fair of Georgetown University. "At worst, they look completely complicit."





Pakistani officials are adamant that they weren't hiding Mr. bin Laden, and they acknowledge being embarrassed by the raid. The future of their relationship with the U.S. now hinges on whether they have been sufficiently embarrassed to more aggressively pursue militants who use Pakistani territory as a haven for attacks at home, on U.S. and allied forces in neighboring Afghanistan and on civilian targets in the West.

Sen. Jack Reed (D, R.I.), a member of the Armed Services Committee, said relations with Pakistan are now at a critical point. "This is where the diplomats and the administration and the government of Pakistan have to try to use this moment as a way to improve the relationship—and at least not to allow it to deteriorate. It is a problematic relationship," he said.

Mr. Reed said he didn't know if the Pakistanis knew where Mr. bin Laden was but that the "highest level leadership of the country didn't want to know where bin Laden was. They didn't want to know. That was a problem."

Pakistani officials have at times said as much in private. Long before the bin Laden raid, a senior Pakistani defense official said in an interview that his country "would only lose" if Mr. bin Laden was caught or killed in Pakistan. If Pakistan helped in his death, it would likely enrage many Pakistanis, who saw him as a potent symbol of anti-Americanism; if it didn't help, it would face the very same accusations of complicity now being aired.

Washington has poured billions of dollars in military and civilian aid into Pakistan since the 2001 attacks. At the same time, Pakistan has faced persistent allegations of actively supporting many of the same militants being targeted by the U.S., and Pakistan's public has grown steadily more anti-American following a series of missteps on both sides. 

A new low came with the apprehension earlier this year of Ray Davis, a Central Intelligence Agency operative, after he shot and killed two men on a motorcycle he claimed were trying to rob him in the city of Lahore. 

Mr. Davis eventually was turned over to U.S. custody but not before Pakistan had vented its outrage that it had been unaware of Mr. Davis's presence in the country. A vigorous campaign of U.S. missile strikes from unmanned drones against al Qaeda and Taliban targets in Pakistan's mountainous border region with Afghanistan also have inflamed anti-Americanism in Pakistan, where officials claim they are a violation of U.S. sovereignty.

For years, Islamabad claimed it didn't know Mr. bin Laden's whereabouts, and officials often suggested he was in Afghanistan, implying it was the U.S. that couldn't find him. Those claims now are greeted with skepticism by many in the U.S. and the global security establishment, given that he was found in a conspicuously large and well-protected house in a garrison town, not far from Pakistan's military academy.

"It's unfortunate, but we did not know about the people resident in that compound," the ISI official said. "That is a negative fallout that we have to live with."

The official said that while the ISI cooperated with elements of the intelligence gathering leading to the targeting of Mr. bin Laden, focusing on a trusted courier, it wasn't aware of the attack. The intelligence capabilities that got U.S. military personnel to the house were superior to those of the Pakistani agencies, the ISI official said. 

"We were not able to put two and two together," he said. "They were."

President Obama stressed in his announcement of Mr. bin Laden's death that the raid was solely a U.S. operation. American officials said the Pakistanis were informed only afterward.

Yet questions remain unanswered about how a pair of American helicopters, and most likely additional support aircraft, flew hundreds of miles through Pakistan's closely guarded airspace. The Pakistani official said they were equipped with anti-detection devices.

  CONTINUOUS UPDATES: News, Reactions, More  