As the Yankees weigh whether they will have Phil Hughes back in the rotation this season, another rotation option is waiting in the wings, and both team and pitcher will have decisions to make very soon. 

Veteran Kevin Millwood has been pitching with Yankee minor league teams all month, auditioning for a role with the major league team. 

But General Manager Brian Cashman has been non-committal when asked if Millwood has a shot to be called up. 

"I'm not gonna say," Cashman responded when asked his opinion of Millwood's efforts. 

The Yankees would love to keep the two-time, 18-game winner around as minor league depth, but the pitcher has a May 1 opt-out clause that will allow him to become a free agent—which he likely will activate if the Yankees don't call him up. 

"He doesn't have to opt-out," Cashman said. "But he's obviously pitching down there to get up here.''

Millwood's results have been strong enough against minor league competition to warrant a promotion, but the scouting reports have been lukewarm as to how his stuff will translate against major league competition. 

——Daniel Barbarisi

WASHINGTON—We're reluctant to ask this, but is it possible the Mets' luck has finally turned? On Wednesday, Mike Pelfrey was ailing, putting his start Friday against the Philadelphia Phillies in jeopardy. But the Mets caught two breaks Thursday.

First, Pelfrey said he felt better after losing 11 pounds because of a stomach virus over the last week. The Mets, in turn, decided to start him as planned. Around the same time, the Phillies scratched the pitcher who was slated to start for them Friday, putting Joe Blanton on the 15-day disabled list with an elbow injury.

So it's not like the Phillies just lost Roy Halladay. But all things considered, it's probably a good thing.

The Phillies will call up right-hander Vance Worley from Triple-A Lehigh Valley to start Friday. Then it's back to reality. Halladay and Cliff Lee are slated to start Saturday and Sunday, respectively.

——Brian Costa