Liberal conspiracy theories make life worth living, so we've been enjoying the latest Web sensation courtesy of the Huffington Post and Elizabeth Warren's gang at the new Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.

These columns haven't joined the rest of the press in treating Ms. Warren's policy goals as gospel, and our criticism seems to have struck a nerve. Shortly after our latest editorial on the new bureau, Ms. Warren's minions collaborated with the Huffington Post on an ad hominem smear of our colleague and Journal editorial board member Mary Kissel. The scandalous news? Before she turned to a career in journalism, Ms. Kissel worked from 1999 to 2002 at . . . Goldman Sachs. 

How did the Huffington Post's intrepid Zach Carter pull off this scoop? Well, perhaps he read Ms. Kissel's bio on our website, OpinionJournal.com. For years we've posted the secret there in plain sight. 

Our policy is not to disclose who writes specific editorials because they genuinely are the voice of the editorial board and a collaborative product. We do demand that our writers know something about the subjects they write about, so in our view having worked in finance is a useful credential for writing about finance. Financial knowledge is apparently not a requirement at the Huffington Post. As for the Goldman-is-behind-it-all view of modern life, we'd note only that Mr. Carter and his sources in the Obama Administration have now reached spiritual communion with Glenn Beck.

Mr. Carter quotes "a source close to Warren" as spreading the smear about us and our editorial writer, albeit without providing a name. For the record, while reporting our editorial we spoke with "senior spokesperson" Jen Howard, who handed us off to senior adviser Dan Geldon, who declined to speak on the record but whose colorful animadversions we would not print in a family newspaper in any case. 

Perhaps Ms. Warren—or some adult in the Obama Administration—should ask who on her staff thinks it's cute to smear journalists on the taxpayer's dime. 