 1066 William the Conqueror gets crowned at one-year-old Westminster Abbey, but confusion reigns. As French-speaking Normans and English-speaking Saxons shout out in both languages, Norman soldiers outside think the noise means an assassination attempt and set fire to houses around the Abbey. Riots ensue.

 1303 Edward I's crown jewels are stolen from the Abbey with the help of 48 resident monks. Thief Richard de Podlicote is hanged, but the monks go free. Today the crown jewels are kept in the Tower of London.



 1840 In a radical departure, Queen Victoria gets married in a white silk and lace wedding dress, rather than the customary heavily embroidered ceremonial robes, setting a new trend in bridal wear. Victoria also eschews a tiara for a headdress of orange blossoms.

 1902 The open-top, horse-drawn State Landau carriage is built for King Edward VII's coronation, which is postponed when the king gets appendicitis two days before. The carriage is used for the weddings of Charles and Diana, and the duke of York to Sarah Ferguson (the latter conspicuously absent from Friday's guest list). The footmen liveries, sewn by hand, take seven weeks to make.

 1923 The future King George VI, subject of 'The King's Speech,' gets married at Westminster—in only the second wedding there for centuries. Before Friday, the Abbey had hosted just 15 royal weddings, as monarchs mostly wed in private palace chapels. George's nuptials, held shortly after World War I, spark the tradition of royal brides laying their bouquets on the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier. 

 1947 The future Queen Elizabeth II marries Philip Mountbatten at Westminster in the first royal wedding broadcast on live radio. Wartime rationing is still in place, so the cake's ingredients are sent from Australia. Before her 1953 televised coronation, the Abbey is closed for seven months to set up seating for dignitaries.

 1981 Prince Charles and Diana marry. Like Kate Middleton, Diana does not promise to 'obey' her husband, but instead to 'love, comfort, honor and keep' him.

 2011 Despite modern touches, Prince William's wedding is steeped in history. The bride's bouquet contains a sprig of myrtle from the same bush used for Victoria's flowers. Her ring is made of gold from a North Wales mine. The main cake is a fruit cake, traditional since medieval times because the fruit, soaked in brandy, keeps better than cream cakes. The top of an English wedding cake is usually kept for the christening of the couple's first child. 

—Cecilie Rohwedder