SEOUL—Samsung Electronics Co. escalated its fight with  Apple Inc.
AAPL


0.85
%




 over the appearance of smartphones, filing a new lawsuit in the U.S. Thursday, and introducing its second-generation Galaxy S phone in its home country of South Korea with few apparent changes in appearance from the model Apple alleges copies aspects of its iPhone.

The new phone retains some of the icons that Apple alleges Samsung copied from it, such as a phone receiver against a green background that launches telephone functions and a gear wheel to reach settings. But a photo-app icon now resembles a camera rather than flower petals; Apple's icon is a sunflower.

Samsung representatives in Seoul didn't respond Thursday to requests for comment on the appearance changes. Later Thursday, Samsung filed a lawsuit in federal district court in San Jose, Calif., accusing Apple of violating 10 patents on cellphone technology and design. The suit was announced by Samsung in Seoul on Friday Asia time.

In response, an Apple spokeswoman repeated the statement the company made when it filed suit against Samsung, saying that Apple needed to protect itself "when companies steal our ideas."

After Apple initially filed suit against Samsung, Samsung filed three patent lawsuits against Apple in South Korea, Japan and Germany.

At a news conference Thursday, the chief of Samsung's mobile-phone division,  J.K. Shin, reiterated the company's previous statements about the Apple lawsuit, saying Samsung would defend its patent rights and "protect its pride."

The new phone, dubbed the Galaxy S II, is a millimeter thinner than the previous version (and nearly half a millimeter thinner than Apple's latest iPhone 4). It has a screen that is 14% larger and a faster processor, and it runs the latest version of  Google Inc.'s Android smartphone operating system, called Gingerbread.

Mr. Shin said the company initially targets sales of 10 million units of the new version, without giving a specific time frame. Another Samsung executive said the lifecycle of the second-generation model may be less than the 11 months of the first Galaxy S phone, though he didn't say when a third-generation model may emerge.

The phone will first be offered in South Korea for 847,000 won, or $790, without carrier subsidies, the company said. Samsung aims to roll it out in 120 countries by early June.

Samsung, the world's second-largest manufacturer of phones by units after  Nokia Corp.
NOK


-1.19
%




, was a late entrant to the smartphone market. But it shipped more than 14 million of its first Galaxy phones since its launch last May, accounting for about 6% of the approximately 250 million phones sold in the period.

Separately, Mr. Shin said Samsung was on track to release a second version of its Galaxy Tab tablet computer in June. The first version, with a seven-inch screen, has sold at a rate of about 300,000 units a month since hitting store shelves in October, he said. Samsung aims to sell five times as many tablet computers with the new version, he said.

—Yukari Iwatani Kane contributed to this article.

 Write to  Evan Ramstad at evan.ramstad@wsj.com 