The cure for the offensive woes of Nick Swisher and the rest of the suddenly punchless Yankees? Chicago's Edwin Jackson.

After tallying only 13 hits over three games against the mediocre White Sox, the Yankees demolished Jackson & Co. 12-3 in the finale of this four-game series. Technically, Jackson took a no-hitter into the fifth, but he did it ugly, issuing five walks and giving up two runs despite holding the Yankees hitless.

Then the Yankees got their first hit and didn't stop. After Brett Gardner homered to lead off the fifth, the Yankees batted around in a 32-minute inning, abusing the White Sox for six runs before they recorded an out.

Swisher, a perennial 25-home run man, finally hit his first homer of the season in the seventh, as the Yankees poured it on against Chicago. Swisher, who came into the game on an 0-for-19 skid, clapped his hands over his head as he crossed the plate. He wasn't the only one cheering—backup catcher Gustavo Molina notched his first hit of the year, a double, and just in time—he's likely to be jettisoned with Francisco Cervelli returning soon.

The offensive explosion earned CC Sabathia his second win of the season. 

—Daniel Barbarisi

WASHINGTON—After a weeklong joy ride, the Mets fell back to Earth Thursday. And by that, we mean back to last place in the National League East. Their six-game winning streak ended with a 4-3 loss to the Washington Nationals, who moved a half-game ahead of the Mets in the standings.

Chris Capuano was hit hard all night, giving up four runs on 10 hits in 5 2/3 innings. And unlike Wednesday, there would be no late-inning comeback to preserve the win streak.

The Mets' offense, which averaged 6.5 runs per game during the streak, was held in check by Livan Hernandez, who allowed only two earned runs despite giving up seven hits in eight innings. 

The takeaway? As the last week showed, the Mets aren't as bad as they looked when they lost seven games in a row earlier this month. But they're not as invincible as they seemed during the winning streak, either.

—Brian Costa