Since the November election, Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner has tried a new tack with House Republicans: make friends.

In the three months since the GOP captured control of the House, Mr. Geithner has been meeting or speaking with key players such as Majority Leader Eric Cantor (R., Va.), Ways and Means Committee Chairman David Camp (R., Mich.) and Budget Committee Chairman Paul Ryan (R., Wis.).

The effort is paying some dividends, with a number of lawmakers saying they are willing to start fresh and tackle major fiscal issues like an overhaul of corporate taxes. But other Republicans are wary of Mr. Geithner's recent courtship, saying they were often ignored by the Obama administration when the GOP had less power. 

"If all of a sudden you warm up and want to be friends, the question is, 'why haven't you wanted this relationship in the past?' " said Rep. Randy Neugebauer (R., Texas), chairman of the House Financial Services Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations.

Treasury officials said Mr. Geithner has repeatedly reached out to lawmakers over the past two years. He has met with House and Senate members "of both parties on a range of financial and economic subjects," said Kim N. Wallace, assistant secretary for legislative affairs.

Mr. Geithner could emerge as the administration's top congressional negotiator on the most pressing fiscal issues this year: taxes, government spending and the federal debt ceiling. He is likely to be called to testify before Congress frequently on these and other issues.

Before November, relations became so strained the two sides rarely spoke. From January 2010 through August, Mr. Geithner had only one conversation with a House Republican in an official capacity outside of a congressional hearing, according to a review of his calendar. That was a five-minute phone call he had with Rep. Spencer Bachus (R., Ala.) in May.

In September, Mr. Camp appeared to mock Mr. Geithner, when he tweeted, "Asked Geithner if the taxpayer-funded stimulus was 'too big, too small, or just right,' did not get a straight answer." 

After the elections, Mr. Geithner arranged private meetings to thaw relations. He sat down separately with Messrs. Camp, Ryan and Bachus, who is now chairman of the House Financial Services Committee. 

Mr. Camp said he used the meeting as an opportunity to get to know Mr. Geithner better and came away impressed. Their relationship would prove to be crucial when they worked in December to broker a compromise on extending Bush-era tax cuts.

"He's clearly very bright, and from my recent experience I see more and more of the administration's portfolio going through him," Mr. Camp said in an interview. Mr. Geithner was "very straightforward, and he never said anything that he didn't deliver on."

Perhaps Mr. Geithner's biggest challenge could be winning over the new House speaker, Rep. John Boehner (R., Ohio), who called for Mr. Geithner's resignation last year. The speaker still wants Mr. Geithner to step down, spokesman Brendan Buck said.

"The speaker has long believed that in order for the administration to address the people's priorities and create jobs, it should have people in its leadership who have done so in the private sector," Mr. Buck said.

Mr. Geithner's predecessor, Republican Henry Paulson, forged a working relationship with then-House Financial Services Committee Chairman Barney Frank (D., Mass.), which enabled them to work together during the financial crisis.

Mr. Geithner's tenure got off to a rocky start amid questions about his personal taxes, and he received just 60 votes for his Senate confirmation in January 2009. But his stature inside the administration has steadily grown, particularly because of his frank demeanor and refusal to sugarcoat bad economic news, people familiar with the matter said. 

"He's really grown with the job," said Sen. Mark Warner (D., Va.). "At times he's taken incoming from both the left and the right, and particularly when you are in this Treasury's role at a time of financial crisis—if you are getting 100% kudos from either end of the spectrum, you aren't doing a good job."

Administration officials hope the recent additions of White House Chief of Staff Bill Daley and National Economic Council Director Gene Sperling could help mend ties with Republicans. It also may help that Mr. Geithner's relations with Senate lawmakers are more cordial.

"I think he's a guy we can work with," said Sen. Saxby Chambliss (R., Ga.), who met with Mr. Geithner several times last year about the financial overhaul effort. "Whether we agree or not is another question."

 Write to  Damian Paletta at damian.paletta@wsj.com 