John Roll, the Arizona federal judge killed Saturday by a gunman at a political event, was seen in the legal community as a conservative and even-handed jurist and to those who knew him personally, a man devoted to his family and his Roman Catholic faith.

"He was a very dedicated judge—calm, reasonable, dispassionate and fair," said Rebecca White Berch, chief justice of the Arizona Supreme Court. "He will be sorely missed." 

Judge Roll, 63 years old, attended the event Saturday in Tucson to thank Rep. Gabrielle Giffords for signing a letter to Judge Alex Kozinski, the chief judge of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, according to Michael Daly Hawkins, a judge on the court.

The letter was intended to help persuade the court to declare his federal district a judicial emergency due to the high number of immigration cases that were being heard there. Such a declaration would trigger measures such as allowing judges to delay a trial because of strained resources.

Judge Roll went to the Giffords event immediately after Mass, which he attended almost daily, said Alan Sears, a friend and the president of the Alliance Defense Fund, a conservative legal group based in Arizona.

A native of Pittsburgh, Judge Roll went to college and law school at the University of Arizona and spent his four-decade career in the state, mostly as a prosecutor or judge in Tucson.

Judge Roll was appointed to the federal bench by President George H.W. Bush in 1991, and had served as chief judge of the District of Arizona since 2006. On the federal bench, Judge Roll developed a reputation for dealing sternly with criminal defendants, especially those accused of crossing illegally into the state from Mexico.

The judge was also fair-minded, said Richard Martinez, a Tucson attorney. Mr. Martinez appeared before Judge Roll in a high-profile 2005 lawsuit filed by Mexican immigrants who claimed that their civil rights had been violated by Arizona ranchers who had detained them at gunpoint after they crossed the border.

In 2009, Judge Roll denied the ranchers' motion to dismiss the case, a ruling that earned him scorn from some and even death threats. "Whatever his personal feelings were about the case, they didn't come out in court proceedings," said Mr. Martinez, counsel to the immigrants. "That is the mark of a real judge."

Off the bench, Judge Roll was known primarily as a man devoted to his family—including his wife, Maureen, a social worker, and his three grown sons and five grandchildren—and his church. 

"It was well known that he was conservative and a very religious man," said Michael Piccarreta, a defense lawyer in Tucson who knew Judge Roll for 25 years. "But he never wore that on his sleeve professionally. You'd never know about his faith just from watching him on the bench"

The judge was described by lawyers as unfailingly polite and cordial, often asking about attorneys' spouses and children by name.He managed to swim for about one hour almost every morning, and he showed up many days at the federal courthouse in Tucson in his burgundy-colored Corvette, said Richard Weare, a senior administrator for the federal bench in Arizona. 

Judge Roll was involved in several prominent cases. In 2005, for instance, he dismissed a lawsuit against the U.S. Department of the Interior by the families of 11 illegal immigrants who died crossing the Arizona desert.

In 1994, he struck down part of a high-profile federal handgun-control law, known as the Brady Law, as an unconstitutional federal encroachment on states' rights.

Judge Roll also spent considerable time promoting the federal bench. He worked with Ms. Giffords in advocating for funding for a new federal courthouse in Yuma, Az., due to be built later this year.

Judge Roll's family released a statement through Mr. Weare. "The devoted husband, father of three, grandfather of five, and friend to all who knew him, will be greatly missed by his family and community," the statement said. "He was a warm, compassionate judge and inspirational leader." 

—Alexandra Berzon and Stephanie Simon contributed to this article.

 Write to  Ashby Jones at ashby.jones@wsj.com and Nathan Koppel at nathan.koppel@wsj.com 

 Corrections & Amplifications  The Alliance Defense Fund is a conservative legal group based in Arizona. A previous version of this article incorrectly stated the group's name as Alliance Defense Council.