Rep. Mike Pence of Indiana has decided against running for the White House next year, disappointing social conservatives who had encouraged him to seek the Republican nomination. The decision may be the first step toward a campaign for Indiana governor.

Mr. Pence is a favorite of many social conservatives, due to his staunch stances against abortion and gay marriage and his votes against big-ticket government items such as the financial sector bailout. Some had launched an organized effort this month to draft him into the 2012 nomination race.

But in a letter to supporters Thursday, Mr. Pence said he and his wife had decided against a run for the White House. "My heart is in Indiana," he said.

The six-term Republican gave up a high-ranking post in the GOP House hierarchy last year, making it clear that he wasn't likely to seek reelection to Congress in 2012. 

In his letter to supporters, Mr. Pence waxed nostalgic about the "highways and byways" of his state and said he planned to cruise those roads in the weeks and months ahead "to listen and learn about how Hoosiers think we might best contribute in the years ahead."

Mr. Pence's decision to spurn a White House run will leave many social and fiscal conservatives still seeking a favored candidate. With the first caucuses and primaries nearly a year away, no major candidate has yet announced plans to run for the GOP nomination.

The 51-year-old lawmaker and former radio host said he would decide later this year what to do next, but a run for governor is likely. The current governor, Republican Mitch Daniels, cannot run for re-election under Indiana's election laws.

In an interview Thursday, Mr. Daniels said he could not remember a time in the state's history when the door was so wide open for a candidate such as Mr. Pence. Lt. Gov. Becky Skillman has decided against a run for the nomination, while the state's most powerful Democrat, former Sen. Evan Bayh, has also ruled out running.

Indiana's Democrats suffered sharp losses in November, and no Democrat in Indiana now holds statewide office.

 Write to  Neil King Jr. at neil.king@wsj.com 