In the conference room of publisher Robert Laffont, overlooking the rooftops of Paris, Marc Levy, the French author and one-man book-selling phenomenon, cuts a relaxed, rangy figure.

Suntanned from a holiday in Mustique, he's flown in from his home in New York to promote newly released "The Strange Journey of Mr. Daldry," his 12th novel in as many years. With his books translated into 42 languages and total sales of more than 21 million copies, he is France's top-selling novelist world-wide for the seventh year running.

Although he only started writing at age 37, Mr. Levy's first book, "If Only It Were True," (2000) was an instant bestseller, with the film rights snapped up by Stephen Spielberg for box-office hit "Just Like Heaven" (2005).

Today, 49-year-old Mr. Levy is uncovering his own backstory. 

His studies weren't in literature, but in management and computing and at 22, while at Paris-Dauphine University, he founded his first company importing computer peripherals with two friends. "We bought the third or fourth PC that was sold by IBM in Paris," he recalls. "We bought it with a student loan."

At the same time, he was also working unpaid for the Red Cross. He'd volunteered at 18 and put in six years, first in a roadside assistance team, then as a regional director organizing emergency relief. "I believe [that] the fact that my father had been in the Resistance in the war and had been 17 at the time [was what] pushed the teenager that I was to do something when I was young and not just [spend my time] enjoying life."

At university, he had to do an internship but was told it couldn't be in his own firm because it was too new. He protested that the course was designed to equip students to be entrepreneurs. "They told me: 'Sorry, it's a rule.' So I said, 'Sorry, I'm leaving.'"

The company moved into computer graphics and expanded into the U.S. "The company grew up quite nicely, we were doing a lot of R&D, then I failed," he says. "I tried to save my company but I lost everything I had. I was a young entrepreneur and I was a very, very bad capitalist and I didn't see it coming. One morning, my company was not my company anymore...I lost my company almost the same week my first son was born."

Married at 26, he'd been living in a pricey neighborhood of Paris and commuting trans-Atlantic. Upon losing majority control, he resigned.

"Very, very soon after I lost my company, I was not married anymore. In almost a couple of months I went from a very nice apartment in the 6th [arrondissement], a married man with a nice car and CEO of an 80-employee company to a young, single father living in a 15-square-meter bedroom under the roof with a baby to feed.... It was such a school of humility." He raised his son in a joint-custody arrangement with his former wife.

Starting anew, he and a friend set up as handymen and were given work by builders. "I started to see how disorganized the construction industry was and I was fascinated by the waste.... I said to my partner, 'If we were to import the logistics that I learned in the computer business into construction it would really work.'" 

With a young architect, they founded an interior design and construction company to create headquarters for large corporations.

As the company flourished he began writing a novel, not for publication, he says, but for his son, Louis, who at the time was 9. "What I wanted to share with the man that my son would become one day is that the biggest mistake you can make in your life is to avoid any mistake by not doing anything."

His sister Lorraine, who works in the film industry, persuaded him to send the manuscript to Robert Laffont. Within eight days he had a deal. Before the book was printed, the film rights were sold and very soon Mr. Levy left the company to take "the risk of writing a second novel."

Today, he has 12 bestsellers to his name, two of which have been made into films and one adapted for French television.

"When I write, I work 17 hours a day for four-and-a-half months of the year. I go into the workshop. Because there is no choice. Telling a story is manipulating thousands of dreams."

His novels about love, friendship, family, childhood and loneliness—sprinkled with the supernatural—are dismissed by the French literary establishment as romans de plage (novels for the beach). 

But his latest book, "The Strange Journey of Mr. Daldry," is already topping the charts. It's a heartwarming and atmospheric character-driven tale about Alice, a young woman in 1950s London who creates perfumes. When a soothsayer reveals that she has two lives in her, "the life you know and another one, which is waiting for you," Alice is skeptical. However, accompanied by her eccentric neighbor, Ethan Daldry, Alice embarks on a journey leading into her past. 

"Alice has a very specific way of seeing life. She lives through scents.... The reason I was so excited about that is that the olfactory memory is the most reliable... It can bring back a lot of memories. A lot of the scents described in the novel are from my own memory. I grew up in the south of France by the sea and there were hundreds of scents coming from the sea or affected by the sea."

After a spell living in London, in South Kensington, Mr. Levy and second wife Pauline Lévêque, a journalist for Paris Match, moved three years ago to the West Village in New York City. Their son, Georges, is 14 months old. 

"Manhattan is an island where 163 different communities and ethnicities live together with a desire of building a 164th identity, which is to be a New Yorker, and you can definitely say you are a New Yorker with any foreign accent and nobody will smile in your face.

"London is also very cosmopolitan, very open minded but the very difficult people to meet in London are the English.... At 6 p.m. you're having a drink with them and then they leave and you're wondering, 'Are we all going to have dinner some time?' And of course you're not, because we didn't all go to boarding school together. 

"....In Paris, you cannot say you are a Parisian with a foreign accent because everybody will tell you you're not."

What does it mean to him to have had such a successful writing career so quickly?

"It's really funny because some people when they get money they have a huge desire of possession, collecting cars or watches," he says. "But at the end of the game, who cares about being the richest man in the cemetery?"