Col. Moammar Gadhafi's supporters celebrated the leader's tightened grip on much of western Libya, while rebel fighters in the east, showing signs of unraveling amid the chaos of the conflict, pulled back from the outskirts of a key oil town.

In a sign of the government's confidence, foreign journalists were allowed for the first time in two weeks to visit Zawiya, 30 miles west of Tripoli, which has been shut off from the outside world by telephone and Internet and by road. 

Track events day by day.

See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

A look at the economic and political status of selected countries facing unrest in North Africa and the Middle East.

Zawiya had been the symbolic center of resistance in the west to Col. Gadhafi's rule, but fell back into government control this week after days of fierce and bloody clashes.

Government minders proudly displayed to foreign journalists the battle scars of the fighting. Along Tripoli Road, the main east-west thoroughfare leading to the downtown square that has been the focus of intense, two-week fighting, the asphalt was chewed by tank treads.

Tops of poplar trees framing the road were lopped off and branches hung jagged, apparently from sustained barrages of bullets. The Zawiya Jewel Hotel, the last holdout for the armed opposition forces battling the government's elite brigades, had what appeared to be tank shell holes punched across the six-story building.

The pace and details of the battle this week were difficult to confirm. However, the damage visible to the high-rise buildings facing the square, including two banks, a hotel and a mosque, reflect the use of heavy artillery, tank shells, and a variety of lighter weapons.

The human casualties from the fighting remained hidden. Interviews conducted clandestinely with Zawiya residents over the past two weeks suggest that dozens of fighters and civilians died in the clashes. Government officials haven't provided a death toll, and foreign media were barred from access to medical staff.

In efforts to clean up the square ahead of the journalists' arrival, government workers whisked away seven graves that the rebel fighters had fashioned last week in the middle of the landscaped square for their fallen comrades when they had control of the territory. In the place of graves were mounds of uneven yellow sand.

Early Friday morning, Libyan state television broadcast footage from Thursday of soldiers parading through Ras Lanuf.

A senior U.S. defense official said that Col. Gadhafi's recent military successes, as well as division within the international community about how to react to those gains, have helped the Libyan leader solidify his position.

"He's gaining some momentum and confidence," the senior official said. 

In Tripoli, the streets are dominated by soldiers, militiamen, police, plainclothes security officers and neighborhood patrols consisting of teenagers loyal to the regime. Residents whisper of arrests and reprisals for antigovernment political leanings. Internet service has been cut off for eight days, apparently as a method to quash organized opposition from forming in the capital.

—Julian E. Barnes contributed to this article.

 Write to  Margaret Coker at margaret.coker@wsj.com, Charles Levinson at charles.levinson@wsj.com and Sam Dagher at sam.dagher@wsj.com 