Consumer-staples stocks sat out much of the party as the U.S. stock market rallied over the past two years. But fabled brand names with steady earnings growth and healthy dividends might have newfound investment appeal in a suddenly riskier world.

To find consumer-staples companies with steady profit growth and lagging shares, Barron's screened the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index for those whose earnings increased at a faster clip than S&P earnings in the past decade. We eliminated stocks that outperformed the S&P in the past year, and a few retailers.

That left 10 household names that trade at or below historic price/earnings multiples, offering an inexpensive way to participate in emerging-markets growth:  Colgate-Palmolive
CL


-0.59
%




 (CL),  Procter & Gamble
PG


0.16
%




 (PG),  Clorox
CLX


0.94
%




 (CLX),  General Mills
GIS


-0.91
%




 (GIS), Kellogg (K),  PepsiCo
PEP


-0.53
%




 (PEP),  Coca-Cola Enterprises
CCE


-0.98
%




 (CCE), Molson Coors Brewing (TAP),  Avon Products
AVP


-3.20
%




 (AVP) and  Campbell Soup
CPB


-1.23
%




 (CPB).

"I would be looking at household-related products and get rid of anything industrial," says  Doug Kass, head of Seabreeze Partners Management, which owns Clorox, Colgate, Kellogg, P&G and PepsiCo.

Some on the list, including Clorox, Avon and Colgate-Palmolive, are takeover candidates. That may be reflected in Clorox shares, which ran up after activist investor  Carl Icahn disclosed a 9% stake in the company last month. But not so for Colgate, which could be wooed by Unilever (UL), or even  Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway (BRKA), Mr. Kass says.

Despite stiff competition and economic weakness over the past three years, Colgate's earnings rose 12% and Procter & Gamble's, 4%.

P&G's exposure to faster-growing foreign markets and its reasonable valuation make the stock attractive. P&G could generate total returns of 8% to 10% in each of the next five years, says  Diana Joseph, chief investment officer at Barrington Wealth Management Group in Chicago.

Food producers have struggled with soaring commodities prices, which could hurt companies such as Kellogg, General Mills and PepsiCo if consumers balk at more price hikes. But Kellogg raised North American cereal prices at the start of 2011. General Mills has raised prices on half its U.S. retail products since November. General Mills and Kellogg each could see 6% profit growth this year, and 8% to 9% growth in 2012.

PepsiCo's earnings could get a lift this year from growth in emerging markets and sales of nutritional products like Naked juices. Coca-Cola Enterprises, the bottler in parts of Western Europe, could see stronger sales of noncarbonated drinks in Europe.

For Campbell Soup, promotions hurt margins in the latest quarter, and analysts don't see much gain in earnings this year. But its dividend is attractive. And while Molson Coors shares got little traction last year, international expansion and improved productivity could help.

—For more stories, see barrons.com.