MUMBAI --Future Ventures India made a weak stock market debut Tuesday as investors avoided the scrip on fears that venture capital was a risky business with not enough clarity on earnings. 

Shares of the Future Group company, headed by retail tycoon Kishore Biyani, opened at 9.50 rupees, 5% below its issue price of 10 rupees, in a strong broad market. This comes after a positive market debut last Friday for Muthoot Finance, a provider of loans against gold. 

Future Group owns India's most valuable retailer, Pantaloon Retail (India). 

As of 0525 GMT, Future Ventures was trading at 8.85 rupees, with 15.5 million shares being traded with the price moving in a range of 8.20 rupees and 9.50 rupees. The benchmark Sensitive Index was up 0.6%. 

The weak listing follows tepid investor response during subscriptions for the 750 million shares on offer, despite the indicative price band being 10 rupees to 11 rupees per share which was termed attractive by experts. 

Its 7.50 billion rupees ($167.8 million) initial public offer was subscribed just over 1.5 times when the issue closed April 28, with the institutional and retail investors' portions remaining unsubscribed. This led the company to price the issue at the lower end of the price band. 

Future Ventures plans to use a large part of the proceeds on acquisitions and a small part on expansion. It has investments mainly in companies across fashion, food processing, consumer goods, rural distribution and home products segments. Companies in its portfolio include Indus-League Clothing, Lee Cooper (India), Future Consumer Enterprises and Indus Tree Crafts.

"Venture capital is a risky and long-gestation business, so there is no clarity on returns," said an analyst at a Mumbai-based brokerage, asking not to be named. He expects the stock to trade between 12 rupees and 13 rupees in the long term. 

Managing Director Biyani, however, is upbeat about the company's prospects. 

"We are expecting this fiscal year's revenue to grow 40% to 50% over the last fiscal year," he said. 

However, the company's investments in rural distribution through its Aadhaar Retailing unit have led to losses. 

"If that reduces, we'll be able to turn profitable at the net level in this fiscal year [which started April 1]," he said. 

The listing comes at a time when the local stock market is volatile. IPOs for the most part have seen sluggish demand this year, with just a few companies launching deals beyond $100 million in size. 

The stock opened at 9.50 rupees compared with its issue price of 10 rupees. 

As of 0408 GMT, the stock was at 9.10 rupees with 13.3 million shares being traded. The price was moving within the range of 8.20 to 9.50 rupees. 

The financial services firm, part of the Future Group, had set an indicative price band of 10 to 11 rupees per share for the issue 

The company's 7.50 billion rupees share sale was subscribed more than 1.5 times when the issue closed on April 28.