NEW DELHI – A close aide of India's former telecom minister Andimuthu Raja, who was under investigation in connection with alleged irregularities in the allotment of telecom licenses and bandwidth, died in the southern city of Chennai Wednesday.

The federal investigative agency probing Sadiq Batcha's role in the telecom bandwidth allocation scam said the probe will not be hampered by the death. 

"Further investigations are on by higher authorities," said a police official at the Teynampet police station, under whose jurisdiction Batcha's house falls, told Dow Jones Newswires. The official, who didn't want to be named, declined to reveal any details. 

He neither confirmed nor denied press reports that cited Mr. Batcha's family as saying he had committed suicide. 

Mr. Batcha, managing director of Greenhouse Promoters Pvt., was being probed by the Central Bureau of Investigation and other federal investigation agencies in connection with alleged irregularities in the allocation of telecom licenses and bandwidth in 2008. The CBI says the irregularities resulted in a potential revenue loss of $4.88 billion to the government, though a federal audit body pegged the potential loss at up to $39 billion. 

The scandal has rocked Prime Minister Manmohan Singh's government and has so far resulted in the arrest and detention of Mr. Raja, who was forced to resign last November after allegations of favoritism and manipulation. The agency has also arrested and detained two former aides of Mr. Raja, as well as a top executive of a real-estate firm whose telecom unit received licenses in 2008. All four have denied any wrongdoing. 

The Supreme Court is now monitoring the case and the federal government has announced an investigation into the case by a panel of lawmakers. 

A spokesman for the federal investigation agency said Mr. Batcha's death was unexpected, but "will not hamper the investigations into the case, as all evidences have been recorded." 

The official denied that the CBI was putting pressure on Mr. Batcha. "He was cooperating with the agency". 

The CBI had questioned Mr. Batcha on numerous occasions in connection with the scandal, with the last round of questioning on Feb. 24. Media reports say the CBI was close to arresting Mr. Batcha. The CBI didn't offer a comment. 

The probe agency has said it will file charges against Mr. Raja and the others in the case by March 31. 

 Write to  R. Jai Krishna at krishna.jai@dowjones.com 