Japan's campaign finance laws have claimed yet another talented politician. Foreign Minister Seiji Maehara resigned on Sunday after admitting that he had received a small donation from a constituent who was not a Japanese citizen. Mr. Maehara's career may not be over, but this minor scandal comes when Prime Minister Naoto Kan is teetering, and the foreign minister was a strong candidate to succeed him. The crusade for moral purity in politics is crippling Japan's leadership.

In January, prosecutors indicted Ichiro Ozawa, Japan's most powerful political figure, on charges of falsifying the records of his political funding entity, similar to a political action committee in the U.S. All that has been proven so far is that the entity took an illegal 21 million yen ($252,000) donation from the Nishimatsu construction company. 

But it doesn't make sense that this was done knowingly. As Mr. Ozawa pointed out, the donation was only illegal because it was made through organizations created by Nishimatsu—in other words, the deception was on the giver's side. Had he known, Mr. Ozawa could simply have directed the money to his party, the Democratic Party of Japan, which can legally accept corporate funds.

The complex web of campaign finance laws may have started with the noble intention of "cleaning up politics." But the reality is that politics costs money, and money is one way interest groups get a seat at the table. So the politicians pass laws that give the appearance of removing money from politics, but actually just redirect it through new channels. In the course of this obfuscation, transparency decreases while opportunities to use the laws for political purposes increase.

Prosecutorial discretion is especially concerning in Japan, where the bureaucracy has entrenched power that sometimes enables it to resist the will of elected politicians. Mr. Ozawa is well known for wanting to tame the clout of civil servants and reform old-style machine politics (despite being a master practitioner himself) ever since he left the Liberal Democratic Party in the early 1990s. So it's telling that in 2009, prosecutors decided not to pursue a case against LDP politicians for similar donations from Nishimatsu, but continued to investigate Mr. Ozawa.

Then last year it emerged that one of the prosecutors who was involved in the investigation against Mr. Ozawa falsified evidence in a bribery case against another politician. Tsunehiko Maeda was arrested in September for altering data on a floppy disk, and his superior is also being charged with covering it up. The data was changed in order to make the facts of the case conform to the prosecution's theory of the crime—which probably happens more often than many would like to think in a judicial system with a 99.7% conviction rate.

In Japanese society the merest suggestion of a criminal act brings strong censure, and an arrest is often considered evidence of guilt, meaning that once the judicial process is started an acquittal is nearly impossible. Some might argue that convicting innocent defendants is an acceptable cost in the fight against violent crime—Japan boasts the safest cities in the world. But when it comes to politics, the system seems to be devouring itself, and taking the country down with it. 

The Political Funds Control Law has been continually amended over the decades, making the requirements ever more Byzantine and the penalties for breaking them ever more Draconian. It has become impossible for voters to keep track of who is giving what to whom, while politicians must live with the knowledge that they are all in violation of the law in some way, and hence could be brought down at any time.

The result is that leaders who offer new ideas are rarely able to build up their own political support structure to challenge the "iron triangle" of business, bureaucrats and established politicians. If somehow they do rise to the top, they will be tripped up like Mr. Ozawa and Mr. Maehara. Campaign finance laws were supposed to be about making sure the system is not rigged in favor of the corrupt. But that is precisely what they have accomplished in Japan.