BEIJING–China's commercial center, Shanghai, will make it easier for foreigners to invest in the private-equity sector, a move that could give the nascent homegrown industry a boost even as it further opens a potentially lucrative market to outsiders.

Under a trial program, certain types of foreign investors can apply to convert foreign currency into yuan, which they can directly invest in private-equity funds based in Shanghai. The program would allow the investors to bypass China's tough restrictions on bringing funds into the country for financial investments—limits that are part of Beijing's effort to control its currency and limit outside participation in potentially volatile markets such as stocks and real estate.

It wasn't clear how much investors will be allowed to bring in, or under what terms investors would be allowed to convert profit back into other currencies. Investments would still have to be approved by China's State Administration of Foreign Exchange, the nation's currency watchdog.

Still, industry participants say they hoped it would bring sophisticated investors who typically invest with private-equity funds—known as limited partners—into a market that needs experience. "This will be a form of technology transfer to benefit an industry that only had experience with local limited partners, which are in a very nascent state," said  Lawrence Sussman, head of law firm O'Melveny & Myers LLP's Beijing office. Mr. Sussman worked with the Shanghai government in drafting the new rules.

The move marks Beijing's latest step to loosen restrictions it has set up to keep its currency from appreciating. China has liberalized trading of the yuan, also known as the renminbi, in Hong Kong and given firms greater leeway to settle trade agreements in the Chinese currency. State-controlled  Bank of China Ltd.
BACHY


-0.21
%




 now allows customers at its branches in the U.S. to open yuan-denominated accounts.

At home, Beijing is also trying to wean the country's economy off an overdependence on bank lending, which tends to favor state firms over private entrepreneurs, by encouraging alternative funding sources like private equity. But while there's no shortage of funds willing to invest, the sector so far lacks the discipline and support experienced institutional investors can offer.

Fund managers complain that local limited partners often aren't willing to commit their funds long term without having direct input in the fund's management.

According to the new rules, overseas sovereign-wealth funds, pension funds, insurance companies and funds of funds will be among the institutional investors that will be allowed to directly invest.

In recent months, Beijing has made other moves to help support the development of an institutional investor base for private equity, allowing insurance companies to invest a portion of their assets in the sector. China Development Bank Corp., long a private-equity investor, last month launched China's first private-equity fund of funds.

In the past, most private-equity investments in China have used dollars raised overseas. The dollars would only be converted into yuan after the target company received them from the private-equity firm. It is a time-consuming process that requires approval from China's currency regulator. 

In recent years, local fund managers have tapped local investors to set up yuan-denominated funds, which have an advantage over foreign-currency funds in that they don't require government approval and so can invest on shorter notice. More recently, foreign private-equity firms, worried that they were missing out on opportunities, have been setting up their own yuan funds, raising capital from local investors. 

Under the new rules, the currency watchdog will sign off on the conversion of dollars to yuan when a foreign investor decides to buy into a Chinese fund. That gives the funds a ready supply of yuan, allowing them to more easily compete with funds that have raised yuan locally. 

At a time when economies in the West continue to struggle, China's annual growth of around 10% is especially appealing to private investors, particularly as the country's burgeoning middle class and urbanization promise investment opportunities across the breadth of the economy.

The new rules are dated Dec. 24 but weren't posted on the government's website until this week.

—Aaron Back contributed to this article.

 Write to  Dinny McMahon at dinny.mcmahon@wsj.com 