Thirty six of the companies in this year's Journal ranking are new to the list. So what happened to last year's contenders?

There were two stock-market debuts and some high-profile acquisitions—all of which could deliver the returns that venture-capital investors seek when taking a chance on promising start-ups. Two companies saw their valuations surge above $1 billion, disqualifying them from this year's ranking. 



At least five well-funded companies fell off the list due to business setbacks that resulted in layoffs or top officials stepping down. Still more companies dropped from the list because competitors secured more cash or added more-experienced board members—at least during the period when the ranking was tabulated—propelling those new candidates to the top. 

In short, the top 50 ranking, based on data from Dow Jones VentureSource, highlights the sometimes speculative nature of venture investing—and the difficulties in predicting which companies have the greatest potential to succeed in a competitive environment. 

For instance, last year's No. 1 company, Pacific Biosciences of California Inc. began trading on the Nasdaq Stock Market in October. Similarly, No. 7  Complete Genomics Inc., a provider of DNA-sequencing services, made its debut in November. Shares of Pacific Biosciences were at $14.25 Wednesday, down from its $16 IPO price. Complete Genomics was at $7.11, down from the $9 IPO.

There also were big opportunities for acquisitions, such as No. 22 HuffingtonPost.com Inc.'s sale to  AOL Inc. for $315 million, which closed earlier this week. Google Inc. bought two of last year's ranked companies: No. 37 Slide Inc. for about $180 million, and No. 26 Metaweb Technologies Inc. for an undisclosed amount of money. 

Last spring, newspaper-and-magazine publisher Hearst Corp. bought iCrossing Inc., No. 46, for about $325 million, people familiar with the matter said at the time.

Moving off the list with valuations at more than $1 billion were No. 3 HomeAway Inc., a vacation-rental company, and No. 4 Zynga Inc., a social-gaming company. No. 23 Pandora Media Inc. filed an IPO registration in February. 

But other companies didn't fare as well. Last year's No. 5, Solyndra Inc., a solar company that secured a $575 million loan from the federal government and close to $1 billion in equity from venture investors, withdrew its IPO filing in June, replaced its CEO and slashed costs. Solyndra didn't make this year's list. 

Nor did No. 44 Casabi Inc., a cloud-based content provider that was sold in October for $1.95 million, after having previously raised $20 million in venture funds. 

Network-appliances maker Azul Systems Inc., the former No. 6, hasn't raised funds in the past three years, making it ineligible for this year's list. 

In addition, it has been one or more years since the following businesses raised equity: DriveCam Inc., CVRx, Oceana Therapeutics Inc., Schooner Information Technology Inc., Adchemy Inc. and PhotoThera.

Last year's No. 27, Satiety Inc., a medical-technology firm, is seeking a buyer for its assets and also didn't make the cut. Gone, too, after deep cuts in staff are last year's Nos. 49 and 50, consumer-services company RockYou, and health-care manufacturer Acceleron Pharma Inc., respectively. 

Lastly, a number of companies simply fell off the list because new contenders out-muscled them for spots on the ranking. 

These include Boston-Power Inc., a provider of lithium-ion batteries, and Gilt Groupe Inc., an Internet business for sample sales. 



 Write to  Sarah E. Needleman at sarah.needleman@wsj.com 