Rising incomes and fast economic growth are commonly cited as reasons to invest in emerging markets. But for many investors, nagging questions about exposure to developing markets continue.

Read the complete  Wealth Adviser report .

Can managers still find genuine value after so many years of double-digit returns? Will inflation ruin the party? And with so much cash chasing equities, are stocks overvalued?

Head winds persist for emerging markets, presenting a complex web of challenges for investors at both domestic and international levels. A look at some of the pitfalls:



 1. Political instability  

Mass demonstrations across the Arab world are a stark reminder of the risks that political instability poses to emerging-market investments.

History shows countries and economies benefit from a move to democracy over the long term. But when instability hits, the immediate effects for investors can be swift and damaging.



 2. Inflation risk 

Inflation is the top challenge for emerging markets now. Rising world food prices are increasing populist pressure for change. A sustained rise in oil prices and wages, meanwhile, would eat into corporate profits. And quantitative easing in Western economies means more cash being spent on emerging-market equities. Understanding how each country responds to the challenge of inflation will be key.



 3. Firms under state or family control 

Many companies in emerging markets are controlled by the state or wealthy families, whose interests are not always aligned with those of minority shareholders. If the state is a majority shareholder, will decisions be made purely on the basis of maximizing shareholder value? Similarly, companies controlled by oligarchs or wealthy families may transact with other holding companies in ways that will not necessarily benefit minority shareholders.



 4. Avoid acronyms  

BRIC may be a catchy acronym for the four biggest emerging economies (Brazil, Russia, India and China), but it should not be the basis of your investment strategy.

The BRIC countries have been outpaced by the wider emerging-markets universe over the past three years, with the MSCI BRIC index up just 17% compared with 33% for the MSCI Emerging Market index.

Mark Dampier, head of research at Hargreaves Lansdown, says: "Why stick with four countries when you have got 62 to choose from?"



 5. Frontier markets 

Frontier markets are a subset of emerging markets, comprising smaller economies, or those with some restrictions on commercial activity. 

Liquidity is low, which means you may have trouble getting your money out. On the plus side, they have a low correlation to other markets so can outperform in otherwise tricky times.

But experts warn against believing you will replicate the high returns of early emerging-markets investors simply by getting in early.



 6. Cyclical stocks 

A large proportion of emerging-market economies are based on resources companies, which are, by their nature, cyclical. As commodity prices rise and fall, companies generating those commodities also rise and fall in value. While some people will have made a lot of money very quickly through rising commodity prices, others will have been burned on the way down. 



 7. Avoid trackers  

Many people argue that low-cost index funds are the most efficient way to invest in the markets of the West.

Not so in the less-mature emerging markets, say experts. Peter Elston, Asia strategist at Aberdeen Asset Management PLC, says, "Emerging-markets economies have grown more than developed economies for years, but that has simply not been reflected in stock markets." 

Glen Finegan, portfolio manager, global emerging markets, First State Investments, part of Commonwealth Bank of Australia, attributes this to companies' tendency to destroy value by investing outside their core areas of expertise.



 8. Overvalued stocks  

No one doubts the growth potential in emerging markets. But are investors paying too much for access? Some fund managers see valuations overheating. "Large numbers of emerging-market companies are trading at high ratios," Mr. Finegan says.



 9. Liquidity  

Getting your money out of emerging markets is not always as easy as putting it in. Poor liquidity can be seen in wide bid-offer spreads and in long waits to offload assets at low prices. One way around the problem is to invest in Western companies that do a lot of business in emerging markets, says Tom Stevenson, investment director at Fidelity International, a privately owned investment-management firm with close links with Fidelity Investments.

 10. Under exposure 

Despite the risks of emerging markets, a bigger risk is missing out on the potential upside. The consensus view is that emerging-market economies will continue to grow for decades to come, even if there are rocky periods. Some industry insiders say that most investors are not exposing themselves to enough emerging market stocks. Jason Britton, chief investment officer at U.K.-based fund manager T. Bailey, says: "People talk about having 3% or 4% in emerging markets, because it is risky. But the reality is you need between 15% and 25% of your portfolio in emerging markets."

 Mr. Greenwood is a personal-finance writer in London. He can be reached at reports@wsj.com.  