Journal Community (at WSJ.com/Community) is the social network where you can ask questions and share your knowledge and expertise.

Go to our site and join the discussion. Sunday Journal will publish some of the questions and answers you post online. Comments may be edited for brevity and clarity.

 Q: Do you ever need motivation to power through your to-do list? What works best for you? 

I have a handwritten organizer with daily and weekly tasks. I look at it every day. When I do one, I cross it out in a nice, messy way.

—Charles Kasakophski

If there's no external pressure, such as a looming deadline, I use the promise of play time with friends and family. If that doesn't do it, music will often occupy the part of my brain that gets in the way of my work process.

—Tina Brower

 Q: Are professional résumé services worth the cost? 

— Richard Romero 

No, they are not. If a résumé is well-organized, easy to read, highlights accomplishments and contains no misspellings or grammatical errors, it is good enough. It is more important for the job-seeker to show by actions and demeanor that he or she is enthusiastic, competent and genuinely interested in doing a good job.

—Greg Vermeychuk

Rule No. 1 is to research the company and determine how you as an applicant can be of use.

—John Fitzgerald

No. It's more important to meet people and network. Who has your résumé is much more important than what the résumé says.

—David Kaiser

 Q: At nearly 60, I am planning what will likely be my last cross-country camping trip. I have seen the "big" stuff like Yosemite, Rushmore and the Grand Canyon. One stop will be New Orleans. Any suggestions for what I should include in my American journey? 

— Elizabeth Hasbrouck 

You could see the Smoky Mountains and the Skyline Drive in the Shenandoah National Park.

—James Walters

Travel down the road parallel to the Mississippi River between Baton Rouge and New Orleans. Check out the gorgeous plantations. The local cooking is fabulous.

—Doug Matthews

Come through San Antonio, see the Alamo (of course), then go north to Fredericksburg to the National Museum of the Pacific War. Then you can top it off with a stop in Luckenbach for some entertainment: armadillo races!

—Mike Acquisto

Go to Big Bend National Park in Texas. You will never regret it. You will remember what silence is.

—Avery Burns 

Dinosaur National Monument in Colorado and Utah. And just outside of Pittsburgh: the site of George Washington's battle with the French and Frank Lloyd Wright's Fallingwater.

—Don Hansen 

Ashfall Fossil Beds State Historical Park in Nebraska contains complete skeletons of many now-extinct animals, right where they fell as they breathed ash and dust from an Idaho volcanic eruption. A wonder of the world!

—Carol Kujawa 

Big Sur and the central California coast.

—Winton Woods

  Next month's question:    Q: In light of the Japan earthquake and tsunami, what kind of disaster planning do you recommend? What steps have you taken? 