WOODRIDGE, Ill.—After Hu Jintao's four-day American visit, from an official state dinner at the White House to an ornate welcome in Chicago, the Chinese president made his final stopover in this small town with much less fanfare.

The quiet suburban village of 35,000 west of Chicago showed barely any evidence of the president's presence. Several local businesspeople said they didn't even know he was here.

"Are you sure he's in Woodridge?" asked a receptionist at the Pabst Brewing Co. office here. The local newspaper, the Woodridge Bugle, made no mention of the town's worldly guest. 

Town leaders tried to keep Mr. Hu's visit hush-hush for security reasons, said Michael J. Mays, Woodridge Director of Community Development. Local officials "wanted to not reveal his visit until afterward," he said.

That was in stark contrast to the Chinese president's stops in Chicago. On Thursday, he arrived in the Windy City and made his way to the downtown Hilton for a dinner with Mayor Richard M. Daley.

He was greeted at the hotel by hundreds of Chinese students enrolled at schools across the Midwest, waving big red Chinese flags and dancing in golden dragon costumes. Protesters waving Tibetan flags and chanting for Tibet's independence from China also were there.

On Friday morning, he visited the Walter Payton College Preparatory High School, a school on the city's north side well known for having a strong Chinese-language program. 

He and Mayor Daley then traveled to a Woodridge business park where they toured exhibits of Chinese companies with ties to the Midwest, including Chicago-based Wanxiang America Corp., an auto-parts maker. Mr. Daley said Chicago and the Midwest want to be a "gateway" for Chinese commerce in the U.S.

Mr. Hu decided to visit Woodridge only within the last two weeks, partly because of a connection between Wanxiang America and Bridge Development Partners, a Chicago-based office-warehouse developer with several properties in Woodridge.

"We're very excited," said Steve Poulos, partner at Bridge Development. The Chinese "are actually bringing jobs here and manufacturing in the Midwest, which is exactly what everybody wants and needs."

Mid-sized towns like Woodridge see big business-development opportunities in courting Chinese companies. Thursday, a Chinese delegation in Chicago oversaw the signing of 10 soybean purchase agreements totaling $1.8 billion between Chinese importers and U.S. exporters, including Cargill Inc.,  Archer Daniels Midland Co.
ADM


-0.45
%




 and Bunge North America.

"Not only is China the world's largest market for Illinois soybeans, but it is also still a growth market, with demand steadily increasing," said  Ron Moore, chairman of the Illinois Soybean Association.

Woodridge is known for its 10 million square feet of office space and nine business parks. The village markets itself as a haven for companies that want to take advantage of the comparatively low sales tax rate of 7.75%—compared to Chicago's 9.75%—and the area's proximity to major expressways that ease distribution.

"Woodridge has a very friendly pro-business environment," said Woodridge Mayor William F. Murphy.

The Woodridge police were tasked with coordinating with Secret Service and the State Department to ensure a safe visit for Mr. Hu.

"It was a really big deal for us," said  Steve Herron, chief of police at the Woodridge Police Department. "We've never had the president of China come into town before. Barack Obama hasn't even been here."

 Write to  Lauren Etter at lauren.etter@wsj.com 