First, doctors told Eric Chavez he had broken his foot. 

Then, Chavez told the doctors that his feet were both already broken—and have been since birth, he thinks. 

Wait, what? 

Chavez came up lame rounding third base against Detroit last week, and when initial X-rays in Detroit showed evidence of a fracture, Chavez was told he had a broken fifth metatarsal. 

But when Chavez flew back to New York for an examination with a specialist, they saw that the fracture was old, very old— and while the area was weak, there was only deep bruising rather than a new fracture. 

The injury-plagued third baseman has always had fractures in the outer bones of both feet, he said. He wore casts to protect the area when younger. But he has never had serious trouble with it before, until he was rounding second base against Detroit. 

"It's got to be a genetic defect," Chavez said. "The fractures, however they happened, never healed completely. So there's two bones here that are semi-weak, and when I hit the ground, one of them slipped, and that's where the irritation all came from." 

Strange as it sounds, the new diagnosis was a relief for Chavez, who figured that a broken foot could keep him out for more than a month. Now, he could be back in a few weeks.

"When I went and saw the doctor, it was about as good a diagnosis as I could get. There were no new fractures. We're just dealing with a deep bone bruise, and the doctor feels pretty good that in two to three weeks, it's going to be alright," Chavez said. 

During his baseball career, Chavez has had injuries to almost every part of his battered body. At 33, he has dealt with shoulder and back problems, multiple surgeries, neck issues and all manner of other minor injuries. 

He almost retired this winter before deciding he was healthy enough to play. 

But after all that, he has never had a problem with his feet before, aside from a little plantar fasciitis.

He couldn't figure out why his broken feet hadn't caused him problems until now. 

"Just a freak thing,'' he said. "I probably put too much pressure on it at the wrong time."

When his problem arose, Chavez was rounding second on his way to his first triple since 2007. He was hitting .303, showing gap power, and playing stellar defense—until his feet stepped in. 