 The competition for rental homes is heating up as more Americans choose to rent instead of buy. And that increase in demand is driving up rent prices in some markets.

Below are six tips for getting the best deals.

 1. Work rental websites. Looking for an apartment in a large rental community? Start with Rent.com, says  Allison Atsiknoudas, CEO of Rentometer.com, a site where you can analyze and compare rent prices. But if you're looking for a unit owned by a smaller apartment company or a condo unit being leased by the owner, start out on Craigslist.org, she says.

HotPads.com features rental and for-sale home listings from 400 partners, including multiple-listing services and brokerage companies. Cazoodle.com pulls listings from nearly 10,000 websites, including newspaper classifieds, online forums and individual property management sites.

 2. Spread the word. Sometimes you can get into a great apartment through word of mouth before it hits the market, Ms. Atsiknoudas says. So tell friends and family members that you're looking for a place.

 3. Consider a single-family home. Homeowners may be renting out their condos and houses because they're having difficulty selling them in this market, says  Douglas Pope, co-founder of HotPads. These properties are often priced lower than other rentals, partly because they may not come with the same level of amenities and owners may be more motivated to get their places rented.

 4. Look beyond rentals. With the housing market still weak, ask home sellers if they'd be willing to rent instead.

 5. Compare rents. After finding a place you're interested in, look for comparable rentals to make sure its rent price is competitive. HotPads.com shows how rentals compare with others in the area. Rentometer.com analyzes how a particular rent compares with others in the neighborhood.

 6. Flaunt good credit. If you have good credit, mention that to the landlord, Ms. Atsiknoudas says. It may help you stand out against other possible renters.

—Amy Hoak  Marketwatch.com 

For all the benefits of retirement -- less stress, fewer obligations, the time to travel -- new research paints a somewhat bleaker picture: Without careful attention and some preventative steps, retirement, it turns out, may take quite the toll on our faculties.

The earlier people retire, the sooner they're likely to get Alzheimer's disease, according to a study of 382 men published in the International Journal of Geriatric Psychology in 2010.

Another recent study showed that "retirement was negatively associated with cognitive test scores over time," implying that retirees may have more difficulty solving problems and understanding complex issues, according to  Beverley Roberts, a professor of cognitive epidemiology and aging at University College in London.

  Susann Rohwedder, who co-authored a 2009 study titled "Mental Retirement," says retirement itself drives lowered cognition. The most popular hypothesis about why this happens is probably the "use it or lose it" hypothesis, she says.

If you're using your brain effectively, like you would at work, you stay mentally fit. But retirement may not be as mentally demanding as full-time employment, which can mean essential processes like time management, organization skills and the ability to accomplish a task in a given time are affected, Ms. Rohwedder says.

Yes, working, even part-time, may help forestall decline, says Ms. Roberts. But so can mentally stimulating hobbies, like bridge, learning a new language, or tutoring, says  Marc Agronin, a geriatric psychiatrist and author of "How We Age." Regular physical activity and frequent social interactions also help.

—Catey Hill  SmartMoney.com 

When it comes to investing, the so-called slacker generation has become downright timid -- and in big danger of falling further behind on its retirement savings.

Financial advisers generally recommend that Generation X -- those 50 million or so Americans now in their 30s and early 40s -- have at least 70% of their retirement portfolios in stocks. But according to data from several investment and research firms, many Gen Xers are playing it far safer than their parents.

On average, individuals aged 30 through 44 had just 48% of their 401(k)s in equities at the end of 2009, down from 55% in 2007, according to an analysis by the nonprofit Employee Benefit Research Institute. By comparison, baby boomers had about 41% in stocks, down from more than 48% in 2007.

Why so jittery? Members of Gen X have experienced several intense financial booms and busts, leaving them more wary of the markets than their parents, who lived through the bull market from 1982 to 1999.

To reverse course, advisers say Gen Xers need to sock away more 401(k) savings -- most recommend at least 9% of each paycheck, compared with the roughly 4% average this age group deferred in 2009, according to Vanguard Group. Equally important, they need to increase their stock holdings, says  Stuart Ritter, a  T. Rowe Price
TROW


-0.02
%




 financial adviser.

—Jilian Mincer  SmartMoney.com

—The Aggregator features news and commentary from The Wall Street Journal and other publications. Email: cristina.lourosa@wsj.com 