 Libya's government moved to recapture key sections of the country controlled by rebel forces, launching air attacks in two coastal cities to the east of the capital Tripoli, witnesses and rebel army commanders said. 

The bombings came as the West moved on several fronts against Col. Moammar Gadhafi—sending its first concrete aid to Libya's rebellion in the east of the country while implementing asset freezes and keeping alive the threat of military intervention.

 The U.S. joined other governments in calling for Gadhafi to step down immediately, as Secretary of State Hillary Clinton discussed ways to ramp up pressure on his regime. 

In a five-way meeting in Geneva, Clinton, German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle and the foreign ministers of France, the U.K. and Italy discussed setting up a United Nations-controlled zone for humanitarian assistance in Libya and a no-fly zone over Libyan airspace.

British Prime Minister David Cameron said his country wouldn't rule out the use of "military assets" in confronting Gadhafi. Cameron also told Parliament that he had asked the Ministry of Defence to work with "our allies" on plans for a military no-fly zone. 

The U.S. Treasury Department froze $30 billion in assets controlled by Gadhafi and his family in what the Obama administration said was the single largest financial seizure in U.S. history. 

 Iran arrested opposition leaders Mir Hossein Mousavi and Mehdi Karoubi along with their wives, and transported them to a jail in Tehran, according to a statement posted on Mousavi's websites. 

Iran's chief prosecutor Gholam Hossoein Mohseni Ejei said earlier that members of the opposition were isolated and cut off from communication and that further action against them could follow.

The news comes on the eve of massive nationwide anti-government protests planned on Tuesday as part of a plan by the opposition to increase pressure on Iran's government by continued street demonstrations.

 In Bahrain, antigovernment protesters temporarily blocked access to the Parliament and massed outside the state-owned broadcaster, broadening a strategy of gathering at sensitive locations to boost pressure on the ruling family after two weeks of protests. 

 Omani protesters in the town of Sohar where at least one person was killed Sunday, said they wouldn't give up their demands for better pay and working prospects despite some modest government concessions. 

 Trading on Egypt's stock market is slated to resume Tuesday after a sometimes violent uprising ousted the Arab republic's president and shut the exchange's doors for over a month. 

 Europe's bill for imported oil could be bigger this year than it was in 2008, when crude jumped to $147 a barrel, potentially endangering its fragile economic recovery, the International Energy Agency's chief economist said. 

 European Union officials have proposed to soften some of the controversial provisions of a euro-zone economic overhaul proposed by Germany and France, but consensus is still not clear on any of the reforms of the so-called competitiveness pact.  

Portugal's plan to cut its budget deficit could be hurt by rising in oil prices and raw materials, but the government is ready to launch new austerity measures, Finance Minister Fernando Teixeira dos Santos said. 

Spanish banks may need to raise as much as €50 billion ($68.77 billion) to boost their solvency and regain market confidence, more than twice the amount the government has said would be needed, Moody's Investors Service said.

 A U.K. jury has found a former British Airways software engineer guilty of four terrorism-related counts for using his job to prepare terrorist acts and plotting with U.S.-born radical cleric Anwar al-Awlaki to do so.  

Italian Premier Silvio Berlusconi went back on trial for alleged tax fraud, the first of several court cases to resume after Italy's Constitutional Court watered down an immunity bill that spared the premier from trial. Berlusconi, who wasn't in court, has denied the allegations.

The case was immediately adjourned until April 11, when Berlusconi may appear, lawyers said.

 The PKK, the Kurdish separatist organization that has been at war in Turkey since the 1980s, said it was ending its unilateral cease-fire. The PKK, which stands for Kurdistan Workers' Party, blamed intransigence on the part of Turkey's ruling Justice and Development Party for the decision. 

 The United Nations secretary-general said a suspected shipment of helicopter gunships from Belarus to Ivory Coast is a "serious violation" of an international arms embargo imposed on the West African nation, whose longtime ruler is clinging to power despite losing a presidential election. 

Consumer spending cooled off at the start of 2011 despite tax cuts meant to spur an economy fighting high joblessness. The slowdown in spending came even though personal income rose by 1.0%, the largest gain since May 2009.

The saving rate rose in January, to 5.8% from 5.4% the month before, a sign of caution among consumers.

Frank Buckles, the last surviving U.S. veteran of World War I, died of natural causes Sunday at his home in Charles Town, West Virginia, biographer and family spokesman David DeJonge said. He was 110. Buckles also survived being a civilian prisoner of war in the Philippines in World War II.

 U.S. officials have approved the first permit for deepwater drilling since last year's Deepwater Horizon oil spill, allowing Noble Energy to resume drilling in the Gulf of Mexico about 110 kilometers southeast of Venice, Louisiana.  

 As prices for food and other essentials climb across Asia, a growing number of governments are adding or extending subsidy programs, price controls and other short-term fixes that many economists fear will worsen inflation. 

 China plans to more than double the value of its entertainment and other cultural industries to nearly three trillion yuan, or roughly $460 billion, within the next five years in effort to boost domestic consumption and propel Chinese culture overseas.  

China's energy consumption rose 5.9% in 2010 to 3.25 billion metric tons of coal equivalent, though growth of such consumption was expected to slow as Beijing promotes cleaner fuels and lowers its target for broader economic growth.

 One of Vietnam's best-known dissidents, Nguyen Dan Que, is being detained by police in Ho Chi Minh City for posting an Internet appeal for the overthrow of the Communist government, a state-run newspaper reported.  

An Iraqi court convicted a British man and sentenced him to 20 years in prison over the shooting deaths of two contractors, making him the first Westerner convicted in an Iraqi court since the 2003 U.S. invasion. 

Somali pirates hijacked a Greek-owned cargo vessel with 23 crew on board, the European Union Naval Force said. The MV Dover was seized in the north Arabian sea, 420 kilometers northeast of the Omani port of Salalah, the naval force said.

In a separate incident, pirates released the MV Izumi on Friday, the naval force said. The Panama-flagged vessel, which was taken in October, and its Filipino crew of 20 are believed to be making for a safe port. 

Pirates have hijacked a Danish sailboat with four adults and three children aboard as they were crossing the Indian Ocean, Denmark's government said. Most hostages captured in the pirate-infested waters off East Africa are professional sailors, not families. Pirates are not known to have captured children before.

South Africa's Department of Mineral Resources is extending the moratorium on new prospecting-right applications because it needs more time to finish its review. The moratorium doesn't affect the processing of existing prospecting and mining right applications that were received before Sept. 1, 2010.