

 The end of the Fed's second big bond-buying program might benefit Treasurys. The market has rallied over the past four weeks even though the Fed, the biggest buyer of the debt, is planning to leave the market in late June.  



 Greece has been slipping further behind its budget-deficit targets and is expected to need nearly $43 billion in extra financing for 2012.  



 The U.S. dollar is gaining after weeks of steady declines. Several factors, including signs of faster U.S. economic growth, are aiding the currency.  



 China fined Unilever for triggering a consumer scramble for its products when the company suggested plans to raise prices on its soaps.  



 Kia Motors expects its global market share to grow to 3.4% this year, helped by a major design overhaul and an improving reputation for quality.  



 Maersk raised its emergency-risk surcharge to offset higher costs as piracy surged off the Somali coast.  



 A wave of high-priced mergers and IPOs is creating a new generation of millionaires and billionaires.  



 Investors are likely to hesitate to buy into this week's seven U.S. IPOs. Concern over market declines in Asia and the performance of recent deals is hurting sentiment.  



 Indonesia's central bank banned Citigroup from opening new branches for a year. The sanctions follow investigations into alleged embezzlement by a Citi employee and the suspicious death of a Citibank borrower.  



 BP can go ahead with its troubled $16 billion Arctic exploration and share-swap deal with Russia's state oil company, but only if it pursues it through its existing Russian joint venture TNK-BP, a panel of independent arbitrators ruled Friday.  



 A series of multibillion-dollar deals has sent U.S. M&A activity soaring 41% this year, surprising many bankers.  

 Asean leaders pledged to continue economic integration in the region, even as they failed to make much progress toward solving some of the high-profile problems in the region.  

 The Chubu nuclear plant's operator in Japan refused over the weekend to follow the government's demand for an immediate shutdown. U.S. officials worried in the past that Japanese officials weren't protecting nuclear plants from possible terrorist attacks, according to documents on the WikiLeaks website.  

Afghan security forces clashed with militants in Kandahar for a second day on Sunday after the Taliban unleashed a major assault on government buildings in the southern city.



Malaysia will accept 800 asylum seekers who entered Australia illegally by sea in a ground-breaking deal between the two countries to tackle people smuggling. In return, Australia will resettle 4,000 registered refugees living in Malaysia.



Tropical storm Aere lashed the northeastern Philippine, killing at least nine people and forcing more than 100,000 villagers to flee from farming towns threatened by landslides.

Searchers have recovered a total of 21 bodies from a Merpati Nusantara Airlines plane that crashed Saturday into the sea off eastern Indonesia with 25 people aboard. They also recovered the flight-data recorder and located the voice-data recorder.



Detainees at an Iraqi detention facility attempted a prison break Sunday morning in a violent clash that left 17 people dead, including a top counterterrorism officer.