And the Revised Oscar for Best Supporting Actor goes to...Chauncey Billups.

Don't even bother summoning presenter Reese Witherspoon or re-opening the envelope. Sorry to Christian Bale. Mesmerizing job in "The Fighter," bub, but step out of the hybrid limo and give that golden doorstop back.

The prize should have gone to Chauncey B. Yes: that Chauncey, the asterisk of the Carmelo Anthony deal, the add-on, the roadie, the attaché, the complimentary dessert. It was Billups, not Anthony, who plunged the three-point knife into Miami to help give the Knicks a stirring 91-86 victory over the Heat Sunday, when most of the earth was dozing off to another somnambulant Hollywood prize-grab.

Now Mr. Afterthought is getting a deserved shove to the forefront. For all the hoopla about the double-threat of Anthony and Amar'e Stoudemire, the 34-year-old Billups may have an equal say about whether this reconfigured Knicks team will make a postseason dent.

Yes, the basketball Ph.D.s were alert to Billups's stealth value in the Carmelo deal. Last week, Knicks GM Donnie Walsh lightly admonished the media for not making more of it. "One name I haven't heard [enough of] is Chauncey Billups," Walsh said.

But as soon as Billups arrived, he was obscured by Melo Mania. There was no video tribute to Billups before last week's debut against Milwaukee; no stampede for Billups jerseys at Modell's. At the introductory press conference, he played Oates to Anthony's frontman Hall. He was such a postscript, there wasn't even an Isiah Thomas conspiracy theory attached to his name.

Billups didn't seem to know what to make of the deal himself. He wasn't angling to get out of Denver like his teammate. The Mile High was his hometown—Billups played high-school ball there, and college hoops not far away at the University of Colorado. The Nuggets actually apologized for trading him away.

"We tried every way possible not to include him in this trade," said Nuggets general manager Masai Ujiri.

(By the way, Ujiri's post-trade press conference may have been the most raw, honest moment of public leadership in sports executive history. Uriji actually said he "got killed" on the deal, and his refusal to cheesily spin the loss of Anthony and Billups will make you secretly root for the Nuggets GM.)

Here in New York, Billups steps into a slot left by passing comet Raymond Felton, who will be remembered for his steady play and nuclear orange sneakers. Immediately, Billups gives the Knicks an upgrade in playoff gravitas. He owns a ring and a Finals MVP from his days on the pre-disaster Detroit Pistons.

The Knicks have done the Big Name Guard in Winter before—Stephon Marbury; Penny Hardaway, etc. This is not that. Billups is now on his sixth team and may not be a speedster, but he's still a reliable presence who paces, pushes, draws fouls, and, sakes alive, hits foul shots. His 16 points against Miami was just a fraction above his career average, but his late flurry with the three-pointer and a steal got him the post-game interview on ESPN, and a courtside high five from hip-hop impresario Birdman.

"Chauncey, people forget about him," Miami's LeBron James said afterward. "As players, we never do."

These are the Knicks, of course, so it won't be easy. (It never is.) The weekend began with a humiliation in Cleveland, and Billups must continue to diagnose an imperfect team. But it's already clear these Knicks are bigger than Two and a Half Men.

 Write to  Jason Gay at jason.gay@wsj.com 