FRANKFURT—Germany's current-account surplus shrank in January, falling short of economists' expectations amid a surge in imports, in a sign that Europe's largest economy is rebalancing towards internal demand. 

The current account surplus fell to €7.2 billion ($10.01 billion) in January from €19.3 billion in December, according to figures released Thursday by the Federal Statistics Office, or Destatis. Exports fell 1% on a monthly basis in seasonally adjusted terms to €82.4 billion, while imports rose 2.3% to €70.6 billion. 

"Falling exports is not good news for the German economy as net trade might be a drag for growth in the first quarter," said  Annalisa Piazza, strategist at Newedge. "However, the solid improvement in imports is a sign that domestic demand is gaining momentum." 

German Finance Minister  Wolfgang Schäuble said last month that internal demand will make up "the overwhelming majority" of Germany's economic growth this year, fending off criticism that Europe's largest economy is too dependent on exports. 

The merchandise trade surplus for January fell to €10.1 billion, the lowest level since August and down from an upwardly adjusted €12.2 billion in December.

Despite Thursday's drop, "exports should remain a reliable source for growth", due to "stronger than expected" demand from other euro-zone countries and the strengthening U.S. economy, said  Carsten Brzeski, an economist at ING Bank. Still, "the stronger euro and higher import prices could weigh at least on German price competitiveness" in the medium term, he added. 

Exports and imports both surged on an annual basis as Germany's economy bounced back from recession, with exports up 24.2% compared with January 2010, and imports up 24.1%. 

"Since the trough of the recession, exports have increased by more than 30%, returning to their pre-crisis level," Mr. Brzeski said. 

Germany's trading partners often see its persistent external surpluses as proof of an unbalanced growth model, and the U.S. and various European Union members have repeatedly urged it to cut the surplus by boosting domestic demand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank President  Axel Weber said Tuesday Germany's growth this year will be supported by an increase in private consumption amid "continued positive labor market developments," as well as rising overseas demand for German machinery and equipment. 

 Write to  Tom Fairless at tom.fairless@dowjones.com 