WASHINGTON—At the White House, China's Hu Jintao was to be treated to a Wednesday dinner of poached Maine Lobster and dry-aged rib eye with "buttermilk crisp" onions.





His reception promises to be a little colder when he travels Thursday to the Capitol, where lawmakers from both parties have been castigating the Chinese president and his government, saying they jail dissidents, bully neighbors and manipulate their currency.

President Barack Obama and his wife, Michelle, were to lavish Mr. Hu and his entourage with a state dinner, the third of Mr. Obama's presidency. After the dinner, prepared in part with ingredients from the White House garden, guests were to be treated to a concert by jazz star Herbie Hancock and 28-year-old Chinese-born concert pianist Lang Lang.

The guest list included Microsoft Chief Executive  Steve Ballmer, General Electric Co. Chief Executive  Jeffrey Immelt, Boeing Co. Chief Executive  James McNerney and Coca-Cola Co. Chief Executive  Muhtar Kent, among others with a stake in China's economy. Wall Street also was to be represented, with Goldman Sachs Group Inc. CEO  Lloyd Blankfein and J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. Chief Executive  Jamie Dimon in attendance.

Congressional leaders would be scarce. The only party leader scheduled to attend Wednesday's dinner was House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D., Calif.), an outspoken critic of China's human-rights record. Ms. Pelosi's last overseas trip as speaker was to Oslo, Norway, to honor a jailed Chinese dissident who was forbidden from receiving his Nobel Peace Prize.

Recently elected House Speaker John Boehner (R., Ohio) declined an invitation. Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D., Nev.) and Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R., Ky.) also skipped the event.

Mr. Boehner, who shies from other formal Washington events, didn't give a reason for declining the state-dinner invitation. His office said he had attended only one—for Queen Elizabeth—in his 20-year congressional career. He is due to sit down with Mr. Hu during a Thursday morning session in the speaker's Capitol office with congressional leaders from both parties. 

A spokesman for Mr. Reid said the Nevada Democrat was on a plane to Washington on Wednesday and couldn't make it in time for the dinner. Mr. Reid plans to meet with Mr. Hu on Thursday morning.

"I look forward to meeting him," Mr. Boehner told reporters Wednesday.

A McConnell spokesman said the senator went to Kentucky after returning earlier this week from a trip to Afghanistan and Pakistan. His wife, former Labor Secretary Elaine Chao, was scheduled to attend the state dinner.

The guest list included two former presidents: Jimmy Carter, who hosted the first state dinner for a Chinese leader in 1979, and Bill Clinton, who hosted the last one, 13 years ago (and is the husband of Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, who is also attending).

Republicans and Democrats on Capitol Hill railed against the Chinese leader and his government Wednesday during a hearing on Capitol Hill.

Rep. Chris Smith (R., N.J.), a frequent critic of China's government, said Wednesday that he believes Mr. Hu should be forced to stand before the war-crimes tribunal at The Hague "to be held accountable for his crimes, rather than being treated to a state dinner."

—Corey Boles contributed to this article.