NEW DELHI – A consortium of Indian state-run companies said Thursday it won't bid for  Riversdale Mining Ltd., further easing the path for  Rio Tinto
RIO


-0.22
%




 PLC to acquire the Australian coal mining company. 

"We discussed all the factors, like the pricing scenario, resource availability and the competing offer and then the board [of the consortium] took a conscious decision not to bid,"  C.S. Verma, chairman of Steel Authority of India Ltd. told reporters after a meeting of the consortium. 

The consortium, International Coal Ventures Ltd., or ICVL, was incorporated in 2009 as a joint venture between Steel Authority of India Ltd., NTPC Ltd., NMDC Ltd., Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. and Coal India Ltd. to acquire overseas assets. 

ICVL's decision means there is now only one bidder for Riversdale-- mining behemoth  Rio Tinto,
RIO


-0.22
%




 which has bid $3.8 billion to take over the company. Earlier this month, the Riversdale board recommended the bid to its shareholders. 

At present, Tata Steel Ltd., with 24%, is the biggest shareholder in Riversdale, which has 13 billion metric tons in coking and thermal coal reserves in its Benga and Zambeze projects in the southern African country of Mozambique. 

ICVL's decision not to bid for Riversdale was more or less expected. The consortium has so far been unable to acquire any overseas coal assets. The board of ICVL is authorized to make acquisitions of only up to $300 million, beyond which they need a nod from the federal cabinet, a time-consuming process hardly conducive to bidding for global assets. 

On the other hand, analysts had expected a bid from Tata Steel, which has a significant experience of global acquisitions, having acquired Anglo-Dutch steelmaker Corus in 2007. Tata Steel's Managing Director H.M. Nerurkar had told reporters in December that the company hasn't yet decided on whether to put up a bid for Riversdale, though he said the steelmaker has no problems with working with Rio Tinto for the smooth functioning of Riversdale's business. 

Indian steelmakers and power generation companies desperately need coal, as the expansion of domestic coal production has been hampered by strict environmental laws and a complicated, bureaucratic process to acquire mining leases. 

 Write to  Prasenjit Bhattacharya at prasenjit.bhattacharya@dowjones.com 