The Obama administration has launched an investigation into the role of Bahraini security forces in violent crackdowns on protesters last month, part of a broader reassessment of U.S. security assistance and big-ticket arms sales to long-time Arab allies caught up in a wave of popular revolts.

In a March 10 letter to Sen. Patrick Leahy, a Vermont Democrat who chairs a Senate panel that oversees foreign aid, the State Department said Washington was "investigating the actions of the Bahraini police and Ministry of Interior forces and assessing their conduct in connection with the protests" last month.

In addition, the State Department said "the administration is reevaluating its procedures for reviewing U.S. security assistance and defense sales during periods of domestic unrest and violence and has specifically included Bahrain in this reassessment."

The investigation could force the U.S. to cut off aid to specific military units found to be involved in crackdowns on civilian protesters. It could also delay multibillion-dollar arms deals to Gulf states, one of the fastest-growing markets for U.S. defense contractors. The arms review confirmed by the State Department in the Leahy letter was first reported by The Wall Street Journal February 23.

Before the outbreak of unrest, the Obama administration was aggressively pushing to sell sophisticated arms to oil-rich Arab allies, including Bahrain, as part of a campaign to isolate Iran and shore up regional partners. In October, the U.S. unveiled a record 10-year, $60 billion deal to sell F-15 fighters, helicopters and other arms to Saudi Arabia.

The letter from acting Assistant Secretary  Miguel Rodriguez, reviewed by the Journal, said the State Department was working with the U.S. embassy in Bahrain to determine which units were "involved in the government's response to protests," how they conducted themselves, and whether any of those units had received U.S. assistance. 

The protest movement in Bahrain began gathering in intensity on Feb. 14, after police killed a protester and injured 25 more. Over the following days, six more demonstrators were killed and more than 200 injured. Under pressure from the U.S., Bahrain's king directed the security forces to pull back and launched an investigation into the deaths. 

"There are conflicting reports regarding the role of the military in responding to protests and we are working to establish the facts as soon as possible," the State Department letter said. It called Bahrain's decision to investigate the violence a "positive step towards holding any who may have used excessive force accountable."

Violence flared up again Friday when Bahraini police fired tear gas and rubber bullets to break up tens of thousands of protesters. Hundreds were injured.

Under a law named after Mr. Leahy, referred to as the Leahy Amendment, the U.S. is required to cut aid to foreign security forces if they are found to have violated human rights.

"The State Department says it is investigating, which I welcome," Sen. Leahy said. "But I am still waiting to find out if any of our aid was used against civilian protesters."

The six Gulf Cooperation Council countries—Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, United Arab Emirates, Oman, Qatar and Kuwait—along with Jordan, are set to spend about $70 billion on defense in 2011, analysts estimate. Their spending is expected to reach nearly $80 billion in 2015.

Critics of such packages warned that Washington shouldn't sell arms to authoritarian rulers who could one day lose power, much like the U.S.-backed Iranian shah did in 1979.

Supporters of continued arms sales argue Gulf states need modern equipment to counter Iranian influence. These people say it is better for the U.S. to sell arms to Arab allies than to have these governments go to other suppliers such as China and Russia, which typically impose fewer conditions on how the systems can be used. 

The $60 billion Saudi deal for F-15 fighters has already cleared Congress but prospective sales of naval ships and missile-defense systems to Saudi Arabia and other regional partners have yet to be completed and could run into congressional hurdles, officials and industry expert say.