KATONAH, N.Y.—The ice is thinning and, for the 1,000 regulars who chase trout, pike, panfish and other species in the area's glut of reservoirs, this weekend will likely mark the end of ice fishing here until next winter. It will be at least Christmas before they can return to subjecting themselves to entire days on the ice at the mercy of the elements.

"People who don't fish are like, 'Are you crazy? It's zero degrees out,'" said Bill Weizenecker, who has been ice fishing in Westchester for more than 35 years. "I wait all year for hard water. I could go soft-water fishing any time."

To the uninitiated, venturing out onto the frozen reservoirs can be unsettling. Especially when the thin top layer, formed by fresh snow and rain, cracks noisily underfoot. In reality, though, there is nothing to worry about. The fishermen in their cleated boots freely clomp around with heavy sleds in tow. 

Last weekend, the ice was still 12 to 18 inches thick, with layers that got progressively lighter from the sturdy black ice on the bottom to the brittle stuff on top. Though everyone has a story about someone they know falling right through, it hardly ever happens when common sense prevails. 

The regular ice fishermen here can tell a clueless novice a mile away. They tend to be the ones with the long rods standing over holes that others have abandoned. And their buckets tend to be empty. Those who know what they are doing understand that ice fishing takes specifically tailored gear, starting with rods that are no more than three feet long. 

"It's more fun," said John Miller, who runs Bob's Sport and Tackle. "Even a little bluegill will bend your rod in half. Everything feels like it's huge."

Although over the weekend, the results were on the smaller end of huge.

 Seemingly dressed to take on the South Pole on this February Sunday, Ed Mezger stood on the ice waggling his fishing rod. He and his partners had not caught a thing since daybreak and that was not about to change. He altered the bait. He fiddled with the line. Nothing doing. So he moved on to another patch. 

Twisting his ice auger—essentially a four-foot corkscrew—he drilled a new hole through the ice. He gave it about 15 minutes before drilling yet another opening. Weizenecker, equally unsuccessful, was doing the same. Run and gun, they called it.

As the afternoon wore on, it became clear that they were not going to improve over their 5:30 a.m. haul. They would enter those in the ice fishing derby at Bob's Sport and Tackle and hope for the best. Safe in the knowledge that there had been plenty of excellent days this winter, Mezger packed up and said, "There's always tomorrow."

On the Muscoot Reservoir, Jim Seaboldt was not having much luck, either. Surrounded by tip-ups—small contraptions that sit on the ice with a line into the water and flag that springs up when something bites—he sat on an upturned bucket waiting for something to happen.

He kept one eye on his three yellow perch, worried that seagulls might swoop in, and the other on his fish locator, crucial for any ice fisherman. It is a piece of sonar equipment that displays the surface, the bottom and the bait, with passing fish sporadically appearing. Seaboldt said it made ice fishing like playing a video game, but really it brings the search a little closer to hunting enemy submarines. 

Blips on the display. Frantic depth adjustments. The tense wait. Sometimes they score a hit and another frenzy ensues. More often the enemy, or indeed a yellow perch, maneuvers its way to safety and off the screen. 

These are the battles of wits that ice fishermen engage in dozens of times a day, jigging their rods to make the silvery bait dance just right. But try as he might, Seaboldt could not turn his day around.

"Is it too hot out here or what?" Seaboldt said to his partners, bemoaning the weather for climbing into the 40s.

Yes, the hard core of ice fishermen actually root for the cold. The further the temperature drops, the better the fishing. Come biting wind or driving snow, people like Seaboldt, Weizenecker and Mezger head out to the frozen expanses several times a week to stand by a six-inch hole, surrounded by nothing but footprints and sled tracks. 

"Your guides freeze up, your hands freeze, the wind," Weizenecker said. "But if you're catching fish, you don't even feel it. You're just getting mad because your guides are frozen and you can't get the line down fast enough to get the next fish."

On the worst mornings, when the wind is roaring and the temperature plummets, the fishermen have one more recourse. And it is not staying home. They pop up little tents on the ice and sit over their holes, shielded from the elements. "You get inside of that, put your light on, it's like fishing in your living room," Mezger said. 

Perhaps the Siberian conditions are what attract so many Eastern Europeans to Westchester's frozen reservoirs. Every weekend, dozens of people from all over the former Soviet bloc, where ice fishing is a favorite pastime, make the drive up from Brooklyn and Queens to sit on the ice and recapture a taste of home. 

They sit in large groups and spend the day grilling, chatting and napping. Actual fishing seems like a secondary concern. 

"Here it can be like minus 10 for a few days and everyone says it's really cold, but in Poland it's an every-day thing!" said Marta Dolina, a 28-year-old native of Poland. She and her husband, Robert Cimaszewski, 29, live in Maspeth and fish all year round.

When it came time for the final weigh-in at Bob's, complete with light-hearted speculation about the scale's accuracy, Weizenecker's catch fell short. "Now show me the real fish," Miller told him, as he handed them back. 

Even if they were not prize fish, they would more than do on a dinner plate —breaded and fried. "Everything that's out here, superb eating," said Mezger, who added that at least three or four of his meals come out of the reservoirs every week. The same goes for virtually all the regular ice fishermen here. 

"Almost every time out, I can put dinner on the table," Weizenecker said. "You can always catch four or five fish—that's 10 fillets. Very seldom do I get skunked."