The "friend" in the title of James Brabazon's fascinating memoir is a South African mercenary named Nick du Toit. On March 7, 2004, he was arrested in Malabo, the capital of the African petrostate Equatorial Guinea, having been caught in flagrante trying to overthrow the country's dictator, Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo. Mr. du Toit was providing an advance team for a group of mercenaries planning to topple the government and reap millions by installing another in its place. The main force and its commander, Simon Mann, were arrested the same day in Zimbabwe as they tried to load up guns and fly to Malabo. 

Mr. du Toit first appears in the book languishing in prison. The guards had run out of shackles, so they used handcuffs, hammering them shut when they proved too small for Mr. du Toit's legs. If everything had gone according to plan, Mr. Brabazon would have been in jail right along with his friend. 

Most of the memoir is told in flashback, detailing the author's budding friendship with Mr. du Toit. They met through a mutual acquaintance in 2002. The author's work as a journalist and filmmaker required a dangerous trip into Liberia during that country's civil war, so he engaged Mr. du Toit as personal security. The two spent the next couple months hiking through the Liberian bush, "as if on a dysfunctional school trip," acquiring exotic parasites, getting shot at and observing horrors described more vividly than a reader might prefer. (Two words: human sweet breads.) Shared hardships drew journalist and mercenary close, and back-to-back cases of bloody, purulent dysentery sealed a bond of friendship.

Though the author didn't know it when they were introduced over a beer in Johannesburg, Mr. du Toit (the final "t" is pronounced, as in "Detroit") was already a legend: He had spent 21 years in South Africa's special forces, fighting the apartheid regime's dirty wars in Angola and Mozambique and undertaking covert missions to kill operatives of the African National Congress. With the collapse of apartheid, such men scattered across the continent as bush-war ronin. 

During the 1990s, Mr. du Toit's chief employer was the slickest and most capable of private armies: Executive Outcomes. As the ground chief of the company's operations in Sierra Leone and Angola, Mr. du Toit equipped and led a profit-seeking version of his old commando units, which would defeat the rebel forces in those countries and take as its prize not only fees in the tens of millions but also handsome concessions of diamonds and oil. In those years, Mr. du Toit proved extremely entrepreneurial, dealing arms and setting up diamond companies when he wasn't fighting. Mr. Brabazon never seems to notice that Mr. du Toit was rather overqualified to be a bodyguard for a cash-strapped filmmaker or to wonder why Mr. du Toit doesn't complain when the funds from the TV studio dry up. 

When the scheme to topple the Equatorial Guinean government is hatched, Mr. du Toit approaches Mr. Brabazon with a proposition. Join the team and film the coup. News reports of the new president returning to the country to lead the revolution would, mercenary logic goes, create a mythology of his puppet presidency and make it seem legitimate. Mr. Brabazon was well aware of how preposterous the idea was and how profound a violation of his journalistic integrity. But it was also a heck of a story, and so he consented to becoming "the Leni Riefenstahl of his coup d'etat." Thinking like a cinematographer, he realizes the difficulty of filming a beach landing and asks: "Is there any way we could do this at dawn?"

 By James Brabazon  Grove, 457 pages, $25.95

He doesn't, in the end, participate, because of the death of his grandfather, and instead spends much of the five years of his friend's imprisonment making a documentary about the failed coup. It turns out to have been a comedy of errors. The plotters (among them, Mark Thatcher, son of Margaret, behaving badly not for the first time) distrusted one another and confided in the wrong people. They made elementary mistakes, like depending on Robert Mugabe's Zimbabwe as a source of arms. And they had plain bad luck, such as when a cargo plane that should have delivered men and matériel was struck and nearly downed by (of all things) a wild goose.

What comes through "My Friend the Mercenary," in mesmerizing detail, is the pathology of war and the shared craziness of those who spend too much time around it. Mr. Brabazon cops to a serious addiction to combat, and of the figures in this book his case appears to be the most mild. He beats a weeping Liberian man who asks for his help, then considers ordering a rebel to shoot him. "Being alone with a beautiful woman in Italy," he writes of a holiday from reporting, "was frankly boring compared to being with the rebels in the Liberian jungle." Adrenaline is his drug, and the friendship of Mssrs. Brabazon and du Toit sometimes resembles that of two winos who stumble between bars, leaning on each other for support. 

The cure for the addiction, it seems, is prison. A moving epilogue describes Mr. du Toit in South Africa immediately after his pardon in September 2009 and his readjustment to freedom and to a family five years older than he remembered. He has become religious and says he is glad to have been locked up: The mock executions, abuse and years of fighting rats for scraps of food taught him that the coup attempt was "just greed and vanity." The path from mercenary wars to god is a common one. The ex-Rhodesian assassin in Alexandra Fuller's wonderful "Scribbling the Cat" (2005) found Christ, as did "Mad Mike" Hoare, whose 1978 Seychelles adventure had held the booby prize for worst-planned African coup until Simon Mann and Co. targeted Malabo.

Mr. du Toit, now living peacefully in South Africa, is relieved. "Thank god we didn't kill or injure anyone," he says. File this under lessons learned better late than never.

—Mr. Wood is a contributing editor of the Atlantic Monthly.