Forces loyal to Libyan leader Col. Moammar Gadhafi pounded a rebel-held oil-refinery city Thursday from the ground and air, in what appeared to be an escalation of the government offensive against opposition fighters in the east. 

"They bombed us with tanks, airplanes, missiles coming from every direction," said Mahmoud Abdel Hamid, a 25-year-old fighter, who lay in the hospital with multiple fractures in his right arm and shrapnel embedded in his face. 

He and other rebel fighters said they were forced to retreat form the strategic oil city. They said they saw around 50 tanks on the town's outskirts before as they left early Thursday evening. 

Such government military gains appear to be fueling a sense of urgency among rebel leaders who are seeking to secure a more robust intervention by the international community.

"We need international support, at least a no-fly zone," Mr. Hamid said. "Why is the world not supporting us? Is this a sign that the world supports Gadhafi and doesn't support us?"

In another bed, rebel fighter Mustafa Ramadan could communicate only by writing after a shell knocked him off his feet, slammed him into a car and ruptured his ear drums, according to his account. "They just kept bombing and bombing and bombing again," he wrote. 



Libya's Defense Ministry, in a statement read out to foreign journalists, confirmed the government beat back rebels from Ras Lanuf during "very severe" fighting Wednesday and Thursday. The military said the rebels were armed with Russian-made Grad rockets and other artillery, but much of the weaponry was left behind when fighters fled. 

Early Friday morning, Libyan state television broadcast footage from Thursday of soldiers parading through Ras Lanuf, waving guns and saying they had chased out the "rats" and traitors who had held the town.

Rebels retreated to defensive positions in the small village of Ajaila, about 45 miles east of Ras Lanuf. Staff at Ras Lanuf's hospital evacuatee along with patients to the hospital in Ajdabiya, further to the east. 

Dr. Ahmed Hamad, a surgeon at the hospital in Ajdabiya, said the hospital received about 50 to 60 cases throughout the day, compared with 20 to 30 a day in past days. "The injuries are different now," he said. "Before it was mostly bullet wounds. But now I'm seeing a lot of amputees, shrapnel wounds." 

Track events day by day.

See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

A look at the economic and political status of selected countries facing unrest in North Africa and the Middle East.

A precise casualty count isn't available. But on Wednesday, medical officials in Benghazi said they had tallied more than 400 deaths in eastern Libya since the uprising began on Feb. 17. 

In Tripoli, Seif al-Islam Gadhafi, a son of Col. Gadhafi, vowed to drive out members of the provisional government that has taken form in the country's east, and which on Thursday was officially recognized by the French government. "They and their families will flee on the frigates of the Christians," Mr. Gadhafi said in a speech at a rally organized by a youth organization he funds. He flashed a victory sign and pumped his fist in the air as they chanted slogans like "Saif el-Islam we have gotten rid of the rats," referring to Col. Gadhafi's earlier description of rebels and protesters as "rats." He was showered with flowers as he spoke.

Haitham al-Hamrouni, 33, who heard the speech said he was "deeply saddened" because Libyans were now killing each other. "We do not deserve this," said Mr. Hamrouni, who works for an oil-services company in Tripoli. 

In other fighting, a diesel storage tank exploded at the Sidr oil facility Wednesday, 360 miles east of Tripoli, sending thick smoke into the air.

Shukri Ghanem, the chairman of Libya's National Oil Corp. and Libya's de facto oil minister, said the explosion didn't damage any key oil installations. He didn't comment on the cause of the explosion.

 Write to  Margaret Coker at margaret.coker@wsj.com, Sam Dagher at sam.dagher@wsj.com, Charles Levinson at charles.levinson@wsj.com and David Gauthier-Villars at David.Gauthier-Villars@wsj.com 