After a decade of playing second fiddle, large-cap equity mutual funds may finally upstage their small-cap peers this year.

Read the full  Investing in Funds report .

Industry insiders cite a number of reasons—the laws of probability, for one. The small-cap Russell 2000 index has outperformed the large-cap Russell 1000 in seven of the past 10 years. All streaks eventually come to an end.

Another reason, more grounded in science: Small-cap shares are near all-time highs, which makes them expensive compared with large caps. The Russell 2000 is about 4% off its record close of 855 in 2007, while the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index is off 16%. Small caps are trading at an average 21 times estimated earnings for the next 12 months, while shares that make up the S&P 500, the most common benchmark for large-cap funds, are trading at 14 times forward earnings, says J.D. Joyce, senior vice president of investments for UBS Financial Services in Houston. That gap, he says, translates as a 57% premium for small-cap shares, compared with 5% historically.

The bigger the stock, the more affordable it is right now, says  Jim Barrow, lead manager of the $36 billion Vanguard Windsor II large-cap fund.

Mr. Barrow divided the stocks that make up the Russell 1000 Value index into four equal groups and compared them by total return and price. For 2010, the 250 smallest stocks had the best return and the highest price/earnings ratio. The 250 largest stocks had the poorest return and the lowest P/E ratio.

"They're just cheaper," says Mr. Barrow, who also co-manages the midcap Vanguard Select Value fund. He says he thinks earnings growth for the rest of the year in his large-cap Windsor II fund will exceed expectations at a rate "as good or better than midcaps and small caps."

Large caps that pay dividends look increasingly attractive to defensive investors ready to pull out of sinking bond funds. Concerns about inflation are raising expectations that interest rates will eventually rise again, which would hurt asset values in bond funds and possibly drive money into the stock market.

The large-cap stock category "is a natural destination for those coming from bonds," says Quincy Krosby, a market strategist for  Prudential Financial.
PRU


-0.51
%




 "They're the next best thing to a bond for a defensive investor because they've got free cash flow, the balance sheets are strong, [and] they've got the dividend."

The global economic environment also currently favors larger companies. The U.S. is still trying to get back in shape, while the star economies right now are China, Brazil and other emerging nations. Mr. Joyce, of UBS, estimates that 35% of S&P 500 company profits come from overseas, while 15% to 20% of Russell 2000 profits come from abroad.

Here are five funds with portfolios heavy in the largest stocks. Each recently had an average market capitalization of at least $35 billion,  Morningstar Inc.
MORN


-0.23
%




 says, compared with $24.3 billion for the S&P 500.



  BRIDGEWAY BLUE CHIP 35 INDEX: With an average market cap of $123.5 billion, this fund shops only in the XXL section of the plus-size store. Late last year, it held 33 of the 35 largest stocks in the S&P 500. Size hurt its performance last year as it returned 10.6% and trailed the S&P 500 by 4.5 percentage points. So far this year, it's up 3.7%, trailing the 5.4% return of the S&P 500. As of Dec. 31, its top three holdings were  Apple Inc.,
AAPL


0.89
%




 oil-services company  Schlumberger Ltd.
SLB


-1.13
%




 and agricultural giant  Monsanto Co.
MON


-0.38
%




 "This fund has bucked a major trend," wrote Morningstar analyst Greg Carlson in a September note. Over the course of its 13-year history, it has outperformed the S&P 500, he wrote. Mr. Carlson credited the fund's diversification rules—only four holdings derive from the same industry—and its 0.15% expense ratio.



  OLD MUTUAL FOCUSED: This fund's charter allows it to fish anywhere in the market for roughly 30 to 40 cheap stocks with growth potential. Right now, everything its net pulls in seems to be a whale: Companies in its portfolio have an average market cap of $61.63 billion.

"We remain convinced that many of the largest companies in the U.S. are not being properly priced given their market share, overseas exposure, pricing power and balance sheets," fund manager  Jerome Heppelmann wrote in a recent commentary. As investors seek alternatives to low-yielding bonds, he added, "the stable blue chips seem poised to outperform."

As of Dec. 31, the top holdings were  ExxonMobil Corp.
XOM


-0.33
%




,  MetLife Inc.
MET


0.51
%




 and  Microsoft Corp.
MSFT


0.35
%




 Mr. Heppelmann is known for moving in and out of holdings rapidly. The fund ranks in the top 10% of Morningstar's large-blend category for the past five years and the top quarter for 10 years.



  VANGUARD WINDSOR II: The management of this fund is divided among nine portfolio managers at six firms, but Mr. Barrow, an executive in Dallas asset manager Barrow, Hanley, Mewhinney & Strauss, has managed the majority of the portfolio since the fund's inception in 1985. "He's as contrarian as ever, still buying out-of-favor stocks with above-average yields and below-average valuations," wrote Morningstar analyst Dan Culloton in a September note. "Lately, the squad has been leaning toward big companies with solid balance sheets and competitive advantages." The top three holdings at year-end:  ConocoPhillips,
COP


-1.24
%




 International Business Machines Corp.
IBM


-0.01
%




 and  Wells Fargo
WFC


1.33
%




 & Co. Companies in the portfolio have an average market cap of $46.2 billion. The fund fell behind the S&P 500 in 2010, but it's ahead so far this year. For the past 10 years, it has topped the return of the S&P 500, by an average annual 4.2% to 2.6%.



  ING CORPORATE LEADERS TRUST: This historic trust may be the closest thing out there to a megacap sector fund. At year-end, Exxon Mobil was the top holding, industrial-gas producer  Praxair Inc.
PX


-0.15
%




 was fourth, and  Chevron Corp.
CVX


-0.82
%




 was fifth. Almost a third of the portfolio was in the energy sector. The trust, which recently celebrated its 75th anniversary, has an unusual passive strategy. It began with the 30 leading dividend-paying companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange in 1935, and has stayed with them. The fund's composition changes only when there is a merger, an impending bankruptcy, a dividend suspension or a spinoff. The average market cap in this fund is $75.96 billion. Its concentration in energy has helped it to a 9.8% return for the year to date, soundly beating the S&P 500.



  JPMORGAN U.S. LARGE CAP CORE PLUS: This is a 130/30 fund, meaning that it can take a limited amount of leverage and invest in short positions as a minority part of the portfolio. The average market cap of its long positions is $51 billion. The fund, which is up 4.9% for the year to date, has backed tech giants for some time. Recently, its top holding was Apple; its fourth-largest, Microsoft; and its fifth-largest,  Cisco Systems.
CSCO


0.36
%




 The other holdings are widely diversified.

Mr. Curran is a writer in Denton, Texas. He can be reached at rob.curran@dowjones.com.