WASHINGTON—President Barack Obama and House Republicans used their weekly radio addresses to continue a blame game over surging gas prices that will heighten and shrink as fuel prices fluctuate. 

President Obama continued his call for Congress to end tax subsidies for oil companies, saying rising gas prices mean "real pain for our families" but also translate into bigger profits. This week companies including  Chevron Corp.
CVX


-1.30
%




,  ConocoPhillips
COP


-2.06
%




 and  Exxon Mobil Corp.
XOM


-0.49
%




 all reported surging profits partly as a result of soaring gas prices. 

Rep. James Lankford, a Republican from Oklahoma who delivered the GOP's weekly radio address, said "gasoline is at the top of the list" of concerns from people in his district. He said "prices at the pump have nearly doubled since President Obama took office, making everyday life like driving to work, buying groceries, picking up kids at school and visiting family more expensive." 

The average price for a regular gallon of gasoline is about $3.91, according to the auto club AAA, up from $2.88 a year ago. 

President Obama has said oil companies don't need tax subsidies of $4 billion a year when they are making billions in profits. "When oil companies are making huge profits and you're struggling at the pump, and we're scouring the federal budget for spending we can afford to do without, these tax giveaways aren't right," he said. 

Mr. Lankford said "The president may think he's punishing CEOs of big companies, but his plan will hurt the everyday consumer of energy and imperil the jobs of millions of hardworking people in American-based companies." 

Oil executives have said companies would likely pass costs lost from ending the subsidies onto consumers. 

Two top Democrats, Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid of Nevada and House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi of California, are pushing to hold votes on ending the tax breaks this week. Chances are low that a package would pass. 

The White House has seized on comments from House Speaker John Boehner of Ohio that he'd be willing to review oil-industry breaks as part of a broader effort to lower the deficit. Still, Republicans have said they want that to be considered as part of a larger revamping of the U.S. tax code, not as an individual move. 

Mr. Lankford also criticized Mr. Obama for calling for a vote on the nation's debt limit to be separate from efforts to trim the deficit. 

A bipartisan group of lawmakers is expected to meet this week with Vice President Joe Biden and other administration officials to begin talks about how to lower the country's deficit. 