 Fort Myers, Fla.  

A.R. Gurney's "Sylvia," which is being performed with terrific comic energy by the Florida Repertory Theatre, is both clever and cute in all the right ways. First seen in New York a decade and a half ago, Mr. Gurney's droll tale of a dog who comes between a middle-age man and his frustrated wife has long since become a regional-theater staple, as well it should be. Not only is "Sylvia" one of the funniest small-cast plays of the past quarter century, but just beneath the surface it has serious things to say about the travails of what one of the characters calls "the dangerous years…the years between the first hint of retirement and the first whiff of the nursing home." Moreover, Mr. Gurney says them so amusingly that you almost fail to notice the sharp bite of the medicine of truth.

The trick to "Sylvia" is that the title character, a stray poodle-Labrador mix, is played by a young woman (Michelle Damato) who is capable of conversing with her master (Gordon McConnell) and mistress (Carrie Lund) when no one else is around to eavesdrop. Greg, who found her in the park one day, is deep in the throes of a work-related midlife crisis. Accordingly, he falls for Sylvia in much the same way that another man might fall for a younger woman, much to the horror of Kate, his wife, who didn't want a dog in the first place and really doesn't want one on whom her husband dotes to the exclusion of everyone else, Kate included. Stir in a third actor (Chris Clavelli) who plays three smaller roles, two of them in drag, and you get a recipe for Gurney-style comedy, meaning that most of the laughs—many of which are very loud indeed—are faintly but unmistakably flavored with a jigger of rue.

 Sylvia  Florida Repertory Theatre  Arcade Theatre  2267 First St., Fort Myers, Fla.  ($39-$44), 239-332-4488  Closes Jan. 23

The Importance of Being Earnest  |Roundabout Theatre Company  American Airlines Theatre  227 W. 42nd St., New York  ($67-$117), 212-719-1300  Closes Mar. 6

I had to miss Long Wharf Theater's well-received revival of "Sylvia" in New Haven last March, so I decided to fly down to Fort Myers to see the play done by Florida Rep. Maureen Heffernan, who directed the lovely production of Brian Friel's "Dancing at Lughnasa" that I saw there two seasons ago, has done an equally fine job this time around. Here as before, her staging is blessedly free of obtrusive tricks: Ms. Heffernan appears to simply let the play happen, and though you know it's vastly more complicated than that, you never stop to think about how she did it. Ms. Damato is entirely delightful in the canine role created Off Broadway by Sarah Jessica Parker in 1995. Her frisky body language and dead-sure comic timing couldn't be bettered. Not that her colleagues are anything other than right on the button: Here as in the two previous Florida Rep shows I've seen, you get the feeling that you're watching a permanent ensemble at work on stage, one whose members know and trust one another.

I wonder how many of the citizens of Fort Myers know exactly how lucky they are to have access to a theater company like Florida Rep. It's easy for regional theatergoers to assume that to see the really good stuff onstage, you have to go to New York. But after three visits, I feel secure in saying that Florida Rep is one of America's top repertory companies, a troupe that consistently chooses strong plays and produces them with polish and imagination. They've yet to steer me wrong.

Speaking of drag acts, the smartest one ever to come my way is currently doing business in Manhattan: The Roundabout Theatre Company has brought to Broadway Brian Bedford's brilliantly zany Stratford Shakespeare Festival staging of Oscar Wilde's "The Importance of Being Earnest," in which the veteran classical comedian dons wig and gown to play Lady Bracknell.

As I wrote in this space when I saw the production in Canada two summers ago, "I don't care for camped-up drag acts, but Mr. Bedford, who makes himself up to look like Queen Victoria and carries himself like a snooty gargoyle, is giving us something completely different, an impersonation so sharp-witted and closely observed that it demands to be accepted on its own daring terms…. I might well have taken it for granted that Lady Bracknell was being played by a woman had I not glanced at the program before the curtain went up." Desmond Heeley's fantastic set, which looks like a giant marzipan sculpture by Georges Seurat, has moved to New York along with Mr. Bedford, and the new cast includes Dana Ivey and Paxton Whitehead, two of the American theater's most trustworthy wits. I haven't yet been able to catch the show in New York—I was one of those unlucky fliers who got caught short by Wednesday's blizzard—but I'll be surprised if this version is any less good than the one I saw in Stratford.

—Mr. Teachout, the Journal's drama critic, blogs about theater and the other arts at www.terryteachout.com. Write to him at tteachout@wsj.com.