European leaders are having a tough time patching cracks in their grand experiment in which 17 sovereign countries share one currency. 

The euro had a pretty smooth run for its first decade, defying skeptics who saw political and historical reasons for its creation but economic hurdles to making it work. The past year has revived those worries. 

So while the rest of the world focuses on the earthquake-tsunami-nuclear disaster in Japan and instability in the Middle East, Europe is struggling to shore up the euro's economic footing. 

It's a conversation—complicated by acronyms, local politics and national rivalries—hard for outsiders to follow. But it can be boiled down to one contradiction and two fundamental tensions.

 The contradiction. The first objective of Germany and some others is to make bailouts so tough on borrowing countries and their private creditors that governments will be less profligate and investors won't lend so readily. The second objective is to persuade financial markets that there's a backstop big enough so no government will default. Only then will investors lend at reasonable rates to governments that need money. 

The rub: The harder European leaders press on the first objective, the greater the likelihood that they will fail on the second—and provoke a bondholder run that will trigger the very taxpayer bailouts they are trying to avoid. 

 Fundamental tension I. A lot, and I mean a lot, has been said about the straitjacket of a "one-size-fits-all" monetary policy. As the European Central Bank flirts with raising rates soon, the strains are increasingly apparent. 

Germany and France are so big (48% of euro-zone output) that if the ECB sets rates just right for the whole currency bloc—and that is its job—then rates tend to be about right for Germany and France, but not for all others. 

The chart with this column makes the point. Start with a rule devised by Stanford University's John Taylor that uses the inflation rate and the gap between actual and potential output to prescribe an interest rate. Compare that Taylor Rule to the actual ECB-set short-term interest rate. 

For Germany and France, ECB rates have been right on the mark. For Greece, Spain and especially Ireland, rates were too low for much of the 2000s. Cheap money fueled binges and bubbles. And now, given unemployment and banking crises, rates there look too high—even before the ECB raises them. 

The original notion was that national governments would use tax-and-spending policies to compensate when euro-zone monetary policy was too loose or too tight for their economies. But it hasn't worked out. Spain and Ireland ran surpluses, but not big enough to offset easy money, misguided bankers and borrowers, and inadequate regulations. Deficit limits were evaded by nearly all—hence current attempts to fashion stronger fiscal constraints. 

 Fundamental tension II. By improving productivity (output for each hour of work) and restraining wage increases, Germany has made itself much more competitive than other euro-zone economies both in and outside Europe.

The average labor cost of making something in Germany, a measure called "unit labor costs," has risen about 6% since the advent of the euro in 1999. In France, unit labor costs during the 2000s rose 25%; in Italy, 33%; in Ireland, 34%; in Spain, 36%, and in Greece, 41%. So it's no surprise, Germany has become the export powerhouse of Europe.

Before the euro, Spain or Ireland would have devalued currencies to make their wares cheaper to foreigners. Joining the euro made that impossible. So they need some other way to compete with Germany. 

One way would be for Germany to raise wages and tolerate more inflation than its neighbors, perhaps even higher than the ECB target of just under 2%. Germany isn't interested. The other is for the rest of Europe to cut wages (ouch!) and sharply increase productivity (hard to do quickly).

Ireland is doing the first; it hurts. Recent talk of a "competitiveness pact" in Europe is meant to force the second by raising retirement ages, linking pay to productivity and the like.

So far, Europe has managed to do just enough at each intersection to avoid financial and economic calamity. But truly ensuring "stability and growth" depends on resolving these very tough dilemmas.

 Write to  David Wessel at capital@wsj.com 