 The uneven global recovery continues apace but sovereign debt and financial sector risks, particularly in Europe, could threaten global stability, the International Monetary Fund said. 

A pair of reports released by the fund suggested that advanced economies are still struggling to move past the recent financial crisis, while growing emerging economies are showing signs of overheating and inflationary pressures. 

 International investors poured into the first bond issued to fund a new European Union facility to save euro-zone governments from default, underscoring confidence in the EU's efforts to safeguard the euro. The €5 billion ($6.82 billion) issue by the European Financial Stability Facility was eight times oversubscribed with bids totaling more than €40 billion. 

 Bankers are showing up at this week's World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, eager to mingle with politicians and regulators in the hopes of fending off new restrictions on how they run their businesses and pay their employees. 

 The U.K.'s snow-battered economy shrank for the first time in more than a year during the fourth quarter of 2010, a surprise negative hit that will trigger debate about the country's aggressive fiscal tightening and the direction of interest rates.  

In its preliminary estimate, which is frequently revised at a later date, the Office for National Statistics said gross domestic product fell 0.5%, after expanding by 0.7% in the third quarter. It is the first quarterly contraction in GDP since the third quarter of 2009. 

Bank of England Governor Mervyn King reaffirmed his support for aggressive cuts to U.K. public spending, in remarks that once again raise questions about whether he is straying into political territory supposedly off-limits to independent central bankers. 

 Portuguese Prime Minister José Sócrates said in an interview he is counting on a pickup in exports and foreign investors to ease Portugal's debt crisis. But doubts persist—including from Portugal's central bank—about the health of the country's economic vital signs.  

 Germany's movie-ratings agency said it won't clear a Turkish movie about last year's clash at sea between Israeli soldiers and Turkish aid activists in time to permit the film's planned launch there on January 27, an annual day of commemoration for the Jewish Holocaust. 

Turkey's central bank raised its 2011 inflation forecast and issued a robust defense of its controversial policy to simultaneously curb hot-money growth and cool a domestic lending boom. 

 Russian President Dmitry Medvedev said terrorism is "the main threat" the country faces and vowed to find and eliminate those responsible for Monday's deadly suicide bombing at the country's busiest international airport. Speaking to security officials, Medvedev said airport officials and police responsible for what he called lax security at Moscow's Domodedovo Airport would be punished. 

 President Barack Obama will call for a five-year freeze on nonsecurity discretionary spending in his State of the Union address "as a down payment toward reducing the deficit," a White House official said. The freeze won't touch some of the budget's biggest items, such as Medicare, Social Security and defense spending, nor will it apply to homeland-security spending or foreign aid.  

 Home prices fell in November, continuing a downward trend that began in August, according to the S&P Case-Shiller home-price indexes. The indexes, based on the three-month averages of home prices, turned lower in August for the first time in four months, a delayed response to housing-market weakness after federal home-buyer tax credits expired in April.  

 A former Guantanamo detainee was sentenced to life in prison after he was convicted last year of one count of conspiracy in the 1998 bombing of U.S. embassies in Africa. Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani, 36 years old, was the first former detainee of the prison in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, to be tried in a U.S. civilian court.  

The Nigerian man accused of attempting to bomb a Northwest flight bound for Detroit on Christmas Day 2009 will go to trial almost two years after his arrest, a federal judge ruled. 

A blue-ribbon panel investigating the financial crisis has made several referrals of factual evidence from its probe to law-enforcement agencies over the past year, according a person familiar with the matter. The Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, established by Congress, has made the referrals to other agencies as possible evidence of wrongdoing has come to light during the course of its investigation, this person said. Details of the referrals couldn't be learned. 

 The Illinois Supreme Court agreed to review the case challenging Rahm Emanuel's qualification to run as Chicago's next mayor. The high court issued a one-page order saying that it would act on the former White House chief of staff's emergency motion seeking a review of a lower-court decision that knocked him off the mayoral ballot.  

The Bank of Japan kept its easy monetary policy unchanged and maintained its view that the nation's economy will gradually return to a moderate recovery path as it overcomes deflationary pressures that have dragged on growth.

Chinese military experts disputed that China obtained secret U.S. technology to develop its new J-20 stealth fighter, saying the country relied on homegrown innovation to produce a plane that has drawn new international attention to its military advances.

In the Philippines, a powerful blast from a suspected bomb ripped through a bus in Manila's financial district, tearing a huge hole in the vehicle and spraying shrapnel at the passengers. Four people were killed and fourteen wounded. 

India and Indonesia signed a slew of business pacts that promise investment worth a total of $15.1 billion in the world's largest archipelago, and said they aim to double bilateral trade to $25 billion by 2015.

India's central bank raised its key interest rates by a quarter-percentage point each to slow spiraling inflation, complementing government efforts to boost supplies of key foodgrains. The Reserve Bank of India upped its borrowing rate, or reverse repurchase rate, to 5.5%, and the lending rate, or repurchase rate, to 6.5%. 

 Afghan President Hamid Karzai lashed out at the international community for fomenting "crisis" in the country by pressing him to inaugurate parliament on Wednesday, and promised prosecutions of incoming lawmakers involved in election fraud. 

 In Lebanon, a billionaire businessman and the chosen candidate of Shiite group Hezbollah was named as Prime Minister, as angry Sunnis staged nationwide demonstrations against his candidacy. Najib Mikati secured 68 votes in parliament, enough for a majority and beating the Sunni favorite, former Prime Minister Saad Hariri who received 60 votes.  

 Three people died in protests in Egypt as thousands across the country joined the largest antiregime protest in recent memory. Two were killed in the city of Suez, one of several places countrywide where demonstrators called for an end to President Hosni Mubarak's 30-year rule. One security officer died in the Cairo protests. 

Wildlife officials in eastern Congo buried the bodies of eight people killed in an attack on rangers working at a large national park. Virunga National Park's director said Monday's attack killed three park rangers and five Congolese soldiers. He said officials believe the attackers, who fled on foot, were Rwandan-led Hutu rebels who retaliated after rangers destroyed two of their camps in the park in December. 

A Rwandan rebel accused of orchestrating killings and rape in neighboring Congo to gain political power was extradited by France and jailed at the International Criminal Court's prison complex in the Netherlands. Callixte Mbarushimana, a 47-year-old leader of the Hutu rebel group Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda was arrested last October in Paris. 

Police charged three Indonesians with people-smuggling offenses in relation to the shipwreck of a boat of asylum seekers off the coast of Christmas Island in December that killed almost 50 people, including women and children. 