MUMBAI—India's central bank raised its two key interest rates by a quarter-percentage point each Thursday, continuing its tightening measures as the fight against inflation trumps concerns of a global slowdown in growth after the Japan earthquake. 

The rate rises come after a key inflation reading was higher than expected in February, surprising policy makers who had watched food inflation taper off for five consecutive weeks. 

The Reserve Bank of India raised the repurchase rate, its key lending rate, to 6.75%, and the reverse repurchase rate, its key borrowing rate, to 5.75%. 

The rate rises are expected to "continue to rein in demand-side inflationary pressures while minimizing risks to growth, and manage inflationary expectations and contain the spillover of food and commodity prices into more generalized inflation," the RBI said. 

Finance Minister Pranab Mukherjee said he expects the increases to have a "salutary effect" on inflationary pressures. 

"It is in tandem with fiscal policy and thinking of the government," said Mr. Mukherjee, who recently lowered the government's deficit target for next fiscal year to 4.6% of GDP, from 4.8% previously. 

Kaushik Basu, chief economic adviser to the Finance Ministry, said he expects inflation to ease below 7% in April, after hovering above 7.5% in March. 

C. Rangarajan, chairman of the prime minister's Economic Advisory Council, said the central bank may pause in its tightening cycle if inflation eases to 6%. 

Thursday's moves come as central banks across Asia are raising interest rates in a struggle against inflation. South Korea, Thailand and Vietnam all have raised rates this month, while China and Indonesia raised rates in February. 

The RBI has been among the most aggressive central banks in the region, increasing rates eight times, including the current move, since mid-March 2010. Cumulatively, it has increased the repo rate by two percentage points and the reverse repo rate by 2.5 percentage points, and has raised banks' cash reserve ratio by one percentage point. 

The bank revised its inflation estimate for end-March to 8%, from 7% previously. That marked the third time the central bank has revised up its inflation projection for the current fiscal year. 

The central bank kept its bond holding ratio, cash reserve ratio and bank rate unchanged. 

Government bond prices fell after the decision. The most-traded 8.08% 2022 bond fell to an intraday low of 99.91 rupees after the policy announcement and ended at 99.99 rupees. The bond was trading at 100.1 rupees before the rate move. The Sensex extended losses, with the benchmark 30-stock Sensex closing down 1.1% at 18149.87. 

Bankers said the increase in policy rates may push up banks' deposit and lending rates. 

"I foresee a similar hike of 0.25 percentage point in our lending rates. In fact, the deposit rates have sharply increased in the last two or three months and the entire increase has not been passed on to the advances side," S. Raman, chairman and managing director at Canara Bank, told NDTV Profit news channel. 

The RBI maintained its previous estimate of 8.5% growth in gross domestic product, with an upward bias, in the fiscal year ending March 31. 

But it sounded much more cautious on growth, noting that "continuing uncertainty about energy and commodity prices may vitiate the investment climate, posing a threat to the current growth trajectory."

The central bank's decision to stick to its rate-raise script indicates that concerns over domestic inflation have trumped fears of a slowdown in growth after Japan's powerful earthquake and nuclear emergency, and the continuing political turmoil in the Middle East. 

The central bank said it was too early to assess the macroeconomic impact of Japan's disaster, but said any substitution of thermal for nuclear energy may further pressure petroleum prices. 

HSBC said in a research note Wednesday that despite the uncertainty after the quake, fear of a deflationary impact on Asia was misplaced. 

"Neither is Japan a major driver of regional growth nor will the crisis necessarily knock its economy off track, with reconstruction activity eventually providing a boost," HSBC said in a report. 

Analysts said RBI, which expects to continue its anti-inflationary stance, will raise rates more going forward. 

"With the RBI highlighting that energy and commodity prices pose a threat to growth, we think it will stick to its calibrated rate tightening," said  Anubhuti Sahay, an economist at Standard Chartered Bank in Mumbai. 

She expects another 0.5 percentage point of increases in both key rates through 2011. 

All 15 economists polled by Dow Jones Newswires after Thursday's rate move expect a similar 0.25-percentage point increase in the May 3 review. 

They also expect another 0.50-0.75 percentage point of rate increase through the next fiscal year. 

Indian inflation remains stubbornly high, with pricing pressures driven primarily by food now spilling over into manufactured products.

Non-food manufacturing inflation—a gauge the RBI watches closely—rose sharply in February, to 6.1% from January's 4.8%. 

February's wholesale price index rose 8.31% from a year earlier, quicker than January's provisional 8.23% rise. The median estimate in a Dow Jones poll of 15 economists had been for WPI to slow to 7.8%. 

The government also raised December's inflation reading to 9.41%, from the provisional 8.43% reported earlier. 

—Prasanta Sahu in New Delhi contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Subhadip Sircar at subhadip.sircar@dowjones.com 