  Leonard Stern believes in "participatory philanthropy," that is a hands-on, direct approach to doing good. His new initiative called Milk From the Heart is as direct as it gets: free milk to poor families in New York City.

Mr. Stern, 72 years old, is chairman and CEO of the Hartz Group, a closely held real-estate company. He founded nonprofit Homes for the Homeless, an organization that administers the milk program, in 1986 with the goal to "get people turned around," he says. 

Homes for the Homeless provides support services and temporary housing for families with young children. Other initiatives include literacy programs, tutoring and an employee readiness program. Mr. Stern is the primary benefactor for Homes for the Homeless, contributing millions over its 25 years of operation, including a recent gift of $300,000 to expand Milk from the Heart.

It's a simple program. A van outfitted with coolers makes stops around the city on weekdays, mostly near housing developments, schools or community centers. Currently, there are a dozen stops. Local social service organizations spread the word, people line up, answer a few questions anonymously—that data are later used in research that is shared with other nonprofits—and then get two quarts of 1% milk.

The program was immediately popular during its pilot phase last year. "We would announce we'd be giving away milk in both Spanish and English at this corner and 200 to 300 people would come by to pick up milk," says Mr. Stern. "They showed up in the rain and in the very cold weather with the little kids."

The immediate goal is to provide a nutritional staple to needy children. The program plans to distribute about a million quarts of free milk in its first year with a cost of between $2 million and $3 million in the entire city. But Mr. Stern hopes to significantly expand the program by engaging New Yorkers who want to give back to the neighborhoods where they were raised.

"I'm going to prove it's workable," says Mr. Stern, "and hopefully other people will feel enough passion about the plight of children who are not getting good nutrition to adopt their town, their cities, their boroughs, their suburbs and start similar programs."

One obstacle is making sure that New Yorkers know "the depth of poverty as it affects young children's nutrition," he says. "I just don't understand how we can have this kind of poverty in this city. I just don't understand what our priorities are?"

Mr. Stern goes on, "It's like there's two societies. One tucked away not so neatly and the other one having a good time. It's just hard for me."