 Sidney Mishkin Gallery, Baruch College  135 E. 22nd St.  212-802-2690, through April 6

In China, natural rocks—the bones of the Earth; the essence of chi (energy, or universal life force)—represent the spiritual distillation of the rugged grandeur of sacred mountains, as well as the yang (bright, solid, hard, unyielding) to water's yin (dark, void, soft, yielding). A column of rocks, it was believed in China for millennia, was built by a goddess to repair one of the destroyed mountain pillars that supported the tent of the sky. Sources for meditation and reflection, "spirit rocks" and "scholars' rocks," with their unique shapes, colorations, surfaces and energies—as well as their resemblance to animals, people and deities—have been inspirational models for Chinese landscape painting for more than 2,000 years.

Organized by Sandra Kraskin, this exhibition comprises paintings by Chinese artists C.C. Wang (1907-2003) and Hai Tao (b. 1959), hung alongside actual Chinese rocks and accompanied by two classic manuals for the artist and connoisseur. It is the first to explore the rock and the mountain in both traditional and contemporary Chinese landscape painting. Mr. Wang's beautiful classical ink-and-color "Landscape" (2000), in which misty mountains drift above rock formations, is dense with veiled light. Though captivating at first, Mr. Tao's 14 Modernist-influenced, ink-on-sparkling-rice-paper landscapes, some quite large, are illustrative and over-the-top by comparison. Swirling, silken and fluid—part Art Nouveau, part Georgia O'Keeffe and part fairy-tale ice-castle—Mr. Tao's vistas place us floating on thin air amid crystalline mountain peaks.

But it is this show's 17 Chinese rocks that held my attention. One is prized for its likeness to a "fish"; another for its union of "two energies sucked into each other"; another, still, for looking like "Batman." Sculptural, expressionistic and dynamic (one polished black rock suggests a cross between Auguste Rodin and Jean Arp), they give this show artistic, natural and spiritual ballast. Here, oddly, nature trumps art.



 ZieherSmith  516 W. 20th St.  212-229-1088, through March 26

Chuck Webster (b. 1970) is a metaphoric abstract painter. That's saying a lot in an era when artists are compelled to treat the medium sarcastically rather than poetically. Though serious underneath, his paintings walk that perilous line between sincerity and irony.

The 17 abstract paintings here, all from 2010 or 2011, are burnished to porcelain luster. Goofy and enigmatic—loose amalgamations among architecture, landscapes, animals, vessels, logos and eddies—they tease and beguile. Mr. Webster singles out, pares down and conflates elements of the world to the point that we aren't sure what, exactly, we are looking at. "Winter Bomb Pop" is both lapping tongue and onion dome. "Red Cavalry" is a crustacean swimming in red. "Held" suggests a human head made out of two clasped hands or copulating creatures. Missing here, however, is ample pictorial tension. Decorative, jovial forms feel plopped down in recumbent rectangles. And evocative titles too often close, rather than open, doors. Still, I'm intrigued—anticipating a time when Mr. Webster, engaging more seriously with abstraction, pulls his tongue out of his cheek.



 The Pace Gallery  534 W. 25th St.  212-292-7000, through March 26

MoMA's stunning exhibition "Picasso: Guitars 1912-1914" shows how Picasso, a figurative artist working with the subject of the guitar and other still-life objects, for the first time in sculpture dissolved gravity-bound mass. He dissected and reconstructed space and form with planar divisions, and created mysterious, sometimes suggestively erotic volume out of void. After you have marveled at Picasso's sculptural reinventions, take a trip down to Chelsea and see how Donald Judd (1928-94), an abstract artist continuing in the Constructivist tradition—working with cubes, right angles, planes and diagonals—whittled away all trace of the representational object.

This gorgeous gathering of a dozen wall- and floor-based sculptures (all from 1978 through 1992 and "Untitled") is cold yet comforting; a combination of openness and closure. The sculptures are made from a variety of colors and materials, including rusted steel, Plexiglas, raw plywood and enameled aluminum. Mr. Judd, merging and liquefying light and matter, pulls the world, as if malleable, to-and-fro like taffy. He creates welcoming, secretive, sometimes vertiginous realms somewhere between solid and void. The largest work—a box (or yawning tunnel) of Sierra white granite roughly 4 feet high, 8 feet wide and 8 feet long—sets the tone, occupying the gallery like an expectant mausoleum.

—Mr. Esplund writes about art for the Journal.