WASHINGTON—The Treasury Department plans to start selling off a $142 billion portfolio of mortgage-backed securities it purchased during the financial crisis, signaling an end to a program put in place to help stabilize the housing market. 

The Treasury said the securities can be sold with "minimal impact" on mortgage rates. Officials say they will halt the program if markets appear unsettled.

The mortgage market initially reacted negatively to the news Monday. Prices fell for mortgage-backed securities that would most likely be affected by Treasury sales, particularly 30-year agency securities with coupons of 4.5% to 5.5%, which make up the bulk of the Treasury's portfolio.

By early afternoon, the selling had almost entirely reversed, and mortgage prices and interest rates were roughly unchanged on the day. 

"The key driver of mortgage rates will continue to be the outlook for economic growth and not the modest selling that Treasury is undertaking," said  Greg McBride, senior financial analyst at Bankrate.com. He noted that rates sank to a three-month low last week amid concerns about an economic slowdown due to the disaster in Japan.

The government started to accumulate the mortgage securities in October 2008 after the market for such debt all but froze during the crisis as home-loan defaults skyrocketed. Though the outlook for the housing industry is poor and defaults remain elevated, the Treasury said, the market for the securities has "notably improved." 

The Treasury's mortgage-backed securities, if liquidated today, could bring the Treasury between $15 billion and $20 billion in profit. The Treasury said it would spread the process out over roughly a year, selling up to $10 billion each month. 

"Our mission is not to hold market securities," a senior Treasury official said. "These things need to be in the private market."

A Treasury official said the sale wasn't linked to any potential Fed action.

But the sale could serve as a precursor to a similar move by the Federal Reserve, which owns a much bigger portfolio of mortgage-backed securities—worth about $944.1 billion as of March 16.

The Fed has been passively reducing those holdings by allowing mortgage bonds to be retired when they mature or get paid off by mortgage borrowers. Fed officials want to keep monetary policy easy to spur economic growth. 

But as they move toward tightening policy, perhaps later this year or next, sales of mortgage-backed securities are likely to one of the tools they will consider using to tighten financial conditions. 

The Fed is sure to monitor the market's reaction to the Treasury announcement. Because the Fed conducts monetary policy independently, the timing of the Treasury announcement doesn't give much indication of whether or when the Fed will move forward with sales. The Fed is still expanding its portfolio of securities holdings under a $600 billion program of U.S. Treasury bond and note purchases. 

The move could mean the Fed could start selling off its assets starting next summer, RBS economists  Michelle Girard and  Omair Sharif wrote in a research note. The Treasury's sales of mortgage-backed securities "will significantly ease concern over the market impact" of the Fed's portfolio sales, they wrote. "The Fed will simply be picking up where the Treasury left off." 

Analysts at Barclays Capital, however, said the Treasury's move isn't a signal that the Fed will start selling its holdings in the near future. 

The Treasury's investments are mostly 30-year, fixed-rate mortgage securities guaranteed by either Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac. The Treasury also purchased a smaller amount of 15-year fixed-rate mortgage securities. 

The Treasury's planned sale of mortgage-backed securities points to a much-improved market, said  Mahesh Swaminathan, an analyst at Credit Suisse. 

"The emergency measures are not needed anymore," because investors are far more willing now to buy mortgage securities, he said. "It makes sense for the government to exit." 

The sale of mortgage securities by the Treasury could possibly gain the federal government a few extra days before it hits its borrowing limit. The Treasury early this month estimated the U.S. would hit the $14.294 trillion ceiling between April 15 and May 31. 

—Jon Hilsenrath  and Mark Gongloff  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Jeffrey Sparshott at jeffrey.sparshott@dowjones.com 