COLUMBUS, Ohio—Republican lawmakers presented amendments Tuesday that would scale back a bill intended to curb public employees' collective-bargaining rights, as thousands of union members rallied at the statehouse against the measure. 

The amendments, presented by Republican Sen. Shannon Jones, would prohibit unions that represent the state's 400,000 public workers from bargaining over health benefits, pensions and working conditions. Those terms would be set by employers. Unions would be permitted to continue bargaining over wages, hours and certain terms of employment. 

Public workers would no longer be allowed to strike and would be subject to penalties if they did, including being docked twice their daily pay for each day they participate in a strike, or as much as $1,000 if they violate a court injunction. 

"We're going to reform collective bargaining," said Republican Sen. Kevin Bacon, who led the 12-member insurance-, commerce- and labor-committee hearing, which lasted less than 30 minutes.

Mr. Bacon said the changes are needed to help state and local employers trim labor costs to help make up projected budget shortfalls statewide. "What we're trying to do is give them the flexibility so they can make adjustments, just like a business would," he said. 

Mr. Bacon said Republicans would meet with Democrats Tuesday night to discuss the amendments. He said the committee could vote on the measure Wednesday, which could lead to a vote of the Republican-led Senate later that day. If it passes, it proceeds to the Republican-controlled House. 

Democrats criticized the changes to collective-bargaining rules and said they would request further testimony on how the amendments would affect workers in the state. 

"This isn't a slam dunk," said Democrat Sen. Joe Schiavoni, who is on the committee. He said Democrats would go over the 99 pages of amendments with a "fine-tooth comb." "We're going to drill her with questions tomorrow," he said of Ms. Jones. "We're not done yet." 

Meanwhile, protesters filled the lawn outside the statehouse, chanting "We are the middle class!" and "Yes to workers! No to Kasich!" referring to Gov. John Kasich, who supports Senate Republicans' efforts to restrict bargaining rights for public workers. Capitol officials estimated the crowd at 8,500, while the senate Democratic caucus said they believed it was roughly twice that. 

  James Hoffa, president of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, told the crowd his union's 1.4 million members support their opposition to the bill. "Today they take on the public employees. Tomorrow they take on the private sector!" he said. 

Deirdre Devine, 41, of Hubbard, Ohio, wore red earmuffs and a yellow paper hat that said "Impeach Kasich." A supervisor in the Mahoning County jobs- and family-services agency who was laid off in September, she said she left her home at 6 a.m. to drive to the rally. If the bill passes, she said she believes it will drive down workers' wages across the state. "We'll all be earning seven bucks an hour with no health insurance. How is that going to stimulate the economy?" 

Republican state Rep. William Coley walked past the crowd and said he was waiting to see what the final senate bill looked like but that collective-bargaining rules needed to be changed to make the state more competitive. "We're not worried about the noise," he said of the protesters. "We're worried about the silence as more businesses leave the state." 

 Write to  Kris Maher at kris.maher@wsj.com 