LONDON -- U.K.-listed, India-focused Vedanta Resources PLC aims to purchase a 58.5% stake in Cairn India Ltd. following its recent stake purchases in the Indian gas and oil explorer, Vedanta's chief executive said Thursday. 

"Under the present situation, having acquired 18.5%" through Vedanta's Sesa Goa Ltd. unit, and taking into account a minimum requirement to purchase a 40% stake in Cairn India from its parent Cairn Energy PLC, "that will bring the total to 58.5%," said M.S. Mehta said in a conference call with journalists. 

The total value would be $9.4 billion, the company said in a presentation earlier Thursday. 

Mr. Mehta said Vedanta is waiting for government ministers to hold a meeting to discuss the approval of the deal. The meeting was to scheduled for Monday of this week but was postponed. 

"We would be happy to close this transaction as soon as possible," he said. "The government has set up a body to evaluate this transaction." He said he expects the deal to close by the middle of May. 

Last August, London-listed miner Vedanta proposed buying 51% to 60% of Cairn India Ltd. for about $8.5 billion to $9.6 billion in cash, but the deal has been delayed due to a lack of government and regulatory approvals in India. 

Approval has been delayed in order to determine who will be responsible for royalty payments on a key producing asset in the north-western state of Rajasthan. 

Vedanta said all royalty discussions should be dealt with separately. 

"I still believe that original agreement will move forward," said Anil Agarwal, chairman of Vedanta. 

State-run Oil & Natural Gas Corp. owns a 30% stake in Cairn India's Rajasthan oil field but pays the entire royalty on production under the federal government's previous policy of giving discounts to attract investors. ONGC, which maintains the deal needs its approval, wants royalty to be recovered as a cost from revenue. 

Mr. Agarwal said he is talking to the government and believes that the corporate transaction should be dealt separately from the royalty issue. 

"It has to be separate, it can't be linked," he said. "We believe Cairn Energy is working" to resolve the royalty issue, he said, adding that he expects the deal to be approved this month. 

Vedanta acquired an 8.1% stake through Sesa Goa's open offer to shareholders, which closed on April 30. It also bought a 10.4% stake from Malaysia's Petroliam Nasional Berhad, or Petronas.