Federal Reserve officials last year, prodded by Chairman Ben Bernanke, seriously considered adopting an explicit target for inflation of 2%, but Mr. Bernanke failed to forge a consensus and backed away. The issue could resurface in 2011.

The Fed informally has said its goal is inflation of around 2%. But after years of internal debate on the subject, it hasn't adopted an official target.

Proponents say adopting a formal objective would blunt criticism of the Fed that current easy-money policies could lead to an upward spiral in consumer prices and could reinforce the Fed's commitment to avoiding deflation, or falling prices. Skeptics, however, wonder if an inflation target is needed and worry it could distract the Fed from its congressionally set mandate of maximum employment.

"An explicit inflation target would help us immensely," says Charles Plosser, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia and a longtime proponent. Mr. Plosser says he feels like Sisyphus, the mythical Greek condemned to pushing a boulder up a hill only to watch it roll down in his efforts to advance a target. "It helps promote the credibility of the central bank by being explicit about its objectives and it helps anchor [inflation] expectations," he says.

Proponents say inflation targets help to cement public expectations about price changes, making investment and spending decisions simpler. They also say targets help to give the public a roadmap for how the central bank is likely to behave—when inflation is running below target they would expect easy monetary policy and when above they would expect tight policy. It also provides more accountability than vague pledges of "price stability."

The European, British and Canadian central banks each set inflation targets—typically around 2%—and commit to move interest rates as needed to keep inflation near that goal.Meeting the goal isn't always easy. The Bank of England has a 2% goal and inflation there is now running over 3.5%, forcing it to write a public letter of explanation to the government.

Mr. Bernanke, a strong advocate of inflation targeting before he joined the Fed, has moved a reluctant Fed toward the approach. In January 2009, the Fed began publishing long-run inflation forecasts of its policy makers, essentially their long-term inflation goal. Forecasts cluster between 1.75% and 2%. 

Inside the Fed, the idea resurfaced in the fall as the Fed debated the merits of initiating a $600 billion bond-buying program known as quantitative easing. In an Oct. 15 speech in Boston, Mr. Bernanke took another step, saying that Fed officials "generally judge the mandate-consistent inflation rate to be about 2% or a bit below." With inflation running at around 1%, he said there was a case for more Fed easing. An inflation target might be an easier sell when inflation is low; if it were adopted when rates were high, it would be seen as a reason for higher interest rates, which are never popular. 

After the speech, Mr. Bernanke flew to Washington for a video conference call with other policy makers in which talk about targets quickly got bogged down on familiar issues, according to people who participated. One big hurdle was the Fed's legal mandate. The Federal Reserve Act requires the Fed to aim for "stable prices" and "maximum employment." Some officials worry that adopting an inflation objective could be viewed as putting more weight on inflation-fighting and less on unemployment-fighting.

Some argue an inflation objective might not be needed because the Fed's informal goal is well understood. "I think it's pretty clear that we have a relatively narrow range of inflation rates that we think about as mandate consistent," Narayana Kocherlakota, president of the Minneapolis Fed, said in a recent interview. Others at the October discussion worried that adopting an inflation goal while launching the new quantitative-easing program might confuse the public.

New challenges this year could put the inflation target back on the agenda. Several Republican lawmakers, concerned that the Fed is stoking inflation, have proposed narrowing the Fed's mandate to price stability, eliminating the employment part.

Adopting an inflation target would ease the concerns of legislators and the public about inflation, says Columbia University's Frederic Mishkin, a former Fed governor. "The Fed needs to make it clear that it will do whatever it takes to keep inflation from getting out of control," he says.

The controversial decision to embark on a new round of quantitative easing gave the Fed added reason to adopt a target, Mr. Mishkin says. "In order to make quantitative easing understandable you need to move in this direction of being much clearer about what your long-run inflation objective is and how quantitative easing fits into it," he says. Proponents also say an inflation target goes hand-in-hand with the Fed's employment objective because low inflation supports economic growth and hiring.

Those arguments don't fall on deaf ears at the Fed. Mr. Bernanke has been slowly building the case for setting an official inflation target since he joined the Fed in 2002. He has taken a number of steps toward implementing one and seems unlikely to give up the cause now.

 Write to  Jon Hilsenrath at jon.hilsenrath@wsj.com 