Japan's nuclear-power crisis is reviving long-held doubts about the strength of the nation's nuclear regulatory system and its independence from government efforts to sell nuclear technology abroad.

There aren't indications that any government regulatory failures contributed to the problems at the Fukushima Daiichi complex in northeastern Japan, where government and industry officials are battling to keep three of the six nuclear reactors from overheating and releasing dangerous levels of radioactivity. 







However, the woes there put a spotlight on Japan's Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency, which oversees design and regulation of Japan's nuclear plants. 

It also highlights past problems with falsified safety records at the Fukushima Daiichi plant and with its parent company,  Tokyo Electric Power Co.
9501


0.14
%




, or Tepco, though there is no evidence those prior problems are adding to the current problems. 

The Japanese nuclear safety agency, known as NISA, is part of Japan's Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry. The larger ministry, known as METI, has in recent months revved up a push to help Japanese power companies, including Tepco, win deals to build nuclear reactors abroad.

A METI statement issued by ministry spokesman Tatsuji Narita says Japan maintains a healthy regulatory environment through a redundant, second agency attached to the Cabinet named the National Safety Commission. That agency reviews METI's nuclear-regulation efforts with a focus on safety.

"Japan maintains the independence of its nuclear regulatory agencies through this redundant 'double-check' system," the statement said.

In August, Masayuki Naoshima, then Japan's Minister of Economy, Trade and Industry, led a delegation to Vietnam to promote the sale of nuclear power plants to the Southeast Asian country for the second phase of its atomic power project. The delegation included Tepco Chairman  Tsunehisa Katsumata, as part of a group of Japanese power companies that banded together to win contracts in the face of rising competition from companies in South Korea and Russia, among other places. 

Japan will likely win a contract to build Vietnam's second nuclear power plant, following a joint statement late last year by Vietnamese Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung and Japan's Prime Minister Naoto Kan saying that "Vietnam confirms that the Vietnamese government chooses Japan as a cooperation partner to build two nuclear reactors."

Tepco couldn't be reached to comment.

In the U.S., the previous nuclear-energy regulator, the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, came under attack in the 1970s, accused by members of Congress of being unwilling to stand up to the commercial nuclear industry because it was supposed to promote the nuclear industry even as it assured public safety.

In 1975, a new independent agency was created, the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, which was charged with overseeing safety issues. A newly formed Department of Energy was to guide research and grant monetary support to the sector.

The Fukushima Daiichi plant has a black mark on its record from earlier in the last decade, when a scandal involving falsified safety records led to parent company Tepco briefly shutting down its entire nuclear fleet in Japan. In 2002, Tepco admitted to the Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency that it had falsified the results of safety tests on the containment vessel of the No. 1 reactor, which is now one of three reactors that workers are struggling to keep from overheating. The test took place in 1991-1992. 

The scandal was the latest in a string of nuclear safety records cover-ups by Tepco, including the revelation that the company's doctoring of safety records concerning reactor shrouds, a part of the reactors themselves, in the 1980s through the early 1990s. Five top executives resigned after the company admitted to having falsified safety.

In 2003, Tepco shut down all of its nuclear reactors for inspections, acknowledging the systematic cover-up of inspection data showing cracks in reactors. 

Japanese regulators already have some credibility issues after previous episodes in which the strength of the response was called into question. 

In Japan in 1999, an uncontrolled nuclear chain reaction at a uranium-reprocessing plant killed two employees and spewed radioactive neutrons over the countryside. Government officials later said safety equipment at the plant was missing and the people involved lacked training, adding that their assessment of the accident's seriousness was "inadequate."

In 2007, an earthquake heavily damaged Tepco's Kashiwazaki-Kariwa plant. The company initially said there was no release of radiation, but admitted later that the quake released radiation and spilled radioactive water into the Sea of Japan.

"The Japanese government is saying that the containment's OK, but that belies belief when you see the violence of the explosion," said  John Large, a nuclear consultant, referring to the current troubles at the plant. He added, "Understandably, they do not want to panic their population."

The recent problems have prompted new rounds of warnings from anti-nuclear groups. "A nuclear disaster which the promoters of nuclear power in Japan said wouldn't happen is in progress," the Tokyo-based Citizens' Nuclear Information Center said in a statement on its website. "It is occurring as a result of an earthquake that they said would not happen."

—Alison Tudor  and Dionne Searcey contributed to this article.