ABIDJAN, Ivory Coast—This country's internationally recognized president said he may lobby foreign governments for sweeping new sanctions to oust a rival who refuses to step down after losing a presidential runoff, a move that threatens to throw further complications into the global chocolate business. 

Alassane Ouattara said in an interview he is considering pushing for a total trade ban with his country if the incumbent, Laurent Gbagbo, continues to resist the pressure of targeted financial sanctions. The European Union has imposed economic sanctions and frozen the the assets of Mr. Gbagbo and his allies. The U.S. has imposed travel bans on Mr. Gbagbo, his family and his allies. 

 Read excerpts from The Journal's interview with Mr. Outtara.

"If financial sanctions don't bite, we should move on to economic and trade sanctions," said Mr. Ouattara, who has spent more than six weeks in a hotel protected by U.N. peacekeepers. "That includes cocoa exports."

Such a step would aim to cripple the finances of his foe, but it also risks battering the economy of the world's largest cocoa producer and throwing into turmoil markets that trade in the commodity. The Ivory Coast is responsible for about 40% of the globe's cocoa production.

On Thursday, cocoa futures traded at an intraday high of $3,178 a metric ton on the InterContinental Exchange, a five-month high. The price rise came as the EU restricted EU-registered ships from conducting new transactions with the country's two main ports. Cocoa prices remain off last year's highs by a few hundred dollars.

A full ban on Ivory Coast cocoa would "create pandemonium in the market," one cocoa consultant said. A London-based trader added: "At this point, the concern is less with the current [EU] sanctions but the possibility of complete sanctions on the country."

Given the large stakes, foreign governments aren't expected to offer immediate support for a dramatic expansion of Ivory Coast sanctions. "I don't think we're ready to take that step yet," says a Western diplomat in Abidjan. "We certainly understand why they're doing it, and we're looking at ways to help limit Gbagbo's effectiveness, but we're not ready to take that step yet."

Mr. Ouattara is recognized as the winner of the country's Nov. 28 runoff presidential election by the U.S., EU, United Nations and the African Union. Mr. Gbagbo alleges his opponent benefited from fraudulent votes and that he is the rightful victor, and retains the support of parts of the country's military.

The EU has already imposed a travel ban and asset freeze on Gilbert Anoh N'Guessan, the head of the Ivorian cocoa-management board, the CGFCC. It has placed sanctions on financial transactions for the two main Ivorian ports, San Pedro and Abidjan. 

Mr. Ouattara's allies are ratcheting up pressure on the cocoa industry, which is seen as a lifeline for Mr. Gbagbo's embattled government.

The Federation of Cocoa Commerce, the trade organization for cocoa buyers, has received a letter from Mr. Ouattara's prime minister, Guillaume Soro, telling exporters they risk severe sanctions if they pay taxes to the "illegal regime" of Mr. Gbagbo. 

Traders warn that the country's storage facilities may not be able to protect cocoa bean stocks from tropical heat for long periods of time, meaning Ivorian farmers could bear the brunt of a sustained action. "A long blockade would be catastrophic for Ivorian farmers," said Maurice Sawadogo, the manager of a major cocoa-exporting cooperative. "For the government, it would be a complete strangulation."

Mr. Ouattara is looking for additional ways to increase pressure on Mr. Gbagbo, who has been in power for 10 years. West African heads of state are expected to meet Saturday to decide on whether Mr. Gbagbo's will continue to have access to his main source of cash at the West African central bank.

Denying such access would endanger salaries of civil servants and the army and could erode Mr. Gbagbo's domestic base of support.

—John James in Abidjan and Leslie Josephs in New York contributed to this article.