With the dedication of an Olympic athlete, Lay Na See has been preparing for the biggest day of her career for the best part of a year. Ms. See, a sous chef at the Mandarin Oriental Kuala Lumpur, is representing Malaysia later this month in France at the Bocuse d'Or, the world's top culinary competition. In recent months, she has finished a regular work day—it starts with preparation in the late morning and ends with a nonstop five-hour dinner shift—and then, four days out of five, she's gone back into the kitchen for an additional 10 hours to practice each stage of the two multistep platters she will have to cook on the day. In December, she kicked the training up a notch, adding 20 full practice runs, during which her coach timed her as she meticulously ran through the complete service she will have to prepare to perfection if she's to stand a chance in the competition proper. By the time that comes around, Ms. See will have invested more than 1,000 hours in training for the event, and she will have practiced each dish hundreds of times. Ask the young chef what the Bocuse d'Or means to her and she has only one word: pressure.

Established in 1987 by legendary French chef Paul Bocuse—the father of "nouvelle cuisine" and owner of L'Auberge du Pont de Collonges, one of the most revered restaurants in France—the Bocuse d'Or takes place every two years and is also known as the "World Cuisine Contest." 

The two-day competition is the main event at the Salon International de la Restauration, de l'Hôtellerie et de l'Alimentation—Sirha—a hotel and catering extravaganza in Lyon, France, that draws thousands of chefs and tens of thousands of public visitors from around the world. In 2009, more than 15,000 visitors watched the Bocuse d'Or when Norwegian chef Geir Skeie was awarded first prize and prize money of €20,000, or about $26,000. 

This year, the event takes place Jan. 25 and 26. More than 50 international television networks plan to broadcast the show and dozens of cameras will be on hand to capture every drop or slip of the hand.

Twenty-four two-person teams draw cards to decide whether they compete on the first or second day. 

Once the whistle blows on competition day, each team has five hours and 35 minutes to prepare one fish platter and one meat platter, each containing 14 faultless servings—12 plates to be judged by the 24-person jury, and two for the official photographs. Judges award a total of 60 points: 40 for taste; 20 for presentation and originality. Those who bring home the gold stand to become veritable rising stars in the field of cooking and all competitors get to showcase their skills in front of the best in the industry. Judges in previous years include culinary superstars such as Heston Blumen thal, Ferran Adrià, Wolfgang Puck and Thomas Keller. 

Of the 12 past winners of the Bocuse d'Or, six were from France, four from Norway, and one each from Sweden and Luxembourg. Only once has a chef from outside Europe penetrated the top three positions in the competition—William Wai of Singapore took home bronze in 1989. 

But this year, there is some hope that a chef from Asia could make an even bigger impact.

"The trend of the world is looking towards Asia," says Bocuse d'Or director Florent Supplisson. "More than anything we want to see what comes out of our Asian contestants."

Asia's fine-dining scene has taken off sharply in recent times as a rising class of wealthy consumers attracts a slew of world-famous chefs to the region. Celebrity chefs Guy Savoy, Pierre Gagnaire and Daniel Boulud have opened restaurants in Asia within the past few years. 

Since 2008, the Michelin Guide, the self-styled arbiter of fine-dining excellence, has launched city guidebooks for Tokyo, Kyoto, Hong Kong and Macau. 

Tokyo now has 11 three-star Michelin restaurants, more than any other city in the world (Paris has 10). To win a Bocuse d'Or might just be the icing on the cake of Asia's growing culinary maturity.

"In the future, there is no doubt someday Asia will place on top [in the Bocuse d'Or]," says Stefan Stiller, president of the Chinese team. Four teams carry the flag for Asia this time around. Their journey to Lyon began last March. 

At the Bocuse d'Or Asia semifinal round held in Shanghai, teams from 11 Asian countries competed for the chance to go to France. Unlike the finals in Lyon, the semifinals lasted just one day, and contestants had three hours to prepare a single platter featuring a key ingredient—this time, Sterling White Halibut. 

At the end, teams from Malaysia, China, Indonesia and Japan qualified for the global grand final.

While a team from Japan has competed in every Bocuse d'Or competition since its inception, the rest of the Asian competitors have less experience. This will be the third time that Malaysia made it into the finals, the second time for Indonesia, and the fifth time for China. 

"People see Japan as the champion of Asia for food," says Japan candidate Tatsuo Nakasu. "I should have placed higher in the semifinals, and I will work twice as hard for the finals in Lyon." When asked what place he hopes to attain, Mr. Nakasu responds: "First, of course."

Three months prior to the competition, many of the Asian teams are still trying to familiarize themselves with the 45 pages of regulations that competitors in the finals must read. The rules explain everything from what equipment they can use to how much preparation work they can do. For instance, a carrot can be peeled beforehand, but not cut, and no electrical equipment can use more than 10 kilowatts of power.

This year, each team must work with Scottish monkfish and Scottish saddle of lamb. "Setting a uniform ingredient ensures that all chefs have the same starting point to work with," says contest director Mr. Supplisson. 

In October, contestants submitted their recipes to the Bocuse d'Or Committee. What they will cook on the day can no longer be altered in any major way, and each recipe is a tightly guarded secret. For the teams, all that's left to do is practice. 

Famously, some contenders have gone to extreme measures in this regard—2009 winner Mr. Skeie rented a trailer with a built-in kitchen so he could visit and train under different chefs along his commute to Lyon and cook even while in transit. 

This year, Indonesia's Guruh Nugraha, chef de partie at the Park Lane Hotel in Jakarta, will be moving into a specially designed kitchen made to the exact specifications of the Bocuse d'Or kitchens. China candidate Steven Shi-jing Shen of Stiller's Restaurant in Shanghai will relocate to Switzerland to train six days a week. "Every minute will be planned," says China team president Mr. Stiller.

In fact, Asia's contenders will do well just to place. For starters, there's a perceived advantage to teams from France—even the U.S. has failed to crack the home-team bias, never placing higher than the sixth-place in 2009 by Timothy Hollingsworth from the French Laundry restaurant in Napa, California. 

Asian teams also cite the cost of competing as a disadvantage. Mr. Stiller estimates Team China will need 500,000 yuan, or about $75,000, for air tickets, cargo, accommodation, training and food. Some of Asia's teams, though, have their costs covered by the big international hotel chains they work for.

Some in the Asian camps also complain about a clause in the competition rules that states all chef assistants must be 22 years old or younger. While cooks enter apprenticeships in their late teens in Europe, in Asia, many don't start their careers in a serious way until later. "This means that the caliber of the available assistants within [the specified] age range here is much lower on average," says Stefu Santoso, executive chef of the Park Lane Hotel in Jakarta and promotional manager of the Indonesian team.

Asian teams also complain that they are at a disadvantage because they're unfamiliar with the ingredients. 

"The Scottish lamb is not allowed to be shipped here due to government import regulations," says Mr. Santoso. The Indonesian team is practicing with Australian lamb instead, while the China team is practicing with frozen instead of fresh monkfish.

There's no foreseeing what last-minute catastrophes may sway the odds. Dropped platters, missing ingredients, and running over the time limit are risks for any of the contestants. 

During the semifinals in Shanghai, for instance, a server for Team Malaysia tripped while holding the platter, causing the food to slip and ruining the presentation of the servings. "My heart stopped," says Ms. See, adding thankfully that the scene was captured on camera and the judges took that into consideration. 

Even without an accident, for an Asian team to pull off a major coup by winning the event—or even just to match Mr. Wai's third-place finish of 1989—they'll certainly have to cook the best dishes of their careers. But regardless of where they finish, the competitors from the region are hopeful they can make an impression. 

"There is a starting point for everything," says Marcel Kofler, the Malaysian team coach. "We are ready for a fight."