DUBLIN—After nearly 80 years of dominance, Ireland's longtime political giant—the Fianna Fail party—appears to be headed for a hard fall of historic proportions in elections scheduled for March 11. 

Widely blamed for the devastating economic problems that have beset Ireland and necessitated an international bailout, the latest polls give Fianna Fail just 14%—a dire rating for a party that has loomed large in Irish politics since 1932 and has been in government for all but three of the last 20 years. 

If that result is reflected in election-day results, Fianna Fail faces the loss of more than 50 seats in the 166-seat Dail, or parliament.

Some commentators predict Fianna Fail, which governs in a coalition with the Green Party, may be heading for oblivion. 

"I don't see them returning to their dominant position for 15 to 20 years—if they ever return," said Dr. Theresa Reidy, a lecturer in politics at University College Cork. "They could also just fade away completely."

If it loses on March 11, Fianna Fail will join the swelling ranks of Western political parties that have been punished by voters for their handling of the recession and financial crisis of the last two years.

Critics have accused the party and its leader, Prime Minister Brian Cowen, of exacerbating Ireland's economic woes by providing a blanket guarantee for all bank loans and deposits in September 2008, to the tune of €440 billion. Ministers were also attacked last fall for repeatedly denying that discussions were underway with the International Monetary Fund and European Union on a rescue package for Ireland. The €67.5 billion bailout was finally agreed in November.

"That was the final nail in the coffin that brought their poll numbers down from the mid-20s to the mid-teens," said Richard Colwell, head of Red C research, a Dublin-based polling organization. "Before that, most people thought there was no way they would ever fall below 20%."

"I would never vote for them, after what they've done to this country," said John Donnelly, a retiree, speaking outside Dublin's imposing Customs House. "All the bankers are living it up in Honolulu and we're stuck here, with this mess."

The early election was called Thursday after Mr. Cowen's attempt to reshuffle his cabinet backfired spectacularly, ending a week of high political drama in Dublin. 

The Green Party threatened to walk out of the government after Mr. Cowen tried to replace six departing cabinet members with younger members of Fianna Fail. The plan was seen by critics as a ploy to enhance the members' prospects in the upcoming election. 

Mr. Cowen was forced to back down and reassign the vacant ministerial positions to the remaining ministers in his cabinet. The government crisis came just two days after Mr. Cowen survived a vote of confidence in his leadership. 

As things stand, center-right Fine Gael is expected to emerge as the largest party in the March 11 election, and will likely form a coalition government with Labour. A poll released by Red C research earlier this month gave Fine Gael 35% and Labour 21%, with Fianna Fail on equal pegging with the hard-left nationalist party Sinn Fein on 14%. The Greens have 4% and independents 12%.

Fianna Fail—or "Soldiers of Destiny"—was a product of Ireland's long struggle to break free from British dominance. Growing out of a split in the nationalist movement, its founders rejected the peace deal struck with Britain in 1921, seeing it as a betrayal of Irish independence.

With a broad reach that included both conservatives and liberals, it presided over Ireland's emergence as the Celtic Tiger, Europe's fastest-growing economy. But voters deserted them when the boom turned to bust and Ireland's success was revealed to have been partly based on a huge real estate bubble fueled by cheap credit and a lax banking system.

Fianna Fail's implosion could fundamentally reshape Ireland's political landscape, with a more conventional right-left divide replacing the current balance of power between Fianna Fail and Fine Gael, both centrist parties. Some commentators predict left-wing and progressive parties like Labour, the Greens, Sinn Fein and the United Left Alliance could one day coalesce to form a coalition government.

However, it's unlikely that Labour will countenance an alliance with Sinn Fein, long seen as little more than the political wing of the Irish Republican Army which waged a long-running guerrilla war to drive the British out of Northern Ireland.

But there's also skepticism that any change at the top will make much difference. Most of the parties have accepted the four-year austerity program underpinning the EU-IMF rescue package, so the next government will have little room to maneuver.

"Can you name anyone who'll do it better?" asked Sean O'Cuinn, a Dublin retiree. "Whoever gets in will have us on our knees."

 Write to  Guy Chazan at guy.chazan@wsj.com 