  Q: I plan to buy a new car in 2011—maybe Lexus or Cadillac. I don't want to pay the extra $3,000 for a navigation system as my Garmin Nuvi works just fine. I keep my cars for five or more years. Will I suffer at the next trade-in time by not buying the navigation option now? 

—Joe R. Denton, Texas

 A: I doubt it. With time, built-in automotive navigation systems as we know them may seem as old-fashioned as the car phones of the '80s. 

People are increasingly using hand-held navigation devices or smart phones to find their way, and those systems are improving rapidly. By the time you are ready to sell your car the lack of a navigation system may even be an advantage.

  Q: Your question regarding transmission fluid triggered this question regarding brake fluid. Although the owner's manual says replace the brake fluid every 30,000 miles, my mechanic says the brake fluid is clean and there is no need to replace it. Is he correct? I drive a 2003 Lexus LS430 and the brake fluid has not been replaced since I have owned the car and have driven it 80,000 miles. 

—Will Snodgrass, Rancho Mirage, Calif.

 A: Whether and when to change brake fluid is a topic car people have debated for years. It is true that dirty-looking fluid needs to be changed, but that also could be a sign that you waited too long. Brake fluid attracts moisture and you can't always tell if the fluid is contaminated. That's why manufacturers recommend periodic changes. Sometimes the interval is 30,000 miles, sometimes every two years. 

Either way, these are good recommendations. And knowing you have taken care of your brakes is worth the cost of the service, which will probably be around $150 to $200 for parts and labor.

  Q: My wife owns a 2004 Toyota Prius, which has a "variable" transmission. What on earth does that mean, and should it be serviced every 30,000 miles, as the dealer claims? 

—Tom Enderby, Attleboro, Mass.

 A: Variable is short for a continuously variable transmission or CVT. Instead of using gears, CVTs use pulleys that effectively vary their diameter to seamlessly change their drive ratio. 

This allows acceleration without the surging, shifting rhythm associated with traditional transmissions. CVTs also tend to boost fuel efficiency. We are likely to see them on a growing number of vehicles.

The service interval of 30,000 miles is correct. 

  Q: The service advisor says I need tires on my 2008 Camry. She says I might make it to 30,000 miles. Really? The car has 20,700 miles, is garaged, and driven at speed on Dallas streets and highways. No drag racing, jackrabbit starts, or off-roading! What's the deal?  

—John Thomas, Dallas

 A: Even what seem like everyday cars often come equipped with high-performance tires. They aren't marketed that way, but they use softer compounds and tread designs that wear faster than we expect. As cars get heavier and consumer' expectations for handling, acceleration and load-carrying capacity increase, the life expectancy for tires decreases.

—Email mecar@wsj.com 