Suze Rotolo appeared in one of folk music's most lasting images, the cover to "The Freewheelin' Bob Dylan," the 1963 album that made Mr. Dylan a star.

Ms. Rotolo, who died Friday at age 67 after a lengthy illness, was Mr. Dylan's girlfriend at the time, and by his account and hers had an important influence on his music.

Such Dylan songs as "Boots of Spanish Leather," "Tomorrow is a Long Time," and "Don't Think Twice, It's Alright" grew out of experiences they shared.

"How many nights I stayed up and wrote songs and showed them to her and asked, 'Is this right?"' Mr. Dylan told author David Hajdu in "Positively 4th Street" (2001).

The cover photo showed a couple in a romantic clutch on a snowy Greenwich Village street. In her 2008 memoir, Ms. Rotolo recalled how they prepared for the photo shoot.

"Much time was spent in front of the mirror trying on one wrinkled article of clothing after another until it all came together to look as if Bob had just gotten up and thrown something on," she wrote. "Image meant everything."

As for herself, she said she had not expected to be photographed and had thrown a coat over a bulky sweater. "I felt like an Italian sausage."

She later found success as a commercial and fine artist, and taught at Parsons School of Design in New York. She married an Italian film editor,  Enzo Bartoccioli, and remained interested in leftist politics. 

She and Mr. Dylan met in 1961 in the context of a bubbling Greenwich Village folk music scene in which Mr. Dylan was a rising talent. Ms. Rotolo was a precocious and cultured 17-year-old from Queens, N.Y., who had grown up with parents who were Communist Party members, though she didn't like to talk about it.

Of their first meeting, at a folk concert at Riverside Church, Mr. Dylan wrote, "Right from the start I couldn't take my eyes off her. She was the most erotic thing I'd ever seen." She was fair skinned and golden haired, full-blood Italian. The air was suddenly filled with banana leaves."

But Ms. Rotolo had more to offer the young singer than good looks. She introduced him to the works of Picasso, Kandinsky, and Red Grooms. She gave Mr. Dylan his first exposure to poets such as Byron and Rimbaud and the songs of Brecht and Weill. She brought him to meetings of the Congress of Racial Equality and to protest marches.

Before too long, they moved in together in an apartment on West 4th Street. The relationship was close but occasionally tumultuous. Ms. Rotolo wrote that as Mr. Dylan's fame grew, their relationship diminished. "I was very young, I was still forming myself, but I did know I wasn't a musician, nor was I a musician's 'chick,' " she wrote. 

In 1964, they separated for good. She and Mr. Dylan stayed mum about their relationship for decades.

"When you know that someone is human, to make them godlike is disconcerting," Ms. Rotolo told The New York Times in 2008. "I'm not a rapacious Dylan junkie."

 Write to  Stephen Miller at stephen.miller@wsj.com 