For almost two decades, Australia has ruled cricket as few countries have ruled any sport.

But that dominant era is officially over. On Thursday, Australia lost to India by five wickets in the quarterfinals of the 2011 Cricket World Cup, ending its 12-year reign as world champion and signalling the collapse of one of the greatest dynasties in the history of international team sports.

When the World Cup concludes on April 2, it will be the first time since 1996 that an Australian captain won't end up holding the trophy. It will also be the first time since 1992 that Australia has failed to reach the final. And this isn't entirely a surprise.

"They were beaten by a better team," said Ian Chappell, a former Australian team captain and now a cricket analyst. "They're not used to losing in World Cup cricket, but they really haven't risen to the occasion when they've needed to. It's the end of the road for Australia."

Not so long ago, Australia's cricket supremacy was unquestioned. Powered by superstars like Shane Warne and Glenn McGrath, the Australian team set record winning streaks in all formats and established a virtual monopoly over Test cricket, the highest form of the game. If the ICC rankings had existed between 1995 and 2009, Australia would have spent all but eight months at the top.

But in the past few years, the Australian team has suffered one of this sport's most remarkable declines. Australia is currently fifth in the Test rankings, having lost one of its past four series. Before last year's World Twenty20 final in Barbados, the Australians had won 28 of their previous 31 matches in all formats. Since then, they have lost 18 of 30.

Even as its Test team struggled, the triumphs of the country's one-day team proved that Australia hadn't completely lost its edge. Just four weeks after a heavy defeat in the 2011 Ashes, Australia hammered England 6-1 in the one-day series between the two sides. 

But not anymore. Last week, Australia surrendered its 34-match unbeaten run in the World Cup in a group-stage defeat by Pakistan, while the five-wicket defeat by India in Ahmedabad means it leaves the tournament having beaten just one of the top eight nations—a seven-wicket win over New Zealand in the group stage.

"They have plenty to worry about—their bowling is distinctly lopsided and their batting is erratic," said Geoffrey Boycott, the former England captain who called Thursday's game. "But I'm not sure if they've got the talent available to get back to where they were."

Cricket officials in Australia are stumped for answers, too. Earlier this month, the sport's governing body enlisted Allan Border, Mark Taylor and Steve Waugh—three of the country's greatest captains—to join a working group looking into the causes behind the country's epic decline.

The panel is expected to report back to Cricket Australia later this year, in time for its recommendations to be implemented for the 2011-12 season.

Granted, Australia's decline is partly explained by personnel. No team can afford to lose a group of once-in-a-lifetime cricketers and expect things to stay the same: Warne, McGrath, Steve Waugh and Adam Gilchrist are irreplaceable. Justin Langer and Matthew Hayden aren't far behind. But Australia's team lost all six to retirement within the space of four years.

There are those who believe that Australia's dominance of this gentleman's game ended when the team started to behave like gentlemen. Paul Marsh, chief executive of the Australian Cricketers' Association, puts the blame for the country's decline on curbs imposed on "sledging"—a polite cricketing term which roughly translates as verbal assault.

For years, Australians were the masters of this form of intimidation, but Cricket Australia introduced rules limiting on-field aggression in 2008 following an ugly Test match against India. The upshot has been a lack of mental toughness, says Marsh. "There was an immediate noticeable change in the way the team played the game," he said.

But Australia's current slump may actually be a direct consequence of its sustained period of global domination.

For one thing, the country's pioneering training systems have since been adopted by teams all over the world in an attempt to gain an edge. Five years ago, Indian cricket officials flew to Sydney to copy Cricket New South Wales's high-performance program. Now, for every one elite player that Cricket New South Wales produces, India has roughly 20,000.

In addition, the country's prolonged success made succession planning all but impossible. While Australia's elder statesmen were lording it over all-comers, there was no reason to blood new players. But allowing stars like Warne, Langer and Hayden to end their careers aged closer to 40 than 30 meant a large crop of experienced pros spent their peak years without any access to international cricket.

"There is almost a lost generation of Australian players in their late twenties," said Michael Holding, a former West Indies bowler and now a cricket analyst. "[They] should have been learning their trade during the 2006-07 Ashes, but couldn't find a spot because there were so many exceptional thirtysomethings in the team."

At the same time, the development of new forms of the game has made the task even harder. Limited overs games used to be seen as an opportunity to give promising Test players a taste of international cricket, but the rise of Twenty20 has led to the emergence of specialist players uniquely suited to the demands of the 20-over game. As a result, Australia's selectors have chosen more than 50 players in two years.

Still, some feel that Australia's combination of climate and cultural obsession with cricket mean any decline will be short-lived. 

"This country is so gifted in sports people that it won't take us all that long to recover," said Ian Harvey, a former Australia all-rounder. "[In] probably two or three years, we'll get back again."

 Write to  Jonathan Clegg at jonathan.clegg@wsj.com 