WASHINGTON—The U.S. took a step closer to offering financial aid to the beleaguered Libyan rebels, after Sen. John Kerry said Wednesday he was drafting legislation to free up some of the $34 billion in Libyan assets frozen by the White House.

Libyan rebel leaders arrived in Washington to press the Obama administration Wednesday for quicker financial aid, hoping to overcome uncertainty inside the U.S. government over how to free up assets seized from Col. Moammar Gadhafi's government. Rebels fighting to oust Col. Gadhafi say they are down to less than two weeks of cash reserves and are hard-pressed to pay for food, fuel, and medicine.

"I needed something yesterday," Ali Tarhouni, the finance minister for Libya's Transitional National Council, said in an interview Wednesday. "The issue for me is running a war economy with no resources." 

Libya's oil production, though most of it's in rebel-held territory, has plummeted to some 100,000 barrels a day from 1.6 million barrels and is hard to export amid attacks by government forces, he said.

Mr. Tarhouni, a former professor at the University of Washington, and Mahmoud Jibril, the rebel council's foreign minister, began talks Wednesday with White House officials. More meetings were set for this week with the Treasury and State departments and Tom Donilon, the national security adviser.

Messrs. Jabril and Tarhouni are urging the Obama administration to set up a short-term mechanism to allow international aid to immediately begin flowing into rebel accounts.

"We're seeking to push the legislation through as quickly as possible," Mr. Kerry (D., Mass.) said in an interview, adding that his planned bill comes after a request from the State Department and the White House. John Mccain (R., Ariz.) and other lawmakers back such aid.

The rebels are initially seeking $3 billion for six months of operations, but recognize that even getting that first part of the frozen funds could take time, say people involved in the talks. But the Libyans are stressing to U.S. officials that they need immediate help. The U.S. has so far given the rebels $25 million in humanitarian aid.

"This is our money," said Mr. Tarhouni. He said the rebels are seeking a line of credit or a loan backed by the frozen assets. "We're basically saying, give us a loan," he said, stressing that the opposition council has no intention of removing the frozen assets from the U.S. financial institutions where they are parked.

Track the latest events in Libya.

One proposal championed by the council would establish an international trust fund to oversee disbursements, say rebel officials. Under the plan, the fund would be administered by allied governments, possibly Italy, and funds disbursed would ultimately be paid back by the council.

The rebels' visit to Washington comes as Gadhafi forces and the opposition, based in the eastern city of Benghazi, are at a stalemate. However, the rebels, backed by North Atlantic Treaty Organization airpower, have advanced in recent days. Rebels in the embattled western city of Misrata celebrated Wednesday what they hailed as a major victory in their months-long struggle against Col. Gadhafi's troops.

A Misrata-based spokesman for the rebels, Mohammed Slim, said anti-regime fighters seized the strategic air base and air force academy south of the city. The compound served as one of the main staging grounds for artillery and rocket attacks against the city by pro-Gadhafi soldiers and has been repeatedly bombarded by coalition forces since March. 

Mr. Slim said rebels "liberated" the road leading to the sprawling air base and then entered it earlier Wednesday.

But by nightfall the rebels' hold on the base appeared to be in contention. Mr. Slim said Misrata was coming under fresh attack by pro-Gadhafi forces positioned beyond the air base. Another official in the rebel capital Benghazi farther east said the fight over the airbase was still far from over.

The Benghazi official, Saadoun al-Misrati, a native of Misrata, said rebels entered the airbase earlier in the day and then retreated closer to their supply lines when they came under attack by regime forces. 

In Tripoli, government spokesman Moussa Ibrahim said the airport remained under the control of Col. Gadhafi's forces.

Late Wednesday, Libyan state television showed a short video clip of Col. Gadhafi, the first new footage of him shown since a NATO airstrike on April 30 destroyed one of his residential and command compounds, killing one of his sons and three of his grandchildren. His absence from public view had fed speculation that he too had been killed or wounded.

Shielded by a security detail, the Libyan leader apparently slipped unnoticed into and out of a Tripoli hotel where foreign journalists are lodged, meeting in a conference room with men he introduced on television as Libyan tribal leaders. A camera filmed him from a distance and zoomed in on a TV screen in the room that displayed Wednesday's date. Col. Gadhafi, wearing big sunglasses, embraced his guests stiffly and sat with them in a half circle. "You will be victorious," one elderly guest told him. 

Meanwhile, the European Union's external affairs chief, Catherine Ashton, said she intended to open an EU office in Benghazi "to support the interim transitional national council and Mr. Jibril."

The U.S. has expressed willingness to help fund the rebels, most recently in comments last week by Secretary of State Hillary Clinton. Mrs. Clinton said the administration and Congress were working on a bill to free up some frozen assets.

But the Obama administration still hasn't settled on a way to transfer funds seized from a standing—if questionably legitimate—government to a rebel force the U.S. hasn't even officially recognized. Mr. Tarhouni said the lack of official recognition "is actually impeding" U.S. efforts to aid the rebels.

Senior State Department and Treasury officials sat down Wednesday with lawmakers to try to map out a process. But U.S. officials said there wasn't a clear precedent for drafting legislation needed to release the funds.

Sen. Kerry said he was drafting legislation that "will authorize the transfer of available cash assets to the [opposition] council." Mr. Kerry added that "it will not come from the taxpayer but from Col. Gadhafi himself." He did not specify how much money would be released or a timeframe.

Mr. Obama could issue an executive order unfreezing some seized funds. But to do so, officials say Mr. Obama would have to certify the funds were needed to respond to foreign military aggression against the U.S., which the White House is wary to do.

The release of the frozen funds is also complicated because Col. Gadhafi's regime held assets in forms that could be difficult to liquidate, according to U.S. officials.

—Richard Boudreaux in Tripoli and Scott Greenberg in Washington contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Keith Johnson at keith.johnson@wsj.com, Jay Solomon at jay.solomon@wsj.com and Sam Dagher at sam.dagher@wsj.com 