DUBLIN—Irish Prime Minister Brian Cowen said he was resigning as leader of the governing Fianna Fail party ahead of the March 11 general election, bowing to pressure from within his party. 

Mr. Cowen will remain as prime minister through the election. "I want the party to be in the best possible position to fight that campaign as a united party," Mr. Cowen said. "Fianna Fail's big fight is with the opposition not with ourselves."

He said he will step aside to allow another Fianna Fail leader to campaign in the general election, which is still set for March 11 in order to pass the Finance Bill that will bring into law tax measures from December's budget. 

"That's the sensible thing to do for the country," Mr. Cowen said. "I will continue in my role as Taoiseach as before....I want to assure you that the government will discharge its duties properly and appropriately." 

Fianna Fail has the lowest level of support in its 85-year history at around 14%, behind the two main opposition parties, amid widespread criticism of its handling of the economic crisis. 

See key dates in Ireland's economic crisis.



The government agreed to a €67.5 billion ($92 billion) in aid from the European Union and International Monetary Fund in late November—a humiliating reversal of fortune for the former Celtic Tiger. Ireland will contribute an additional €17.5 billion. 

Foreign Affairs Minister Micheal Martin is the front runner to succeed Mr. Cowen. Finance Minister Brian Lenihan and Tourism Minister Mary Hanafin are among those previously tipped to succeed Mr. Cowen. 

Enda Kenny, leader of the center-right Fine Gael party, is in pole position to become the country's next leader, most likely in a coalition with the left-of-center Labour Party. Both parties want to renegotiate the EU/IMF deal. 

Mr. Cowen faced fresh dissent last week from within his Fianna Fail party after his junior coalition partner, the Green Party, blocked his attempt to shuffle five cabinet posts ahead of the general election. 

Late Wednesday, he accepted resignations from ministers and intended to reassign their posts to noncabinet members. Green Party leader John Gormley warned Mr. Cowen that his party wouldn't support such a move. 

Rather than appoint new younger ministers, an attempt to raise their profile in the seven weeks before the general election, Mr. Cowen was forced to reassign five vacant ministerial positions to sitting ministers. 

Mr. Gormley has said the Finance Bill—published Friday and expected to pass through Parliament in the coming weeks—is the main reason for his party remaining in government and to ensure an orderly transition to the next government.

 Write to  Quentin Fottrell at quentin.fottrell@dowjones.com 