TOKYO—In a sign that  Sony Corp. has anointed a possible successor to Chief Executive  Howard Stringer, the company said it plans to combine its videogame and consumer electronics businesses and then promote  Kazuo Hirai, the head of its PlayStation game business, to oversee the newly formed unit. 

By handing over the reins of Sony's two highest-profile businesses, the company is elevating Mr. Hirai, 50 years old, a longtime executive who has played a major role in building the PlayStation business from scratch since the early 1990s, to a position that would make him the front-runner to eventually succeed Mr. Stringer. 

Mr. Stringer himself, in an interview with The Wall Street Journal, confirmed the intent behind Mr. Hirai's promotion. "He is the leading candidate," said Mr. Stringer, who announced he is staying on as CEO for the foreseeable future. "The logic (of the choice) is inescapable." 

Mr. Stringer said that Mr. Hirai's appointment as executive deputy president and representative corporate officer— a distinction shared by only Mr. Stringer and Vice Chairman Ryoji Chubachi, a former Sony president—is the first step in a systematic succession plan. He cautioned, however, that the plans are still not finalized. 

Sony said Mr. Stringer has "extended his commitment" to the company to oversee the realignment of its businesses without disclosing any other details. A person familiar with the matter said Mr. Stringer decided to renew his employment contract with Sony. Mr. Stringer said there is no timetable for a transition but the conclusion of Sony's three-year business plan, which runs until March 2013, may offer a logical exit point. 

By naming a best among equals, Sony is hoping to eliminate any uncertainty should the 69-year-old Mr. Stringer, who is also the company's president and chairman, choose to step down in the future. Since becoming the first non-Japanese CEO of Sony in 2005, Mr. Stringer has sought to make Sony more nimble while slashing its costs by reducing staff and increasing outsourcing of production. 

A former journalist, Mr. Stringer has also pushed Sony to marry content and hardware, or what he calls a convergence strategy, with the creation of an online content platform that links into the company's gadgets. From his long career at the videogame unit, Mr. Hirai has the most experience among Sony's senior executives in delivering on that strategy. Mr. Hirai also oversees Sony's Vaio computer business. 

"Hirai is probably in a good position to transform the company from an engineering centric company to one that combines strong engineering with the content-based advantages it has," said Jay Defibaugh, equities-research director at MF Global FXA Securities in Tokyo. 

Sony said it will realign its two biggest business divisions to form the Consumer Products & Services Group, which will house the company's videogame business along with consumer electronics products such as televisions and digital cameras. There will also be a separate Professional & Device Solutions Group, which will oversee the semiconductor and other components businesses along with products sold to broadcasters. Executive Deputy President Hiroshi Yoshioka, who is currently in charge of the consumer-electronics business, will oversee this new group. 

The changes will take place on April 1. 

In 2009, Stringer tapped a quartet of bilingual Japanese executives whom he dubbed "the four musketeers" to turn around the electronics business. The four, who included Messrs. Hirai and Yoshioka, were all seen as potential successors. 

Mr. Hirai is also credited with returning the videogame operations to profit. While the videogame business has been profitable for five straight quarters, the business has lost money in the past four fiscal years. For the fiscal year to March, Sony has said it expects to return to the black. 

He will now be asked to oversee a profit turnaround at Sony's flagship television business, which is on track to be in the red for a seventh straight year. 

With almost no engineering background, Mr. Hirai has taken an unlikely path to a senior position at Sony. 

He started his career at Sony's music joint venture with CBS in 1984 before joining Sony Computer Entertainment in 1995. He was a loyal deputy of Ken Kutaragi, the executive credited with creating the PlayStation, and helped to build the game business in the U.S. His first major role at headquarters came only after Mr. Stringer reshuffled his management team two years ago. 

Even though he has been considered a potential successor to Mr. Stringer for some time, Mr. Hirai had privately told people that he isn't very ambitious and he wasn't particularly interested in becoming Sony's next chief. However, he did tell people jokingly that it would be nice to come back and be the head of Sony after a career of working at the subsidiaries, which can be seen as subordinate to the parent company. 

A seasoned public speaker, Mr. Hirai is perfectly fluent in English and Japanese—perhaps, the result of a childhood in Japan, Canada and the U.S. His wife and children still live in the U.S. 

—Juro Osawa contributed to this article.

 Write to  Daisuke Wakabayashi at Daisuke.Wakabayashi@wsj.com 