Japanese stocks led much of Asia higher Thursday as strong U.S. jobs data inspired optimism and a weaker yen boosted exporters.

"The strong jobs data fueled expectations that the [U.S.] non-farm payrolls data to be released [Friday] may be strong as well," said  Hideyuki Ishiguro, an investment strategy supervisor at Okasan Securities.

Automatic Data Processing reported Wednesday that the U.S. added 297,000 private-sector jobs in December, almost three times the 100,000 analysts had expected.

That contributed to a brightening picture of the U.S. economy, which in turn has given the dollar a boost against other major currencies.

"The U.S. dollar has just about recovered all the losses suffered in the dying days of 2010,"  Sue Trinh, senior currency strategist at Royal Bank of Canada wrote in a note. However, she also advised caution, saying the ADP number "has had a patchy record as an indicator for payrolls."

In Tokyo, a weaker yen helped manufacturing and technology exporters as the Nikkei Stock Average climbed 1.4% to 10529.76.

  Fanuc rose 2.7%,  Kyocera climbed 3.1% and  TDK
TTDKY


0.82
%




 gained 3.4%.



  JVC Kenwood Holdings
JVCZY


-3.38
%




 soared 26% after it officially announced a capital-increase plan late Wednesday. The stock had previously sustained steep losses over concerns about share dilution.

Other shares also outperformed the index.  Nikon
NINOY


0.46
%




 rose 3.5% to its highest close since May 19, following a strong operating-profit forecast for its precision-equipment unit and an upgrade to "outperform" at Mitsubishi UFJ Morgan Stanley Securities. 

Tokyo's advance was held back by  Fast Retailing,
FRCOY


1.50
%




 which fell 5.1% in reaction to its announcement late Wednesday that its Uniqlo unit's domestic same-store sales fell 15.5% on year in December. 

Chinese shares failed to keep pace with the rest of Asia as investors took satisfaction in recent gains. Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index, after choppy trading, ended little changed at 23786.30, while China's Shanghai Composite slipped 0.5% to 2824.20. 

"Although China's inflation rate may have slowed in December from the previous month, the chance of another interest-rate hike is still in the cards in the short term," said Central China analyst  Zhang Gang. 

  Ping An Insurance fell 4.1% in Shanghai and 0.7% in Hong Kong, amid market speculation that the firm may launch a capital-raising issue. A company spokesman declined comment.

Coal miners in Shanghai were hit by profit-taking.  China Coal Energy slipped 0.7% and  China Shenhua Energy dropped 1.4%. In the previous four sessions they had gained 6.4% and 4.5%, respectively.

Interest-rate concerns were in play in Mumbai as the Bombay Stock Exchange's Sensitive Index fell 0.6% to 20184.74.

Losses were led by ICICI Bank, which lost 1.6%, and State Bank of India, which slid 2.7%. 

Auto stocks were led lower by Bajaj Auto, which fell again on concerns it wouldn't be able to meet its annual sales target. Shares slid another 3.6% after sinking 11% in the previous three sessions. Maruti Suzuki fell 3% and  Tata Motors shed 1.8%. 

 Write to  Colin Ng at colin.ng@dowjones.com 