Four "queens of crime" dominated the Golden Age of the mystery novel, the years just before and after World War II: Agatha Christie and her fiendish way with plots; Dorothy Sayers with her cerebral Lord Peter Wimsey novels; New Zealander Ngaio Marsh embellishing the detective novel with flourishes from the theatrical and artistic worlds; and Margery Allingham, the most energetic of the four and the most resistant to classification. Allingham flouted the very conventions that these detective novelists are alleged to have espoused, and her refusal to stay true to a formula may explain why she is the least known of the four today. But it also makes her the most interesting to read. And thanks to a reissue series from Felony & Mayhem Press (16 Allingham volumes and counting), reading her is as easy as it is completely enjoyable.

It is not that Allingham's detective novels are experimental. Each features the same sleuth: the enigmatic, noble-born Albert Campion. There are the usual murders to solve, and solutions are arrived at by the end of each book. But more than any of the other Queens of Crime, Allingham varied her work and had no qualms about switching from rollicking adventure to tight-knit village mystery to international intrigue. There are tonal changes, too, an evolution from the merry brio of the early books to the dread-filled menace of Allingham's masterpiece, "The Tiger in the Smoke" (1952). The Campion series as a whole demonstrates the breadth of what's possible in a crime novel, and Allingham's restlessness with the genre's constraints.

"He's quite inoffensive, just a silly ass" is how readers are introduced to Campion, he of the "tow-coloured hair" and "foolish, pale-blue eyes behind tortoiseshell-rimmed spectacles" in "The Crime of Black Dudley" (1929), a serviceable account of murders at a house party. (The same setting, much transformed, is the backdrop for a more significant Campion adventure 27 years later, "The Beckoning Lady.") But here, and more prominently in "Mystery Mile" (1930), his first starring role, Campion's apparent foppishness—he was imagined as a parody of Sayers's nobleman detective—and "hard to recollect, impossible to describe" appearance hide a keen intelligence, a strong sense of justice and wicked irony. "Coups neatly executed, nothing sordid, vulgar or plebeian, deserving cases preferred, police no object," reads Campion's card. Manic humor and punning repartee fills the early books: 



 "Shocking! I don't know what my wife would say," said Campion.  

 "Good lord, you don't have a wife, have you?"  

 "No," said Campion, "That's why I don't know what she'd say."  



In the 1930s, Campion grew from a figure of parody to one with gravitas. The Wodehouse-like humor gave way to existential crises, as in "Dancers in Mourning" (1937), when Campion nurses an infatuation for the married Linda Sutane that leaves him startled and angry: "In common with most other unembittered mortals, he cherished a secret belief that the mental, emotional and physical female equivalent of himself did somewhere exist, so that to discover it and find it unattainable was an elementary form of tragedy none the less painful because it was a hackneyed tale."

Preservation instincts prevail, but soon after in the series—with 1941's "Traitor's Purse"—Allingham gave Campion his happy ending in the form of Amanda Fitton, an engineer and pilot who is something of a proto-feminist counterpart to the traditionalist Campion. 

As good and varied as all the Campion books are, "The Tiger in the Smoke" is the finest. Here Allingham describes the ruins of postwar London and pea-soup fog that masks a knife-wielding killer, for whom the reader eventually feels empathy. With a mature, declarative style, Allingham created an overwhelming sense of menace: "The sky was yellow as a duster and the rest was a granular black, overprinted in grey and lightened by occasional shivers of bright fish colour as a policeman turned in his wet cape." 

At the emotional center of "Tiger" is a young woman's fidelity to a husband lost in the war, even as she has supposedly moved on with another man who loves her. But the dread comes from Jack Havoc, a murderer who frightens with his casually lethal use of knives and single-minded spree as the fog grows thicker. Campion is tasked to stop the murderer, but Allingham spends less time on her hero than the exploration of Havoc's fractured psyche, wounded by war and glowing for revenge. "That man is killing mad," fumes Campion's policeman friend Charlie Luke. "He's knifing right and left as though human life had no value and any poor beast who gets in his way had no right to exist. . . . He's got no right to life. There's no place for him under the sun."

Life did not always treat Allingham (1904-66) kindly. She was garrulous and energetic in person, and the publication of her debut novel, "Blackkerchief Dick," at age 19 marked her as a literary prodigy. (The need for a dependable income plus a friend's dare spurred her to the mystery genre, where she stayed, more or less, for the rest of her career.) But Allingham hid crippling bouts of depression. She eventually sought electroshock therapy treatments in the mid-1950s, causing years to pass between her final novels. 

Her marriage to Philip Youngman Carter, a journalist, editor and the cover designer of her books, was fraught with complications: long absences (she worked at her beloved D'Arcy House in Colchester, he kept a place in London), his extramarital affairs and mutual resentment about the dependable income needed to maintain the large country house. Some of the couple's difficulties bore fictional fruit through Minnie and Tonker, the many- years-married couple at the forefront of "The Beckoning Lady." 

Allingham also played down her intellectual gifts, often casting herself as the modest, loving wife happily ensconced at a country estate: "The average British crowd is quick to admire beauty, especially in distress, but there is a curious streak of temperament which makes it distrust the quality of smartness, especially when it is allied, however remotely, to something questionable or suspicious," she wrote with considerable astuteness in "Flowers for the Judge" (1936). 

Allingham had the business acumen to recognize when to leave a publisher and how to best ensure that her work would stay in print. She hated Britain's onerous taxation, and "The Beckoning Lady" has the murder of a tax inspector at its center—and the novel explores the tax code in detail. "We've had plenty of fights but never any real business until now," says Tonker. "And why has it happened at all? Because some silly official first decides that we're the same person for income-tax, and then starts trying to split us because even he can see that we're not. We don't conform to the blue-print, so we've got to be altered." 

In her novels, Allingham moved between light and dark tones with ease. Her way with description of both people and place situates her most strongly as a postwar writer, complete with the anxieties and preoccupations of the time. But she never took herself too seriously. Even late in her career, she always made room for jokes: 



"When is a policeman not a policeman?" she inquired.  

 "When he takes his clothes off," said Rupert, licking the marmalade spoon. "Then he's just an ordinary silly old man."  



Her mix of the serious and the silly made her an uncomfortable fit during mystery's long-ago Golden Age. Even today, despite the contemporary demand for crime fiction laden with meaning and weight, she seems out of place. But the pleasures of Allingham's brand of entertainment remain and demonstrate that conventions and rules are irrelevant in the face of pleasure. 

—Ms. Weinman writes "Dark Passages," a monthly mystery and suspense column for the Los Angeles Times, and blogs about crime fiction at Confessions of an Idiosyncratic Mind (www.sarahweinman.com). 