NEW DELHI -- Foreign investments in Indian government and corporate bonds are close to the maximum permitted limit, but the government does not plan to raise thresholds for now, a senior official said on Wednesday.

"We do not want to open it up completely [foreign investment in government bonds]," said a senior government official, who didn't want to be named. "There is a need to encourage foreign funds to invest in bonds of infrastructure companies." 

India's high interest rates and the safety of government bonds provide foreign investors an attractive arbitrage opportunity over the near-zero rates in developed countries. 

However, the government is trying to encourage long-term foreign investments in infrastructure to meet the massive funding needed to overhaul the shoddy infrastructure in Asia's third-largest economy. 

India is targeting investments of $1 trillion for infrastructure development in the five-year period starting April 1, 2012, a large chunk of which is expected to come from private companies and overseas investors. 

In the federal budget for the current financial year announced in February, the government increased five-fold the limit for foreign investments permitted in bonds issued by infrastructure companies to $25 billion from $5 billion. 

However, only a small portion of this limit has been used up, about $33.55 million, according to most recent data. In corporate bonds, other than those issued by infrastructure companies, foreign investors can pump in up to $15 billion. Only $500 million remains unutilized under this limit. 

The government generally reviews the limits once 80% of the limits are utilized, but it doesn't have any plans for a review this time around. 

"It [a review of limits] is not on the radar immediately," the official said. 

Current regulations also cap foreign investments in government bonds at $10 billion, half of which must be in bonds maturing in more than five years. The official said there is still headroom available for overseas funds to buy government bonds with more than five-year maturity. The remaining $5 billion for investments in government bonds maturing in less than five years has been completely exhausted, the official added. 

Instead, India hopes to direct foreign investors toward infrastructure bonds to help finance the massive infrastructure overhaul required in Asia's third-largest economy, the official, who didn't wish to be named, told Dow Jones Newswires. 

In February, the federal government doubled the limit of foreign fund investments in corporate bonds to $40 billion. Of this, $25 billion is earmarked for investments in infrastructure bonds. And, the official said foreign investors haven't put that much money into infrastructure bonds yet. 

However, the remaining $15 billion, which can be invested in corporate bonds, is close to being exhausted. 

Current regulations also cap foreign investments in government bonds at $10 billion.

  