Japanese stocks fell sharply Friday after a powerful earthquake rocked the country's northern coast, triggering a tsunami and generating tremors that shook buildings in Tokyo.

News of the quake, which struck in the closing minutes of Tokyo trading, accelerated a fall driven hefty overnight losses on Wall Street and lingering worries over the political turmoil in the Middle East.

The quake—the worst in Japan since at least 1891—had a magnitude of 8.9 and an epicenter 231 miles northeast of Tokyo, according to the U.S. Geological Survey. Tsunami warnings were issued for Japan and many other countries, including Mexico, New Zealand, Indonesia and Taiwan. At least five people were killed and nearly four million buildings in and around Tokyo lost power, while fires broke out in many buildings, according to reports on the government's NHK World news channel.

Japan's Nikkei Stock Average ended 1.7% lower at 10,254.43, with losses deepening in the final minutes of trading. Shares of MS&AD Insurance Group Holdings Inc. fell 3.2%, Japan Petroleum Exploration Co. dropped 3.3% and Fast Retailing Co. gave up 2.9%.

"It's probably too early to really assess the impact... There's always a knee-jerk reaction to such things," said Andrew Sullivan, director for institutional sales at OSK Securities. "The tsunami wave seems to be creating a lot of damage, so the insurers are probably going to be badly hit by that. You generally see construction companies do quite well after [a quake]... What people will look at before Monday is how [Japanese companies'] American Depository Receipts trade in the U.S. tonight."

In volatile foreign-exchange trading, the yen fell sharply immediately after the earthquake was reported, before bouncing back against the U.S. dollar. The greenback was recently buying 82.79 yen, after moving in a range between 82.63 yen and 83.30 yen.

Japanese government bonds soared after the earthquake, with the lead JGB futures contract rising 0.66 to 139.20 points, while the yield on 10-year cash JGBs fell 0.03 percentage point to 1.270%.

Dow Jones Industrial Average futures were down 68 points in screen trade, while April Nymex crude oil futures fell $1.40 to $101.30 per barrel on Globex.

Stocks in some other Asian markets also extended losses in the wake of the temblor, notably in Hong Kong and India, amid fears of damage to Japan's economy.

Hong Kong's Hang Seng Index finished 1.6% lower, China's Shanghai Composite dropped 0.8%, Taiwan's Taiex fell 0.9%, South Korea's Kospi gave up 1.3%, Australia's S&P/ASX 200 slid 1.2% and India's Sensex closed 0.8% lower.

Among the losers, China Overseas Land & Investment Ltd. fell 3% in Hong Kong and Sterlite Industries Ltd. fell 2.5% in Mumbai trade.

Most Asian markets were already following China's release of monthly inflation data earlier in the day, which raised fears of further monetary tightening in the country.

China's February consumer price index rose 4.9% from a year earlier, unchanged from 4.9% in January, but topping expectations for a 4.8% rise, according to the median forecast in a Dow Jones poll of analysts. China's producer price index, a measure of pipeline inflation pressures, rose 7.2% from a year earlier, up from January's 6.6% rise and higher than the 7% expected.

The CPI report was "the single biggest sell factor this afternoon across all of Asia," Mitsuhige Akino, chief fund manager at Ichiyoshi Investment Management, said in Tokyo.

The fresh worries about more tightening measures from Beijing weighed on interest-rate sensitive stocks in Hong Kong and China. Among banks, China Merchants Bank Co. shed 2.6% in Hong Kong and 2.4% in Shanghai.

"The market should be prepared for a reserve ratio requirement and rate hike in the next couple of weeks," Bank of America-Merrill Lynch economist Lu Ting wrote in a note. "The chance of a rate hike could be quite high in the second half of March or early April."

China's central bank governor Zhou Xiaochuan said Friday at a news conference that interest rates are an important policy tool.

Even before the China data, regional sentiment was depressed on reports Thursday that Saudi Arabian police fired rubber bullets to disperse a crowd of about 200 Shiite protesters in the eastern town of Qatif.

Australian shares were lower across the board, slightly extending their losses after the China data. But tensions in the Middle East and Libya are a greater drag on Australian shares than the Chinese inflation figures, said Ric Spooner, chief market analyst at CMC Markets.

"There's nothing in those China figures to cause a substantial change to people's views on the China growth view," Mr. Spooner said, even if Beijing takes steps to slow its economic growth. Uncertainty over oil prices were a "significantly larger variable" than China's inflation, he said, noting sustained higher oil prices could force people and businesses to cut back on spending to meet the higher costs.

Among heavyweight miners, Rio Tinto Ltd. was down 2% and BHP Billiton Ltd. fell 1%.

Among other markets, New Zealand's NZX 50 dropped 0.7%, Philippine shares fell 0.9%, Singapore's Straits Times Index was down 1% and Thailand's SET down 1.2%.

In foreign-exchange trade, the euro was at 114.60 yen, from 114.36 yen in late New York trade Thursday, and at $1.3829 from $1.3799 in late New York trade Thursday.

Spot gold was at $1,415.20 per troy ounce, up $4.10 from its New York settlement Thursday.



 Write to  Colin Ng at colin.ng@dowjones.com 