Who ever said that living through an economic boom was supposed to be enjoyable? That an abundance of jobs, a buoyant property market and anything as abstract as record-breaking growth rates guaranteed good times all round? Not the Canadian-born, British-based novelist David Szalay, whose 2008 debut novel "London and the South-East" invited readers into the belly of the boom years of the early 21st century. These were years of which it might have been said we'd never had it so good, though you could have fooled the book's protagonist, advertising salesman Paul Rainey. 

Rainey was a sad example of what, even at the best of economic times, a commission-based, over-the-phone sales job can do to a man. First comes the loss of soul, then, as is the nature of the industry, the loss of the job itself, and with it, full-blown personal disintegration. Rainey's attempt to rebuild himself through more nourishing employment was a long day's journey into turn-of-the-millennium England: a land of insecure short-term jobs, strip-lit soporific offices, greasy chain pubs, over-furnished suburban homes and immense, irresistible supermarkets. Swimming in wealth it may have been, but in Mr. Szalay's telling this was a country unlovely to the eye and ice-cold to the touch.

The story of Paul Rainey's downfall was followed in 2009 by "The Innocent," a short, brisk, unexpected thriller about Stalin-era Russia, but with his latest novel Mr. Szalay has returned to home soil and more recent history. If "London and the South-East," set in 2003, takes place in the high summer of the period of plenty, then "Spring," opening in 2006, is rooted in that same period's autumn. Like most of the people we meet in this novel, serial entrepreneur James has seen better days. Once a thrusting presence on the Sunday Times Rich List, James has taken a turn for the introspective after a string of business failures.

"No more magnificence," writes Mr. Szalay as the former estate agent, dot-com CEO and magazine proprietor looks into the shaving mirror. "Now he [James] just wants things to be okay. He wants somewhere okay to live. An okay job. . . . And a woman." The pursuit of okayness sounds more manageable than the pursuit of wealth, never mind happiness, but for James it turns out to be lined with troubles. 

 By David Szalay  Jonathan Cape, 272 pages, £16.99

The trickiest obstacle in his path is that sought-after woman. James first encounters Katherine, not long into her thirties but already divorced, at the wedding of a mutual friend. The two quickly fall into a relationship. A pattern forms of weekly meetings in not-too-expensive bits of London for food, drinks and, though Katherine makes it clear each time that nothing of the sort must happen, sex. Why she repeatedly says one thing and does another—James, keen but tired, applies no particular pressure on her to do so—is the mystery of her character, and the central mystery of the novel. The Blake-reciting, Flemish art-loving Katherine, and James, "who tends not to have much to say for himself, especially when the talk [turns] intellectual," are not an obvious match, and at times appear to be a singularly bad one, as we are reminded when she ruminates on how "he does not know her. He does not understand her. He has no instinct for her. . . . No more than she [does for] him." Yet theirs is an intriguing pairing—James desirous of love but too exhausted to fight for it, Katherine without desire one moment and aflame the next—and Mr. Szalay does well to keep us guessing about how it will develop. "We're just not having fun," says Katherine during one date, apparently putting an end to the affair; but a few minutes later James is "supine on the bed with her astraddle him," in one of Spring's many vigorous, but not unequivocally joyful, bedroom scenes. 

James and Katherine's relationship, such as it is, is the suspenseful core of the novel; keeping the tension alongside it is a sub-plot concerning James's latest money-making scheme. A possibly illegal "touch" involving a racehorse co-owned with a public-school friend, this stands to net James a few thousand pounds: useful money for the one-time multimillionaire, and a sorry illustration of how far his star has fallen lately.

As the day of the touch approaches we move deeper into the world of horse racing, economically bustling but sleazy, and populated by characters—chief among them a corrupt, UKIP-supporting horse trainer—seemingly less deserving of authorial tenderness than are James or Katherine. This world has much in common with the telesales world of "London and the South-East"—rapacious, double-crossing, not at all pretty, it adds up to another portrait from Mr. Szalay of capitalism in the raw. No wonder, with profit-generation so disagreeable a business, that James longs to say goodbye to it all and take refuge in romance. If only the boom years hadn't worn him out; and if only Katherine could get to the bottom of her own heart.

This is a novel about timeless human miseries—of loving and not being loved in return; of not being able to love—but it is also about the miseries of one time in particular, the late days of a specific era. Mr. Szalay's first novel was energized by disgust with that era; "Spring" does not have quite such energy and, though efficiently constructed, is the less thrilling book, and is relieved to see that era go. As the novel ends, springtime is burgeoning in London, and you can smell recession and rebirth in the air. 

 Mr. Genders is a freelance editor and writer based in London. 