Earlier this week, Natalie Portman won a Golden Globe for her role in Darren Aronofsky's ballet-thriller "Black Swan." The film has grossed over $61 million in the U.S. since its release—a huge sum considering ballet is a minority art form. Relatively few people may see it live on stage, but it seems they flock to watch dance on film. They also talk about it online, with "Black Swan" prompting the scale of comment and discussion normally associated with blockbuster movies. Ms. Portman's fans, and devotees of Rodarte designers Kate and Laura Mulleavy, who created her costumes, have raved about the movie, while professional dancers could be heard groaning at its clichés and old-fashioned depiction of the art form. "There's still scope to make a good dance film," is how former Royal Ballet dancer-turned-filmmaker Michael Nunn tactfully puts it.

There is little doubt that "Black Swan" peddles one ballet stereotype after the next. Ms. Portman plays the fledgling dancer Nina Sayers, who is desperate to perform the dual lead role in "Swan Lake," but, while she has the innocence to portray the white swan Odette, she lacks the dark heart for the rival black swan Odile. The film depicts Ms. Portman as frail, needy and vulnerable. She is easily manipulated by the tyrannical ballet director, who shouts at her in a foreign accent. She makes herself vomit, self-harms and has a domineering mother. She wears a pale-pink cardigan. She is surrounded by ballerinas who throw tantrums and then throw themselves under cars because they can't cope with the pressure. She only draws strength from beating her rival and outdoing her mother, rather than from the poetry of the art form or her growth from ingénue to artiste. 

Mr. Aronofsky may not know it, but this depiction of ballerinas has long been lampooned by Les Ballets Trockadero de Monte Carlo, or the Trocks, as they are affectionately known. The all-male spoof troupe dresses up in tutus and tiaras and gently mocks ballet—its fairy tales, its tippy-toed refinements and its supposedly frail ballerinas, who are really clear-eyed young women who only feign vulnerability to please the audience. The Trocks also mock our confusing ballerinas with the characters they portray—a trap Mr. Aronofsky has fallen into.

Ballet films, it seems, are made to the template set by Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger's 1948 classic "The Red Shoes." Based on the fairy tale by Hans Christian Andersen, it had a diabolical director Lermontov (Anton Walbrook) and a ballerina torn between life and art (Moira Shearer); only, as a dancer with the Royal Ballet, Shearer had the physique and the musicality of a ballerina. "The Red Shoes" also had exceptionally good dance scenes by Sir Robert Helpmann, and renowned dancers of the era, including Léonide Massine, in feature roles.

The dance sequences in "Black Swan" have an appealing dynamism, but they don't compare to "The Red Shoes." Nor are they as good as those in last year's much more modestly budgeted BBC biopic of Dame Margot Fonteyn, directed by Otto Bathurst. The dance sections were arranged by Mr. Nunn and fellow former Royal Ballet dancer William Trevitt, who also coached the actor Anne-Marie Duff in the Fonteyn role. Ms. Portman has done more of her own dancing than Ms. Duff, but despite describing how she trained for a year—"five hours a day with a ballet teacher"—the effect is less convincing. The reason is that while Ms. Portman does some reasonable moves with her head and shoulders, she doesn't have a ballerina's physique or musicality, and despite her physical beauty and petite frame, she lacks a dancer's innate grace and downy-soft elegance. Few could doubt the clever camerawork of "Black Swan," but Ms. Portman looks static when she's moving. 

No doubt her fans will argue that "Black Swan" is a thriller, not a documentary, and that absolute balletic authenticity isn't important. However, that is rather like saying that poor driving doesn't matter in a race movie and that Westerns can saddle up with ordinary horsemanship.

The curious thing about "Black Swan" is that despite its balletic awkwardness, it is a compelling psychological thriller, with interesting ideas about doubles and doppelgangers. Mr. Aronofsky cleverly depicts how emotional stress distorts Nina's visual and mental faculties. She experiences imaginary events, has hallucinatory visions of herself and thinks she is literally turning into a swan. Her increasing psychosis and inability to distinguish between her life and her art are unsettling, and there are moments of real menace, such as when she seems to suffocate herself. The film's horror sequences are also compelling, with Winona Ryder as an aging, psychotic ballerina and Mila Kunis a sensuously menacing rival. Dan Schrecker's special effects reinforce the tension, especially the sequences where the ever-present mirrors ratchet up Nina's growing paranoia.

"Black Swan" would be a much better film if its ballet scenes were as good as its psychological ones. Given its blue-chip dance team, it is surprising they aren't. As well as several eminent retired dancers, including the late Georgina Parkinson, the film enlists an able corps from the Pennsylvania Ballet, plus the New York City Ballet star Benjamin Millepied, who both appears in the film and choreographed its dance scenes. Mr. Millepied shines when he is dancing, but little of his artistic refinement has transferred to the film's representation of ballet.

"Swan Lake" is the most famous ballet of all time. It was made in Russia in the late 19th century with a sumptuous score by Tchaikovsky. It draws on an old German myth of a woman who is transformed into a swan by an evil sorcerer and can only be released by the promise of true love. A prince provides this promise but is duped into betraying it. The ballet is an allegory; it's about the promises we make and how easily we break them, and the transformative power of love, as well as our twin natures—the good and the bad—and the difficulty of reconciling the two. It requires exceptionally able dancers with both strong balletic technique and first-rate acting. It is both a cracking story and a robust work of art that can flex and give way to endless reworkings. Mr. Aronofsky's film is the latest of many reinterpretations, and if it weren't for the crashing balletic clichés, it would be an interesting urban update of the story. It also shows that, for all our supposed modernity, the old ballets still compel our attention best.

 Write to  Sarah Frater at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 