The banjo has long been an accessory to Steve Martin's career, first as a time-filler in his fledgling comedy routine, then as a totem of absurdity when he was filling arenas at the peak of his stand-up act in the 1970s. The instrument has become a growing focus for the 65-year-old actor, writer and art collector. On Tuesday, Rounder Records will release his second bluegrass album.

The new collection of songs, "Rare Bird Alert," was recorded with the band he tours with, the Steep Canyon Rangers. Some songs are humorous, others sincere. Mr. Martin, who learned banjo as a teenager by slowing down Earl Scruggs records, plays in two traditional picking methods, clawhammer and three-finger style. Occasionally he sings on the album, but mostly he leaves the vocals to others, including Paul McCartney on the song "Best Love." Mr. Martin has been received warmly by the bluegrass community—his musical debut, "The Crow," was the top-selling bluegrass album of 2009. Next week he launches a concert tour in New York.

 The Wall Street Journal: You have a precise but gentle style of banjo-playing. Is that something that sets you apart?  

 Mr. Martin: There's only one way I try to differentiate myself, and that's by writing all the songs. I didn't feel that just to play other people's songs was going to be enough. There's too many good players. When you write things yourself, something unique by definition comes out.

 Do you recall a moment when you went from learning to play the banjo to becoming a songwriter?  

I did that almost immediately. There were no instructors. Once I had exhausted my sources, I was left with just myself. Three of the songs on the first record ["The Crow"] I wrote by the time I was 25. I've written some songs in the past six months that I really, really like. I read a book by David Hackett Fischer called "Paul Revere's Ride." I wrote a song about the ride from the point of view of his horse. It sounds like a comic song but it's not. 

 The song "Best Love" is about the ins and outs of marriage and contains a line about solving a crossword puzzle. That's not a very bluegrassy.  

We can't keep singing about trains and mines. The world has expanded so much, though I guess you could sing about black lung disease if you wanted to. [Musician] Tim O'Brien has written songs about computers. Whether that's an emotional topic or not, I don't know. With "Best Love," there's a lightheartedness and a sense of joy. That's the most personal song on the record.

 The first time you toured as a musician, you'd been famous for decades. Does that mean you've never had the experience of bombing as a banjo act?  

The first show we did, a little over a year ago, I was worried because I didn't know if I could play for an hour. Now, it's a great feeling. But it's not as if the audience was warmed up. I didn't know how they were going to respond to the music. When you're a comedian you're expecting a response every 10 seconds. I discovered you can play a song for three minutes without worrying what the audience is doing. 

 In his autobiography, Keith Richards describes a feeling of physical liftoff he gets when playing guitar with the Rolling Stones in concert. Do you experience something similar on stage?  

If you're doing stand-up, you're virtually always thinking. You can get a huge laugh, but your mind has already moved on. Playing music can be unconscious. There's an autopilot situation where you can groove on the playing and you're not thinking, "Where's my pinky going?" Maybe with acting you can get into the groove, too. 

 When you were young, you were incredibly ambitious in your comedy and very disciplined about finding your voice. Is your drive similar when it comes to music? 

It is, except I'm much more relaxed. I do it because I really like it. It's not a life-or-death situation. And it's quite intimate. The world of this record is small enough that it feels that it's actually my work. When you've written a script or acted in a movie, there's so many people involved you can't quite pin it on one person. 

 Some laymen would say the same thing about bluegrass that they might about rap: "It all sounds the same." What should casual listeners listen for, especially in the banjos? 

Arguing backwards, I would say none of the songs on this album sound the same, to me. A lot of the songs in bluegrass have the same chord structures, but they can grow in sophistication. You have to give it several listens and you start to discern subtle differences. There are two aspects of the banjo. One is the hard-driving sound, such as Earl Scruggs playing "Foggy Mountain Breakdown." Or it can be heartbreaking, and that's a particular sound I really love. And I think that's for all Americans, that melancholy sound. 

 What other styles of music do you listen to?  

Well, not much else. Through my life I've listened to classical guitar and symphonic orchestra music. I don't listen to a lot of modern rock 'n' roll because my hearing is damaged and I can't listen to loud music. I'm just studying the music I play. 

 What's your regimen for good banjo-picking fingernails? Do you grow them or use fake nails? 

When I'm playing three-finger, I wear picks. But when I'm playing clawhammer, I go to a beauty shop and I have them put on two acrylic or silk fingernails on my first two fingers. Otherwise they would just splinter. I go about every two weeks.

 Do you have a specific salon you go to?  

No, almost anyone can do it. And they do it in varying qualities. They always think you're a guitar player. I think banjo players are really rare in salons. We're too manly for that.

 Bluegrass is very hidebound to tradition. No electric instruments, for example. Does it suit your personality to work within those parameters? 

I wrote a play, "Picasso at the Lapin Agile," about a conversation between Picasso and Einstein. There's a scene with an art dealer and he's waxing rhapsodic about a painting and he says, "You know what makes this painting great? The frame. It forces a containment and the painter has to work within the boundaries. They have to innovate within." I like that [about bluegrass]. Here's what you've got, now what you can do with it? 

 Can you describe how a song takes shape in your mind compared to a joke or a piece of writing?  

The judgment is the same. It either reads or sounds flat, or it sounds interesting, or surprising, or unconventional. The difference of course is that a sentence sometimes just has to make sense. With the song "The Great Remember," I was sitting there fiddling with it and I was tuned to a certain tuning that I love to play in. And I just had never put my fingers on those frets in that situation before. I didn't even know you could put your fingers there and still be in tune. So sometimes it's even a physical thing. I was with a painter [Mark Grotjahn] today at his studio, and I could tell he was thinking the exact same way that I do with a song or with writing. He said, "This section here is just not working yet." And it was an abstract painting. It was interesting to hear the same kind of language. He's seeing something that is very clear to him, yet he has to use dumb words to say it. If he could tell you why, I guess he'd be working on a book or something. 

 Unlike most celebrities on Twitter, you've shown restraint in hyping your projects. Do you have some dos and don'ts for Twitter? 

This is the first time I've ever done more than one [promotional tweet]. I'm quite proud of the record. As long as it's just me and not the record company doing it. I can't think of anything worse than the audience getting a flat-out commercial tweet that's not written by me. I guess some people can get away with that, if they're really hot. 

 Twitter is almost an epilogue to your stand-up career, in that you're delivering jokes directly to the public again. 

For some reason, these are easy to write, yet writing stand-up is very hard. It's sort of like what Carl Reiner told me about "The 2000 Year Old Man." He said, "All I have to do is ask Mel Brooks the hardest question I can think of and he works his way out of the corner." I do sort of the same thing. The other day I tweeted that I had scientists in my backyard using meat thermometers to determine the age of the Earth. At first I thought I'd have them discover the Earth was 60 years old, younger than I am. But it ended up being a joke about why you shouldn't find scientists on Craigslist. The jokes are so specific to Twitter. I couldn't build a routine about meat thermometers. And I don't need to. 

 Write to  John Jurgensen at john.jurgensen@wsj.com 