It has been a successful six months for Fletcher Building Ltd. Chief Executive  Jonathan Ling, with his company's share price finally trending higher as investors anticipate the benefits of the rebuild following New Zealand's two large earthquakes. The share price had nearly halved during the global recession and a housing-sector slump.

Fletcher Building—Australasia's largest building-supplies company by market capitalization, at 6.1 billion New Zealand dollars (US$4.8 billion)—was recently added to the Australian exchange's S&P/ASX-200 index and has further increased its exposure to Australia through the purchase of Crane Group. 

The stock is up 17% on the New Zealand stock exchange and up 11% on the Australian exchange since Jan. 31, when Fletcher Building's offer for Crane was unanimously recommended by the target's directors.

Following a 7.1-magnitude earthquake in September, the Earthquake Commission awarded Fletcher Building, which also has a construction unit, the job of overseeing the Canterbury region earthquake project, managing an estimated 60,000 claims from homeowners as well as commercial rebuilding. After a second strong earthquake hit New Zealand's second largest city, Christchurch, on Feb. 22, the country's rebuilding needs swelled and investors were able to see the company's upside potential.

Mr. Ling, 57 years old, spoke with Lucy Craymer about what this means to the company and what is in store in the long term. The following interview has been edited.



WSJ: You are expecting the Christchurch earthquake to knock between NZ$14 million and NZ$24 million off your earnings after interest and tax in the full year to June 30. When do you expect to start benefiting from the rebuild?

Mr. Ling: A tiny amount of work will start to happen this year but I don't think it will get into full swing for a full year until fiscal year 2013. We are doing emergency repairs still.

The way we are thinking about it at the moment is the repair bill looks like it will be about NZ$15 billion to NZ$20 billion over 10 years, which is about a NZ$1.5 billion to NZ$2 billion increase a year. 

I think we could expect something like a 10% lift in our volumes for the next 10 years.

WSJ: How do you manage to ensure you have the necessary labor and resources for the rebuild? 

Mr. Ling: There is plenty of room in labor and materials to cope with that rate of rebuild. But there will be certain skills we will be short of like assessors, quantity surveyors, some of the engineering skills as it goes into the commercial and infrastructure rebuild. Our engineering division tends to be project based anyway so those crews tend to be moved around the country depending on where the big projects are. 



WSJ: Is Fletcher Building starting to see any improvement in any of its markets?

Mr. Ling: Formica Asia (a business unit) is going very well particularly in the Southeast Asian countries and China. We are very, very, very happy with that. There are also parts of our European Formica business in Russia and Eastern Europe that are going well. Those aside, the rest of the world is very flat at best. 

I think, as we've always said, the recovery in the Western world is going to be fairly wobbly for five to 10 years.



WSJ: With weakness remaining in some markets, how do you plan to adjust your strategy?

Mr. Ling: What we need to do is continue our focus on cost and efficiency and productivity improvement, and that is what you will really see us doing throughout the group and that's what you will see us really focusing on over the next few years.



WSJ: What opportunities do you see following Fletcher Building's purchase of Crane? 

Mr. Ling: We should complete the final acquisition of Crane by the end of June. That's going to keep us very busy for the next couple of years so our appetite for large acquisitions at the moment is reasonably small. But the opportunity for earnings enhancement through Crane is substantial.

We've now had the opportunity to go through the due diligence in detail and the great thing is there have been no surprises.



WSJ: What will happen to Crane once you complete the purchase?

Mr Ling: We will retain Crane as its own brand. You will notice that even in New Zealand very few of our brands have Fletcher in the trading name. It is part of our product brand strategy and part of the company's decentralized model.

They are established brands. Every one knows brands like insulation product Pink Batts, so why would you get rid of a brand name like that.



WSJ: The purchase of Crane has increased Fletcher Building's exposure to Australia. Does this concern you?

Mr Ling: There are challenges in every business ... Australia has weathered the storm of the global financial crisis very, very well… There is evidence now of softening or flattening-out of the building sector in Australia.



WSJ: Fletcher Building launched sponsored American depositary receipts in the U.S. in December. How has that decision paid off?

Mr Ling: It is early on and it is something we want to build over time. There are a number of U.S. funds that we are talking to that can only own our shares in ADR form so that will be helpful.



WSJ: How do you manage the volatility that we are seeing in the New Zealand dollar currently with its weakness against the Australian dollar and the weakness in the U.S. dollar?

Mr Ling: It doesn't make much difference to our group. Our debt is positioned around the world in relation to our assets. The only other impact is a noncash impact that when you bring profits back there in the translation impact. At the moment I'd have to say the Aussie dollar is probably helping as we've got a lot of earnings in Australia.