New test results have identified PCB contamination in another city school, this time P.S. 11 in the Fort Greene section of Brooklyn.

Of the 28 samples taken from aging light fixtures at the elementary school, 18 were found to have PCB levels higher than federal law permits, the Environmental Protection Agency said Monday. PCBs, or polychlorinated biphenyls, are a group of chemicals widely used in construction from the 1950s until 1978, when they were banned. They are now listed as a probable carcinogen and have been linked to other health problems, including immune- and reproductive-system disorders.



The testing at P.S. 11 was the second spot inspection conducted by the EPA during a standoff with city officials over how serious a threat the PCBs pose to students and school staff—and how much it would cost to replace the suspect light fixtures. The results at P.S. 11 are similar to findings at an elementary school in Staten Island tested a week earlier.

Devices called ballasts in aging fluorescent light fixtures have been found to leak PCBs. 

EPA officials said the findings are further evidence that the city should agree to immediately begin removing all suspected fixtures tainted with PCBs. The city has balked at that request, saying PCBs pose little risk of harm in the air—the most likely means of exposure at a school—claiming such a far-reaching removal plan could cost $1 billion. 

Federal law requires removal of material with PCBs in higher concentrations than 50 parts per million. In the samples tested at P.S. 11, results of testing on globs of a tar-like substance ranged from zero PCBs to as high as 3,800 parts per million.

"These are astounding numbers and I think it's time the Department of Education woke up and started taking action,'' said  Assemblywoman Linda Rosenthal, a Manhattan Democrat who plans to offer a bill that would force a cleanup. "It looks like the city is going to have to be dragged into doing its job through legislation.'' 

  Natalie Ravitz, a spokeswoman for the city school system, said the city is taking measures to address the fixtures at P.S. 11. If stains or residue are found, the light fixture will be removed; if a leak is found, the leaking component will be removed; and if a component known to have PCBs is found, even if it is not leaking, it will be replaced, she said.

 Write to  Devlin Barrett at devlin.barrett@wsj.com 