WASHINGTON—The Obama administration said Wednesday it is shelving a proposed change to workplace noise standards, following strong opposition to the proposals from manufacturers and some lawmakers. 

The moves come a day after President Barack Obama ordered executive agencies to review all pending regulations and assess whether they were overly burdensome to business.

The Occupational Safety and Health Administration said Wednesday it will withdraw a proposal to toughen requirements for what employers had to provide to protect workers' hearing in loud environments, by changing its interpretation of what would be "feasible" for them.

Employers are currently allowed to provide personal protective gear, such as ear plugs, rather than installing noise-dampening equipment or limiting the amount of time that workers can spend in noisy areas, if it is more cost-effective for them. OSHA was considering whether to require that employers prove that they would be put out of business by taking more expensive measures.

Trade groups and lawmakers had said that the cost of complying with the proposals would stop them from hiring additional workers. 

David Michaels, assistant secretary of labor for occupational safety and health, said in a statement that "hearing loss caused by excessive noise levels remains a serious occupational health problem in this country" but that the agency had decided that "addressing this problem requires much more public outreach and many more resources than we had originally anticipated."

The agency will study whether "other approaches" and would hold a stakeholder meeting with employers, workers and noise control and public health professionals, Mr. Michaels said.

Sens. Joe Lieberman (I., Conn.) and Olympia Snowe (R., Maine), the co-chairs of the Senate Task Force on Manufacturing, wrote to OSHA in December arguing that "this new proposal would force businesses to make drastic and costly changes, often at the expense of job creation." Mr. Michaels said he met with their staff earlier this month.

The National Association of Manufacturers had also campaigned against the proposal and set out its concerns in a letter to the new chairman of the House oversight committee, Rep. Darrell Issa (R., Calif.) who has invited business groups to contact him about regulations they oppose. 

"Clearly the message has been heard by OSHA," said Joe Trauger, NAM vice president of human-resources policy.

 Write to  Louise Radnofsky at louise.radnofsky@wsj.com 