PARIS—The French government said Thursday it would abolish a controversial tax shield for the rich and overhaul its wealth tax, as President Nicolas Sarkozy prepares for next year's presidential election.

The announcement came in response to popular discontent with the shield —which stops France's wealthiest people from paying more than half their income in tax. The shield is seen by many French people as a measure benefiting a wealthy few, and has contributed to a decline in Mr. Sarkozy's ratings. A survey by TNS Sofres survey for Figaro Magazine published Thursday showed Mr. Sarkozy had sunk to a 22% approval rating, the lowest of his presidency. The next presidential election, in which Mr. Sarkozy is widely expected to stand, is scheduled for May 2012.

"The tax shield has been misunderstood, and the crisis has probably made our citizens more sensitive to some of its effects," Prime Minister François Fillon said Thursday.

The shield was designed to limit the impact of France's wealth tax, paid by households with assets worth over €790,000. There are various brackets in the tax, from 0.55% to a 1.8% rate for the largest fortunes.

Finance Minister Christine Lagarde criticized the dual system of the tax shield and the wealth tax, and said that changing it was essential for France to become more competitive. Germany abandoned a similar wealth tax in the 1990s.

"I think it is time to get rid of this tax schizophrenia, especially when our neighbors have got rid of their equivalents," she said.

The government says the wealth tax drives rich tax payers out of the country, and Mr. Fillon said the government would either abolish or significantly change it. One option being discussed would be to raise the minimum threshold to €1.3 million of assets.

The tax changes present a budget problem for the government as France is under pressure to rein in its budget deficit, which was around 7.7% of gross domestic product in 2010. The wealth tax brings in far more money for the government than the tax shield loses: If both were simply abolished, the government would need around €3.2 billion to make up the shortfall.

Mr. Fillon ruled out a variety of options that have been suggested in recent months. The government would not tax gains on the sale of main residences; raise the inheritance tax, which it has reduced; or introduce an additional income tax bracket, he said.

Mr. Fillon said the wealth tax changes were part of the reforms necessary for greater tax convergence in the euro zone. The French government thinks that the country's current tax structure, which includes heavier fixed charges on employers as well as the wealth tax, puts its industry at a disadvantage to Germany and other European neighbors.

Mr. Fillon said France and Germany should aim to harmonize corporate taxes, starting with the base of these taxes before looking at the rates.

France's recovery—its economy grew 1.5% in 2010—has lagged Germany's, which expanded by 3.6%. Data released Thursday showed that unemployment in mainland France at the end of 2010 fell only slightly to 9.2% in the fourth quarter from 9.3% in the third.

The government aims to bring a tax bill to parliament before the summer. 