ATHENS—Greece expects that a June audit of its budgets will show that a new financial-aid package of nearly €60 billion ($86 billion) will be needed to cover its financial needs stretching into 2013, a senior Greek government official said Tuesday. 

The official, with knowledge of the talks between Greece and the European Union and International Monetary Fund, said the issue of extending current packages, or arranging new loans, will be discussed at a regularly-scheduled meeting of EU finance ministers next Monday and Tuesday. 

Greece is projected to need around €27 billion in new assistance next year and another €32 billion in 2013.

The Greek finance ministry said when contacted for comment that efforts are underway to find a realistic solution.

"The debate that is taking place is about finding a solution that is credible, and in such a way that there is no gap in covering Greek financing needs in 2012," said a Greek finance ministry spokesperson. "But there are no specifics yet regarding the size or details of a package."

At an early round of talks in Luxembourg late Friday, senior EU officials discussed the possible construction of this new aid, but no decisions were taken. A final decision won't be made until after the results of the June audit of Greece's ability to sustain its debt, the Greek official said. 

"We expect final decisions after the review of the Greek debt sustainability in June," the senior Greek official said. "But the matter will be extensively discussed at next week's EcoFin," he said, using the shorthand for EU financial ministers' meetings. 

Among the options being discussed is extending Greece's current maturities and giving Greece access to the EU's government bailout fund, the European Financial Stability Facility. 

A new memorandum of understanding may set state-owned properties as collateral, the official said. 

"I expect a new set of measures for Greece which will have a strict timeframe and guarantees that it will be seen through," the senior Greek government official said. 

This official said that Germany will find it difficult to convince its taxpayers to give more money to Greece after contributing to a €110 billion package from the EU and the International Monetary Fund only a year ago. 

The German government prefers an extension of bond maturing in 2012 and 2013, but it might consider a combination with access to EFSF funds. 

"These matters were generally discussed in Luxembourg but no decisions were taken," the Greek official said. 

The possibility that Greece could default on its debt next year without more external aid has created a new emergency for European governments, the European Commission and the European Central Bank. 

Last Friday's meeting in Luxembourg included the finance ministers of Germany, France, Italy, Spain and Greece. Also attending were ECB President  Jean-Claude Trichet, European Commissioner for Economic Affairs  Olli Rehn and Eurogroup President  Jean-Claude Juncker. 

U.K. Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne on Sunday said that EU countries will spend the next several weeks discussing ways to provide Greece with more financial aid. 

"I think it's inevitable that we are going to look at the Greek package and see what they can do to get through next year, but that might involve additional assistance from, for example, the euro zone," he said in an interview with BBC television. 

Mr. Osborne said the chance of Greece being unable to regain access to capital markets next year has been recognized as a problem. But he said he doesn't think it is inevitable that Greece will default on its debt. 

The re-emerging Greek debt crisis came after Greece failed to meet its deficit targets last year, forcing the government to impose stiffer austerity measures that would, in turn, push the economy deeper into recession. A prolonged economic contraction could dry up tax receipts and get Greece into deeper fiscal trouble. 

Moody's Investors Service warned Monday of a "multi-notch" downgrade if it concludes in an upcoming review that Greece's debt is unsustainable. The agency currently has a B1 rating on the country's sovereign debt, which implies a 20% risk of a default or debt restructuring. 

Rival ratings agency Standard & Poor's on Monday lowered Greece's rating further into junk status, to B and C for its long-term and short-term debt ratings, respectively. 