  Markus Taubert, head of private banking at Hamburg-based Berenberg Bank, talks sustainable power investment with The Wall Street Journal. 

 WSJ: What is your favorite sector right now?

 Mr. Taubert: We have identified "smart grids" as a very attractive investment theme. Smart grids offer long-term growth opportunities with high barriers to entry, which suggests a high potential to create value over time.

 WSJ: So what exactly is a "smart grid"?

 Mr. Taubert: A smart grid is a form of an energy-efficient electricity network integrating various decentralized forms of power generation through the adoption of digital technology. Smart grids enable monitoring and controlling of power demand, which in turn help to smooth the needs of the electricity generation capacity and to achieve the reduction targets for CO2 emissions. 

 WSJ: Why do you think they make a good investment?

 Mr. Taubert: The growth potential is underpinned by several factors which complement each other. Firstly, there is growing demand world-wide for energy. Secondly, there is the need for new infrastructure in emerging markets. Thirdly, the existing energy grids in the developed world are more or less antiquated and need to be replaced, and renewables have to be integrated into the energy mix.

 WSJ: How can investors get exposure to this theme?

 Mr. Taubert: Either you invest directly in companies with high exposure to smart grids like ABB, Alstom, Schneider Electric,  Siemens or high-voltage cable producers. Or you can choose a smart grid fund, an ETF or a structured note investing in a basket of smart grid companies.

 WSJ: What are the risks associated with smart-grid investing? 

 Mr. Taubert: Although there is a huge market opportunity, investments in this area tend to be cyclical. Investments in smaller companies can be riskier due to the limited breadth of their product portfolios and strong competition. Structured notes bear the additional risk of the issuer.

 WSJ: Does this theme have a long-term future?

 Mr. Taubert: Around the world the need to address climate change has been recognized for some years now. Smarter supply and increased efficiency are needed to meet growing energy demand as well as the CO2 emission targets. I think that there will be increasing interest in this theme and in funds covering this theme, especially due to the ongoing discussion about the future of CO2 free power generation, including nuclear power.