A federal judge declared a court emergency in Arizona that lengthens the time period allowed for bringing certain criminal cases to trial, a response to the rising number of illegal-immigration and drug-smuggling cases in the state. 

The "judicial emergency" follows a campaign for such a declaration by the late Judge John Roll, who served as chief of the Arizona federal judicial district. Judge Roll was shot and killed Jan. 8 along with five other people at an event held by Rep. Gabrielle Giffords, who was among 13 wounded in the attack. 

Judge Roll attended the event to thank Ms. Giffords for supporting the request.

The emergency declaration came from Judge Roslyn O. Silver, who succeeded Judge Roll and made the decision after conferring with other jurists. It loosens requirements under the Speedy Trial Act, which grants a criminal defendant the right to a trial within 70 days of being charged.

Under the emergency declaration, that time limit can be extended to up to 180 days, according to the Ninth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, which oversees federal courts in Arizona and other Western states. The declaration doesn't affect time limits for defendants who are in custody only because they are awaiting trial, the announcement said. Nor does it affect the requirement that an indictment be filed within 30 days of an arrest.

The Ninth Circuit said the Arizona court has the third-highest criminal caseload in the U.S.—behind two districts in Texas—due largely to immigration and drug-smuggling cases along the U.S.-Mexican border.

The caseload has increased 65% since 2008, when the federal government expanded law-enforcement efforts along the border. Under a Department of Homeland Security program, anyone crossing the border illegally is imprisoned and prosecuted on criminal charges.

In the Tucson division, which handles most federal criminal cases in Arizona, three judges are handling an average of 1,200 cases each, the Ninth Circuit said. Among Arizona's 13 authorized federal judgeships, there are three vacancies. The Ninth Circuit said the caseload levels would qualify the state for as many as five more judgeships. 

In a statement by the court, Ninth Circuit Chief Judge Alex Kozinski said he hoped the emergency declaration would spur action by Congress. "The district court in Arizona urgently needs additional resources. Judicial vacancies need to be filled and new judgeships should be given strong consideration," he said.

Judge Roll had actively sought the emergency declaration. According to Michael Hawkins, a Ninth Circuit judge based in Arizona, Judge Roll had telephoned Rep. Giffords to thank her for signing a Dec. 21 letter backing the call for a judicial emergency.

When she mentioned she would be appearing at a Jan. 8 constituent event in the parking lot of a Safeway supermarket in his neighborhood, Judge Roll decided to stop by to thank her in person, Judge Hawkins said. 

The alleged shooter, 22-year-old Jared Lee Loughner, is in federal custody facing murder and attempted murder charges. On Monday he entered a not-guilty plea. 

A spokeswoman at the Administrative Office of the United States Courts said no other judicial emergencies are now in effect. 

—Evan Perez contributed to this article.

 Write to  John R. Emshwiller at john.emshwiller@wsj.com and Alexandra Berzon at alexandra.berzon@wsj.com 