Every month, U.K. inflation makes a mockery of the Bank of England's set target, and every month investors bet that this time, the central bank will go beyond writing letters to the Chancellor of the Exchequer and steel itself to raise interest rates from their record lows. And every month, investors have been disappointed. 

February's consumer price index rose 4.4%, a whisker above the 4.3% that had been expected. More damningly, it is a long way above the 3% "emergency level" at which the BOE's governor has to explain how he plans to respond—and which it has topped every month since January 2010. Even the "core" measure, which strips out volatile components such as energy and food, rose 3.4% last month, the fastest pace since records began in 1997.

Forward contracts based on the sterling overnight index average rate, or Sonia, responded by moving up expectations for the first increase in the Bank Rate, now 0.5%, to July, from August. The pound, which would become more attractive if interest rates were higher, climbed to a 14-month high of $1.6401, from $1.6313 late Monday in New York. 

Inflation is just one factor likely to have an adverse influence on stocks, bonds and sterling (although blue-chip stocks would likely suffer less because a large portion of earnings come from outside the country). Another is the first full-year budget, due Wednesday from the U.K.'s coalition government elected last year to deliver austerity. That could weaken an economy that has already endured one quarter of negative growth since emerging from recession in late 2009 and is estimated by the Organization of Economic Co-operation and Development to to grow an uninspiring 1.5% this year.

The position of the Bank of England, whose sole mandate is to fight inflation, has long been that temporary factors, most beyond its control, are at the root of inflation. Previous declines in sterling, January's rise in value-added tax to 20% from 17.5%, broadly rising commodity prices: It has offered them all as explanations as it has insisted that none should railroad it into rate hikes that the economy isn't strong enough to handle.

To be sure, there are many who disagree with the Bank of England's excuses for inaction. Monument Securities' strategist  Marc Ostwald said in a note Tuesday that markets could soon "completely lose faith in the Monetary Policy Committee's management."

But the Bank has picked its path. Sterling and bonds were spared a selloff in 2010 simply by not being euro-denominated assets, as euro-zone debt wallowed in the unwelcome spotlight of some financially strapped nations.

They won't have the same luck in 2011 as the Bank of England's dilemma becomes more acute. Neither sterling not U.K. government bonds can rely on investors patiently waiting for the central bank to act. If inflation won't cool, both could soon find themselves friendless.

 Write to  David Cottle at david.cottle@dowjones.com 