JAKARTA—Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao wrapped up his official visit to Malaysia and Indonesia Saturday, after signing multibillion-dollar investment deals as it seeks to expand bilateral trade with the two Southeast Asian countries. 

Mr. Wen also spent some time on the two-country, four-day trip to promote the use of the yuan as a currency for trade settlement in the region, highlighting the mutual expansion of financial institutions that could facilitate crossborder trade in the local currencies. 

China is keen to step up its influence in the Southeast Asia, a region with vast natural resources needed by the recently crowned world's second largest economy, but also faces tension from territorial disputes in the South China Sea with some countries from the Association of Southeast Asian Nations. 

In a speech in Jakarta on Saturday, Mr. Wen said that China will speed up the development of transport connections with Southeast Asia, building roads, railways, telecommunication and power infrastructure. 

Some Chinese companies Saturday signed investment deals worth total $10 billion in various infrastructure, cement, property and agriculture projects in Indonesia. 

Chinese construction machinery maker  Sany Heavy Industry Co.
600031


-10.01
%




, for instance, will invest $200 million for a production facility in Indonesia. 

The two governments had agreed to expand economic and trade cooperation, including the extension of $8 billion commercial loans by China for infrastructure and industrial projects, Mr. Wen said, after holding talks with Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono. 

In Malaysia, Mr. Wen vowed to expand trading ties and increase crossborder investments, as the two countries signed a series of agreements on infrastructure projects worth $3 billion. 

"China is running a fairly large deficit with Malaysia, but we have no complaints about it," Mr. Wen said Thursday after holding talks with Malaysian Prime Minister Najib Razak. 

China seeks balanced trade with its trading partners, and added that more companies should make use of the China-ASEAN Free Trade Agreement, Mr. Wen said. 