BOGOTA—Colombia's largest guerrilla group has freed all but one of the 23 workers for Canadian energy firm  Talisman Energy Inc. who were kidnapped Monday in a brazen daylight operation that some say indicates country's Marxist rebels are making a comeback.

President Juan Manuel Santos said Tuesday the rebels released the kidnap victims because of heavy pursuit by air and land from Colombia's armed forces in the eastern jungles of Vichada, near the Venezuelan border.

The president called on his military commanders to redouble their fight against the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC. "We're not going to rest until we see all kidnap victims freed, until we have a country without kidnappings and a country that's not unsafe," said the president, who took office seven months ago.

Officials said FARC rebels likely decided to keep hold of one of the kidnap victims to prevent the military from attacking them with firepower, which could make it easier for them to escape.

Talisman, in a brief statement on its website, noted all the workers who were kidnapped were Colombian nationals. It said the workers weren't direct employees of the company, but were doing seismic work for a Talisman contractor.

Along with state-run oil company  Ecopetrol, Talisman in January completed a purchase of the Colombian assets of  BP PLC for $1.75 billion.

Talisman is one of many multinational energy companies that have entered Colombia in recent years after former President Alvaro Uribe undertook a military offensive against FARC that successfully reduced the rebels' size and capabilities. That allowed companies to explore and drill for oil in regions once deemed too dangerous.

Mr. Uribe's hard-line policies cut the FARC's numbers by nearly half to around 8,000 fighters and the military captured or killed several of the group's top commanders.

Among those throwing their weight behind Colombia's improved investment environment is Mexican billionaire Carlos Slim, whose Grupo Carso last month announced it was acquiring a 70% stake in Tabasco Oil Co., which is involved in oil exploration and production in Colombia.

But Monday's kidnapping is being seen by some as a sign that FARC is far from defeated and could even be making a resurgence.

"This massive kidnapping is evidence the guerilla movement is recovering," top military analyst Alfredo Rangel told RCN Radio Tuesday. "There is an immense challenge now" for the Santos administration.

Defense Minister Rodrigo Rivera disputed that argument later Tuesday, saying the quick release of most of the kidnap victims due to military pressure shows the armed forces "are capable of protecting the people in Colombia."

 Write to  Dan Molinski at Dan.Molinski@dowjones.com 