Everything about "South Riding," a three-part miniseries set in a small town in Yorkshire, looks and feels entirely familiar and bears the by-now-indelible imprint of who knows how many other artfully produced period dramas in the "Masterpiece" canon. The nature and condition of the lead characters will seem even more familiar. Sarah (Anna Maxwell Martin), a progressive-minded educator—young, single-minded, fired by ambition and content, apparently, to live in single blessedness—comes up against a governing establishment not quite ready to embrace her or her visionary plans. Her most implacable opponent, Robert (David Morrissey), is an embittered, darkly handsome sort, who wants no truck with her social views. His bitterness has a cause—he bears the haunting burden of a mad wife, hidden away in an institution. These are, in short, characters with a long literary—and Hollywood—pedigree.

Which makes all the more impressive the vividness and mystery they bring to this series (adapted by Andrew Davies from a 1936 novel by Winifred Holtby)—thanks, needless to say, to extraordinarily seductive performances. It's hard to imagine a portrayal better designed than the one Ms. Martin delivers as Sarah, the determined headmistress with the notion—foreign to the members of the South Riding Municipal Council—that girls should have school facilities, like science laboratories and such, equal to those available to the town's boys, and that the town's poor deserve help in getting an education. Ms. Martin's Sarah, brisk and fetching in a business-like way, brings a touch of female allure to her role as head of the girls' high school—a slow growing, complicated sort. And she'll finally have, as so many fictional schoolteachers do, a moment of transformation from brisk and fetching to pure glamour—Eliza Doolittle ready for the ball. But it's a brief one, much like the promise of personal happiness—love, that is—that brought her to this moment. In works of social consciousness—novels dealing in class, poverty and women's emancipation—heroines can't expect much more.

It will come as no surprise that the brooding Robert and the headmistress he so vociferously opposed are quickly entangled in a friendship soon to become something more complicated—a tangle all the more irresistible for its lack of acknowledgment. Mr. Morrissey, a highly gifted brooder as actors go, puts that gift to use compellingly in this portrait of a gentleman farmer who has not only suffered a family tragedy but witnessed the horrors of the Great War, in which he served.



The shadow of World War I hangs heavy over this England of the early 1930s, along with the Depression, not to mention the looming menace of the new war to come. It is an England of many widows. Sarah's own fiancé was one of the millions of servicemen killed in World War I. He was the love of her life, she declares at the beginning of the series—and there's no room in her life, she suggests, for anyone else. A strong hint that this state of affairs is about to become undone.

The state of affairs not likely to be undone soon is the one on display in the quarters that are home to the town's poor—slums of terrifying squalor where diseases flourish, exhausted women die untended after yet another pregnancy, and girls don't get to go to school because there are young sisters and brothers to look after. The fate of one of these girls, a devourer of poetry and a gifted writer—she's seen immersed in a book on the rooftop of the family shack, the one place at home where she can find some solitude—galvanizes Sarah into efforts to get her to school. Saving young Lydia (Charlie Clark) from her mother's life turns out in the end to be a rescue of Sarah herself—a restoration of the zeal to struggle and to do that had once burned so bright in her, and then diminished. The rescue of the singularly gifted but impoverished student is, itself, the stuff of an older culture, and of old Hollywood—think Bette Davis in that Welsh mining town in "The Corn Is Green" (1945), drumming learning and love thereof into the heads of young villagers. And one in particular. 

It's of course in this older culture—of which this novel was a part—and older Hollywood that schoolteachers were represented as rescuers and heroes. Those days would seem to be long gone.

That fact accounts in part for the power of this royally entertaining drama. These heroes, these themes, have been gone so long they feel new—recharged with drama and vitality, all delivered by a supremely skilled cast.

It's a safe bet that few people tuning into the beginning of "Anaconda: Queen of the Serpents" are going to turn away from this intimate look at the lives of these nonvenomous constrictors whose camera closeups grace so many of the early scenes. And all the other ones as well. There is little that can credibly be called queenly about these creatures, least of all when they display their menacing teeth. Still, there are those who love them, humans who have spent the better part of their lives following these creatures like dutiful subjects wherever they go—which is mostly in the sludge of swamp. They follow with naked feet: an extraordinary sight, as the filmmakers clearly understood given all the footage of Dr. Jesus Rivas and his wife and research partner, Dr. Sarah Corey, trudging barefoot and imperturbable through Venezuelan swamp waters, every now and then stepping on or around alligators. 



"You don't want to find a rattlesnake with your feet," Dr. Corey explains, somewhat unnecessarily. "But with an anaconda it's best to dive right on top of it." Her husband agrees emphatically—finding has to be done with bare feet. A "hands-on approach," the narrator says at this point, slightly confusing the issue. 

No matter—next come the scenes of the researcher couple landing on a huge female anaconda (the females are far larger than the males) and wrestling it into relative submission. The struggle is long—beats anything from WWE—and hypnotizing to behold. That's not the only part of this giant snake's life of which this can be said. Its sex life is far more protracted. The anaconda's mating process goes on, indeed, for weeks at a time, with numerous males, working in a cluster, on the same female. A National Geographic jewel. 