MOSCOW—Police detained three opposition leaders and more than 100 other activists here and in St. Petersburg during New Year's Eve rallies against curbs on political freedoms and a judge's decision to keep Mikhail Khodorkovsky, the country's best known prisoner, behind bars, Russian news agencies reported.

The police action Friday evening marked a renewed crackdown on anti-government protest. One opposition leader,  Eduard Limonov, told the Echo of Moscow radio station that he had been detained on his way to the rally in Moscow and sent to jail for 15 days for allegedly insulting a police officer, a charge he denied. Another protest leader,  Boris Nemtsov, was ordered held in police custody until Sunday, other opposition activists said.

Seventy demonstrators in a crowd of several hundred who had gathered in Moscow's Triumfalnaya Square were detained, news agencies said. About 50 others were detained in St. Petersburg.

One prominent protest leader, 83-year-old  Lyudmilla Alexeyeva, wore the light blue outfit of the Snow Maiden. Others were dressed as Father Frost, a traditional festive character resembling Santa Claus. Some wore masks of Prime Minister Vladimir Putin and held posters reading "Putin is a bloodsucking insect." 

Since the middle of 2009, a movement known as Strategy 31 has held rallies on the last day of each month with 31 days to call attention to guarantees for free assembly under Article 31 of Russia's constitution. The gatherings in Moscow were routinely broken up by police until Oct. 31, when city authorities under a newly appointed mayor gave the organizers a permit to rally and didn't move against the crowd.

On Friday, the police resumed their practice of rounding up the protesters. 

Two branches of the now-divided movement had applied for permits in Moscow, but just one was allowed to gather. Nonetheless, both groups showed up in Triumfalnaya Square. In addition to voicing their traditional cause, they chanted slogans in support of Mr. Khodorkovsky, the jailed Kremlin critic and former oil tycoon whose prison term was extended by six years Thursday.

"We came here to bring officials to their senses. Yesterday they hugely disgraced Russia," Mr. Nemtsov told reporters before he was detained.

Activists from both groups were among those taken into police custody in Moscow, Russian news agencies reported. They included Ilya Yashin, a youth leader of the liberal Yabloko party. Mr. Yashin was quoted by Interfax news agency as saying police stormed the crowd as the demonstration was ending. The agency quoted a police official as saying that demonstrators were detained as they surged out of the area blocked off for the authorized rally and tried to stage a march.

The protest in St. Petersburg was banned, and police said they detained the activists when they refused to disperse, Interfax reported.

Earlier Friday, a lawyer for Mr. Khodorkovsky, Karinna Moskalenko, appealed the extension of the former tycoon's prison sentence. She said Mr. Khodorkovsky's conviction on charges of stealing nearly $30 billion worth of oil from his company and laundering the proceeds was marred by procedural violations.

Western governments, including the U.S. and Germany, criticized the sentence against Mr. Khodorkovsky, who has been in prison since 2003 on an earlier conviction for tax evasion. Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov rejected the criticism. "Russian courts are independent from both Russian and foreign governments," he said.

 Write to  Richard Boudreaux at richard.boudreaux@wsj.com 