CAIRO—Egypt's prime minister resigned Thursday and was succeeded by a U.S.-educated former transport minister supported by the opposition, meeting a major demand of the protest movement that toppled Egypt's former president, Hosni Mubarak. 

Protesters had called for Prime Minister Ahmed Shafiq's ouster, saying the former Air Force official was too close to Mr. Mubarak and would help his National Democratic Party cling to power by preventing real democracy from taking hold. 

Track events day by day.

"The high council of the military forces has decided to accept the resignation of Mr. Ahmed Shafiq and assign Dr. Essam Sharaf to form a new cabinet," the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces said in a statement on its Facebook page. It was unclear if Mr. Shafiq resigned of his own will or was pushed to step down by the military. 

Protest leaders and opposition politicians welcomed the choice. Dr. Sharaf was one of a slate of candidates that protesters had suggested to the military rulers as potential successors for Mr. Shafiq. Protest leaders and the military met last week. 

"It's a perfect choice, actually," said Bassem Fathi, a member of Egypt's revolutionary youth movement, who described Dr. Sharaf as a man who represented ideals of democracy and scientific enlightenment.

"Goodbye Shafiq, friend of Mubarak, and welcome Sharaf and congratulations to the new Egypt," Ayman Nour, head of the opposition Ghad Party, who ran against Mr. Mubarak in 2005 presidential elections, wrote on his Twitter account. 

Mr. Sharaf was transport minister under Mr. Mubarak's government from 2004 to 2006, but resigned in opposition to how the ministry was being run under Mr. Mubarak. He has since worked in academia and is widely seen as free of taint from Mr. Mubarak's party.

The move is likely to help ease growing tensions between the military and the protesters. Since Mr. Mubarak's resignation was announced on Feb. 11, protesters had pressed for action on their remaining demands, which included the resignation of Mr. Shafiq, the release of political prisoners, and the end of Egypt's emergency law. 

On Friday night, Feb. 25, protesters clashed with troops who tried to clear them out of Tahrir Square, the nerve center for the protest movement. Troops used electric prods and batons to clear out some protesters and arrested others. 

On Wednesday, a military court sentenced a protester, Amr Abdullah El-Behairy, to five years in prison for allegedly attacking an army officer during the clashes. 

The case has caused an outcry because Mr. El-Behairy was sentenced within three days by a military court, according to human-rights activists. 

Protesters had called for massive turnout on Friday to push their demands and had threatened another sit-in at Tahrir Square. After the news of Mr. Shafiq's resignation, protest leaders said they would still hold a protest but canceled plans for the sit-in.

Dr. Sharaf graduated from Cairo University with a degree in civil engineering in 1975. 

He went on to earn civil engineering master's and doctoral degrees at Purdue University in Indiana, focusing on highway management, according to the Purdue University website. 

He returned to Egypt and took up a position as assistant professor of highway and traffic engineering in 1985. Former President Mubarak appointed Dr. Sharaf minister of transport in 2004. The new minister launched an "Eisenhower Project" to revamp Egypt's dilapidated infrastructure—a project named after the former U.S. president.

Dr. Sharaf stepped down after clashing with private investors who wanted more influence in the ministry and favorable terms on infrastructure projects, according to the Al Masry Al Youm newspaper.

 Write to  David Luhnow at david.luhnow@wsj.com 