WASHINGTON—Public-interest groups are pushing for President Barack Obama to appoint White House adviser Elizabeth Warren director of the new consumer-financial-protection agency, even as Republicans threaten to block any nominee. 

Some groups that pushed for the creation of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau had refrained from publicly endorsing a nominee but are now urging the president to nominate Ms. Warren and then appoint her to the post to ensure the bureau has a director by its July 21 launch. 

"We urge the president to stand up to this bullying, to swiftly nominate Professor Warren to lead the Consumer Bureau, and to make a recess appointment if the Senate refuses to act," said Lisa Donner, executive director of Americans for Financial Reform, in a statement Friday. 

The statement marks the first time the coalition has called on the president to put Ms. Warren in charge through a so-called recess appointment, a controversial maneuver that is likely to frustrate Senate Republicans because it would mean Ms. Warren would lead the agency without the Senate's endorsement. 

An Americans for Financial Reform spokesman said the coalition's executive committee agreed Thursday night to call on Mr. Obama to nominate and then install Ms. Warren through a recess appointment. 

In addition, the consumer-advocacy organization Public Citizen is calling on the president to nominate Ms. Warren. 

"The Senate Republicans' strategic gambit likely leaves Obama no choice but to appoint a CFPB director during a Senate recess," said David Arkush, director of Public Citizen's Congress Watch division. "It also leaves him no reason to appoint anyone but the strongest candidate: Elizabeth Warren." 

The statements come in the wake of news Thursday that Senate Republicans plan to block whomever the president nominates to spearhead the bureau. In a letter to Mr. Obama, 44 Senate Republicans—nearly all of the chamber's Republicans—said they wouldn't support any nominee unless the agency is reworked so that its funding faces congressional scrutiny, its director is replaced by a board and its actions can be overturned by other regulators. 

"We will not support the consideration of any nominee, regardless of party affiliation, to be the CFPB director until the structure of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau is reformed," they wrote. They said they "support strong and effective consumer protection" but the structure of the agency "violates basic principles of accountability and our democratic values." 

Consumer advocates say Republicans, who have opposed the creation of the new bureau, are simply trying to weaken the agency. 

Under the Dodd-Frank Act, if the agency doesn't have a director by July 21, its powers to fight abusive financial practices will be limited. 

Obama administration officials have been cool to many of the changes Republicans are proposing, arguing that the consumer agency already has significant oversight and accountability. 

 Write to  Maya Jackson Randall at Maya.Jackson-Randall@dowjones.com 