  Q: What is the makeup that TV anchorwomen and other celebrities are wearing that looks so flawless? Is it a spray that I can buy to use at home?  

—H.R., Leawood, Kan.

 A: You're likely referring to "airbrush" makeup, a new kind of foundation that's now being used by many TV personalities, celebrities and brides. An air-jet wand emits a fine mist of foundation that sits evenly on your skin, minimizing imperfections and leaving you with a poreless, natural look. 

I saw this for myself in 2007, when I was a guest judge on the TV show "Project Runway," which was broadcast in high definition, a medium that shows every pore. Before the taping, I sat with my eyes closed and a smock covering my dress, while the studio's makeup artist took about five minutes to air-brush my entire face and neck. The result: Not a visible fine line anywhere on my face—and I didn't look or feel heavily made up. 

Many people turn to a makeup artist to apply airbrush makeup. But airbrush kits are available for all you brave souls to use at home. They start at about $200 and are marketed under names such as Dinair, Temptu (sold at Sephora stores) and Kett Jett—whose $657 appliance features an adjustable air-flow range.

Airbrushing yourself requires practice and a knack for using makeup. I consulted  Debbie Loggins, a freelance Los Angeles makeup artist who has been airbrushing clients for about four years. Each kit includes the appliance and several bottles of liquid pigments that are thinner than traditional foundation. You'll need to mix the colors together to get a shade that matches your skin. Then you put the liquid into a vial connected to a fine-tipped wand. Ms. Loggins recommends holding the wand about seven inches from your face. With your eyes closed, apply the spray in circular motions to avoid blotches and streaks. 

Don't forget to allow yourself time to clean the airbrush machine right after you're done so that makeup doesn't clog the applicator wand. 

Getting the hang of this takes agility. But if you're one of those skillful women who can pop on a pair of false eyelashes in a few seconds, then you'll need only a little practice to learn how to airbrush yourself evenly. 

—Email questions to askteri@wsj.com 