FLORHAM PARK, N.J.—That Mike Pettine took the less traveled road in becoming the Jets' defensive coordinator is well known by now. He went from being a high school head coach in suburban Philadelphia to a video and computer technician with the Baltimore Ravens, where in 2002 he aligned himself with a brash young coach on the rise named Rex Ryan. Nine years later, here he is, on the cusp of a second AFC Championship Game as Mr. Ryan's defensive coordinator.

"It's awesome, isn't it?" Jets defensive end Trevor Pryce said. 

Part of what makes Mr. Pettine's story resonate is that, in going from a comfortable high school coaching position to an entry-level NFL job, he made a jump that many coaches are unwilling or unable to make. 

From high school straight to the NFL? With no stopover at a college program? It's rare, yes, but such a background can have its advantages.

Because coaches often hone in on specialized areas of expertise early in their careers, many can lack any head coaching experience at all by the time they reach the NFL. A high school head coach, however, will have been in charge of not merely a group of linebackers or offensive linemen but an entire team—and that sort of leadership is a quality worth considering, former Giants, Jets and Cowboys head coach Bill Parcells said.

 More, since a head coach at an elite high school football program presumably has familiarized himself with a team's every idiosyncrasy, he can prove a more versatile piece to add to a staff.

In 1990, for instance, at the suggestion of assistant Al Groh, Mr. Parcells hired Charlie Weis, assigning him to help oversee the Giants' special teams, among other duties. 

Before joining the Giants, Mr. Weis had been the head coach at Franklin Township High School in Franklin, N.J., leading the team to the 1989 New Jersey State Championship, and as it turned out, Mr. Parcells's show of confidence was the career break Mr. Weis needed.

 He has gone on to be the offensive coordinator for the New England Patriots and Kansas City Chiefs, the head coach at the University of Notre Dame, and the offensive coordinator at the University of Florida.

With the Cowboys, Mr. Parcells also interviewed Todd Dodge, then the head coach at Southlake Carroll High School near Dallas. Mr. Parcells had been impressed with Mr. Dodge's success at Southlake Carroll, he said, though he ultimately decided not to hire him.

"I was open-minded about those kinds of guys," said Mr. Parcells, who won two Super Bowls with the Giants and guided the Jets to the 1999 AFC Championship Game. "I just cared about whether he seemed like a guy who had a passion for football. Obviously, you evaluate his degree of intelligence. You want a guy who's pretty smart if you can get him."

Even the man regarded as the greatest of NFL coaches, Vince Lombardi Sr., spent six years as the head coach at St. Cecilia High School in Englewood, N.J. According to Mr. Lombardi's son Vince Jr., that period served as the foundation for his excellence with the Green Bay Packers. Mr. Lombardi Sr. also taught chemistry, physics and Latin at the school, and whether he was in the classroom or on the football field, he would continue drilling his students or players on a subject until he was satisfied that all of them had grasped it.

"He always kept it very simple," Mr. Lombardi Jr. said in a phone interview. "Once the game began, he didn't want his players thinking. He wanted them to be reacting to what they saw."

If anything, high school football showed Mr. Pettine that he was, in a stylistic sense, the opposite of Mr. Lombardi—that despite going 45-15 during his five years at North Penn High School in Lansdale, Pa., Mr. Pettine was better suited for a higher caliber of football. In fact, the way he would spend the rest of his weekends after Friday night football games never failed to start Dick Beck shaking his head.

Mr. Pettine used his Saturdays and Sundays to break down game film. Come each Monday, he'd show Mr. Beck, his top assistant, 10 to 15 new plays or formations that he had devised from his latest 48-hour study binge—pages of possibilities that were often too complicated for his callow players to carry out.

Mr. Beck could sense Mr. Pettine's frustration over the limitations that coaching adolescents placed on his fertile football mind. He wasn't surprised when Mr. Pettine left North Penn, and he hasn't been surprised at Mr. Pettine's success since.

"When you go from as a high school head coach to a bottom-of-the-barrel [job] in the NFL, you don't have any expectations," Mr. Beck said. "You don't have a pride factor of, 'I don't write up scout cards. I don't break down film.' A lot of college coaches may have that type of attitude—that they shouldn't have to do that."

Since replacing Mr. Pettine as North Penn's head coach, Mr. Beck over nine seasons has compiled a 106-17 record and won five district championships and one state championship in Pennsylvania football's highest enrollment classification. He remains in close contact with his friend, but he has no interest, he said, in following a similar career path—in the jump that Mr. Pettine couldn't wait to make.

"What we get here," Mr. Beck said, "is stimulating enough for me." A different man, a different choice. Mr. Pettine gets his Sunday, in Pittsburgh.

 Write to  Mike Sielski at mike.sielski@wsj.com 