Susan Greenhalgh, professor of anthropology at the University of California, Irvine, starts out by attacking the West's "master narrative" about the one-child policy: A cruel communist state suppresses the reproductive desires of the Chinese people. Then she proceeds to show that this is an accurate reading of the reality.

At first, Ms. Greenhalgh blames the West's preoccupation with human rights abuses committed in the name of population control on the mass media, notably the New York Times and the Washington Post, as well as some well-known scholars. She cites press reports of the tragic consequences of the one-child policy, such as abandoned and murdered baby girls and millions of missing women.

Such reporting, she writes, influenced policy makers in the U.S., especially conservative Republicans and right-to-life advocates. Presidents Ronald Reagan and George W. Bush worked to ensure that the suffering of the Chinese people would not be deepened by giving American funds to international organizations underwriting Beijing's family planning.

Ms. Greenhalgh regards this reaction as wrong-headed. She is well-acquainted with China, where she has done much rural research. She herself refers to the years from 1980-93 as a time of "human and natural catastrophe," of "bad governance, even by the regime's own standards, which have consistently rejected the use of what in party-speak is called 'coercion and commandism.'"

By Susan Greenhalgh  (Harvard, 138 pages, $29.95) 

When Deng Xiaoping took charge of population control in the early 1980s, he was inspired not by Maoist ideology but rather by social Darwinist ideas advanced by some of China's leading scientists. Their theories framed China's large and growing population in Malthusian terms as a crisis of modernization: too many people of too backward a type. Championed by defense engineers Qian Xuesen and Song Jian, this theory rested on the outmoded science of eugenics and incorporated a "veritable religion of science and technology" aimed at reconciling traditional Chinese values with the demands of the modern world.

In the quest for "superior" children and mothers, Ms. Greenhalgh explains, Beijing put aside social, cultural and political factors, and discriminated against whole classes of low-quality people: "rural residents, rural migrants to the cities, women, minorities, and those with substandard bodies" as well as "deviants" such as homosexuals and unmarried couples. She writes, "Some 'low-quality' citizens (such as women) have been targeted for energetic, state-sponsored improvement campaigns, while others (rural people for example) have been essentially abandoned as useless to the modernization effort."

Official pressure to curtail and "improve" births resulted in infanticide and selective abortion, which in turn led to a gender gap among newborns of at best 120 boys to 100 girls. Many Chinese men, therefore, will not find brides, and fewer elderly Chinese will have daughters to comfort and support them. Many urban Chinese have internalized the bias against the family and, as described by Ms Greenhalgh, feel little obligation to care for their parents, want no children and think only of getting rich.

Striving to be fair throughout, Ms. Greenhalgh emphasizes the long life expectancies of most Chinese, high levels of literacy and the improvement in the material lives of many urban adults. But she describes as well the "vast inequalities between the reproductive haves and have nots ... city and village, coastal and interior regions, migrant and non-migrant population, and Han and non-Han groups...."

She uses phrases like "relatively successful" to describe less abusive policies. But Ms. Greenhalgh's summary of what the post-Mao regime has accomplished deserves full quotation: "State power now reaches not only into the bedroom, intruding on sexual negotiations and reproductive deliberations.... It also stretches into the womb, deemed the well-spring of generativity for the woman, her kin, and the community ... to the making of life itself."

Near the end of "Cultivating Global Citizens," Ms. Greenhalgh makes a blunt recommendation: "China's leaders ... could abandon the one- child policy." This would discourage couples "from getting rid of their female fetuses and abandoning their baby daughters." Ms. Greenhalgh is well-connected in China and enjoys considerable prestige in her field. Will Beijing's leaders listen to her suggestion and act? 

 Mr. Mirsky is a former East Asia editor for the Times of London. He was named International Reporter of the Year at the 1989 British Press Awards for his reporting from Tiananmen. 