TOKYO—Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan rolled out a new cabinet stacked with pro-free-trade ministers and fiscal conservatives, signaling his resolve to pursue bold reforms.

Kaoru Yosano, a political veteran with longstanding ties to the opposition Liberal Democratic Party, will join as minister of economic and fiscal policy. Banri Kaieda, bumped from his post by Mr. Yosano, will now head the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry.





Mr. Kan initiated the cabinet change—the second since he took office in June—to placate increasingly cantankerous opposition parties in a divided parliament and to prevent a legislative impasse. 

But the prime minister also used the opportunity to buttress his economic policy team as he prepares for looming battles over his controversial policies. Among them are fiscal and social-security reform accompanied by painful increases in the broad sales tax and participation in a rigorous regional trade agreement that could wipe out much of the nation's already struggling farm sector.

The choice of Mr. Yosano, who has in the past advocated raising the sales tax and who supports potentially painful measures to rein in Japan's mammoth fiscal deficit, surprised many in Mr. Kan's own party. 

Finance Minister Yoshihiko Noda will remain in his current posts. 

It is far from certain the latest changes will help the prime minister regain his legislative initiative in parliament when lawmakers return Jan. 24 for a new session. Opposition parties, which together control one of the two chambers of parliament, are flexing their muscles to challenge a range of legislation, including the national budget and accompanying bills, for the fiscal year starting April 1.

"I have implemented the latest cabinet change to build the strongest possible team to overcome Japan's crisis," Mr. Kan said at a press conference. "I wasn't just thinking about surviving our party's crisis."

However, Mr. Kan did need a cabinet shuffle to duck the attacks from opposition parties in the divided parliament. Sensing a chance to unseat the government, they, which had threatened to boycott the coming session as they demanded the dismissal of two cabinet members, including Mr. Kan's trusted aide, Yoshito Sengoku, over a territorial scuffle with China. 

After spending weeks mulling such a move, Mr. Kan finally decided to remove Mr. Sengoku as chief cabinet secretary Friday and to give him a senior party position. Yukio Edano, another lawmaker close to Mr. Kan, was asked to take up Mr. Sengoku's post in the cabinet.

But a deadlock in parliament over policy differences could further weaken the leadership of Mr. Kan, who has already seen his approval ratings slip sharply over the past several months. The 64-year-old prime minister has been criticized for inconsistent handling of territorial disputes and for a lack of policy clarity in how to cope with an aging population while lifting Japan's economy out of its prolonged slump.

Mr. Kan also faces a rift within his own Democratic Party of Japan amid a standoff with party heavyweight Ichiro Ozawa, who faces indictment in a political funding scandal and just recently agreed to testify before a parliamentary ethics panel after long defying Mr. Kan.

Such headaches kept Mr. Kan on the defensive last year, but he appears to have bounced back. With the dawn of the new year, the prime minister resumed touting his signature economic policies, including the consumption tax increase and trade liberalization. While the policies face strong opposition from many within his own party, the prime minister's renewed embrace is welcomed by the business community.

"These reform steps are indispensable for Japan's future and they can't wait any longer," Hiromasa Yonekura, chairman of Nippon Keidanren, a powerful business lobby, told DPJ lawmakers at its party convention on Thursday. "We ask the government and the ruling party to maximize their political leadership to pursue bold reform."

The business community and private sector economists see a trusted voice in Mr. Yosano. He has held various top positions in the government over the past two decades, serving as minister of finance, economy, education and trade and industry. He has advocated raising the consumption tax from the current 5% to pay for the snowballing cost of caring for the old, while calling for steps to begin balancing the budget, which relies on new bond issuance to cover 48% of annual spending.

The 72-year-old lawmaker joined Mr. Kan's government as an independent, having left earlier this week a small party he formed last year after previously leaving the conservative LDP.

"The particularly large issue we face now is how to build a social-security system that gives us peace of mind. We need to start a debate on how to fund such a system to make it sustainable," Mr. Kan said at his press conference. "I appointed Mr. Yosano.... as I want to see a national debate begin on these issues."

Mr. Kaieda, meanwhile, has supported Mr. Kan's push for joining the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a U.S.-led regional trade pact favored by the business community but opposed by the nation's powerful farm lobby and the politicians with ties to it.