'As an adolescent," the distinguished critic, editor and anthologist John Gross wrote in his memoir, "A Double Thread: Growing up English and Jewish in London" (2001), "I believed that one day I would find time to read everything." Many of his friends and admirers assumed that he had long since achieved his ambition. Last year, Bevis Hillier, writing in the Spectator, called him "the best-read man in Britain." 

Earlier this week, when I wrote to tell the literary scholar John Ellis, who had been at the City of London School with Gross in the 1940s and early 1950s, that our friend had died, age 75, he passed along a story about Gross at school. The headmaster used to compose a 250-point general-knowledge quiz for the entire school, masters as well as pupils. The questions ranged over art, history, literature, science and politics. Occasionally some of the older boys placed among the masters with the top scores. But in 1950, the astonished headmaster announced that the winner was a mere fourth-former—what we would call a sophomore. Gross was 14. 

In his memoir, Gross casually cited "curiosity" as the prod for his reading. "Taste wasn't allowed to get in the way." Mysteries as well as 17th-century poetry, potboilers as well as serious novels, Eliot and Joyce but also "the incomparable Simenon": literary, historical, biographical, political lore of all sorts were his goad. One evening after dinner in Manhattan, my wife and Gross began singing the Rodgers and Hart song "I Wish I Were in Love Again." My wife, no slouch in these matters, knew a couple of verses. Gross knew them all.

One of our favorite pastimes when in London was going on tours with Gross. He knew the city as well as any London taxi driver—better, because he could take you to any address you named and also knew what had happened there from the time of Julius Caesar until the day before yesterday. He sat on the English Heritage committee that dispensed new Blue Plaques to the clamoring line of worthy (and sometimes not-so-worthy) dead, and he introduced us to some delicious conjunctions. At Hyde Park Gate, for example, you can see not only the plaque for Robert Baden-Powell, "Chief Scout of the World," but also the one for Winston Churchill and the 19th-century man of letters Leslie Stephen and his daughter, the future Virginia Woolf. Just around the corner, in De Vere Gardens, Henry James lived for some 15 years. 

Like Stephen before him, Gross was a distinguished representative of that vanishing race he wrote about in his most famous book, "The Rise and Fall of the Man of Letters" (1969). The title, he noted, was something of an exaggeration. Homo litteratus was not, is not (not quite), extinct. But it belongs on the list of endangered cultural species. In a new afterword for the 1991 American edition, Gross delicately acknowledged that "some of the more extreme developments inside universities have gone further than I would have dared predict in demonstrating the dire effects that might follow if literary studies ever became an academic monopoly." "Rise and Fall"—indeed, Gross's entire career—was a quiet, good-humored battle against that reader-proof leviathan. These days academics use the phrase "belle lettrist" as a term of diminishment. Gross gloried in it, noting that "the belittling of the belle lettrist, the person who writes as he pleases, is at bottom a demand for ideological conformity."

He had brief stints teaching, but his real career was in the world of live literary endeavor. He worked briefly at the late, great Encounter magazine in London and had a distinguished tenure as editor of the Times Literary Supplement (1974-81). He was a book critic for the New York Times back when the paper had critics and a theater reviewer for the Sunday Telegraph in London. One of the first people he called when he took over the TLS was the poet and critic William Empson. "'Oh, it's you,' came [Empson's] strange sing-song voice over the phone. 'Are you in the chair already?' 'Yes.' A long pause. 'Does it swivel?' " 

Before Gross's editorship, reviewers for the TLS had been anonymous, a pleasing system for disinterested expertise in theory but one that in practice invited all sorts of abuses, from score-settling to self-serving. Gross remembered a long essay on the state of comparative literature that began by asking whether there were any heirs to the great European practitioners of the genre, men like E.R. Curtius and Erich Auerbach. Only, intoned the anonymous reviewer, perhaps George Steiner . . . Gross, from his new swivel chair, looked up the piece. It was by George Steiner. 

Gross loved to tell such stories. And he had so many by heart that he was the natural person to edit the "Oxford Book of Literary Anecdotes." "The urge to exchange anecdotes," he wrote in the introduction, "is as deeply implanted in human beings as the urge to gossip." It was an urge he indulged with innocent zest. "We value anecdotes about a writer, beyond their immediate point, because they bear the stamp of his or her personality." 

Oxford was on to a good thing with John Gross, anthologist. He turned out a short shelf of them: of essays, aphorisms, comic verse, quotations by and about Shakespeare and, most recently, parodies. All are distinguished by a commanding erudition lightly worn and an intellectual impresario's talent for balancing the serious and the amusing. His anthology of essays, for example, begins with Francis Bacon and includes such worthy and entertaining figures as Sir Thomas Browne, Dryden, Swift, Hume, Oliver Goldsmith, William Hazlitt, Matthew Arnold, the James brothers (William and Henry), Oscar Wilde, John Jay Chapman, H.L. Mencken and many others. He ends with one of the funniest reviews I have ever read, Clive James on Judith Krantz's novel "Princess Daisy." ("To be a really lousy writer," Mr. James began, "takes energy.")

In his introduction to the volume, Gross remarked that the 18th-century editor and essayist Joseph Addison "transformed the essay into a civilizing force, an engine against coarseness and pedantry." Gross was himself such an engine over the course of his career. His friends lost something precious with his passing; our cultural life lost an engaging, tonic, humane and civilizing force.

—Mr. Kimball is editor and publisher of the New Criterion, and publisher of Encounter Books.