SEOUL—GM Korea Co. said Monday it will cut production to prepare for a possible lack of automotive parts from Japan after the recent earthquake and tsunami there, following a similar decision by Renault SA's subsidiary in South Korea.

While the moves are pre-emptive, they show how the twin disasters in Japan threaten the supply chain for South Korean companies that depend on Japanese companies for parts. Renault Samsung and GM Korea both import core engine parts and transmissions from Japan. (See related article on page C2.) 

Many Korean companies are still looking into the impact on their businesses from the disasters in Japan, but industry bodies have expressed concern about the consequences of any long-term disruptions. A recent poll of 500 local firms conducted by the Korea Chamber of Commerce and Industry showed that 9.3% of those surveyed have already experienced problems such as difficulties in obtaining parts as a direct consequence of the Japan disasters. 

The survey showed that 43% of companies expected to see some impact from long-term disruptions caused by the earthquake and tsunami. 

"Since 1990, Korean firms' dependence on Japan for chips and auto parts has declined, but their reliance for raw materials, including plastics and glass, has increased," the Korea International Trade Association said Sunday. 

"Because of the suspension of operations at key Japanese manufacturers, some Korean firms are having difficulty importing components. This situation, in turn, will flow on to affect Korean exporters," it said. 

The Korean unit of  General Motors Co.
GM


-0.87
%




, which imports 4% of its auto parts from Japan for two models, the Chevrolet Spark mini car and the Chevrolet Cruze sedan, said Monday it will limit overtime at two of its three domestic plants, resulting in about a 10% production loss from its current monthly output of 70,000 to 80,000 units. 

GM said last Thursday it plans this week to idle a Louisiana plant that builds small pickup trucks, citing short supplies for a Japan-made part. Renault Samsung Motors Corp. said Friday it will cut back on overtime at its Busan plant in southern Korea due to a shortage of parts after the quake. 

Analysts said that if domestic car makers run out of one or two months of auto parts inventory, they may have to further reduce output, particularly at Renault Samsung and GM Korea. 

Korea's biggest car maker, Hyundai Motor Group, which includes Hyundai Motor Co. and Kia Motors Corp., said Monday it isn't being affected by the earthquake and tsunami in Japan.

"We only rely on around 1% of the auto parts we use from Japan," Hyundai Motor said. "The tiny portion of parts from Japan does not come from the areas hit by the earthquake." 

The Korea Chamber of Commerce and Industry said the domestic tourism and travel industry—which relies heavily on tourists from Japan—will see the biggest impact from the quake, while the semiconductor and electronics industries will also be hit hard in the longer term. 

South Korean memory-chip maker Hynix Semiconductor Inc. has said it is looking to diversify its suppliers of silicon wafers to avoid any possible disruptions to its supply of chips, while Korea's two biggest technology firms, Samsung Electronics Co. and LG Electronics Inc., both say they are monitoring the impact of the disasters in Japan on their businesses. LG has said its outsourcing dependency on Japan isn't high. 

  LG Display Co., a major liquid crystal display maker, has said its Japanese suppliers haven't been affected by the disasters. 

Meanwhile, Korean oil refiners such as S-Oil Corp. have said they are receiving requests from Japanese companies for oil products, while steelmaker Posco will supply cold-rolled and hot-rolled coils to one of its Japanese customers for reconstruction work. 

Immediately following the earthquake, the South Korean government said it expects a limited impact on the local economy for now, but it needs more time to study the longer-term consequences. 

 —Kanga Kong, Min-Jeong Lee and In-Soo Nam contributed to this article. 