March 15 is the date when the "winter truce" protecting tenants in France from eviction is over and the weather deemed warm enough for landlords to proceed with removals. This year it was indeed a splendidly sunny day, prompting the women of Paris to move from winter coats to le trench and bringing fair-weather joggers into the parks.

The latter are a relatively new phenomenon here. Twenty years ago only Americans and riot police were likely to be quite so energetic in public, pounding the same running routes in the Jardin du Luxembourg.

Upon my arrival in Paris six years ago, my nearest park, Buttes-Chaumont, seemed to serve for nothing more strenuous than tai-chi. And when President Sarkozy took to le footing (jogging), there was no shortage of commentators who deplored such behavior as too undignified for a head of state.

My first foray into keeping fit therefore was to set out to find a health club. However, at the first establishment I visited, I ran full pelt into complete culture shock—the staff were lounging  at reception in black tracksuits, drinking espresso and smoking cigarettes. 

I've since learned that gym membership is far less common than in London or New York. The men I know seem to reserve sporting pursuits—skiing, diving, cycling—for holidays (although of course in France this does involve quite a portion of the year). My female friends do take part in exercise classes, but most favor gym douce—activity so gentle that you might not even feel the need to shower afterward.

There's also a preference here for exercise with a cerebral edge. After much searching, I eventually joined a class run by a retired ballet dancer who had developed not only his own system of movements, but also a philosophy to go with it. In three years, I relearned how to walk, stand and sit and discovered the location of my scapulae , ischia and occiput. The result? A sleeker shape, a straighter back and an added two centimeters in height. Also, having been schooled to pay attention to muscle movement, right down to my over-habitual frown of concentration, I have acquired a finer appreciation of Degas. I now see that in his drawings of dancers, and also of a woman ironing, every bit of the body is where it should be.

This spring, I've joined a sophrology class; a system well-known in France and Switzerland but of which I had scant notion. 

Arriving for the first class in sportswear and trainers, I found everyone else in street clothes. The first action was to take a chair and sit down. And so we remained for a full hour while the sophrologue, the class leader, talked quietly, asking us to single out parts of the body in our mind and to be aware of them. At the very end, for about two minutes, we stretched arms and legs and stamped our feet, still sitting on our chairs. 

I probably expended fewer calories than if I'd stayed at home watching television. And yet I signed up on the spot. 

Not because sophrology has been used to coach medal-scooping Olympic ski teams in Switzerland. But because I was fascinated that one hour of seemingly doing very little could appear to flit pass in five minutes. And, more importantly, because of the blissful sense of relaxation which set in as swiftly as with an apéritif, yet with zero calories or alcohol.

Following public outcry, a French government plan to put into private hands one of its most historic pieces of real estate—the Hôtel de la Marine, on the Place de la Concorde in Paris—has been put on hold. The future of this imposing 18th-century mansion, which has long been the home of the Navy, is now being considered by a commission. 

However, many more chunks of state property remain for sale. Everything from lighthouses, windmills and forestry huts to small châteaux, office buildings and barracks.

A government website, www.budget.gouv.fr/cessions, helpfully lists the lot, including a brief description, photos and a map of what's available where. The only snag is that there's no guidance on price. It's up to interested parties to make an offer.

With the Club Méditerranée formula now looking perhaps a tad stale to Continental holiday makers, the French brand is moving into China with ambitious plans to make it one of their most important markets. 

A recently opened ski resort at Yabuli in the northeast province of Heilongjiang is to be followed with four more new holiday villages by 2015, targeting the pockets of the wealthiest 0.2% of the population.

With skiing being a relatively new leisure pursuit for most Chinese, Club Med is also adapting its program to suit local tastes. For instance, après-ski is no longer simply about Glühwein and cherry tart but also includes green tea and Mahjong.

— Next week, J. S. Marcus in Munich.