FRANKFURT—The European Central Bank warned that commodity and food prices could push euro-zone inflation higher, the latest sign of concern from officials about the buildup of price pressures in the currency bloc. 

Inflation risks are mounting in the bloc's largest economy, Germany, where industrial prices jumped last month at their fatstest pace in two years and union workers in the metals sector secured an earlier-than-expected pay increase.

"Very close monitoring of price developments is warranted," the ECB said in its January bulletin, issued Thursday, though officials said they still expect inflation to remain under wraps over the medium term.

Officials cautioned that higher food prices—one of the sources of the recent acceleration in euro-zone inflation to its fastest rate in more than two years, 2.2%—could prove long-lasting. Euro-zone inflation is above the ECB's sub-2% target for the first time since the global financial crisis hit in the autumn of 2008. Many economists expect inflation to climb above 2.5% in the next two months. Recent trends suggest "that there will remain upside pressure on food prices in the long run, due to robustly growing global demand," the ECB said Thursday.

It isn't just food. German wholesale prices soared 0.7% in December from November and 5.3% from a year earlier, suggesting price pressures are building. Business surveys "signal rising price pressures" and suggest higher commodity and raw-material costs are "to some extent, being passed on to customers," the ECB said.

ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet jolted financial markets last week by warning in his monthly news conference that inflation risks "could move to the upside" and that officials "are never precommitted" on interest rates, which some economists took as a signal that ECB rate rises could come as early as midyear.

The combination of the Jan. 13 news conference and Thursday's "Bulletin tends to suggest that, one way or the other, there will be somewhat firmer monetary conditions in the euro area this year," said analysts at Barclays Capital.

The ECB's tough talk on inflation, echoed this week by Germany's central bank chief, Axel Weber, and executive board member Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, have stirred memories of 2008, when the ECB raised interest rates while other central banks, including the Federal Reserve, were slashing them amid signs of turbulence in financial markets.

As was the case in 2008, accelerating inflation isn't isolated to one country or region. U.S. inflation sped up in December, and annual U.K. inflation stands at 3.7% after a record one-month rise in December. U.K. price expectations are at their highest level in more than two years, a survey by the Confederation of British Industry showed Thursday.

Fed officials are more likely to look past energy and food-driven price gains, since U.S. policy makers see core inflation, which excludes those volatile items, as a better gauge of future price trends. But ECB officials largely reject that reasoning. Core inflation in the euro zone is just 1.1%.

Core inflation "can give misleading signals in the event of persistent changes to relative prices," Mr. Bini Smaghi said Wednesday, and can give officials "a downwardly biased assessment of overall price pressures." 

ECB officials are closely monitoring wage developments for signs that higher energy and food prices are filtering through the economy in what the ECB calls "second-round" effects. Three years ago, big wage gains in Germany were thought by economists to have sealed the ECB's case for higher rates in July 2008. Thursday brought some evidence that German wages are on the rise again amid a rapid economic rebound and declining unemployment, giving workers renewed bargaining power.

German labor union IG Metall said Thursday that more than 40% of its 2.2 million members will get an agreed 2.7% wage rise two months ahead of time, starting in February. 

—Tom Fairless and Ainsley Thomson contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Brian Blackstone at brian.blackstone@dowjones.com and Nina Koeppen at nina.koeppen@dowjones.com 