Humans are pattern-seeking primates whose brains evolved to look for and find meaningful patterns in the noise and chaos of nature. When we connect A to B, this process is called learning. Sometimes A really is connected to B, and sometimes it is not. The only reliable way to know for sure is via the scientific method. The problem is that our brains were designed millions of years ago, but science is only a few hundred years old. 

One of the most nefarious anecdotal patterns in recent years has been a seeming connection between autism and vaccines. Parents whose children are diagnosed with autism (A) search for a probable cause; they remember that they had their children vaccinated (B) and forgivably assume that the correlation is causal. These parents worry for their children, enough sometimes to sue the companies that manufacture the vaccines. But collectively they could contribute to a public-health disaster if enough parents were to stop vaccinating their children and communities began to suffer a return of communicable diseases once thought to be routed. 

By Seth Mnookin  Simon & Schuster, 410 pages, $26.99 

This tragedy in the making has now been chronicled in a book that should be required reading at every medical school in the world. Seth Mnookin's "The Panic Virus" is a lesson on how fear hijacks reason and emotion trumps logic. But the story starts with a bit of bad science. On Feb. 26, 1998, the prestigious British medical journal The Lancet published a paper by a medical researcher named Andrew Wakefield who claimed that he had found a causal link between autism and the MMR (measles, mumps, rubella) vaccine. Even though the journal's editors made it clear that further research was needed, at a press conference Dr. Wakefield announced: "With the debate over MMR that has started, I cannot support the continued use of the three vaccines given together." 

Never mind that almost no medical researchers in the field agreed with Dr. Wakefield's findings and that health officials in the U.K. immediately denounced his recommendations. Parents of autistic children glommed onto Dr. Wakefield as a medical messiah. Worse, parents of non-autistic children began to withdraw from vaccination programs, quickly creating the risk that some communities would lose "herd immunity"—the threshold level that permits even those never inoculated to benefit due to the successful immunization of those around them.

Rates of unvaccinated children in New York and Connecticut, for example, doubled between 2005 and 2010. In New Jersey, they rose by 800%. In many other places around the country, they have fallen below the herd immunity rate of about 90%. The consequences are tragically predictable: Mumps and measles are on the comeback trail, and if this medical mass hysteria is not checked soon we could face a terrible resurgence in these deadly diseases, which killed hundreds of millions of people before the invention of vaccines. 

In a brilliant piece of reportage and science writing, Mr. Mnookin explains precisely how medical researchers set about determining whether there is a causal connection in an apparent pattern. "Broadly speaking, there are three ways scientists collect data to test new theories," he explains. "The best possible method is through a randomized clinical trial, in which researchers take a sampling of a population and arbitrarily test their hypothesis on one half while leaving the other half untouched." New cancer drugs are often tested in this way.

Of course, ethically we cannot give half a population a disease and then try different methods of curing it, so "the second-best option is a case control study, where investigators analyze a group that has been naturally subjected to the issue under examination." When even this method is not available, researchers may turn to the least reliable method of a simple case series. "These are oftentimes nothing more than an interesting phenomenon someone happened to notice," Mr. Mnookin notes.

The apparent link between autism and vaccines is one such example. Still, Dr. Wakefield's research is quite possibly one of the weakest studies ever published in the history of science. Just this week, a thorough study of the data by the British Medical Journal concluded that it was nothing less than an "elaborate fraud"—a conclusion supported by Mr. Mnookin's own debunking. As he carefully documents, autism existed long before the MMR vaccine was introduced, and hundreds of millions of children have received the MMR vaccine without developing any negative side effects whatsoever (let alone autism). 

At the very least, Dr. Wakefield's research exhibits several classic examples of researcher bias. He already believed there was a link before he conducted his study, so he was subject to "experimenter bias." He relied on the memories of parents who brought their autistic children to him to determine whether autistic symptoms began before or after the vaccination (so they were subject to hindsight bias). Worst of all, according to Mr. Mnookin, Dr. Wakefield received more than £400,000 to provide support for publicly funded lawsuits against the drug companies that make the vaccines. "The entire report wasn't built on a house of cards," Mr. Mnookin concludes. "There weren't any cards to begin with." 

If the research linking autism to vaccines is so badly flawed, why do so many people believe that there is a link? People have always feared vaccines, going back a century and a half to when vaccines first began to be widely used—it is counter intuitive to subject yourself to a small dose of a deadly disease. Mr. Mnookin also convincingly argues that "anxiety about the individual's fate in industrialized societies" plays a role in motivating anti-vaccination crusaders. "Then, as now, they appealed to knee-jerk populism by conjuring up an imaginary elite with an insatiable hunger for control," he writes. "Then, as now, they preached the superiority of subjective beliefs over objective proofs, of knowledge acquired by personal experience rather than through scientific rigor."

The deeper reason for this fear, I believe, owes to our evolution: We are just not cognitively equipped to grasp the concept of immunization, because we cannot see bacteria and viruses and because anecdotes are more emotionally satisfying than experimental methodology. Television media, constantly in search of good visuals to create cheap emotional connections, are particularly terrible at telling the story. 

On World Autism Awareness Day in April 2010, for example, an episode of "Larry King Live" featured (on one side of the table) two medical researchers explaining why there is no link between autism and vaccines and (on the other side of the table) the former Playboy bunny Jenny McCarthy explaining why she thinks that there is a link. Video clips of her adorable autistic son, Evan, helped to stack the deck. "The type of journalism that relies on the reporter's notion of what does or doesn't 'seem' correct or controversial is self-indulgent and irresponsible," Mr. Mnookin rightly concludes. "It gives credence to the belief that we can intuit our way through all of the various decisions we need to make in our lives and it validates the notion that our feelings are a more reliable barometer of reality than the facts."

We may have evolved to "feel" rather than think our way through problems, but we have also developed the remarkable gift of cognitive flexibility. We have the power to override our instincts and employ reason, logic and science to solve our problems and advance our species. 

—Dr. Shermer is the publisher of Skeptic magazine. His next book  is "The Believing Brain."