T-Mobile USA is considering selling its nonstrategic assets, particularly some of its cellular towers, to raise cash for further investments, according to  Rene Obermann, chief executive of parent company  Deutsche Telekom AG.

Mr. Obermann said the company isn't in a rush to pursue a deal, and that it would consider a sale only if needed to make a large investment. He didn't comment on the potential value of the deal, adding that out of its competitors in the U.S., T-Mobile USA owns the most towers. 

Mr. Obermann and T-Mobile USA CEO  Philipp Humm were on hand at an investor event Thursday to reaffirm Deutsche Telekom's support of the U.S. carrier, as well as to map out its return to growth. The event was set up to answer mounting questions about the direction of T-Mobile USA and the state of its turnaround. 

T-Mobile USA has already taken a more aggressive tack with its marketing and efforts to win over customers since Mr. Humm took over six months ago. He has touted the speed of its network compared with its rivals, and introduced lower-price data plans in an effort to make the smartphone a mass-market device. He said he plans to introduce more affordable smartphones in the coming months. 

Mr. Obermann said he expects T-Mobile USA to return to growth this year and increase its revenue by $3 billion by 2014. He also expects to take $1 billion of costs out of the operation in 2013. 

T-Mobile USA will be specifically targeting customer defection in its turnaround, Mr. Obermann said. That includes plans to reduce its rate of turnover, or churn, to roughly 2% this year, and below 1.8% by 2012. He added that to generate cash, T-Mobile would consider selling noncore assets, including its cellular towers. 

T-Mobile USA generates $2.5 billion to $3 billion in operating cash flow, which is sufficient as a "self-funding platform" able to pay for its own capital expenditures, Mr. Obermann said. But for bigger projects or acquisitions, he said T-Mobile USA will look at its noncore assets to raise funds. He declined to comment on any specific mergers or deals. 

Mr. Obermann said he expects T-Mobile USA to take "higher than our fair share" of the U.S. market, but acknowledged that it would take some time to improve the perception of the carrier. 

T-Mobile USA will be shifting from a purely national marketing campaign to one that has more region-specific advertising, Mr. Humm said, adding he is targeting growth on both the prepaid and postpaid subscriber ends. 

Mr. Humm declined to comment on the prospect of Verizon Wireless getting the iPhone, saying T-Mobile USA is preparing for it by pushing the advantage of its network. But he added that he doesn't believe Verizon getting the iPhone will have as large an impact as when it first launched on  AT&T Inc.
T


-0.61
%




 The executives declined to comment about T-Mobile USA carrying the phone. 

T-Mobile has been more brazen with the characterization of its network, which it considers 4G. The move irked both  Sprint Nextel Corp.
S


-1.25
%




 and Verizon Wireless, which consider their own networks to be true 4G. The carrier also forced AT&T adopt the 4G term in its marketing. 

During the recent Consumer Electronics Show, T-Mobile USA said it would double the speed of its wireless network, which to the irritation of its rivals, it began calling 4G. The carrier plans to cover 140 million customers in 25 cities with the upgraded network by the middle of this year. It also said it plans to introduce 25 4G devices in 2011. 

Mr. Humm said on Thursday that the carrier plans to sell a 4G version of its Galaxy S and Sidekick phones this year, as well as launch the first 4G tablet in the spring. 

Other carriers are racing to get their own 4G tablets in the market, with Sprint targeting a summer launch of  Research in Motion Ltd.'s Playbook and Verizon Wireless preparing  Motorola Mobility Holdings Inc.
MSI


0.31
%




's LTE Xoom tablet for the second quarter. 

Prior to Mr. Humm's arrival, T-Mobile USA was adrift. The nation's fourth-largest wireless carrier by subscriber base was squeezed by lower-end prepaid providers on one side, and by larger rivals Verizon Wireless and AT&T on the other side. To keep its growth going, it sought more prepaid business, cutting into its margins as less profitable customers signed up for service, and eventually pulled back on the strategy. Questions also remain about how the carrier plans to move into a new wireless technology, and whether it has the spectrum to do so. 

Mr. Obermann said that while there is enough spectrum for its short-term needs, the company will eventually have to acquire new spectrum. He said the company was looking for alternative sources, but declined to provide further detail. 

Deutsche Telekom will release more details on T-Mobile USA's fourth-quarter results when it reports its financial statements on Feb. 25. 

 Write to  Roger Cheng at roger.cheng@dowjones.com 