Szeto Wah, who died of cancer Sunday at the age of 79, was one of Hong Kong's most prominent pro-democracy legislators and the lead organizer of the city's annual June 4 rally commemorating the Tiananmen Square massacre. To China's Communist Party he was a subversive, banned for the last two decades from crossing into the mainland. The outpouring of praise this week is testament to the important legacy he leaves—within the halls of power, and especially in Hong Kong's public imagination.

For all of Beijing's efforts to portray him as a radical, "Uncle Wah" was very much part of the mainstream of local politics. He commanded wide respect in part because he remained steadfast in his beliefs, regardless of the personal consequences. But at the same time, as an independent unionist representing teachers, he was hardly a bomb-thrower like some of the younger activists. "I love China," he once wrote. "I just don't like the government."

There was once a time when China's leaders saw the wisdom of working in a "united front" with Hong Kong people holding such views. Szeto and barrister Martin Lee served on the committee formed by Beijing in 1985 to draft the Basic Law, Hong Kong's mini-constitution. Although they were outnumbered by yes men, the two liberals (in the classic sense of that word) were able to have an impact. Hong Kong today has a greater degree of autonomy thanks to their efforts.

They would have accomplished more if not for the bloody crackdown on protesters in Beijing, which brought a million Hong Kong people onto the streets in anger and sympathy. After Messrs. Szeto and Lee sided with the demonstrators they were ejected from the committee, and Beijing hardened its line on controlling the territory after the 1997 handover, inserting requirements for laws against sedition and subversion into the Basic Law.

Fast forward to 2009, and China's government was still wrangling with liberals in Hong Kong over how the territory should transition to greater democracy. Facing pressure from Szeto and his colleagues, Beijing blinked and offered a compromise that gave them most of what they were asking for. Szeto helped lead a majority of the pro-democracy camp in accepting the deal last June: Direct elections will choose Hong Kong's chief executive in 2017 and the legislature in 2020. 

While some liberal hard-liners were disappointed with Szeto for accepting Beijing's outstretched hand, he saw the bigger picture. Full democratization may not happen as quickly as most in Hong Kong would like, but it is coming. As important, the cycle of polarization and confrontation between Beijing and the special administrative region that began in 1989 has been broken. Szeto and his allies made that possible, by sticking to their principles until Beijing had no choice but to recognize their moral authority to speak for the people of Hong Kong.