Since last year,  Tyondai Braxton has been deep in what jazz musicians would call the woodshed. He was reinventing himself following his departure from Battles, the popular indie-rock outfit the guitarist has been an elemental part of for the past eight years. "We were a band that was very Henry Rollins about it," he said, referring to the roadbound habits of the frontman for 1980s California punk act Black Flag. "Get in the van and tour, tour, tour."

But Mr. Braxton, who is 32 years old, had seen enough of that. He loves to sequester himself in a hive-like studio space not far from his apartment in Williamsburg. It's where he put together the music for "Central Market." The 2009 release is an imaginative, often fanciful concept album that fuses orchestral writing with electric guitar and other instruments manipulated through electronic effects. On Monday, Mr. Braxton will perform the work at Alice Tully Hall with the Wordless Music Orchestra, organized by New York promoter Ronen Givony to perform contemporary classics and commissions. Their three-city tour includes dates in Washington, D.C., and Minneapolis.

"I fell back in love with large-scale orchestral pieces," said Mr. Braxton, chatting on a recent morning at the Roebling Tea Room in Williamsburg. "Just being in a rock band I lost the connection to that way of working." 

Armed with electric guitars, a dozen effects pedals and a pair of Echoplex tape delay boxes, Mr. Braxton went back to methods he first used as a solo artist playing downtown venues in Manhattan—his birthplace—after returning from college in 2000. "I imagine each effect being a different instrument," he said. "It's a very faith-based way of working. You have to believe that yourself whistling is a flute."

Those whistles fit so well on his rough draft, which he began work on in 2008, that he kept them on the score. As on the recording, when the Wordless Music Orchestra takes the stage it will be joined by a kazoo section—since the composer saw no reason to substitute the originally intended trumpets. "I got into the texture of it," he said with a smile.

Mr. Braxton comes by his open-minded creative approach as second nature. His father is the far-thinking composer Anthony Braxton, whose peripatetic path as an academic meant the family moved from Woodstock, N.Y., to New Haven, Conn., then the San Francisco Bay Area, and back to Connecticut, where he attended high school. That's when the lifelong music student decided to pick up a new instrument. "When you're 13 years old suddenly the game changes," he said. " I was discovering punk rock and pop music. I thought, 'I've got to play guitar. I've got to drop this clarinet stuff.' "

After years of rocking—even if it was tweaky, rhythmically complex rocking—Mr. Braxton had to listen back to the early days of the 20th century in order to move forward in this one. He dove into Stravinsky, Debussy and Ravel. "I was obsessed with that music," he said, noting his ideas for "Central Market" took a cue from "Petrushka," Stravinsky's evocation of the Shrovetide Fair in 19th century St. Petersburg. 

"The record starts off with this naive, positive vibe and then goes into this cynical dark arc," he said. "When you said the word 'market' in 2008, every single headline was financial crisis. I like the imagery of those two things, this fantasy market and the cold harsh reality of the nation crumbling under this crisis." He paused for a moment, as if to emphasize that such touchstones aren't to be regarded too explicitly. "But that's not what it's about."