With the arrival last month of the 150th anniversary of the start of the Civil War, Americans have been reminded once again of the heroic statesmanship of Abraham Lincoln. What few may know is that Lincoln's example has been a beacon to the rest of the world as well. In both hemispheres, from Europe and Asia to South America and the Caribbean, his life has inspired activists and idealists of various stripes and still does so even now. 

Lincoln's cruel death at the end of the Civil War prompted unprecedented mourning on every continent, among all classes. In the capitals of Europe, grown men wept openly. Over the following half-century, didactic biographies appeared in dozens of languages. An often enigmatic figure in life, Lincoln proved to be a malleable symbol in death, licensing a range of readings by his foreign admirers.

Following Karl Marx, who cast him as "the single-minded son of the working class," German socialists invoked Lincoln for his emancipation not of enslaved blacks but of the American working class. Spanish progressives, Italian democrats, French republicans, Czech nationalists and others saw him as the enemy of autocratic power and aristocratic privilege. Obscurely born but able to rise through hard work and the simple virtues of the "natural man," Lincoln was often portrayed as a figure who transcended national distinctions in the universal cause of the common people. 

Giusseppe Garibaldi, the father of Italian reunification, wrote a letter of praise to Lincoln in 1863, calling America "the teacher of liberty to our Fathers," amazing the world with "her gigantic boldness." Other far-flung patriots expressed similar sentiments. Argentinians, Germans and Slavs found in Lincoln a supreme model of robustness in defending national unity. During the Great War, Lincoln served as the epitome of the firm but moderate war leader, inspiring Britain's David Lloyd George and other allies. 

Lincoln enjoyed a new international salience after World War II. As former European colonies sought independence and the Cold War intensified, the American establishment projected Lincoln as the embodiment of an idealized U.S. 

The sesquicentennial of his birth in 1959 was an especially sustained instance of exerting this soft power. Through the world-wide distribution of information packs, films and Lincoln's works, the U.S. Information Agency countered the diplomatic advantage the Soviet Union had gained through its Sputnik launch and the ugly confrontation over school integration at Little Rock, Ark. It even distributed the Gettysburg Address in comic-strip form in Vietnamese. In these tense times at home, it was Lincoln's language not of equality but of freedom that U.S. opinion-makers emphasized. 

Nowhere was Lincoln more enthusiastically embraced in the midst of the Cold War than in West Germany. There the 1950s saw a starburst of books invoking him as a symbol of anticommunism and self-determination. Willy Brandt, the mayor of divided Berlin, found particular value in Lincoln's famous statement that a "house divided against itself cannot stand." 

At the same time, the anti-colonial movements for independence in Asia, Africa and the Caribbean appropriated Lincoln as an exemplar of freedom and national unity. Kenyan students in the 1940s recited the Emancipation Proclamation in resistance to British rule. Kwame Nkrumah, who presided over the independence of Ghana in 1957, was a graduate of Lincoln University in Pennsylvania and one of several African leaders to invoke Lincoln's example. 

No Asian country has honored Lincoln more durably than Japan. Though he was long a hero of the country's modernizers, it was only after World War II that Lincoln's democratic ideas received their due. The same malleability has marked his uses in Taiwan and the People's Republic of China. Pairing Lincoln and Sun Yat-sen as "great democratic prophets, protecting human rights and upholding justice," the Taiwan government in 1959 issued a stamp of the two standing shoulder-to-shoulder. 

Conversely, Chinese communists have seized on the idea of Lincoln as the great foe of rebellion and secession, using his name to denounce Taiwanese and Tibetan separatism and what they see as American double standards. "How come Lincoln's battle to preserve the Union was completely justified," a high-ranking Chinese official asked in 2007, "whereas our steadfast effort to maintain a unified motherland is not?" This may be one reason why Chinese biographies of Lincoln in recent times (over 80 since 1980) have exceeded those in any other foreign language.

The expansive story of the global Lincoln will surely generate new chapters in the future, at least as long as U.S. administrations are led by his vocal admirers. President George W. Bush used Lincoln as a key symbol in his administration's efforts to promote an international "freedom agenda." His adviser Karen Hughes, charged with improving the U.S. image abroad, opened "Lincoln Corners" in public libraries in South Asia. 

Nor did it escape notice around the world that, in 2007, Barack Obama announced his candidacy for president in Springfield, Ill., in the shadow of the Old State Capitol, where Lincoln himself had spoken with such eloquence. 

—Mr. Carwardine is president of Corpus Christi College at the University of Oxford. "The Global Lincoln," edited by Mr. Carwardine and Jay Sexton, will be published in July.