Ever since the publication of "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland" in 1865, readers have been fascinated by its author, Charles Dodgson, better known as Lewis Carroll, and the model for its heroine, a 5-year-old girl named Alice Liddell. Biographers, critics, scholars and psychologists have delved into Dodgson's relationship with Alice—and by extension his love of little girls and of childhood itself. 

The gifted and versatile Simon Winchester has written a short book, "The Alice Behind Wonderland," exploring this relationship through the lens of photography: Over a 25-year career as an amateur photographer, Dodgson took about 3,000 photographs, most of which have been preserved. Mr. Winchester documents Dodgson's early interest in this new art form, his purchase of the best make of camera of his day (a Double Folding camera made by Thomas Ottewill) and his emergence as an important portrait photographer of cultural celebrities like Tennyson and of young children like the Liddell sisters.

It is clear from Mr. Winchester's account that 1856 was the critical year in this relationship. During this year, Henry Liddell was appointed dean of Christ Church and came to live in Oxford with his large family. Shortly thereafter, Dodgson, who taught mathematics at Christ Church and later also became an Anglican deacon, met the new dean. On March 18, Dodgson bought his first camera. On April 25, he met Alice Liddell. And on June 19, he took a photograph of Alice Murdoch, the 4-year-old daughter of a senior civil servant who lived in Oxford. Mr. Winchester regards the Murdoch photograph as "the first proper picture of a small girl that Dodgson ever took." He goes on to say that it was Dodgson's fascination with young girls, "his need to picture them with or without clothing, his need to make them happy, to amuse them, to have them think of him as a friend . . . and on rare occasions to exhibit brief flashes of physical affection [that] reflect an aspect of Charles Dodgson's character that puzzles and intrigues to this day."

Mr. Winchester soon turns his attention to the photographs that Dodgson took of Alice Liddell. The first was taken on June 2, 1857, when Alice was 5 years old. The last was taken in 1870, when she was 18. In the intervening years, he took nine other photographs of Alice, along with seven of Alice with her siblings. Mr. Winchester's greatest interest is in three of the solo photographs: the first one, from 1857; the second, a year later, showing Alice dressed as a beggar; and the final shot in 1870.

Of these three photographs, the one of the beggar-girl—in which Alice's expression is both calculating and tenacious, her hand cupped to receive the alms that are her due—inspires his most imaginative reading. "What [Dodgson] had in mind was a very brief moral tale, a picture-driven story of a smart little girl brought low by tragedy or ill fortune, then transformed into a girl who, cunning beyond the imagination of her elders and her peers, convincingly acts the impoverished seducer, and assumes an expression and a demeanor so very different from that she had offered to her world." It is a highly subjective but compelling interpretation of an unsettling photograph made by a 26-year-old man of a 6-year-old girl.

At this point, Mr. Winchester candidly addresses the issue of Dodgson's sexual preferences. He rightly acknowledges that this has been a hot topic of much critical writing about Dodgson, but he mercifully does not seek to summarize even the broad outlines of the debate. Instead, he states his own position clearly and unequivocally: "Many have weighed in on Dodgson's supposed sexual predilections. Victorian attitudes toward young children held that they were the literal embodiment of innocent beauty, an innocence to be preserved and revered. All surviving evidence suggests that Dodgson's attitude was no different and that his interest in the Liddell girls during their prepubescent years was unremarkable, in every sense of the word."

 By Simon Winchester  Oxford, 110 pages, $16.95

To my surprise, Mr. Winchester does not appear much interested in the influence that Alice Liddell might have had on Dodgson's creation of the heroine of "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland" and, six years later, "Through the Looking-Glass." He simply relates the well-known story of how Dodgson took the Liddell girls on a picnic on July 4, 1862, during which he told them the tale of a little girl who had fallen down a rabbit hole. Alice, captivated by the tale, made Dodgson promise to write the story down and give it to her as a gift. In November 1864, he fulfilled that promise. 

Mr. Winchester instead focuses on the odd estrangement between the Liddell family and Dodgson in the late 1860s, a breach that has remained largely unexplained. The most dramatic fact is that Dodgson and Liddell never saw each other again after he took the 18-year-old's photograph in 1870. He also relates the rather sad story of Alice Liddell's adult life. Alice herself, after a brief, intense affair with Prince Leopold, a son of Queen Victoria, married a commoner, Reginald Hargreaves, in 1880, by whom she had three sons, two of whom were killed in World War I. When her husband died in 1926, she was left in straitened circumstances and was forced to sell all the "Alice" memorabilia related to Dodgson to help pay death duties. Dodgson spent the rest of his days at Christ Church, Oxford; he died in 1898.

Those who know a good deal about the life and art of Charles Dodgson may not find much that is new in "The Alice Behind Wonderland." For those who know Dodgson's books but not much about their author or the "real" Alice, Mr. Winchester's elegantly written study provides a balanced, sympathetic portrait of a complex and gifted man.

—Mr. Pierce is director emeritus of the Morgan Library and Museum in New York.