Boxing promoter Don King has relisted his more than three-acre oceanfront property in Manalapan, Fla., south of Palm Beach, for $20 million. The gated estate, which contains two homes, was originally offered in early 2009 for $27.5 million. Mr. King took it off the market last summer. 

The larger of the two homes has nine bedrooms and nearly 18,000 square feet of living space. It's built around a coquina stone courtyard with waterfalls and ponds. The smaller five-bedroom home has about 6,800 square feet, an outdoor cabana with a kitchen and an ice-cream parlor. There are two swimming pools and a replica of the Statue of Liberty in the yard. The property includes 300 feet of ocean and Intracoastal Waterway frontage.

Mr. King, 79, has represented clients like Muhammad Ali and Mike Tyson. He purchased the larger house in 1999 for $7.8 million; he paid $6.5 million for the other house the same year. Mr. King's wife, Henrietta, passed away in December at age 87. 

  Jack Elkins and  Bunny Hiatt of Engel & Volkers have the listing. 

Real-estate news about Don King, Mel Gibson, and the 'Home Alone' house.

A Malibu, Calif. compound owned by Mel Gibson has been relisted at the reduced price of just under $11.8 million. That's 19% off its original $14.5 million asking price in March 2010.

The controversial star bought the 2.6-acre property with his wife, Robyn, in 1989; Ms. Gibson filed for divorce in 2009. The property is known as Lavender Hill and has a six-bedroom main house and three guest houses. There's also a pool, a lighted tennis court, fruit orchards and an outdoor entertainment pavilion. The estate was built and designed by Hollywood composer Leonard Rosenman and was later owned by musician Rick Springfield. "Now that the children are grown, there is no need for such a large property," the listing agent,  Ellen Francisco of Coldwell Banker, said in a statement. A representative for Mr. Gibson declined to comment.

The Winnetka, Ill., house that appeared extensively in the movie "Home Alone" has hit the market for $2.4 million. 

The sellers, Cynthia and John Abendshien, have owned the brick house since 1988 and lived there for much of the shoot. The 4,250-square foot home has four bedrooms and five bathrooms. Situated on a half-acre, it has been renovated several times since it appeared in the film. 

"We are now empty-nesters and it's really more house than we need or utilize," says Mr. Abendshien.  Marissa Hopkins of Coldwell Banker Residential Brokerage in Highland Park has the listing. 

—Candace Jackson and Juliet Chung

—Email: privateproperties@wsj.com