WASHINGTON—Business groups have targeted the Environmental Protection Agency along with workplace-safety laws in response to requests from congressional Republicans to describe regulations they believe are curbing growth.

The new chairman of the House Oversight Committee, Rep. Darrell Issa (R., Calif.), wrote to dozens of trade associations and businesses last month asking them to identify "regulations that negatively impact the economy and jobs." 

Since then, President Barack Obama announced a review of all regulations, and said in the State of the Union address that "when we find rules that put an unnecessary burden on businesses, we will fix them." 

Responding to Mr. Issa's call, groups representing the petroleum, manufacturing, construction, paper, chemical and farming industries, as well as small and minority businesses, all criticized the EPA's regulation of greenhouse gases. 

Republicans have said that they will make all of the responses public by mid-February, along with their assessment of regulations that should be jettison or changed.

Many trade associations also criticized the EPA's plans to tighten limits on emissions of some pollutants from industrial boilers, ground-level ozone, the level of nutrients in Florida waters, and pollutants in the Chesapeake Bay. 

The Wall Street Journal looked at 25 letters from large organizations that agreed to make them available. Another 12 declined to do so, and several companies said they had decided not to respond to Mr. Issa's request.

Responses included sweeping statements about the regulatory climate, long lists of particular regulations or parts of regulations that industry groups disliked as well as suggested modifications.

The Association for Manufacturing Technology outlined principles for a federal manufacturing policy, and said "it is obvious that regulators [at the EPA and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration] know little or nothing about manufacturing." 

The Independent Petroleum Association of America cited 20 specific complaints about drilling permits and pollution as detrimental to job growth, and expressed concern over impending commodity market rules as well.

By contrast, the American Meat Institute cited a single proposal concerning the business relationship between producers and packers. 

Construction and manufacturers' groups highlighted several proposed OSHA rules, including plans to tighten standards for combustible dust and require employers to establish formal workplace-safety programs. 

The Construction Industry Round Table and Associated Builders and Contractors took aim at a 2009 executive order that contractors on large-scale federal construction projects allow union representation for workers. 

The contractors' association also criticized the 1931 Davis-Bacon Act that requires workers be paid the local "prevailing wage," as determined by the Department of Labor. It said the wage rates are inflated and job descriptions were inaccurate.

Business lobbyists have scored victories in the past week as OSHA backed off plans to require manufacturers to install noise-reducing equipment and gather data on musculoskeletal injuries. Many trade groups attacked those proposals in their letters to Mr. Issa.

But many of the environment and labor rules that businesses dislike have strong support from Democrats. White House officials have already said the benefits of EPA greenhouse-gases rules outweigh their costs. 

The president also warned in the State of the Union that he would continue to enforce "common-sense safeguards to protect the American people," and specifically cited clean-air laws.

Mr. Issa's solicitation has drawn criticism from his committee's top Democrat, Rep. Elijah Cummings of Maryland, who said that the effort could "allow corporations to basically just take over our government." 

Mr. Cummings has complained that Republicans haven't shared all of the replies they have received from business interests. He said Thursday that he expected the committee to seek evidence of the trade groups' claims. 

Republicans have said that they will make all of the responses public by mid-February, along with their conclusions on regulations that should be scrapped or changed.

 Write to  Louise Radnofsky at louise.radnofsky@wsj.com 