 The Spanish-German actor talks to The Wall Street Journal Europe about how he starts his weekend.  

When Daniel Brühl isn't sipping vermouth with friends at a bar in Barcelona's El Raval neighborhood after an evening run, the 32-year-old actor spends the weekend cooking for friends. "Eating is my main hobby now and most of what I do on the weekend revolves around that," says Mr. Brühl, whose new film, "Der ganz große Traum," recently opened in Germany. 

The Catalan native, best known for his roles as a Nazi sniper in "Inglourious Basterds" and as an East German student in "Goodbye, Lenin!," divides his time between Berlin and Barcelona, currently preferring Spain's relaxing lifestyle to Berlin's party scene. "I enjoy having friends over to eat on my terrace here. You can spend a whole day doing that," he says in between filming scenes for "Los Pelayo," an upcoming Spanish family drama. 

Mr. Brühl is hoping to convert Berliners to Spain's gastronomic good life: He opened a tapas bar, Raval, in Berlin's artsy Kreuzberg district in February. 

  How do you start your weekend?   

I always try to start my weekend by running on the beach, which is great fun here in Barcelona. I start by the Columbus monument at La Rambla and head left, run for 20 or 30 minutes and see all the tourists start fading away. Tourists here are so lazy; they tend to hang just around the monument, so if you run a little farther, you come to this beach where you're all alone except for a few others. It's always great to take a bathing suit, jump in the water and run right back. Then I'll drive home and there's a tradition here of drinking vermouth, so I'll hang out with friends in a bar—often Boadas in El Raval—and drink vermouth. 

  And the next morning?   

I enjoy passing time in my house. I'll get up, head out on the terrace, think about what to do, fool around oiling the floorboards or hanging pictures askew. Yesterday I exploded a saucepan cooking. I'm also writing a book about Barcelona in my spare time. It chronicles a day in which I meet interesting people, get to know them and little corners of the city I find special. It's a mix between city guide and stories. 

  Many people think of you as German, but your mother is Spanish and you were born in Arenys de Munt.   

I spent my school years in Germany, but I've always come back here a lot. I would come at least twice a year with my parents because they have a house in the country. My brother still lives in Barcelona, so there's always been a reason to come. I'm happy I can film a lot here. I really want to film here more than in Germany right now; I feel more at home here. I'm also really proud of having my own home in Barcelona. It means I'm not just someone's visitor or a tourist. You know, I actually carry my house key in my hand sometimes when I walk around the streets to sort of show people I live here, even though it's a little childish.

  Where do you wander with that key?  

I really love going to the market in the Gràcia district and buying things to cook. All those little old chubby grandmas hang around the markets—it's so much fun, much different from buying food in Germany. 

 What have you cooked lately? 

I'm learning with my mom how to cook more Spanish food. I'm trying to make a good paella, but that's a real art. I was always too lazy to learn to cook before, because she cooked so well for me or I went to restaurants. I'm really getting to know my mom better through cooking with her. I'm not a good cook but I want to become one; that's one of my goals.

 Do you have a favorite Barcelona restaurant? 

La Panxa del Bisbe—that means "The Fat Stomach"—is a real favorite, definitely one of Barcelona's best. That's my insider tip, don't forget! 

  You opened a tapas bar in Berlin.  

I was in Berlin for 10 years, so the only really new thing for me in Berlin is my tapas bar in Kreuzberg....It's a lot of work, but it's tied in with a lot of joy and I don't see it as a work thing but as something I can do in my free time. I have a good partner who manages the hard business end of it. 

  What do you do in Berlin?  

I always try to go to cultural events—concerts lately. There are a few musicians in my circle of friends who give me recommendations. A good friend is a total classical music fan and gives me tickets to the philharmonic, which is awesome because I never used to be into classical music. I was a philistine, I'll admit, so now I'm glad Berlin has one of the best orchestras out there. The cultural offerings in Berlin are larger and cheaper than Barcelona, but Berlin is dangerous in a way—there's too much to do. I'm someone who also enjoys doing nothing on the weekends and when offers to go out come pouring in, well, you could spend a good year just hanging out in Berlin bars. 

  And if you had more free time?   

I would love to travel more for me, not for work. I would love to spend a year living in New York; I've wanted to do that since I was 18. I'll be really disappointed if I'm 50 and haven't done something like that. Hey, I'd take even six months there. I think I'd walk through the streets with my house key in my hand there too, so I could feel like a real New Yorker. 