If ever there was a time to go out and make a purchase or two, it's now. Readers, here follows, in no particular order, a list of my favorite items and stores this spring.

 Comme des Garçons' striped sweatshirt 

I know that this seems predictable and that everyone has done stripes for the past few seasons; but nobody does them like CDG. (£170). The ultimate in Breton.

 Cutler and Gross vintage glasses 

In the congested world of "sunnies," Cutler and Gross stands out: understated, stylish and, ironically, rather modern looking, despite the fact that I'm recommending their vintage line from Dover Street Market (from £279).

 Sue Devitt  

I spent a year circling my eyes in Sue Devitt's smoky eye intensifier pencil before I knew anything about her. Devitt is an Australian-born makeup artist with the usual roster of celeb clients; where she differs is in her approach to her high-performance line, containing vitamins, minerals and a seaweed complex. The jury is out on whether any of that stuff makes any difference, but Devitt's clever color palette is inspired by Africa and her global travels; she's philanthropic, supporting the Africa Foundation (www.africafoundation.org) and her makeup does what it says it will.

 Diptyque 34 

I've always thought that both the strength and weakness of Diptyque candles is the polarizing effect of their fragrances: I love their woody, smoky "dark" scents (Santal, Baies, Myrrhe), but I can't be doing with their florals (Roses or Gardenia). I can't decide, then, whether the 50-year-old Parisian firm has come up with an idea of astounding brilliance or a brand-bruiser with their new "34" scent (£50), which celebrates their original store. The perfumers specifically set out to offer such a potpourri of ingredients (more than 100) that the fragrance no longer belongs to any olfactory family. Intriguingly ambiguous.

 Chucs Dive & Mountain Shop 

A few years ago at a dinner party when we had both been bored rigid by an aging rock star, überagent and producer Charles Finch and I discussed shopping. Finch's dream was, he said, to open his own store. And I thought he was just making conversation. Chucs Dive & Mountain Store, opened last month on London's Dover Street, sells the dream of adventure and the kit to go with it. Dominated by a vast photograph of Finch's Everest-climbing grandfather (who, he says, also invented the puffer jacket), the shop is home to thick cashmere fishermen's sweaters (£545); swimshorts inspired by his late father Peter Finch's own glamorous lifestyle of hellraising with Errol Flynn and Noël Coward in Jamaica; and high-waisted, flattering bikini bottoms (£125) and shorts (£275) (designed in collaboration with a Finch client, Cate Blanchett). Best sellers: the long-sleeved logo UV shirts (£150), the chic one-piece swimsuits (£245) and the baseball caps (£55) bearing the name of elite mountain ski resorts (Verbier, Megève, Cortina…).

 Comme des Garçons X The Beatles Collection sneakers 

Whose apple is it anyway? You have no doubt read about the controversy surrounding this most ancient of fruits. The Bible, the Beatles' record label and that eminently successful computer-technology company withstanding, these sneakers (£110) should be yours this spring.

 Gap denim flares 

There's a bit of a frenzy in the fashion world surrounding Gap's new perfect flares (from £39.95). Allegedly, they make your legs look fathoms longer. I have road-tested them, and whilst I acknowledge that the radically higher waist and the longer flared silhouette does wonders for your thighs, I feel duty bound to point out that heels or wedges are required if you are under 5 feet 8 inches tall.

 Alaïa corset belt 

I could bang on about Azzedine Alaïa's unique understanding of the female form. I could discuss in detail the way his dresses hug you in all the right places and give you critical room to breathe in others. I could discuss the cut: masterfully rigid yet playful; the fabrics: luxuriant; and the colors: unique, from perfect sludge to inky, intellectual black. But really, this leather corset (£1,660) is a work of art. Wear it or worship it from afar. Either way, it should be on display. 

 Blink brow bars 

Badly shaped brows are worse than a bad haircut because they take at least three times as long to grow back. Well-shaped brows, as any makeup artist will tell you, really can open up and balance the face. Perhaps that's why Blink walk-in brow bars (www.blinkbrowbar.com) appear to be a very good idea. Threading, shaping, trimming and grooming in less than 30 relatively painless minutes. 

 Prada sparkly wedges 

You just know that given the choice Miuccia Prada would probably be Dorothy from "The Wizard of Oz." Many of her collections have had a wistful Wiz undercurrent, but this season her shoes say it all. Sparkly, striped and wedged. If you want fun and fanciful, these are it (£650). 

 The Asprey Bike 

I love walking into the Asprey store on London's Bond Street because it is unique. Norman Foster's idea of creating an external street of what appear to be brick homes on the inside of the store, illuminated by natural light from a glass atrium, makes for an extraordinary shopping experience (though your wallet would need to be feeling pretty confident to withstand the onslaught). If I could afford to be whimsical, I would buy Asprey's bespoke, alligator-upholstered bike (£7,000), which is quite simply a work of art. Whilst I neither know nor care whether it is a bike built for speed, it is most certainly a bike built with style. 

 Balenciaga crackle coat and tunic dress 

I'm still wearing my Balenciaga dresses from five seasons ago. There are few other houses whose clothes I could say that about.  Nicolas Ghesquière is one of the few designers who can turn on a dime, producing both retro-inspired and forward-looking designs, using both couture and modern techniques to create an eminently wearable collection. His futuristic washable polyurethane, silk-lined "crackle coat" (left, £1,045) and his '60s-inspired tunic dress in mint green (£1,095) exemplify the breadth of his talents. This is season-free dressing. How sexy you make it look is up to you, your choice of footwear and, of course, the weather.

 Mama Mio 

I think the founders of Mama Mio are on to something. Years ago, I met a fabulous-looking 80-year-old beauty expert who looked 60 at most. She put it all down to a series of facial exercises she had developed. Mama Mio skincare (from £22.50) comes with a series of exercises targeted at specific facial and neck areas (depending upon what cream you are buying). The principle: that you should exercise the muscles in your face as you do those in your body; together with the creams' high formulations of protein for the face and neck, they are worth considering. 

 The Outnet 

Should one confess to having a bad Outnet habit? The only positive thing to say about it is that it is not as damning as having a serious Net-a-Porter habit. Either way, the Outnet (www.theoutnet.com) is NAP's cheaper sister. It's not new, but recently it has become incredibly good; positioning itself as "the world's most fashionable fashion outlet," selling what are mainly last year's designer clothes, shoes and bags at a fraction of their original price. This is a site for serious fashion classicists, who may have balked at paying £1,070 for the Chloé pleated, crepe, sleeveless blouse last summer, but could make it work this season at £428, ditto Bottega's raffia wedges (once £535, now £268). If you are wondering who on earth would buy the notoriously expensive Balmain "holey" T-shirt in khaki (a snip at around £200, versus the original price of £700 odd), wonder no more. It was I.