One more inspection. That was all that stood between us and finally being able to move into our renovated brownstone in Harlem. It has water, electricity and heat. The floors are done. The walls are closed. The kitchens and bathrooms are in. The ceiling fans and air conditioning are installed.

What could go wrong?

A lot, of course.

Our latest delay began in December. We thought we were nearing the end of the renovation, so we called Con Edison to install the gas meters. We aren't allowed to turn on the heat until the meters are installed. 

Weeks of back and forth ensued. They refused to schedule an appointment to install the meters, but didn't give a reason. Finally, we found a Con Edison worker who explained our plumber had not scheduled the gas inspection that's required before the meters can be installed. 

This crucial fact was buried in fine print on the New York City Department of Buildings Web page. The fact that we had passed the rest of our inspections was displayed in much larger print, and somehow we and the plumber had missed it.

We quickly scheduled the inspection, waited for the day to come — and then promptly failed it. 

The reason? Our boiler was too efficient. My husband Vijay had insisted that we get the most efficient boiler on the market, as part of his campaign to make our house energy efficient. But apparently, the 94% efficient boiler we purchased was vented improperly.

It was too late to change the venting. So, tragically, we simply ripped out the efficient boiler and put in a less efficient boiler. The new boiler, which is only 84% efficient, can be vented the way that we originally envisioned.

After a few weeks, we got the boiler installed and operational. I immediately disliked it. It makes an annoying "thunk" when it kicks on, whereas the high-efficiency one was as quiet as a mouse. Still, we had no time to worry about minor things like thunks.

We were ready for the another go at the gas inspection — except for one thing. 

Our contractor was at the end of his rope. He hadn't been paid in two months because the failed inspection. He gets paid by the bank, which holds our mortgage and renovation costs, and the bank only pays when work is complete.

He had been paying his workers out of his own pocket for two months — and he couldn't afford to continue. He still had to build some doors and walls in the basement around the boiler to prepare for the inspection, and he was saying he couldn't do it without some cash.

Vijay decided that we needed to tide the contractor over until the next bank payment. After all, our contractor had been good to us. The vast majority of our problems with the renovation had been related to inspections.

"Can you get $30,000 in the next two days?" Vijay asked me. 

"Um, not really," I said, beginning to hyperventilate. A few hours later, after I calmed down, I realized I had a few options. I sold a bit of stock that I had forgotten I had. And I called all my credit cards, my bank and my parents to see what I could get. It turned out that borrowing against my 401(k) was the best way to get quick money, because it was a low-interest loan and the repayments could be automatically deducted from my paychecks.

And so, I raided my retirement fund and our contractor stayed on the job. I tried not to mention this to my colleagues at the Wall Street Journal, many of whom spend their time advising against this kind of financial misbehavior. 

We finally passed the gas inspection last week. Now we're waiting for Con Edison to install the gas meters. It is three months after our first call to Con Edison. We still are not allowed to turn the heat on because we don't have meters installed. 

If you had asked me a year ago whether I would have borrowed against my future retirement to pass an inspection, I would have said, 'No way.' 

But this process has made me realize that owning a house is a bit like being a parent. You can't envision the sacrifices you will make until you do it.