NEW DELHI—India's Supreme Court suspended a lower court ruling that divided a bitterly contested religious site between Hindus and Muslims in the town of Ayodhya.

The Supreme Court on Monday stayed a September ruling issued by the Allahabad High Court in India's northern state of Uttar Pradesh that ordered a three-way partition of the site, one for the Muslim side and the rest for two Hindu groups, according to lawyers representing the Muslim and Hindu sides. 

The holy site, long contested by Hindus and Muslims, has been a flashpoint for deadly inter-religious violence. In December 1992, Hindu activists, who consider the site the birthplace of the Hindu god Lord Ram and the location of an ancient temple, partially demolished a 16th-century mosque located on the site. The action sparked riots that killed thousands of people, mostly Muslims, in one of the worst episodes of sectarian violence in India's history. 

The Supreme Court described September's ruling by the Allahabad High Court as "strange" because none of the litigants had sought the land's partition. The Supreme Court said the split of the disputed land has "opened a litany of litigation," the Press Trust of India reported. 

The Supreme Court ordered a status quo on the site, banning all religious activity and any construction. 

The Supreme Court's order was welcomed by Hindu and Mulsim groups that had appealed against the High Court's verdict, demanding the land be wholly allocated to one party. A total of 18 Hindu and Muslim factions had appealed the High Court's verdict. 

"We welcome the court's order. We had never prayed for the partition which the court ordered in September," said Indira, national secretary-general of the Akhil Bharat Hindu Mahasabha party, who goes by one name. The party was one of the Hindu litigants in the case.

  Vivek Sharma, the lawyer of the Hindu group, said it was "surprising" that the high court had requested the partition of the land in first place. 

"I agree with [the Supreme Court]. No one had asked for one-third, one-third partition," said  Ravi Shankar Prasad, a spokesman of the opposition Bharatiya Janata Party, which came to political prominence partly after its push to build a temple for Ram on the site where the mosque, the Babri Masjid, once stood. 

The Sunni Waqf Board, the Muslim group that filed the appeal against the high court ruling, said it was satisfied with Monday's decision. "We were quite surprised with the [Allahabad] High Court bench order. Today's order was a balanced order," said Zafaryab Gilani, who represented the group in court. 

It wasn't immediately clear when the Supreme Court would issue a final verdict on the case.

The Nirmohi Akhara, a Hindu trust and party in the case, couldn't be immediately reached for comment. 

—Krishna Pokharel contributed to this article. 

 Write to  Vibhuti Agarwal at vibhuti.agarwal@wsj.com 