CAIRO—Hours after the military relieved Egypt's expansive police force of its duties, residents throughout Egypt's capital formed neighborhood security committees to confront the city's rising chaos.

The violence of the past several days has focused squarely on Egypt's law-enforcement services, widely regarded as made up of bullies bent on maintaining order at the expense of any real justice. 

In continuing riots since Friday, protesters have burned many of the city's police stations to the ground. Police personnel, like the rest of Egypt's citizens, have been told to stay home, while the army was called in to restore order.

The two days of widespread citizen policing have led Egypt's citizens to carry all manner of weapons: metal rods, baseball bats, truncheons, kitchen knives and 2x4s. Egyptians are a famously peace-loving populace, and aren't used to dealing with violence and crime. 

A succession of rallies and demonstrations, in Egypt, Jordan, Yemen and Algeria have been inspired directly by the popular outpouring of anger that toppled Tunisian President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali. See how these uprising progressed.

In Cairo's sandy exurb of Sixth of October City, the law-enforcement void has pushed knife- and club-wielding youths—in many cases, the same ones who burned police stations and attacked officers the day before—onto the streets to do amateur police work.

"The people had lost all the trust in the police," said Mohammed Mamdouh Fouad, 22 years old, who, by early Sunday afternoon, had been patrolling for 30 straight hours. "They've been protecting the 'major thief' for 30 years, so we don't trust them anymore."

"Those who protect also rob," he added, invoking an Arab saying about police.

Mr. Fouad, who runs a cosmetics and accessories business while studying for his business degree, carries a traditional Upper Egyptian weapon called al shuma: a wooden rod, covered in leather and studded with small silver spikes.

Over the weekend, he and his friends caught the driver of a vehicle after he tried to break through an unofficial traffic checkpoint. The neighborhood watch handed the man over to the military police, who now manage and occupy the neighborhood police station.

Mr. Fouad's work is made more complicated by a recent, terrifying event: A prison breakout reported at the Fayyoum Prison about 55 miles away has frayed residents' nerves. No one knows for sure how prisoners from at least two jails across the country managed to gain their freedom. Many believe the regime released dangerous convicts into the streets to frighten protesters and spread violence.

In the Al Fardous Compound, a sprawling barracks for police officers and their families on the dusty outskirts of Sixth of October City, worries about the fugitives had reached a fever pitch. Policemen are concerned that convicts will cross the desert to exact vengeance on them and their families.

To protect themselves, they formed their own improvised, off-duty security units.

Just past the compound's entrance, informally decommissioned police officers sat on plastic chairs smoking cigarettes, drinking tea and brandishing assault rifles, handguns and improvised weapons. An army tank idled down the street.

"There is no danger from these prisoners," said one confident officer, who gave his name as Mohammed Abdullah. "Everything is under control. All of these problems will be over with this in two days."

The civilian-clothed policemen insist that they remain on duty, adding that the military is backing them up. But Ahmed Rafaat, a former police officer who also lives in the compound, said policemen had orders not to work.

In the background, a fellow police officer shouted an ominous command through the loudspeaker of a nearby mosque: "Everyone who owns a firearm please go to the front gate to protect the compound." 