The Democrats who ran Washington for the past two years got the federal government deeply involved in the U.S. economy—restructuring car companies, rewriting the rules on health care and finance, and attacking the status quo in the energy industry.

Now, the Republican-controlled House will try to put the brakes on the growth of federal power—and where possible, reverse course. 

Republican leaders plan to push for repeal of President Barack Obama's health-care legislation, seek to slow new rules for Wall Street and the banking industry, and put the administration's efforts to curb global warming in the deep freeze. 

Mr. Obama and Senate Democrats will likely try to block these efforts, potentially creating more of the regulatory uncertainty business leaders have complained about during the past two years.

Divided government will also put more pressure on business groups to choose sides. Early in Mr. Obama's term, some big industry lobbying groups worked with the Democratic administration and Congress, calculating that was better than having new rules written without their involvement. Now, with Republicans regaining power, some business groups are hiring Republicans as top lobbyists and taking public postures more critical of the administration.

But business groups and the Obama administration still share some goals. Mr. Obama's effort to win ratification in this Congressional session of a free-trade deal with South Korea has broad business support. 

Republican plans to attack the administration's regulatory policies and slash spending could also hurt certain businesses. If Republicans succeed in stopping Mr. Obama's greenhouse-gas regulations, for example, businesses that profit from selling wind turbines or pollution-control technology could suffer. Slashing federal spending, for instance, could mean the end of subsidies that sustain certain industries, such as the production of corn ethanol for vehicle fuels.

Here are some significant business policy issues the new Congress will address.



See the average age of the House of Representatives and the Senate, from 1949 to 2011.

Take a look at Republican lawmakers who are taking the reins of key House committees.

House Republicans want to scale back some elements of the expansive Dodd-Frank financial overhaul. But a major rollback of new banking and Wall Street regulations faces long odds.

Alabama Rep. Spencer Bachus, the new chairman of the House Financial Services Committee, will lead the charge for the GOP. He and other House Republicans have the power to call hearings and launch probes to question the hundreds of rules that regulators will write to put the new laws into effect. Republican leaders say they will seek to repeal all "job-killing" regulations.

This could influence how rules are written. But Sen. Tim Johnson, the Democratic chairman of the Senate Banking Committee, has said he didn't see sweeping changes as necessary, and President Barack Obama could still veto any legislative attempts at repeal.

 Key Players: House Financial Services Committee Chairman Spencer Bachus (R., Ala.); Senate Banking Committee Chairman Tim Johnson (D., S.D.).

 Flash Point: Republicans could try to neuter Dodd-Frank by denying funds for regulatory agencies to carry out new responsibilities under the law. 

 Likely Outcome: Gridlock, with the possibility of deal-making on the margins. One scenario is that Republicans get a more business-friendly nominee to lead the new Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, and Democrats get some additional funding for Wall Street regulators.

—Victoria McGrane



Rising oil prices and the Obama administration's determination to curb greenhouse-gas emissions through federal action could produce a combustible mix in the new Congress.

Rep. Fred Upton (R., Mich.), the new head of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, has said he wanted to stop the administration from moving ahead this year on plans to regulate carbon-dioxide emissions from utilities and other large emitters. 

In the Senate, Democrats from states dependent on coal and oil also are likely to assert themselves. Sen. Jay Rockefeller (D., W.Va.) has called for legislation prohibiting the Environmental Protection Agency for two years from regulating greenhouse gases from power plants, factories and other stationary sources.

The Obama administration's curbs on offshore oil drilling will be a target for the new chairman of the House Natural Resources Committee, Rep. Doc Hastings (R., Wash.). Mr. Hastings has criticized the administration for not allowing offshore oil drilling in the eastern Gulf of Mexico and off the Atlantic Coast. 

 Key Players: House Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman Fred Upton (R., Mich.); Sen. Jay Rockefeller (D., W.Va.); EPA Administrator Lisa Jackson.

 Flash Points: Republicans could try to cut funding for greenhouse-gas regulation from the EPA budget. Gas prices could reach $4 a gallon, potentially boosting offshore drilling and renewable energy. 

 Risk for Business: Continued uncertainty over the future of U.S energy policy, slowing billions of dollars of potential investment. 

—Stephen Power



The next round in the fight to shape the future of federal health-care policy officially begins Jan. 12, when House Republicans say they will vote on repealing the Obama health-care law. 

Any legislative repeal will almost certainly die in the Senate, or on President Barack Obama's desk. So the real action will come as House Republicans try to choke off the funding that federal agencies need to put the Affordable Care Act's myriad provisions into effect. 

Among the top targets are the Internal Revenue Service's funding to enforce the requirement that most Americans carry health insurance, the law's Medicaid expansion and money for a new panel that suggests cuts to Medicare spending. 

For health insurers, drug makers and other players in the health-care industry, the wrangling could mean a bumpier process of writing rules that will clarify their new obligations as provisions of the law start kicking in. Meanwhile, Congress and industry lobbyists will be keeping an eye on the progress of court challenges to key elements of the bill. 

 Key Player: Rep. Hal Rogers (R., Ky.), incoming chairman of the House Appropriations Committee. 

 Flash Point: New long-term-care insurance program, which even some Democrats view as a potential budget drain. 

 Likely Outcome: Most of the law stays intact, leaving businesses to cope with both new requirements and political and legal uncertainty until at least 2012.

—Janet Adamy



Republicans and Democrats agree the corporate-tax system needs an overhaul. But producing a deal that can pass a divided Congress is likely to prove more difficult than the deal the two parties struck late last year to extend expiring Bush-era breaks for individuals.

Republicans, along with many corporate leaders, argue that U.S. corporate tax rates should be much lower—to more closely match the tax regimes in other countries. The trade-off could be eliminating some targeted tax breaks that benefit specific industries.

President Obama has suggested lately that he would be open to a proposal that cut corporate-tax rates, closed loopholes and raised the same revenue as the current system. But for most of his first two years in office, Mr. Obama called for raising more than $100 billion of new revenue from multinationals by boosting taxes on overseas income—a proposal businesses strongly oppose. 

It's also possible some businesses could conclude their targeted breaks are more valuable than a broad rate cut. 

 Key Players: Rep. Dave Camp (R., Mich.), chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee; Sen. Max Baucus (D., Mont.), chairman of the Senate Finance Committee. 

 Flash Point:If Mr. Obama pushes an overhaul in his State of the Union address, the issue could move to Congress's front burner. If not, it is likely to become another talking point for the 2012 election cycle. 

 Likely Outcome: The corporate tax debate stretches into 2012, becoming a big issue in the presidential race.

—John D. McKinnon



The 112th Congress will test whether the U.S. can move ahead with new trade deals after a long dormant spell.

President Barack Obama is expected to send a South Korea free-trade agreement to Congress in January, beginning a months-long ratification process. The South Korea pact, negotiated in 2007 but derailed by House Democrats in 2008, was revived in December after Mr. Obama's trade negotiators persuaded South Korea to accept stronger protections for U.S. auto makers. 

That was a coup for Mr. Obama, who has said he wanted to double U.S. exports by 2015. The pact is supported by business groups, and offers an opportunity for Mr. Obama to collaborate with congressional Republicans, who have tended to support trade-opening deals.

Passage won't be a cakewalk. The deal is backed by the United Auto Workers union, but several others have said they opposed it, notably the AFL-CIO, the nation's biggest labor federation. 

 Key Players: AFL-CIO President Richard Trumka; House Speaker John Boehner (R., Ohio); U.S. Trade Representative Ron Kirk.

 Flash Points: Some in Congress want to bundle ratification of the South Korea pact with stalled trade deals with Colombia and Panama. Colombian government and business interests are pushing to seize the opportunity.

 Risk for Business: Free-trade skeptics in both parties in Congress unite to defeat the South Korea accord, derailing business's hopes for more trade-opening deals. 

—Elizabeth Williamson



The new Republican House leadership has painted a target on the backs of mortgage giants Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, setting up a struggle over the direction of the nation's troubled housing industry.

Rep. Spencer Bachus (R., Ala.), the new head of the House Financial Services Committee, says it is time to address the fate of the firms, which have had losses of $134 billion since being taken over by the federal government in September 2008. The White House is set to issue its proposals to Congress this month.

Getting rid of Fannie and Freddie—which some House Republicans support—wouldn't be easy. The firms guarantee half of the $10.6 trillion of U.S. mortgages outstanding and together with federal agencies backstop more than nine in 10 new loans. Without government guarantees for home loans, consumers could face higher borrowing costs, which could further crimp demand for homes. The housing industry is likely to cmount an aggressive campaign to ourt Republican votes to continue some level of federal support for the mortgage market.

 Key Players: House Financial Services Committee Chairman Spencer Bachus (R., Ala.); Senate Banking Committee Chairman Tim Johnson (D., S.D.).

 Flash Point: Nomination of Joseph A. Smith Jr. to lead the Federal Housing Finance Agency, which oversees Fannie and Freddie, could become a hostage in the fight over their future.

 Likely Outcome: Lots of talk, little action. Lawmakers have suggested revamping the mortgage market in three to five years. Some analysts predict it will take 15 to 20. 

—Nick Timiraos