WELLINGTON—New Zealand's prime minister offered a glum outlook Wednesday for the economy, forecasting a 15 billion New Zealand dollar (US$11.1 billion) blow to gross domestic product from earthquakes that have destroyed large areas of the nation's second-largest city.

In response to the looming economic shock from the Christchurch quake, John Key said in an interview Wednesday that rate cuts by the central bank "would probably be our expectation."

"I don't think there is any question that it is helpful if there are lower interest rates to reflect what we are going through at the moment," he said.

The remarks will add to pressure on the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, which the market expects to cut rates by up to half a percentage point as early as next week. The prospect of lower interest rates helped send the New Zealand dollar to its lowest level of the year.

Mr. Key said the sequence of quakes that began last September could flatten growth. 

"If you go from June 2010 to June 2011 it is eminently possible New Zealand will have flat growth as a result of these two earthquakes," he said.

Also Wednesday, Zurich-based reinsurer Swiss Re said it estimates that the total loss from the recent New Zealand quake will amount to between $6 billion to $12 billion. Should the top end of this estimate emerge as the final figure, this would already amount to a third of the roughly $36 billion insured loss from catastrophes in all of 2010, it said. 

Based on preliminary estimates, Swiss Re expects its own claims for the earthquake in New Zealand, where insurance is common and easily available, to be around $800 million before tax. The loss is much higher than analysts expected. The company cautioned that the preliminary estimate may change as new information becomes available. 

The death toll from last Tuesday's 6.3-magnitude earthquake stands at 159, but international and local rescue teams continue to search for around 80 people, with many of the dead expected to be foreign nationals. A third of the city's residents are still without water and 13% without power, but the reopening of some businesses has begun to restore a measure of normality in outlying suburbs and surrounding towns.

  Richard Grace, the head of currency strategy at the  Commonwealth Bank of Australia
CBAUY


0.00
%




 said Mr. Key's forecast that the economy could be weakened for an extended period was alarming.

"New Zealand could face four quarters of recession," said Mr. Grace. "That's the new info here." CBA expects the central bank announce a 0.5-percentage-point cut to 2.5% in its official cash rate during a monetary policy statement scheduled for March 10.

The Reserve Bank has only once moved between meetings, when it made a 0.5-percentage-point cut shortly after Sept. 11, 2001. The aftermath and economic recovery from the quakes could still trigger a downgrade of New Zealand by ratings agencies, which have voiced concern over the country's foreign debt.

"It will almost certainly see us running a slightly higher deficit than we would have expected," said Mr. Key.

Moody's Investors Service said last week that it would "await a fuller assessment of the long-term effects on government finances." Moody's rates New Zealand with a top grading and a stable outlook.

"We have seen early indications from ratings agencies that they have held our rating and that is good," said Mr. Key. "The slightly worrying thing was that we took seriously their concerns that they would potentially downgrade New Zealand unless we addressed our net external liability position."

The quakes are a further reminder of New Zealand's vulnerability due to its location in a geologically active zone know as the Pacific "ring of fire."

 Write to  Rebecca Howard at rebecca.howard@dowjones.com 