PARIS—The International Civil Aviation Organization Monday said it wants to make the digital flight data and cockpit-voice recorders of commercial aircraft easier to find after an accident. 

The crash of an  Air France
AFLYY


0.43
%




 Airbus A330 into the Atlantic Ocean en route from Rio de Janeiro to Paris in June 2009 brought to light shortcomings in present-day methods of tracking aircraft over long expanses of ocean, and of recovering data and voice recorders when they fall into the sea. Searchers have only just discovered the wreck on the sea bed. 

The French aviation accident bureau said Sunday a remote submersible vehicle has brought up the plane's flight-data recorder. The BEA's technicians will examine the black box in the coming days to determine if any information can be retrieved that will allow it to determine the possible cause of the accident. 

Raymond Benjamin, secretary general of the ICAO, a United Nations body that is responsible for setting international standards for aviation safety, security and regulation, told a group of Paris-based journalists that he hopes to get new mandatory norms applied by the aviation industry within the next one to two years. 

The new standards will be "quite stringent" and will be applied to existing aircraft as well as to those that haven't yet been built, Mr. Benjamin said. 

Changes that can be implemented relatively quickly include making the radio beacons of the flight recorders last three times longer than the 30 days at present, and making them emit more powerful signals so as to be detectable up to nine kilometers away, instead of two kilometers away at present. Mr. Benjamin said the ICAO also wants to ensure that recorders can float in case of an aircraft falling into the sea, so as to locate the wreck rapidly. 

"On France's initiative, we're working to improve a system that, I must admit, isn't the best one," Mr. Benjamin said. 

Over the longer-term, the ICAO wants aircraft to be able to transmit data on their positions and other parameters permanently so that they're never completely out of contact with the ground, Mr. Benjamin's chief of staff,  Daniel Azema, said. That will probably involve transmitting data by satellite, as the bandwidth requirement will be so great for such large volumes of data, he said. 

Mr. Benjamin acknowledged that retrofitting upgraded equipment will imply significant costs for airlines. Airframe manufacturers will also have to bear the cost of installing new systems, he said. 

 Write to  David Pearson at david.pearson@dowjones.com 