 China reported a surprise trade deficit for February, its first in 11 months, as export growth slowed sharply and import growth remained strong in part because of rising prices for oil and other commodities. The country imported $7.3 billion more than it exported last month, compared with a trade surplus of $6.45 billion in January.  

 The U.S. trade deficit widened sharply in January to its highest level in seven months, amid surging oil prices. 

 European leaders meet Friday to debate a package to resolve the euro zone's debt crisis, but investors fear the deal will underwhelm due to political differences that have led Europe to scale down the measures' ambition.  

 The euro fell sharply after Moody's downgraded Spain's debt rating. It recovered some ground as the market responded to weak U.S. economic data. 

 The DJIA fell below 12000, before recovering somewhat as disappointing jobs news, concern about Europe's debt crisis and the rebellion in Libya discouraged investors. Asian stocks fell after China recorded a trade deficit.  

 Sony plans to combine its videogame and consumer-electronics businesses under Kazuo Hirai, making him a possible heir to CEO Howard Stringer.  

 Aluminum producer China Hongqiao plans to raise about $1 billion in a second effort at an IPO in Hong Kong.  

 Gome's expansion plans pose challenges for its profitability after the departure of the Chinese company's chairman.  

 Private-equity firm Advent is closing its office in Tokyo because of a lack of deal opportunities, becoming the latest fund to downsize or pull out of Japan.  

 Japan's Pension Fund Association needs to embrace risk to boost returns, its chief investment officer said.  

 Vietnam is cracking down on unauthorized trading in U.S. dollars in a bid to bolster the country's dwindling foreign reserves.  

 South Korea raised its benchmark interest rate to 3%, becoming the latest Asian nation to try to head off inflation.  

 Caesars Entertainment, eager to set up shop in parts of Asia where gambling isn't allowed, plans to lend its brand names to hotels that don't have casinos.  

 Galleon's Rajaratnam used a "corrupt network" of well-placed people to garner inside information he used to make millions of dollars, a prosecutor said in his first pitch to jurors in the case.  

 AOL is laying off 20% of its work force, eliminating 950 jobs in the U.S. and India as it struggles to resurrect its business.  

 Riversdale said Rio Tinto's bid for the company poses the least risk of supply delays and dilution of returns for key shareholders.  

 Hutchison Port lowered the top price it hopes to get in its IPO.  

 Gadhafi's government suffered a series of diplomatic setbacks, with France formally recognizing Libya's main opposition group, the U.S. saying it will hold talks with the rebels and European nations extending sanctions on the Libyan government and its banks.  

 Yemen President Saleh's proposal for a new constitution that would strengthen parliament was rejected by demonstrators.  

 A U.S.-led special forces team killed one of President Karzai's elderly cousins, in a night raid that aggravated the growing tensions between the Afghan leader and the U.S. over civilian deaths.  

 The Dalai Lama plans to formally step down as political leader of the India-based Tibetan government-in-exile in an effort to further democratize the Tibetan refugee community.  

 The U.S. scrambled to contain the damage to its relationship with Japan after a diplomat's alleged remarks about Okinawans caused a furor.  

Suspected Abu Sayyaf militants detonated a bomb near a school on a southern Philippine island, killing at least three people.