WARSAW—Poland's government is preparing its own report on the plane crash in western Russia that killed Poland's president and 95 others that is expected to dispute central findings of a probe into the accident by authorities in Moscow. 

The Moscow-based Interstate Aviation Committee, which oversees civil aviation in countries of the former Soviet Union, last week placed the blame for the April crash—which occurred near a fog-shrouded air field in Smolensk—squarely on the Poles.

Publication of the Russian report has led to the most visible rift between Poland and Russia since the historic rivals began mending fences in 2008 after years of heated disputes over political and economic issues.

Polish Interior Ministry officials say that the airport in Smolensk was unfit to handle any flights, especially in bad weather. The instrument-landing and air traffic-control technology there was obsolete and poorly maintained, while trees on the approach path to the runway were taller than permitted under safety rules.

In December, Poland's government, in comments submitted to the Russian authorities, also said that Russian air-traffic controllers gave misleading information to the Polish crew about their plane's position shortly before the crash. The Polish plane hit trees and then slammed into the ground short of the airport runway.

The Interstate Aviation Committee report said the Polish captain did nothing to abort the landing, despite the lack of visibility. The report said the crew feared President Lech Kaczynski would "get mad" if his delegation didn't land in time for a ceremony commemorating the Stalin-ordered massacre of Polish soldiers at Katyn.

The committee also said Poland's air force commander entered the plane's cockpit after drinking alcohol aboard and pressured the crew to land.

Poland's Interior Ministry, however, says the plane's captain can be heard on the cockpit voice recording deciding to abort the landing before Russian controllers reacted to the plane's dangerously low altitude. It also says there is no evidence the crew was under pressure to land or that the air force commander was intoxicated.

The Interstate Aviation Committee declined to comment Monday. Responding to earlier Polish criticism of the report, Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said last week he hoped nobody would "try to make political capital out of this tragedy."

But the Russian findings have roiled Polish domestic politics. Supporters of the late president and his surviving twin brother, Jaroslaw Kaczynski, head of the Law and Justice party, had already opposed efforts by the government of Prime Minister Donald Tusk to strengthen ties with Moscow.

Mr. Tusk represents the rival Civic Platform party, whose candidate Bronislaw Komorowski defeated Jaroslaw Kaczynski in a presidential election last year after President Kaczynski's death.

Support for the Kaczynskis' party ahead of a general election later this year has increased in the wake of the Russian crash report, a public-opinion survey for Polish Radio found.

—Richard Boudreaux in Moscow contributed to this article.