LONDON—Escalating anti-regime protests in Egypt are increasing perceptions of political risk in the region, pressuring currencies and driving up the cost of insuring government debt against default. 

Fitch Ratings on Friday revised the outlook on Egypt's credit rating to negative from stable. The ratings agency said the country's double-B-plus rating could face a downgrade if there is a continuation or intensification of the political unrest, which has seriously threatened economic and financial performance as well as the economic-reform process. 

"The outlook revision reflects the recent upsurge in political protests and the uncertainty this adds to the political and economic outlook ahead of September's elections," said  Richard Fox, head of Middle East and Africa sovereign ratings at Fitch. 

Foreign banks have total exposure of $44 billion as of the end of September, according to the Bank for International Settlements. European banks lead the league tables, with French institutions accounting for the largest share. 

The cost to investors of Egyptian debt insurance has gone up 25% this week, adding pressure on debt issued by other governments in the region as investors worry about the spread of political instability. 

Street protests against the 30-year rule of President  Hosni Mubarak come hard on the heels of riots by pro-democracy activists in Tunisia, who forced their own autocratic leader,  Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, out of office. 

Egypt's five-year credit default swap spread rose Friday to 410 basis points, 22 basis points wider than Thursday's closing level and up from 312 basis points at the end of trade last Friday, according to data-provider Markit. 

A rise of one basis point in the cost of five-year CDS equates to a $1,000 rise in the annual cost of protecting $10 million of debt for five years. CDS, a measure of default risk, are derivatives that function like a default insurance contract for debt. If a borrower defaults, sellers compensate buyers. 

CDS don't trade on all sovereign debt in the region, but those that do saw similar moves Friday. Morocco, Israel, Qatar and Saudi Arabia all traded wider. 

Each country has its own idiosyncratic story, but investors' perceptions of North Africa are shifting as the political instability continues. 

"Uncertainty is increasingly breeding extreme caution from investors, holding back, at least in the short term, foreign direct investment and portfolio flows, with non-negligible effects on growth and the financing of large current account deficits, notably in Egypt," said analysts at Barclays Capital. 

"This naturally weighs on the credit profiles of some of the countries in the region," the analysts added. 

Morocco's CDS spread was 12 basis points wider on the day at 192 basis points, compared with 156 basis points last Friday, according to Markit. Israel's was 12 basis points wider at 137 basis points, compared with 115 basis points last Friday. 

The region is undergoing "a repricing of political risk," one strategist said. After a long period of calm, reflected by relatively tight CDS spreads, these levels have ratcheted up in line with the spreading volatility. 

The Egyptian CDS spread was around 240 basis points before the anti-government riots in Tunisia that toppled the government there Jan. 14. 

While the CDS on Saudi Arabia barely trades, its pricing has been pushed up by around 20 basis points since last Friday to sit at 95 basis points. 

In currency trading, the Egyptian pound is under selling pressure, and the forwards market in the Saudi Arabian riyal shows that traders are positioning for a fall in that currency over the next three months. 

The Turkish lira and Israeli shekel are also falling, in part because of the blow to investor sentiment toward the region. 

"The unrest is certainly having a bit of an impact on sentiment on other currencies in the region," said Nigel Rendell, emerging markets currency strategist at RBC Capital Markets. 

The Saudi Arabian riyal is a pegged currency and doesn't move from SAR3.75 against the dollar. But the forwards market for the riyal has been under highly unusual pressure for the past two days, signaling that investors are positioning themselves for a future drop in the currency. 

"That sends off alarm bells," said  Hisham Al Kurdi, chief currencies dealer in the region for BNP Paribas in Manama, Bahrain. 

European banks had total exposure of $37.5 billion as of last September, according to the Bank of International Settlements in Basel. The sums include claims on Egyptian banks, the public sector, businesses and households. 

According to the BIS, French banks' exposure was relatively large at $17.1 billion at the end of Sep. 2010; German banks' claims on Egypt stood at $1.1 billion; Italian banks' exposure was $6.2 billion, while UK banks' exposure was $10.6 billion. 

The exposure of U.S. banks was relatively low at $5.1 billion, according to the BIS. Japanese banks were listed as having exposure of less than $1 billion. 

The BIS said total international exposure may be even larger because total foreign claims don't include exposure to derivatives contracts, guarantees and credit lines. 

