In another sign that the city's economic recovery is flourishing, demand for the city's private schools increased by nearly 10% this year, according to new data to be released Monday. 

The number of parents willing to spend upwards of $30,000 a year for elite private schools increased sharply last year, as the number of children who took the admission tests jumped to 4,668, according the Educational Records Bureau, which administers the tests. 

The last time private schools saw this kind of increase was between 2006 and 2007, when the city's real-estate market was in a frenzy, the stock market was at an all-time high and the number of students taking the admissions tests shot up by 12%. When the financial crisis hit in 2008, test takers dipped by nearly 2%; they fell by 5% in 2009. 

"We had a banner year in 2007 with a surge in test takers, but where we are now even surpasses that jump," ERB's executive director,  Antoinette DeLuca, said. 

The sharp increase in test takers coincides with pre-school admissions directors' worries that fewer spots were available in the schools this year after siblings and legacy applicants were factored in, as well as parents' complaints that some children had been shut out unfairly from some schools. 

"It's madness," said M.  Starita Boyce Ansari, a Manhattan philanthropy adviser whose 3-year-old son will attend prekindergarten at the Metropolitan Montessori School next fall. "These are still babies, they should be able to enjoy their lives instead of being subjected to all this pressure at age 4." 

The Independent School Admission Association of Greater New York said some private schools gave out fewer applications this year than in years past or didn't dip into their waitlists. 

"The numbers speak for themselves," said  Patricia Hayot, a spokeswoman for the group and head of school at the Chapin School. "Schools understand parents are going through a challenging time, but things don't always go exactly as planned and parents do have options to choose something else or reapply next year." 

Part of the increased competition is driven by the city's baby boom: The number of children ages 3 to 6 attending school in New York City rose by 48% between 1990 and 2008, to 320,638 children, according to an analysis of Census data by the Center for Urban Research at City University of New York's Graduate Center. 

Meanwhile, the number of spots at the city's top private schools has been stagnant. 

"Manhattan families are getting bigger as parents choose to raise their kids in the city, so there are fewer places in private schools for new families," said  Emily Glickman, president of Abacus Guide Educational Consulting. 

The application process ended last month, when admissions letters were sent out to families and parents signed contracts with accepting schools. Many parents who were unhappy with their results or who were shut out of all the schools they applied to turned to a number of new private schools that have opened in New York over the past few years. 

"Since admissions decisions went out, we've been getting numerous phone calls from desperate families trying to get their kids in, but I can't help them either because we're not accepting any more students for kindergarten this year," says  Kristin Geiger, admissions director at the British International School of New York, which opened in 2006. 

The World Class Learning Academy, which will open in New York in September, says its rolling admissions system has attracted the attention of preschools that report having up to 10 kids shut out of other private schools. 

"These parents are calling their preschools to say 'please help me' and the feeder schools are referring them to us," said the school's admissions director,  Sarah Bottoms. 

Other parents will now turn to public school gifted-and-talented programs, for which applications are due in May. Last year, 33% more children than the year before qualified for the citywide gifted-and-talented program. This year, consultants expect the numbers to be even higher.

"The real growth now is in the number of people applying to gifted-and-talented programs who would have never tried that route before," said  Suzanne Rheault, CEO of test-prep company Aristotle Circle. 

 Write to  Shelly Banjo at shelly.banjo@wsj.com 