 The Oscar-nominated director talks to The Wall Street Journal Europe about how he starts his weekend. 

Trân Anh Hùng, who came to fame with his 1993 movie "The Scent of Green Papaya," says he spends his free time looking for books to adapt to the big screen. His latest film project, "Norwegian Wood," premiered at the Pan-Asia Film Festival in London Wednesday and opens throughout the U.K. March 11; it has already opened in several European countries.

"I have three projects on the go," says the 48-year-old French-Vietnamese director, who lives in Paris. "I am hoping that I will be able to do one of them. But I don't want to talk about them because I don't want to ruin it. I spend my time drinking tea waiting for the financing to come."

Mr. Hùng says he doesn't have a typical weekend. "I don't have any time off because I really live with the feeling of being very tense, every minute of my life. I try to find a book or something to adapt." 

  What is your weekend like?  

I work almost all the time. The only thing that can stop me is my children when they are on vacation...And we would go somewhere and spend some time together. 

  Where would you take them?  

Brittany. We like to spend our time in Dinard and Saint-Malo. We spend our time walking on the beach and try to catch little fish or crabs. It is really sunny and we have good air there. 

  Where do you stay in Brittany?  

We rent an apartment by the beach. You can see the tide. It's relaxing for me. We visit different places. We take a boat and go to an island to see a church or something on the island or visit a garden. The island of Batz has very good potatoes. So we go there and buy some and it's all organic. 

  Where do you eat out?  

We eat local food. We eat the crêpes [and] also go fishing and bring back some fish that we can cook. We really enjoy it. My wife is a great cook. We eat a lot of organic food so we are a little bit picky about food in restaurants, so everywhere we go we try to find a place where they sell organic produce that we can buy and cook ourselves.

  That must keep you healthy.  

I think so. We are quite a fragile family I would say. I have a feeling that we are not as tough as many people that we know. But it's healthy and light.

  What was the last meal you cooked with your family?  

I bought the head of a hake at the organic market in Boulevard Raspail in Paris. We cooked it with onions and aromatic herbs. It's a French dish: you take all the meat out of the head and then you make a béchamel sauce and then you mix them together and you cover it with Gruyère cheese. Then you put it in the oven and you eat it with rice. The rice you have to cook in a certain way, with olive oil and onion. 

 Surely, you must find time to relax. 

There is one thing I really enjoy: to grab my bicycle and ride it for an hour or two in Paris. I recently was interested in a new kind of bike with small wheels. It is only 20 inches (50.8 centimeters) long and it is really light, weighing less than 10 kilos. It's a really enjoyable ride around Paris. Sometimes I go for a jog in the city. There is a garden by Place des Vosges near where I live. It's just a square with dirt, so it is better for the knees to run on that kind of surface. 

  Do you listen to music when you run?  

No. I am not someone who listens to music all the time. I listen to music carefully, when I feel the need. I don't even have an iPod.

  What else do you do in Paris?  

I am a big tea drinker because I am allergic to alcohol. I love getting my tea from Maison des Trois Thés. It is run by a lady who is really good at getting the best teas. She's a master. She has the ability to find the very good tea from the best gardens in Vietnam.

  Do you visit Vietnam?  

We go in the summer and we always stay in Hanoi—my favorite city in the country. The atmosphere, the people...their accent is very different. People in Hanoi are not quite as friendly as in other parts of Vietnam and I prefer that they are a little bit cold, so you can keep some distance. That way you don't feel that everybody will talk to you all the time. 

 Write to  Javier Espinoza at javier.espinoza@wsj.com 