CAIRO—U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates gently prodded Egypt's interim leaders not to rush to new elections, saying the new political movements that helped push longtime President Hosni Mubarak from power in February need time to develop into organized political parties.

Mr. Gates faced a balancing act during his two-day visit to Egypt, his first since massive street protests forced Mr. Mubarak to step down. Mr. Gates said his aim was to reaffirm Washington's commitment to Egypt's peaceful transition to democracy. But Washington is worried that early elections will benefit the Muslim Brotherhood, a party long shunned by the U.S. because of its Islamist leanings. 

Any public airing of U.S. concerns about the timeline for holding elections risks being seen in Egypt as interference in the country's internal affairs.

"I'm absolutely not going to second-guess either the Supreme Council or the interim government," Mr. Gates said of Egyptian leaders after talks in Cairo with the country's interim prime minister, Essam Sharaf.

  Protesters Set Egypt's Interior Ministry Ablaze  

For decades, Mr. Mubarak's National Democratic Party was Egypt's all-powerful political force. The Brotherhood, though officially banned, also developed a deep national structure over the decades. Analysts and organizers of new parties say these two groups are currently uniquely positioned to rally supporters across the country.

"I would simply say that we believe it is important to allow those new elements that have become active in Egyptian politics, some of them for the first time, to have the time to develop political parties and to develop organization and structure," Mr. Gates told reporters, so that "they can play the same kind of leading role in Egypt in the future that they played in bringing about this change in the first place."

Mr. Gates, who will meet on Thursday with the leader of the military, Field Marshal Hussein Tantawi, didn't say how long he thought these "new elements of civil society" would need to become effective political parties.

A senior defense official traveling with Mr. Gates said the U.S. was trying to explain to Egyptian leaders the benefits of allowing nascent political movements to get organized, citing the experiences of other countries emerging from long dictatorships.

"Certainly in Egypt, a longer period of time would probably help secular groups form coalitions and political parties and compete," the senior defense official said.

Egypt has been preparing for elections in the next four to six months, official said.

"Whether four or six months is enough time or too little time, I don't know. Are some of these groups pushing for a longer time period? For sure," the senior defense official said.

The official made clear Washington didn't want to be seen as interfering.

"I think everybody understands that we're not in the business of telling them what to do... Where [the Egyptian government and parties] ask for help, we'll offer it," the senior defense official said. "We all have to be conscious that we don't want to be seen as dictating or driving events because we're not. So we're not looking to do any of this in a kind of an overly domineering way."

The U.S. currently believes that the Muslim Brotherhood would muster between 10 and 30 percent of the popular vote if elections were held today. Israeli officials have told their U.S. counterparts that they believe the party could win 40 to 50 percent of the vote. 