 Bozeman, Mont. 

The ice was steep, but I didn't think twice about heading up the frozen cascade. The swings were harder than I expected. Once, twice, three times—still no stick. Four swings to securely place an ice tool quickly takes its toll on your forearms. Smashing away with one arm, I could feel the other arm weakening, the one holding the firmly planted tool—the only thing between me and gravity's awful tug. 

I took my time, stopped, dropped the fatigued arm, shaking it back to life. I tried to climb as far between placing ice screws as I could, dreading the effort needed to twist one into place and clip the rope to it—even as I dreaded the growing distance above each piece of protection. 

Somehow I straddled the knife edge between caution and confidence for almost 100 feet. I was climbing a frozen waterfall in Hyalite Canyon called Omega, rated Water Ice 5 (on a scale where 6 is generally considered the hardest thing a sane person will try to get up).

Two or three swings from the top, I was pretty sure I had the climb in the bag. Then the hard ice became more difficult. Just before the angle on the column eased back, the sun exposure had leached the ice into the consistency of a dense snow cone: chunks of aerated ice flew like shrapnel, but no matter how hard I bashed my picks, I couldn't get anything better than a wobbly placement. 

For the first time in my ice-climbing career, I really doubted that I could hold onto my tools much longer. Then I couldn't. Suddenly I was falling—the last thing you want to do holding more sharp points than a medieval warrior. A crampon spike snagged the ice and flipped me upside down. 

The rope arrested my fall (what climbers call a whipper) and I was pleasantly surprised to find that I hadn't broken or punctured anything. Except for my psyche, that is. Years of ice climbing had taught me how to stay in control and now—in an instant—that sense of hard-earned mastery seemed shattered. 

I lowered to the ground and my friend Seth finished the climb. I followed with the security of a rope above me, but the whole time something was gnawing at my innards. 

A couple of days later I started up another frozen column. It didn't take long to feel the familiar ache in my arms, but there was a new sensation as well: a tremulous fear. Much of the appeal of climbing lies in walking up to the edge of your abilities while not actually stepping over. But after my whip, I didn't trust my own judgment anymore. 

I climbed down from the ice, borrowed Seth's tools, thinking maybe they were sharper than mine. I went back up the ice, but still didn't feel any more confident. I came down for good. 

"That was a mess," Seth said.

I could only agree. We were supposed to be training for a big alpine trip. Climbing in the mountains is serious business. Mistakes carry consequences—for yourself and your partner. At night I lay awake wondering if I should just go back to gym climbing or find a more sensible sport, such as table tennis. 

I kept my doubts to myself, even as Seth and I drove into Yellowstone National Park for a backcountry route. Snow was piled high against the road. There were few other cars, but we soon found ourselves stuck in traffic: A bison herd was meandering up the road in no hurry to let us pass. Deeper into the park we dropped into the Lamar Valley, where we spotted six wolves on the prowl, majestic creatures whose purposeful, confident movement across the landscape I envied.

We put skins on our skis and spent two hours approaching a deep cleft in a cliff where a fat river of blue ice poured down into a monumental flow. The 200-foot waterfall is called the Hydromonster, featured on the cover of Joe Josephson's "Winter Dance" climbing guide. It's one of the sexiest pictures of ice I've ever seen. A week earlier I would have been completely psyched to lead the climb. Now I was nervous, uncertain and self-doubting. 

I had just enough rope to get to the top—although I wasn't sure when I left the ground if I had the mental stamina to go that far. I figured I could always stop midway on a small ledge if I felt shaky and break the route into two pitches. 

The ice was steep from the start. I moved conservatively, focusing intensely on each swing, breathing slowly but deeply, trying to make the climb what yogis call a moving meditation. Halfway up I found myself a good rest position, one foot on the ice, the other braced against the rock wall. I could drop both arms and relax a bit. 

I was down to two ice screws. It was either time to build an anchor or commit myself to finishing the route—although the dwindling supply of screws meant that any fall would be a long one. 

I kept going. The angle grew more forgiving. But when I looked down, the last screw was so far below that I couldn't see it, the rope disappearing into the void. Spindrift began blowing. My partner was out of sight and shouting range. I felt totally alone. Yet despite the fact that I was sealed up in Gore-tex almost like an astronaut, scaling a column of frozen water as tall as a 25-story building, I didn't feel out of place.

The ice ended. I dug my way through a snowdrift to reach a tree, barely able to pull the last bit of rope up to clip myself to the anchor. Seth came up and we rapped back to our skis and cut fresh tracks through deep powder all the way to the car. 

Once again, I couldn't stop thinking about our future trip. But now I was actually looking forward to it. 

 Mr. Ybarra is the Journal's extreme sports correspondent. 