While the world's attention on Friday focused largely on the royal wedding and the party after it at Buckingham Palace, most people in the U.K. celebrated the nuptials in the time-honored British tradition of holding street parties. 

In neighborhoods as diverse as tony St. John's Wood in the northwest of London and Hackney in the East End, as well as many places throughout England and Wales, Queen Elizabeth's subjects celebrated the marriage of her grandson by throwing the English equivalent of an American block party. While in some cases the parties were genuine expressions of support for the Royal matrimony, in others they were simply an excuse to party, or even disparage the monarchy. 

Across England and Wales there were over 5,500 road closure requests for street parties, according to the Local Government Association. 

There was "a final surge of applications" in recent days, the LGA said. 

In a reflection of the outburst of partying, Sainsbury's had nearly sold out of bunting with 300 miles worth sold, a spokesperson for the U.K. supermarket chain said Friday afternoon. Home-baking sales were up 80% compared with the same period last year, while cooking ingredients were up 125%. 

In Saint John's Wood, home to many American ex-patriots and the Abbey Road studios made famous by the Beatles, one street was decked out with Union Jack flags and pictures of the British Royals in anticipation of an afternoon street party. According to a flyer, it would feature a dog parade, potato races and disco dancing. There were plans to sing the patriotic song "Land of Hope and Glory" and the national anthem, "God Save the Queen". 

Even Hackney, one of the capital's poorest boroughs, got into the spirit. Hundreds of revellers set up an elaborate street party on Wilton Way, and oohed and ahhed around television sets with barely less visible enthusiasm than the crowds surrounding Westminster Abbey and Buckingham Palace.

According to  Corinna Pyke, an economic-development consultant who co-organized the street party, the affair was about community bonding more than anything else. "The wedding is an excuse. It's really just about having a street party and being allowed to do it."

As Prince William and his bride kissed on the balcony of Buckingham Palace, a few hundred people gathered a few miles away in central London for a "Not The Royal Wedding Street Party." Organized by the antimonarchist Republic campaigning group, it had all the trappings of a typical American-style block party—food, music, impromptu dancing and face painting—plus a more serious political message.

"We're the antidote to the royal wedding," said  Graham Smith, executive officer of the group, which wants do away with the power of the British crown and "their sense of privilege."

Volunteers manned a half-dozen tables, handing out leaflets, magazines and buttons to spread the group's message, while a pair of English bobbies—police officers—kept a wary eye on the proceedings. 

"People should have an opportunity to elect their head of state and not be ruled by someone who comes down from the mists of time," argued  John Kennedy, a retired history teacher and now a director of Republic. Mr. Kennedy was selling a booklet of pro-republican essays by  Thomas Paine and others. But at £4 ($6.66) apiece, there weren't many takers. "Everything costs money, I'm afraid," he said.

  Richard Rose, a 30-year-old student visiting from the town of Southampton, was, for no apparent reason, dressed in a deep-red papal gown. He said he was an antimonarchist because the British royal family "wastes loads and loads of money on a wedding when we've got a huge deficit." But he admitted to being disappointed by the street party. "I was expecting to see a stage and hear a passionate speech," he said. "Instead, there's just one bloke with a microphone wandering around."

Several folk seized the opportunity to make a pitch for their own causes. A handful of antimonarchists from Sweden, Denmark, Belgium, Norway and the Netherlands were in attendance, seeking a "monarchy-free Europe."  David Shepherd, dressed in a dusty top hat and untucked shirt, posed for photographs while holding a copy of "Morning Star," a London-based socialist newspaper. The headline, which related to the wedding, was: "A Right Royal Rip Off."

One vendor was hawking personalized certificates that allowed the purchaser to "buy an honour" or "make up your own title," for Pds. 2 each.  Donnachadh McCarthy, an Irishman, carried a basic cardboard sign that said: "We love the queen. Let's vote for him." And one lady wandered around with a queen's mask stamped with the legend: "Best Before Circa 1700."

For several hours, amid the smoke from grilled sausages and impromptu barbecues, the supporters of the Republic group tried gamely—and benignly—to get their message across. Said Mr. Kennedy: "All we want is a less privileged society."

 Write to  Dana Cimilluca at dana.cimilluca@wsj.com, Gautam Naik at gautam.naik@wsj.com and Alistair MacDonald at alistair.macdonald@wsj.com 