  Daniel Mudd, the former chief executive of Fannie Mae, said he has received a Wells notice from the Securities and Exchange Commission, the latest clue that federal investigators have expanded their years-long probe into the troubled mortgage finance giant.

Mr. Mudd, now the head of  Fortress Investment Group LLC, said in a statement provided to Bloomberg News that he had received the formal notification from the SEC that it plans to pursue civil claims against him. The development was first reported by Bloomberg News.

Mr. Mudd took the helm of Fannie in 2004 in the midst of an accounting scandal and oversaw its financial-reporting restatement with the SEC. He was sacked by the government when it took control of the mortgage firm in 2008 and agreed to inject unlimited sums as ballooning loan losses wiped away thin capital reserves. In August 2009, he became CEO of Fortress, the New York-based hedge fund.

A Wells notice indicates that the SEC staff is preparing to recommend civil enforcement actions and gives individuals the opportunity to persuade regulators against such an action. 

Mr. Mudd plans to submit a written response, he said in the statement provided to Bloomberg. The disclosures under investigation by the SEC were "accurate and complete," had been previewed by federal regulators and "have been issued in the same form since the company went into government conservatorship," the statement said. Mr. Mudd declined to elaborate.

The notification is the latest clue that the SEC is deepening its investigation into Fannie Mae and its sibling, Freddie Mac. Both companies have previously disclosed that federal prosecutors and the SEC were conducting investigations into potential violations of federal securities laws.

Mr. Mudd is the highest-ranking official to have disclosed receiving such scrutiny. Last month, the SEC filed a similar notification to one current Freddie Mac executive and at least one former Freddie Mac executive related to unspecified "disclosure matters."

  Donald J. Bisenius, a 19-year veteran of Freddie who currently serves as the executive vice president in charge of the firm's single-family credit guarantee business, will leave Freddie on April 1. Anthony "Buddy" Piszel served as Freddie Mac's chief financial officer until the government takeover in 2008, and he resigned a similar position at  CoreLogic Inc. last month.

 Write to  Nick Timiraos at nick.timiraos@wsj.com 