To Byron Janis, the mind is stronger than the hand. 

The pianist, who continued performing for years after he developed psoriatic arthritis in both bands and wrists, will Monday announce an alignment with the Arthritis Foundation, where he will donate 25% of the proceeds from the sale of his new documentary, book and soon-to-be-released recording, to the foundation.

"All the doctors said I wouldn't play again but I'm a great believer in mind over matter," says Mr. Janis, who developed arthritis in 1973. "While this disease mostly doesn't kill you, it can destroy your life." 

Mr. Janis began playing piano at age 4 and as a child left his home in Pennsylvania to study music in New York. Later, he studied at the Juilliard School and in 1960, was chosen as the first American to be sent to the Soviet Union to perform the piano in a cultural exchange. 

In 1984, he revealed he had been playing with arthritis at a state dinner at the White House with Ronald and Nancy Reagan. 

"For years nobody knew the pain I was playing through," Mr. Janis says. 

Despite winning a number of awards, he sunk into a depression that he says wasn't broken until his wife, Maria, asked him to compose the music for a documentary on her father, actor Gary Cooper. 

"I realized I had another way to stay connected to music and I found my life again," he says. 

It took him six months to move past his pain and agree to serve as a spokesman for the Arthritis Foundation. 

Now 82, he wants to share his story with the millions suffering with the disease and direct a chunk of the proceeds from his work toward additional research. 

"I hope some of them will see that I am like them, suffering with this disease," he says. "But I want to tell them that if you find your passion, you've got to stay with it no matter what." 

Nearly 50 million people in America have some form of arthritis, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Resulting in costs of $128 billion annually, the disease is the most common cause of disability in the country, according to the CDC. 

With the aging U.S. population and the prevalence of obesity and other risk factors, the disease is becoming a growing public health problem, says Debra Neuman, chief external relations officer at the nonprofit Arthritis Foundation. 

The foundation has funded more than $380 million in research grants since it started in 1948. 

Typically it gives out $10 million to $15 million a year and uses the funds to leverage larger grants from the National Institutes of Health and the Department of Defense, Ms. Neuman says. 

 Write to  Shelly Banjo at shelly.banjo@wsj.com 