WASHINGTON—Japan has not requested any financial assistance from the International Monetary Fund and Tokyo has the resources it needs to handle the current crisis, a fund spokeswoman said Thursday. 

Caroline Atkinson said the government was correctly focusing on the highest priorities: humanitarian aid, resolving the potential nuclear catastrophe and building infrastructure back up as quickly as possible.

The comments come as Group of Seven largest economies plan to hold a teleconference later Thursday on the Japanese crisis to discuss both potential ways to help Tokyo and the impact on the global economy. 

A devastating 9.0-magnitude earthquake and ensuing tsunami ruined cities and villages in northern Japan on Friday. Japanese authorities raised the death toll Thursday to 5,457, with another 9,508 missing, though the numbers are expected to climb. 

An early estimate by National Australia Bank put the total damage cost as high as $200 billion. On Thursday, the Bank of Japan announced the provision of emergency funds for a fourth straight day, continuing its effort to calm concern about the disaster's impact on the economy.

Ms. Atkinson declined to comment on the strength of the yen—which hit historically strong levels against the dollar this week—or on whether the authorities should intervene in their exchange rate to soften the economic impact following the disaster. The fund is watching the longer-term trend, she said.

She said that while second-quarter growth in Japan would obviously be hit hard, and Japan's economic problems are likely to affect the region, it's difficult to determine the longer-term impacts. She added there's uncertainty about how long it may take to resolve the nuclear problem, restore power and basic infrastructure.

Although the 1995 Kobe earthquake didn't involve a nuclear crisis, Ms. Atkinson said that historically growth can rebound quickly and strongly given the reconstruction efforts. 

 Write to  Ian Talley at ian.talley@dowjones.com 