FRANKFURT—Annual consumer-price inflation in Germany, Europe's largest economy, was the highest in April since October 2008, driven primarily by energy-price increases, the Federal Statistics Office, or Destatis, said Wednesday, confirming its preliminary figures published April 27. 

Consumer prices rose 0.2% on a monthly basis in April, and increased 2.4% annually, according to final calculations, Destatis said. The figures were unchanged from the preliminary data.

Annual consumer-price inflation in Germany was last as high in October 2008, while a higher figure of 2.9% was reached in September 2008.

As seen in previous months, inflation in April was mainly driven by energy prices, which increased 10.5% compared with April 2010, while food and alcohol-free drink prices rose by 2% on the year.

With Easter holidays falling in April this year, air travel and package holiday prices rose by 13.8% and 10.5%, respectively. In 2010, Easter holidays began in March. The price increase of the package holidays alone accounted for around 0.2 percentage point of April's annual inflation rate, it added. 

Based on items in a European Union-harmonized basket of goods, German consumer prices rose 0.3% monthly and 2.7% annually, Destatis said, raising its preliminary reading of a 0.2% and a 2.6% increase.

Food inflation is expected to "remain a force" in the euro zone as a whole, Barclays Capital's  Fabio Fois said in a research note. Retailers are likely to continue to pass on commodity price increases to consumers, he said. 

This could be a troubling development for the European Central Bank as it aims to put the breaks on inflationary trends in the euro zone. Last week markets viewed ECB President  Jean-Claude Trichet's remarks at his monthly press conference as dovish. 

By saying that the central bank will "monitor very closely" inflationary risks and refraining to say that the bank would use "strong vigilance," the bank cued markets that the next rate rise will most likely come in July, not in June as about a quarter of polled experts had thought prior to the press conference. Yet if inflationary pressure continues to rise, then the bank may be forced to act sooner than they might otherwise want. 

Nevertheless, one probably shouldn't read too much into the German figures. Experts don't expect the upward revision to HICP to result in a change to the aggregate euro-zone figures, which estimated consumer price growth in the single currency area at 2.8% in April. 

"Despite the modest upward revision of the [German] HICP index, we still expect EMU HICP to be confirmed at 2.8% in April,"  Annalisa Piazza of Newedge said. The ECB raised its main rate in April for the first time in nearly three years to 1.25%. The rate had been at 1%, a record low, for nearly two years. 

 Write to  Emese Bartha at emese.bartha@dowjones.com 