Téa Obreht's "The Tiger's Wife" comes freighted with more critical anticipation than any debut novel in recent memory. Last year the New Yorker included Ms. Obreht on its list of the best 20 writers under age 40—a distinction that raised eyebrows not only because she is the youngest of the group (she was born in 1985) but also because Ms. Obreht, though she had published several short stories, didn't have a published book to her name.

That sort of unearned, pre-emptive prestige spurs both impossible expectations and skeptical readings—a burden that would doom most first novels. Yet "The Tiger's Wife," in its solemn beauty and unerring execution, fully justifies the accolades that Ms. Obreht's short fiction inspired. She has a talent for subtle plotting that eludes most writers twice her age, and her descriptive powers suggest a kind of channeled genius. No novel this year has seemed more likely to disappoint; no novel has been more satisfying.

Ms. Obreht's narrator is a doctor named Natalia Stefanovi, a young Serb living in Belgrade a dozen years after the wars that dissolved Yugoslavia in 1995. She and a friend, Zóra, are sent by her university to a Croatian orphanage to set up a free clinic. On the way, Natalia learns that her beloved grandfather—a doctor of reputation and the person most responsible for rearing her—has died. For reasons neither she nor her horrorstruck grandmother comprehend, he fled his home and met his end in a remote Croatian shantytown called Zdrevkov. His body has been returned but not his possessions. Some of his belongings, though, are needed for Eastern Orthodox mourning rituals, so Natalia decides to continue her journey to the orphanage, hoping eventually to find the shantytown, learn why her grandfather was there and locate his things.

I have given specifics about Belgrade and Natalia's ethnicity and the Croatian orphanage, but Ms. Obreht—who was born in Belgrade and has lived in the U.S. since she was 12—obscures such identifying details in the novel. Natalia is said simply to work in "the City." Though villages in the story are given names, we're told that they can't be found on any map—and they do appear to be the author's inventions. Ms. Obreht's aim is not to erase textbook history (indeed, she sets one scene on the eve of a massacre of Bosnian Muslims) but to unlatch her stories from history's rigid factuality. "We're in a war," Natalia recalls her grandfather telling her. "The story of this war—dates, names, who started it, why—that belongs to everyone." But more important, he urges, are "those moments you keep to yourself."

To Natalia, the key to understanding her grandfather can be found in the stories that he held closely. Imbued with the magic of fables, they ran "like secret rivers through all the other stories of his life." And so she begins to relate the stories as a sort of eulogy.

 By Téa Obreht  Random House, 338 pages, $25

Ms. Obreht skillfully entwines these tales—there are two main ones—with Natalia's description of her mission to the orphanage and the shantytown. The first of her grandfather's stories concerns a man called Gavran Gailé, who is cursed with the inability to die but who is compensated by the gift of being able to foretell the deaths of others. Natalia's grandfather meets "the deathless man" three times and confides his encounters to her—and to no one else—with equal parts awe and incredulity at what he is describing.

The second story is that of the tiger's wife, which Natalia pieces together (and embroiders) well after her grandfather's death. During the German bombardment of "the City" during World War II, a tiger escapes from the zoo and is pulled by "long-lost Siberian instinct" to the forest beside a remote mountain hamlet where her grandfather grew up. The strange animal's arrival terrifies the villagers—but not Natalia's grandfather, who recognizes the beast from his copy of Kipling's "The Jungle Book." Nor is the butcher's wife frightened. She lures the tiger to her home with raw meat each night and becomes its inscrutable protector. The tiger is the catalyst for her enigmatic love and for the villagers' fear and hatred—the same sort of passions that will inspire the region's implacable ethnic wars.

When Natalia imagines the lives of these villagers, the narrative can at times read too much like a fabulist pastiche of "1,001 Arabian Nights." We're told, for instance, about Luka the butcher, once an eager street musician, who was duped by a devious silk merchant into marrying the tiger's wife instead of her beautiful older sister. But mostly Ms. Obreht balances the exoticism with real sensory detail. In the surviving picture of Natalia's great-grandmother, "her hands, crossed in front of her, are the hands of a laborer; her expression seems to indicate that the photographer owes her money." The hunter who comes to kill the tiger has "a cluttered smell, the smell of earth and heavy rot, of possessions over which death had been repeatedly smeared."

With her blending of folklore and naturalism, Ms. Obreht calls to mind Gabriel García Márquez. References to skeletons, corpses and rites for the dead recur throughout the novel. In the town of the orphanage, a family of gypsies arrives with the intention of disinterring the body of a cousin, which had been improperly buried and is plaguing them with fevers. Natalia is infuriated by the gypsies' superstitious refusal to have their illness treated at the clinic; but even she, a doctor, is not above trying to find her own peace with the dead through storytelling.

Relating the grandfather's tales appears to be an almost sacred act—an effect reinforced by Ms. Obreht's exquisitely refined rendering of place and character. Care has been taken with each line of this book, not least in the description of the tiger itself, "bright and real, carved from sunlight." The author imposes a stillness on the reader as the novel's imagery and cadence seem to call to the mysteries of life and death.

 Mr. Sacks writes a fiction chronicle for the Review section of the Journal's weekend edition. 