LONDON—Large parts of the U.K. economy showed signs of flagging in April, an early indication that the economy may struggle to grow in the second quarter. 

Surveys on Tuesday pointing to weakness among retailers and manufacturers in coming months also diminished the chances of a near-term rise in the Bank of England's key interest rate. 

"The indicators out today underline it will continue to be a very tough path for the [U.K.] economy in the coming quarters," said  David Tinsley, economist at National Australia Bank. 

Sterling fell to its lowest level against the euro in more than a year after Markit Economics and the Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply, or CIPS, said manufacturing growth slowed to a seven-month low in April. A sharp slowdown in new orders contributed to the index's drop to 54.6 from a downwardly revised 56.7 in March. A reading above 50 indicates expansion. 

Manufacturing has been the bright spot of the economy of late, as exporters have benefited from a weaker pound to boost trade. The sector expanded strongly in the fourth quarter, when the rest of the economy shrank. But Tuesday's figures suggest it won't provide as big a boost in coming months. 

"April's CIPS manufacturing survey provided further evidence to suggest that the best days of the industrial recovery are behind us," said  Samuel Tombs, economist at Capital Economics, a consultancy. 

Also Tuesday, the Confederation of British Industry said retailers in April enjoyed a boost from the run-up to Easter, but they still reported weak sales for the time of year. May is predicted to be worse. 

"Things are far from rosy," said the CBI's chief economic adviser,  Ian McCafferty. "With few signs of demand picking up rapidly in the coming months, conditions on the high street look like remaining tough for retailers." 

News that large parts of the economy are starting to flag comes after the economy only just reversed its fourth-quarter decline between January and March—putting it back where it was in September. 

Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne's £111 billion ($184.88 billion) package of tax increases and spending cuts, which will see benefits cut for some households and a fall in business for companies reliant on government contracts, are likely to weaken growth prospects for the near term. 

The Bank of England looks set to keep monetary policy loose for the near-term at least as a consequence of these weak economic signals. The bank is widely expected to leave its key rate at 0.5% Thursday, after minutes from previous meetings showed the majority of the Monetary Policy Committee is concerned about growth being too weak to justify a higher base interest rate. 

Expectations for rate increases could be pushed further back the following Wednesday, if the BOE downgrades the growth forecasts in its quarterly Inflation Report. NAB's Mr. Tinsley said the recent run of weak economic data make that a likely prospect. 

"It would be a surprise if the MPC did not revise their growth forecasts in the May Inflation Report lower accordingly," he said. 

The PMI survey also showed a slight slowdown in the upward price pressures that have concerned BOE policy makers. Although manufacturers raised their selling prices again to compensate for higher input costs, they did so at a slightly slower pace than in March. 

That modest slowdown in the inflation outlook comes after the consumer price index rose by 4% in the year to March—still double the BOE's 2% target, but down from 4.4% in February. 

A business confidence survey published earlier Tuesday suggested activity in the private sector may pick up, but not in time to lift the economy in the second quarter. 

The Lloyds Bank Business Barometer rose to a balance of plus 30 from plus 1, its biggest increase since May 2009, with the manufacturing sector particularly upbeat. The bank's economists said the strong reading is unlikely to result in higher activity before the second half of the year. 

The reading is the number of businesses that are more optimistic than three months ago minus those who are less optimistic. 

—Jason Douglas and Paul Hannon contributed to this article.