WASHINGTON—The Obama administration has decided to approve the use of higher levels of ethanol in automobiles made between 2001 and 2006, handing a victory to corn farmers and deepening a conflict with auto makers, oil refiners and other interests who oppose such a step.

The Environmental Protection Agency is expected to announce Friday that it will allow ethanol levels in gasoline blends to be as high as 15% for vehicles made between 2001 and 2006, up from the current 10% maximum, according to two people familiar with the matter.

The agency last fall approved the use of E15 for vehicles made between 2007 and the present, and has been awaiting the results of tests conducted by the government on older model vehicles to make a decision on whether higher ethanol blends were appropriate for those vehicles.

An EPA spokesman didn't immediately respond to a request for comment.

The cause of boosting ethanol use in cars has been strongly championed by Growth Energy, an ethanol trade group led by Wesley Clark, the retired Army general and 2004 Democratic presidential candidate.

Gen. Clark's group petitioned the EPA in 2009 for an increase in ethanol levels in gasoline blends.

Without the increase, the group said the U.S. won't be able to meet a congressional mandate requiring some 36 billion gallons of renewable fuel to be blended into the domestic fuel supply by 2022.

Livestock ranchers, auto makers and oil refiners have all challenged the Obama administration's efforts to expand ethanol use in cars. While the groups have varying motives for opposing greater corn-ethanol production, they—along with many environmentalists—generally say the government hasn't conducted sufficient testing to warrant higher concentrations of ethanol in motor fuels. Some have also expressed concern that encouraging more ethanol production could exacerbate the recent run-up in food prices, by diverting corn away from food production to fuel production, but the ethanol industry has disputed such criticisms.

 Write to  Stephen Power at stephen.power@wsj.com 