OSAKA, Japan—The government found more radioactive materials in food and drinking water, raising the possibility that contamination from the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant has spread to increasingly distant locations. 

As the country struggled to extend the scope of its investigation using a limited number of radioactivity testing facilities, Tokyo also faced the difficult task of judging how much radioactivity can be considered safe in the long term.

Radioactive iodine was detected in the water supply in five Fukushima-area towns. The government said Tuesday that the water is considered safe in the short term but told residents not to give tap water to infants.

The government also said it detected higher-than-permitted levels of radioactive materials in seawater near the nuclear plant, raising concerns that contamination could spread to marine life.

The statements came a day after the government ordered Fukushima prefecture, as well as the neighboring Ibaraki, Tochigi and Gunma prefectures, to suspend shipments of spinach and rapeseed after radiation that exceeded regulated limits was detected in some produce. 

The government also banned sales of raw milk produced in Fukushima.

"I'm most scared of the rumors," said Yoichiro Matsuura, a fisherman whose store is on the shopping strip neighboring Tsukiji Fish Market in Tokyo. 

All of Mr. Matsuura's fish are caught off the coast of Nagasaki, more than a thousand kilometers southwest of Fukushima. But he is concerned that consumers may avoid all Japanese fish products. 

How far the contamination spreads will depend largely on the efforts by the government and  Tokyo Electric Power Co.
9501


0.14
%




, to cool the nuclear reactors. Tepco on Tuesday said it had reconnected power to all six of its Daiichi reactors in an effort to restore normal cooling operations.

While scientists agree that heavy exposure to a high level of radiation can cause serious health problems or death, assessing the risk of long-term exposure to low-level radiation, such as when people ingest food and water exposed to radioactive materials, is more complicated. 

The government set tentative limits to the amounts of specific radioactive materials that can be permitted in each type of food. Using those benchmarks and a testing guideline provided by Tokyo, municipal governments scrambled to test their farm products.

But a shortage of research labs capable of conducting accurate radioactivity tests stalled the process. 

Fukushima prefecture, for example, doesn't have a testing facility, so it has been sending its food samples to a research institute elsewhere.

"We would test everything right now if we could," said Yoshio Sawada, a Fukushima official. "Because the testing capacity is limited, we have to start with the areas that are most likely to be contaminated." 

Radioactive materials detected in some of the milk and spinach samples far exceeded the tentative limits. 

A raw-milk sample from Fukushima prefecture contained about 17 times the allowed level of iodine-131, while a spinach sample from Ibaraki prefecture contained 27 times the acceptable level.

Japan's Food Safety Commission was evaluating the government's suggested limits for radioactive materials in food and consulting radiation experts to assess the risks of radiation exposure. 

Setting limits for radioactive iodine-131 is particularly important because it has a tendency to accumulate in the thyroid gland and could raise the risk of thyroid cancer, particularly in small children, scientists have said.

In cases of contaminated food and water, any health consequences would be long-term risks associated with cancer rather than immediate health concerns, scientists have said.

A correlation between an increase in radiation exposure and an increase in cancer risk has been found in studies of large populations, such as people who were exposed to radiation from the atomic bombs in Hiroshima and Nagasaki, said Masahiro Nakashima, a professor of pathology at Nagasaki University who specializes in radiation exposure and cancer risk.

But exposure to radiation doesn't necessarily lead to cancer, he said. "Radiation can damage human DNA, but what part of DNA it damages is largely a matter of chance," Dr. Nakashima said. "And there are individual differences in how resistant people are to those damages." 

In studies of individual clinical cases, it is impossible to single out radiation exposure as a cause, because there are many other possible factors, he said. 

—Yoree Koh  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Juro Osawa at juro.osawa@dowjones.com 