Milestones in history, literature and art mark Sotheby's book and manuscript auction next week in Paris.

A collection of previously unknown working papers written by French revolutionary Maximilien François Marie Isidore de Robespierre leads Wednesday's sale.

They include rough drafts of speeches, articles and letters that reveal the thoughts of a man who largely dominated France's ruling Committee of Public Safety during the Reign of Terror (1793-94). His supporters honored Robespierre as incorruptible, while his opponents saw him as a bloodthirsty dictator. The purpose of the Reign of Terror was to purge those seen as enemies of the revolution. Masses of people were labeled as internal enemies of France and sent to the guillotine. Eventually, Robespierre went too far; and the Reign of Terror ended with his arrest and execution.

The 113 spontaneous papers, written by him in his small but legible hand, date from January 1792 to his death in July 1794. They are marked by crossing-outs and corrections. In them, Robespierre opposes mercy for King Louis XVI, insisting that he be tried for his crimes. Influenced by Robespierre, the National Convention found the king guilty of high treason; and sentenced him to be executed in 1793 along with his wife, Marie-Antoinette. In the papers, Robespierre describes how Convention members who were against sparing the king gathered on the left side of the hall, and those for leniency on the right. From this emerged the political terms of left and right that we know today.

Also included are notes for the speech Robespierre delivered to the Convention on the eve of his own execution. It was accompanied by antagonistic calls from the floor to pull down the dictator, and was never published. An important letter to an unknown correspondent deals with a major concern of Robespierre, the difficult relationship between happiness, virtue and freedom.

The papers are expected to fetch €200,000-€300,000. They were held for more than 200 years by the descendants of Robespierre's friend and fellow revolutionary Philippe-Francoise-Joseph Le Bas. The papers appear on the market for the first time.

A highlight of the modern section of the Paris sale includes a newly discovered typescript of "Le Petit Prince" (1943) by French aviator Antoine de Saint-Exupéry. The typescript is accompanied by seven original drawings. The modern fairy tale, which appeals to children and adults, is one of the best-selling books of all time. It tells of a pilot who crashes in the desert and there meets a little, storytelling prince from the planet B-612. Sotheby's notes that the rare manuscript is the fifth typewritten version of the tale to come to light (estimate: €40,000-€60,000).

Leading illustrated books will be "1 cent Life" (1964), a colorful Who's Who of the Pop Art movement in image and word (estimate: €100,000-€150,000). Written by Chinese-American artist and poet Walasse Ting and edited by American artist Sam Francis, the book is illustrated with colored lithographs by Andy Warhol, Roy Lichtenstein, Robert Rauschenberg, Sam Francis and numerous other American and European Pop artists. It documents a generation that massively influenced the future of art.

Turning to another auction in Paris next week, Sotheby's will hold Tuesday a sale of silver and gold objects crafted through the centuries. It will include a silver drinking cup likely made in France around 1180. Sotheby's says that no public or private collection is known to hold a silver cup of such age and with its specific iconography. The cup is decorated with astral figures that evoke scientific thinking in the early medieval period by Western and Eastern astrologists. In addition, pomegranate seeds on the surface of the cup symbolize fertility. Staring at the drinker from the bottom of the cup is a basilisk, a mythical reptile with a lethal look. Sotheby's suggests that the reptile was designed to encourage restraint. If the drinker enjoyed every drop, the monster's image would be uncovered (estimate: €300,000-€400,000).

 Write to  Margaret Studer at wsje.weekend@wsj.com 