TOMIOKA, Japan—After being shaken by Friday's earthquake, barely escaping the tsunami that followed and then helping orchestrate the evacuation of thousands of his fellow townspeople, Norio Hayashi hadn't seen or heard from his wife and three children in more than 24 hours. 

The municipal systems engineer in the small town had been underground checking the town's water systems when Friday's 8.9-magnitude earthquake hit, and he spent a sleepless night distributing rapidly declining stocks of food and water. The damage to the town was severe, but not as bad as some areas further north along the coast. Still, Mr. Hayashi had no word of his family's whereabouts.

Peeling out of the parking lot of the refuge facility Saturday afternoon, he made a brief announcement to the passengers in his minivan. "I apologize, but we're taking a detour. I need to stop by my house," he said curtly, gripping the steering wheel so hard his knuckles turned white. "The thing is, I don't know where my family is."

Moments later, he pulled up to a two-story house along a back street in a leafy neighborhood. It, like the rest of the neighborhood's houses, was deserted but intact. He walked up to the door where a handwritten note had been posted. 

After a glance, he turned on his heel and jogged back. His relaxed body language told it all: They had headed to a shelter in the town of Kawauchi. "Thank you," he said with a sheepish smile and swelling throat.

Mr. Hayashi, 48 years old, is a lifelong resident of Tomioka, a small town in Fukushima prefecture, or state, that sits in the shadow of two nuclear plants that send electricity to Tokyo.

Now, like hundreds of thousands of Japanese, Mr. Hayashi was being forced to leave his hometown after it was hit with three consecutive disasters: earthquake, tsunami and nuclear-radiation threat. The potential effects of the last are currently rattling Japan's collective consciousness since problems emerged Saturday at the Fukushima Daiichi and Fukushima Daini nuclear power plants, both only several miles from Tomioka, leading authorities to evacuate the nearby area. 

Mr. Hayashi said he and others might have been lured into a false sense of security. "We prepared and prepared and talked about safety measures for a long time. But I honestly never thought something like this would happen," he said.

In the early predawn hours of Saturday morning, Tomioka authorities decided to evacuate the shelter where Mr. Hayashi had been working and send the refugees to a shelter in Kawauchi, further inland. They urged other town residents unaffected by the quake and tsunami to do the same. They said it was a precaution after Tokyo Electric Power Co. engineers had reported that attempts to shut down reactors at nearby Fukushima No. 1 plant were proving problematic. There was no sense of panic, Mr. Hayashi said.

Over the next several hours, eight to 10 private and public buses made the 40-minute drive back and forth along a winding, two-lane pass to a junior high school in Kawauchi, which had been transformed into an ad hoc evacuation center.

But by the time the last bus of evacuees had left—around 2 p.m. local time on Saturday—the situation at the plant No. 1 had worsened considerably. Officials at the plant seemed unable to stop the one of its reactors from overheating.

Just after 3 p.m., the volunteer unit held a closing ceremony on the second floor of the community center and then disbanded. 

Mr. Hayashi's minivan was among the last to leave the community shelter to set out for Kawauchi. About a dozen senior town officials at the Tomioka community center stayed behind, in spite of the government's evacuation order and instead donning protection jump suits with air-intake hoods. It wasn't possible to learn these officials' fate.

At about 3:10, Mr. Hayashi departed Tomioka, population 10,600, his hometown, with none of his possessions, except for the clothes he wore and the car he drove. The road ahead was partly severed in some places by fissures from the earthquake.

As his minivan approached the commandeered junior high school at about 3:45 p.m., dozens of families and unaccompanied teens wandered around outside, some walking to the town's only convenience store—and pay phone—several hundred yards down the road. 

Mr. Hayashi went into the center, parking alongside several hundred other cars on the school's sports grounds. It was unclear if he was reunited with his family.

Unknown to the people at the Kawauchi center, a few minutes before—at 3:36 p.m.—an explosion at a building housing one of the reactors at Fukushima Daiichi plant sent a massive plume of steam and smoke into the air.

Several hours later, the central government issued evacuation orders for anyone within about 12 miles of the nuclear plants in Fukushima—apparently including the thousands crowded into the school gym in Kawauchi.

Mr. Hayashi spoke with fondness about the easygoing lifestyle afforded by the largess of Tokyo Electric. Although not employed by the nuclear facilities, Mr. Hayashi never questioned their safety and noted a decades-long safety record.

The plants, which began operations in the 1970s, provided well-paying jobs and pumped tax dollars into towns like Tomioka. The town community center features a large electronic signboard out front flashing the cheery phrase: "Nuclear energy supports Tomioka!" 

"This community is a collection of faces," he said. "If those faces disappear, then so does the community."

Wiping tears from the corners of his eyes, he added: "I can't even imagine how this place will change from now on. I can't begin to imagine it."

—Eric Bellman contributed to this article.

