German auto maker Volkswagen says its board agreed to extend the contract of chief executive Martin Winterkorn through the end of 2016. The decision should allow Winterkorn to preside over VW's planned merger with Porsche.

A U.S. court last week dismissed a lawsuit filed against Porsche Automobil Holding by U.S. hedge funds, removing a major roadblock for the sportscar maker's planned merger with Volkswagen. 

Registrations of new cars in France declined by 0.7% in December compared to the same month of 2009, making a contraction for the market of 2.2% for the full year, according to industry data. December's registrations were propped up by a last-minute rush to take advantage of a government scrapping bonus scheme that ended Dec. 31. 

 Fiat Chief Executive Sergio Marchionne said he doesn't plan to merge operations with Chrysler Group, but said the Italian firm could lift its 20% stake in the U.S. auto maker to over 50% in 2011 if Chrysler returns to the stock market. Marchionne reiterated previous remarks that Chrysler's initial public offering may take place in the second half of this year. 

Fiat also completed its division into two companies to allow its car and truck businesses to pursue separate development strategies. Fiat Industrial controls the trucks and tractors units Iveco and CNH Global, while Fiat comprises the passenger car operations. 

South Korea's Hyundai Motor Group is targeting 10% growth in vehicle sales globally this year as it steps up efforts to sharpen its competitive edge through a focus on product quality and safety. Hyundai Motor Group, the world's No. 5 auto maker by sales, is aiming for affiliates Hyundai Motor and Kia Motors to sell 6.33 million units in 2011, up from an estimated 5.75 million units in 2010, group Chairman Chung Mong-koo said.

 Bank of America agreed to pay $2.8 billion to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to buy back soured mortgages, and expects to take a provision of about $3 billion in the fourth quarter to cover the repurchase cost. The move represents the latest effort at the largest U.S. bank by assets to put behind it the issue of sloppy underwriting at Countrywide Financial, the giant mortgage originator Bank of America bought in 2008. 

Portugal's government injected €550 million ($735.4 million) into state-owned bank Caixa Geral de Depositos to boost its solvency and help maintain its credit ratings, the bank said in a regulatory filing. The bank issued 110 million new shares, allowing it to boost its Tier 1 capital ratio to close to 9% of risk-weighted assets at the end of 2010, in line with new Basel III capital requirements. 

Piraeus Bank, Greece's fourth-largest lender, said its long-awaited €800 million ($1.07 billion) rights issue will be priced at €1 a share, representing a sharper-than-expected 43% discount to its recent share price and suggesting underwriters feared a lack of investor appetite for the issue. 

Royal Vopak, the Dutch oil and chemicals storage company, said Eelco Hoekstra started as Chief Executive Officer on Jan 1. He follows John Paul Broeders, who will leave the company to become chairman of the executive board of SHV Holdings, a privately-owned trading company.

Warren Buffett's investment holding company, Berkshire Hathaway Finance, is the first high-grade corporate issuer out of the gate in 2011, filing papers to sell $1.5 billion of three- and 10-year senior unsecured notes. The three-year piece will consist of fixed or floating-rate notes or a combination of the two, while the 10-year piece will have a fixed rate. 

Hutchison Whampoa said it plans to spend 5.7 billion Hong Kong dollars (US$733.4 million) to raise its controlling stakes in ports in Hong Kong and Shenzhen, underscoring its optimism about a continued recovery in the container shipping market. 

Korea Development Bank Chief Executive Min Euoo-sung said two to three major corporations have expressed interest in acquiring a controlling stake in Korea Express, South Korea's largest logistics company by revenue. Min said the sale will start early this year, though he didn't identify the firms that have expressed interest. 

Separately, Min said the firm will decide on a timeline for the sale of its stake in Daewoo Shipbuilding & Marine Engineering, adding that there is no reason for the firm to wait on the process. 

Clorox projected fiscal second-quarter results that are sharply below Wall Street's estimates, as the company said the economic environment has remained challenging and product categories in the U.S. have remained soft. Clorox also cited continued fallout from Venezuela's currency devaluation last year. 

Norway's Seadrill said it will buy two ultra-deepwater, semi-submersible drilling rigs, one of which is under contract to Mexico's Pemex, for approximately $1.2 billion. The rigs, Seadragon I and Seadragon II, are being constructed at Singapore's Jurong Shipyard, and are expected to be delivered in the first and fourth quarter of 2011, respectively. 

Contract driller Noble said Marathon Oil is terminating a four-year contract, worth about $752 million in backlog, to lease an ultra deep-water rig in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico. Marathon's reason for the termination was that the rig hadn't been accepted by Friday, but Noble said it believes the rig is ready to begin operations and should have been accepted. 

Chinese scientists have mastered the technology for reprocessing nuclear fuel, potentially yielding additional power sources to keep the country's economy booming, state television reported. The breakthrough will extend by many times the amount of power that can be generated from China's nuclear plants by allowing the recovery of fissile and fertile materials to provide new fuel, China Central Television said. 

French lender BNP Paribas denied reports that two recently frozen funds have been hit by redemptions, saying there aren't any liquidity issues and the decision to freeze them is purely administrative. The decision to freeze the funds, which was announced to investors in December, is a technical step to allow the transfer to a new manager, a spokeswoman said. 

German reinsurer Munich Re said major global catastrophes last year cost around $130 billion, putting 2010 among the six most loss-intensive years for the insurance industry since 1980. Of the total losses, around $37 billion were insured, the company said. 

New China Life Insurance, the country's third-largest insurer by market share, plans to launch an initial public offering in Shanghai and Hong Kong as early as the second quarter, a report said, citing a person it didn't identify. Bankers have said the size of the offering could be US$3 billion to US$4 billion, likely making it one of the biggest deals of the year. 

French publishing group Lagardère said it is in exclusive talks with U.S.-based Hearst over the possible sale of its international magazines unit. Hearst is looking to acquire Lagardère's global magazine portfolio of 102 magazine editions, 50 websites and digital operations outside of France, most of which trade under the Hachette Filipacchi Media U.S. company name, according to a person familiar with the matter. 

 India's largest-ever foreign-investment proposal caught a tailwind when a federal panel approved a plan by South Korea's Posco to build a $12 billion steel project in eastern India.  

News Corp.'s Myspace is preparing to announce a dramatic downsizing of its business, including major layoffs, according to people familiar with the matter. One person said the moves could be announced as soon as this month.

 Goldman Sachs Group and Russia's Digital Sky Technologies have invested $500 million in Facebook, a deal that gives the social-networking site a valuation of $50 billion, people familiar with the matter said. Goldman has put in $450 million, but is expected to sell $75 million of that stake to Digital Sky shortly, the people said. Including the $125 million, Digital Sky, which now owns just under 10% of Facebook, will have invested around $900 million in Facebook, the people said. 