Court documents filed in recent days provide a glimpse into Jared Loughner's possible defense strategies—and into his mental state since being arrested Jan. 8 and charged in the mass shooting in Tucson, Ariz., that killed six and injured 13.

One filing Sunday from the office of Arizona U.S. Attorney Dennis Burke reveals that Mr. Loughner has had several conversations with two prison psychologists since his arrest. Another filing by Mr. Loughner's defense attorneys seeks to move the trial date back by a year or more. It quotes death-penalty experts arguing the importance of mental illness, trauma and brain injury as mitigating factors in capital cases.

Federal prosecutors could seek the death penalty as part of a 49-count indictment unsealed Friday that charges Mr. Loughner with murder and attempted assassination. Mr. Loughner, who is accused of wounding Rep. Gabrielle Giffords (D., Ariz.) and killing a federal judge, will face those charges during a court hearing Wednesday in Tucson. He pleaded not guilty to previous charges in the case.

During a Jan. 8 meeting with Lucia Pujol, a psychologist who conducted an assessment of Mr. Loughner for the Tucson jail, he was lucid enough to ask whether their conversation "might be used by others," according to the documents filed Sunday.

Mr. Loughner's often bizarre online rantings and behavior before the shootings have led people who interacted with him to speculate he suffered from a mental illness and might not be able to aid his own defense.

His defense lawyers have remained silent on the subject of Mr. Loughner's mental state.

Judy Clarke, Mr. Loughner's lead defense attorney, is fighting to bar the Federal Bureau of Investigation from gaining further access to prison psychologists' evaluations of Mr. Loughner, on the grounds that such disclosures violate Mr. Loughner's Fifth Amendment rights against self-incrimination.

The U.S. attorney's office argues such disclosures don't violate Mr. Loughner's rights, because the sessions weren't meant as therapy and, in one case, the presence of guards undermined any expectation of confidentiality.

Whether Ms. Clarke will pursue an insanity defense is still unclear. Ms. Clarke is lobbying the court to push back the start of the trial from the judge's desired date of September 2011 to late 2012, saying in a new court filing that her team needs more time to "gain an understanding of the depth of Mr. Loughner's mental afflictions and their impact on his functioning in the world."

In a declaration filed Friday with the court on behalf of the defense, Richard Burr, a Texas attorney who specializes in death-penalty cases, wrote that he has "been informed by counsel that one of the potential areas of defense that is being investigated is Mr. Loughner's mental health."

Mr. Burr added that lawyers "do not yet know how such issues might relate to Mr. Loughner's ability to assert his rights to a defense against the charge, to mitigation of punishment, or to all three." According to the documents filed by the defense, that investigation could range from family history to childhood trauma or brain injury.

Even if Mr. Loughner's lawyers do not pursue an insanity defense, his mental state may still play a large role in his defense, according to expert testimony filed by Mr. Loughner's defense lawyers as part of their motion to delay the trial.

"In many cases, defendants suffer mental impairments that do not meet the legal definition of insanity or incompetency, but are powerfully mitigating disabilities that are given great weight when juries are charged with assessing individualized culpability," wrote Russell Stetler, an expert on federal death-penalty cases.

 Write to  Tamara Audi at tammy.audi@wsj.com 