BOISE, Idaho—Before the recession hit, Idaho, Nevada and Utah had some of the lowest rates of food stamp use in the nation. It was a boom time in a region that has always prided itself on self-reliance and a disdain for government handouts.

But since the recession began, these three states have the fastest growth rates in the nation of participation in the federal program, recently released figures show. Utah saw a nearly 34% jump in food-stamp participation in December from the same month a year earlier, according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Nevada had the second fastest growth rate at 25%, followed by Idaho at 24%.

For the fiscal year ended Sept. 30, those three states plus Wyoming ranked among the top 10 in food-stamp growth, with Idaho leading with a 42% jump from 2009, according to USDA figures.

It's a striking shift for the area, reflecting a post-boom fallout that has been compounded by the many new residents drawn to the region by a hot economy who lacked a support network when jobs disappeared.

"This is a pick-you-up-by-the-bootstraps type of state, which is why the food-stamp participation has [historically] been low," said Rose Andueza, program manager of Idaho's Division of Welfare. "But I think now people have just run out of options."

Mike Buster, 48 years old, said he lost his construction job in the Boise suburb of Caldwell in 2008 and hasn't been able to find stable work since. His wife, Bonnie, 42, said she tried to work odd jobs, but has been limited by health problems, including a heart condition.

After Mr. Buster's unemployment checks ran out, the couple lost their house to foreclosure. In February 2010, they decided to apply for food stamps for the first time. "We didn't have enough food to last a week, so I looked at my wife and said, 'It's time,' " said Mr. Buster.

The number of Idahoans taking food stamps has climbed every month since an October 2007 low, hitting 223,347, or about 14% of Idaho's population, in December. In October 2007, 5.8% of the population, or 87,232 people, received food stamps.

Nationally, the number of residents using food stamps—which today take the form of debit cards—rose to 44.1 million, or 13.1% of the population, in December from 27.2 million, or 9% of the population, in October 2007.

In 2006, by contrast, Idaho and Nevada ranked second-to-last among states in food-stamp participation, with 53% of people eligible for the assistance actually receiving it compared with a national average of 67%.

The Western region as defined by the USDA—covering California, Arizona, New Mexico, Colorado, Utah, Idaho, Washington, Oregon, Alaska and Hawaii—also ranked last with a 58% participation rate; the Midwest's was tops at 74%. Comparisons on state participation rates aren't available beyond 2008.

Officials attributed the rise in Western food-stamp usage to a general push by states for increased access, such as by expediting the process of determining if an applicant is eligible, as well as the recession's impact. Idaho's unemployment rate reached 9.7% in January, nearly triple the 3.4% rate in November 2007, the recent low point. Nationally, the jobless rate stood at 8.9% in February, up from 4.7% in November 2007. (State data are reported with a one-month lag.) 

Nevada's unemployment led the nation at 14.2% in January, compared with 3.9% in November 2006, while Utah—whose economy has begun to rebound faster than the rest of the West—held at 7.6% in January up from 2.4% in November 2006. 

Idaho's economy has fallen more steeply than most states' as two mainstays, technology and construction, nosedived. As a result, food stamps in the state, which typically bristles at federal programs—it was first to pass a bill to block the federal health-care overhaul—have drawn broad political support. Last June, Republican Gov. C.L. "Butch" Otter suspended for at least one year a federal provision that blocked people with assets such as a boat from eligibility for food stamps.

Officials see no letup in the need for food assistance until Idaho's economy rebounds. That isn't expected until 2013 or 2014, said Donald Holley, an economics professor at Boise State University. And the Idaho Foodbank plans to give out 10 million pounds of food in the fiscal year that began July 1, double what it distributed in fiscal 2007.

Michael and Valorie Bruesch said their monthly income of about $2,200 from his unemployment checks and her disability compensation is about $200 over the food-stamp eligibility cutoff. So the couple, who live in Caldwell, lined up with more than 150 others one recent frigid morning for a food handout at the Oasis Worship Center in the city, to help save money so they could keep making mortgage payments.

"When my unemployment runs out soon, we will qualify for food stamps," said the 58-year-old Mr. Bruesch, who lost his job as a medical-supply specialist 15 months ago.

 Write to  Jim Carlton at jim.carlton@wsj.com 