What makes the relatively high risk of heart disease among South Asians surprising is that most don't have risk factors typically associated with heart problems, such as cigarette smoking, obesity or high blood pressure.

Instead, researchers say, South Asians' elevated risk is related partly to a genetic tendency to have low levels of the "good" cholesterol that protects against heart disease. The elevated risk of heart disease has been identified by researchers in studies of individuals of South Asian origin—including those of Indian, Pakistani and Sri Lankan descent—living in the U.S., the U.K. and elsewhere.

A study of Bay Area patients by the Palo Alto Medical Foundation found that half of those of Indian origin had low levels of protective high-density lipoprotein, or HDL, cholesterol—double the percentage of Caucasians that had a low level. They also had high levels of triglycerides, a form of fat that can raise the risk of a heart attack.

In addition to that, South Asians are likelier than Caucasians to store more fat around their stomach—a type of fat that researchers believe may be linked to a higher rate of heart attacks and diabetes. 

Some lifestyle factors common among South Asians don't help—like eating a lot of carbohydrates in the form of white rice and breads usually made from refined flour, such as naan and roti, and doing little exercise, especially strength-training exercises. 

There are ways for South Asians to stay on top of their heart health. The South Asian Heart Center in Mountain View (www.southasianheartcenter.org) offers special heart screenings and health and nutritional advice for South Asians.

Also, researchers say, body-mass index and waist-to-hip ratios are useful in determining when to conduct heart disease and diabetes screenings. Guidelines on how to determine both numbers are at the Palo Alto Medical Foundation's Web page for South Asian health (www.pamf.org/southasian/healthy/screening/bodysize.html).

 Write to  Vauhini Vara at vauhini.vara@wsj.com 