JUPITER, Fla.—During the winter, while managing the Leones del Caracas of the Venezuelan League, Dave Hudgens had a routine.

He would wake up around 6:30 a.m., go to the gym and then return to his room at a Best Western hotel. There, he would hook his laptop up to a big-screen television. And for the next few hours, before it was time to go to the ballpark, he would watch clip after clip of Mets hitters.

For Hudgens, the newly hired Mets hitting coach, perhaps none were more important to study than Jason Bay. Hudgens said he watched video of all of Bay's plate appearances in 2010, all 401 of them.

 Now, the two are working together to fix a swing that so often seemed broken.

After signing a four-year, $66 million contract in January 2010, Bay was a major disappointment last season. He hit just .259, with just six home runs and finished with a career-low .402 slugging percentage. A concussion in July ended his season.

Bay, a three-time All-Star, isn't making any radical changes to his swing or approach. He said the difference might not even be noticeable to the naked eye. But he's hoping a few subtle adjustments will pay major dividends.

"Last year there was a lot of inconsistency with my mechanics," Bay said. "That leads to a lot of, 'Okay, you're doing this, let's try that,' when all you're really doing is band-aiding a bunch of problems and creating new ones."

What Bay is doing with Hudgens now, he said, is "kind of relearning from the foundation up, so when things go bad, because they always do at some point, you've got a place to go. You know what works rather than just kind of, 'Hey, I don't know what's going on, I'm just going to keep swinging and hope I get out of this.'"

For Bay, who had a pair of singles in Wednesday's exhibition game against the Cardinals, the foundation is his legs. Too often last year, he said he was not in an "athletic" position to hit. Instead of staying balanced, he would lunge at the ball. That made it more difficult for him to make solid contact.

Bay said better weight control and a more consistent approach should also help him be more selective at the plate. He swung at a career-high 27.1% of pitches outside the strike zone in 2010, according to FanGraphs.com, a 7% increase from 2009.

"That definitely doesn't help," he said. "I think when you get in a better position and be more consistent, you see the ball better."

Hudgens said he is also encouraging Bay to try to hit to the middle of the field more often and pull the ball less. Bay has always been a pull hitter, but he did dramatically less damage when hitting the ball to the left side of the field in 2010.

Isolated power, or ISO, is an advanced metric that measures a hitter's raw power in terms of extra bases per at-bat. In 2009, Bay had a .466 ISO when he pulled the ball. In 2010, that figure dropped to .079, just two points higher than weak-hitting infielder Alex Cora.

Hudgens said that when Bay looks to drive the ball up the middle, "That allows him to stay on the ball a little bit longer, which allows your margin of error to be a little bit greater. If you're just looking to pull the ball or go the other way all the time, you're one-dimensional. You need to try to stay in the middle of the field and hopefully hit it everywhere."

 Write to  Brian Costa at brian.costa@wsj.com 