The National Football League is widely recognized for having the smartest executives and the shrewdest owners in sports. But as the clock ticks down toward another deadline in the ongoing labor talks, that reputation may be called in for review. 

The league's precarious position in these talks is a frustrating development for an institution that has always prided itself on internal stability. With the current collective bargaining agreement with the union set to expire at 12:01 a.m. on Saturday, the NFL faces several tough choices fueled by earlier moves that didn't go as planned. 

As of Wednesday evening, the two sides remained deadlocked in mediation over financial issues and the league's refusal to share all of the audited financial statements for its 32 teams. 

The league is holding firm on its demands to reduce player pay by some $750 million. The league declined to comment on specific decisions. In a statement, league spokesman Greg Aiello said the NFL is "not surprised" by the current state of the talks. "We have properly and fully prepared for all contingencies. Collective bargaining is always challenging and we are working hard to reach a fair agreement that ensures the long-term future of the league. There will be plenty of time for analysis when the agreement is done. And there will be an agreement." 

Here are some of the key assumptions the NFL owners made before the talks began, and how they have fared so far: 

When the owners voted unanimously in 2008 to end the labor deal two years early, they'd experienced 15 years of relative harmony with former union chief Gene Upshaw, who'd led the players until his death in 2008. As his successor, the players chose DeMaurice Smith, a little-known Washington litigator with no experience in football, labor negotiations or the sports business. With a labor showdown looming, it seemed unlikely that Smith could educate and galvanize what has long been considered the weakest union in pro sports.

But in interviews, players praised Smith's decision to visit each of the league's 32 teams four times—and are effusive in their support. Star quarterbacks Drew Brees and Peyton Manning have participated in talks. 

The NFL has always known the union could decertify and file an antitrust suit against them (they've done it before). They also knew the first stop for such litigation is U.S. District Court Judge David Doty's Minnesota courtroom. 

Still, the NFL pursued the potentially risky strategy of accusing Judge Doty of being partial to the union and asking the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals in 2009 to remove him from the league-related litigation. Now, with the league seemingly ready to decertify without dissent, the NFL may end up in front of the same judge again.

The central thrust of the NFL's argument is that player costs are threatening profits. But the NFL experienced a season where its record television ratings became a subject of fascination—and network executives hailed its games as the most valuable television programming available. These results have led many analysts, and many fans, to take the league's dire predictions less seriously. 

In 2009, the NFL took the surprising step of asking the Supreme Court to take up a case the league had already won. It wanted to court to affirm an appellate decision that allowed its teams to act in concert in commercial endeavors like signing merchandise deals—the way they were already permitted to do in selling national TV broadcast rights. The court ruled 9-0 against the league. 

The decision suggests the judiciary considers NFL teams independent businesses, something that could prove costly if its players union abandons the collective bargaining process, decertifies, and sues the league on antitrust grounds.

During the past two years, the NFL signed broadcast deals that included provisions for the networks to pay the league some $4 billion a year even if it locks out players and cancels games. But last week, Judge Doty found the NFL hadn't sought to maximize revenues, as the labor deal requires. He said he plans to hold a hearing on whether the NFL can use the money in a lockout. 

 Write to  Matthew Futterman at matthew.futterman@wsj.com 