Republicans appear to be the underdogs in the race for governor of West Virginia as the state heads into primaries Saturday, bucking a trend that has seen the GOP make significant gains in state houses over the past couple of years.

Acting Gov. Earl Ray Tomblin, a Democrat, has wide name recognition, strong business backing and a big lead in polls over his primary competitors, as well as in a hypothetical match-up with Republicans this fall.

One wild card: low turnout for the special Saturday election could help another candidate backed by the state's unions win an upset if labor can get a large percentage of voters to the polls.

The governor's seat opened up when former Gov. Joe Manchin was elected to the U.S. Senate in November to fill out the remaining term of long-serving Sen. Robert Byrd, who died last year. Six Democrats and eight Republicans are vying to become candidates in a special general election Oct. 4.

Most observers see Mr. Tomblin, president of the state senate, ahead of three other Democrats fighting for second place: House Speaker Rick Thompson, state Treasurer John Perdue and Secretary of State Natalie Tennant.

The Republican race has narrowed to former Secretary of State Betty Ireland and Morgantown businessman Bill Maloney.

A poll released Thursday night by Public Policy Polling showed Mr. Tomblin winning 33% of the Democratic vote, ahead of Mr. Thompson, who was endorsed by the 75,000-member state AFL-CIO union, with 20%. The poll surveyed 742 voters on May 11-12, with a 3.6% margin of error.

An earlier poll by the group found that Mr. Tomblin would beat either of the two top Republican candidates by at least 20 percentage points in October. Dean Debnam, president of Public Policy Polling, said Friday he didn't think that calculus had changed, and that Mr. Tomblin would likely benefit from what he sees as a swing among the electorate—both nationally and in West Virginia—toward Democrats after last year's Republican wins. That has shown up in low approval ratings for some newly elected GOP governors, he said

Since 2009, Republicans have increased the number of state houses under their control from 22 to 29, with five of those gains coming in last fall's election. 

The West Virginia Coal Association and the state Chamber of Commerce both endorsed Mr. Tomblin. "During the time that he's been acting governor, he's really shown that he can do the job," said Chamber president Steve Roberts. The group also endorsed both leading Republican candidates in their primary, and Mr. Roberts said it wasn't yet clear who the Chamber would endorse in the fall.

Republicans aren't ceding the race, however. "I think there's plenty of time for whoever our nominee will be to distinguish themselves from the Democrat side," said Chad Holland, executive director of the West Virginia GOP.

Democrats have a big voter registration edge in the state, with 53.5% of voters identified as Democrat, versus 28.8% for the Republicans. The state's most recent Republican governor, Cecil Underwood, left office in 2001.

 Write to  Kris Maher at kris.maher@wsj.com 