Don't forget us.

That is the message from  Citigroup Inc.
C


1.48
%




 Just three days after the Federal Reserve allowed six of the nation's largest banks to begin boosting dividend payments for the first time since the financial crisis, Citi announced it would reinstate its dividend, to a penny—or one-tenth of a penny, to be more precise.

The giant bank, which was in the penalty box with regulators after requiring three separate rescues since 2008, found a way to pay a dividend that will only cost $29 million a quarter. The bank plans to do a 1-for-10 reverse stock split that will cut its number of shares outstanding from 29 billion to 2.9 billion. Without the reverse split, the per-share dividend would have amounted to 0.1 cent.

Despite the moves, Citi stock fell seven cents a share, or 1.5%, to $4.43 in 4 p.m. composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, on a day when the broader market surged. Most bank stocks had risen Friday when the size of other banks' dividend increase were unveiled.

The new share count, effective May 9, will have the added benefit of taking the share price to the mid-$40 range and out of the single digits, often the realm of companies in financial distress. Citi shares fell from $55 in 2007 to below a dollar in 2009.

"They want to change their image and get rid of the penny-stock image," suggested  James D. Rosenfeld, a finance professor at Emory University in Atlanta who has studied reverse splits. He found they typically underperform the market.

Many companies execute reverse stock splits to avoid the threat of their shares being delisted by major exchanges, which can occur if their shares stay below $1, Mr. Rosenfeld added. Some institutional investors "will not purchase stocks selling for less than $5 a share," he noted.

The dividend also will help Citi attract investors at income-oriented mutual funds, some of which may be barred from buying stocks that don't pay a dividend. Analysts expect Citi to raise the dividend more substantially next year.

But the reverse split is likely to have unintended consequences for financial markets. A higher share price can discourage some individual investors who like to own large volumes of low-priced shares. 

Another downside: For short sellers, who bet on a price decline, the stock has more room to fall.

Citigroup stock has also become the favored plaything of high-frequency traders, who take advantage of the vast number of shares and cheap price to zip in and out of the stock. With fewer shares and a higher price, the chance to profit on the stock will be vastly diminished. 

  Justin Schack, a market structure analyst at Rosenblatt Securities Inc., says the move could cut U.S. stock-market volume by 5% and cut options trading, too. 

About 516 million shares of Citigroup are traded on a daily basis in the U.S. on average, the most of any U.S. stock, according to Barclays Capital. Traders say options on low-priced stocks can offer more reward for less risk.

Citi halted its dividend payments as it battled for survival in early 2009. Its share count ballooned from five billon to 29 billion as it was forced to issue about $80 billion in new common stock to recapitalize after suffering huge losses on subprime mortgages.

Other banks that didn't suffer the same kind of brush with failure boosted their dividends more substantially last week after getting the OK from federal regulators.  J.P. Morgan Chase
JPM


0.20
%




 & Co., for example, boosted the dividend by 20 cents a share, costing the bank an extra $796 million quarterly.

—Kristina Peterson  and Jacob Bunge  contributed to this article.

 Write to  Randall Smith at randall.smith@wsj.com 