The WSJ Washington Bureau runners woke to the sound of wind and drumming rain at 6:00 a.m. Wednesday. But we were competing in the 30th annual Capital Challenge 3-miler. So it was time, as our teammate and colleague  Nathan Hodge said, to "embrace the suck."

Each year the Capital Challenge draws about 500 lawmakers, judges, journalists, military and federal agency types, all vying for …. god-knows-what. Government ethics rules require everybody to ignore that the race is sponsored by a lobbying group, the American Council of Life Insurers. 

In a requirement that's just so Washington, each team must have at least one woman.

We arrived at Potomac Park, near the Jefferson Memorial, about 7 a.m., and stood with about 500 other runners huddling in soaked hoodies, under wind-battered umbrellas or plastic grocery bags. Except for Sen.  Kay Bailey Hutchison (R., Texas), who stood in her color-coordinated running gear beneath an umbrella held by a staffer in a suit and tie. 

He was embarrassed. She was not.

Dow Jones transportation writer Josh Mitchell organized our two teams: "Keeping up with the  Dow Joneses" and "Running Dog Capitol-ists." 

The media teams, appropriately, had the most creative names, including NPR's "Wait, Wait Don't Pass Me," and Fox News' "Fair and New Balanced." 

Teams organized by members of Congress were named in tribute to -- wait for it -- those members of Congress. There was Ohio Republican Rep.  Jean Schmidt's "Fast as Schmidt." New York Democratic Rep.  Jose Serrano's " Serrano Peppers." New Hampshire Republican Sen.  Kelly Ayotte's "It's Not A Boat, It's Ayotte," and South Dakota Republican Sen.  John Thune's "Mount Runmore." 

(The lean, chiseled Mr. Thune is a noted congressional jock: as a  Washington Post colleague pointed out, even his face is aerodynamic.)

A waterlogged whistle blew, and we were off, vying for position behind the jiggling buns of scores of fellow desk jockeys. 

Our colleague  Devlin Barrett took the lead. The rest of us strung out behind, holding our own. Our colleague Jennifer Levitz was defying the no-iPod rule as she entered her zone. 

Back at the starting line, our stowed Blackberries were receiving a frantic email from Dow Joneses' Captain Mitchell: "My cab driver is lost. I am on yhe (sic) road. If anyone can pick me up. Please!" 

The goal was seven to eight-minute miles, and we all pretty much made it. 

The Running Dogs took 10th place, besting more than half of our pencil-neck print colleagues. 

We also beat Health and Human Services Secretary  Kathleen Sebelius's "The Fast & the Sebelius" (er, was that supposed to be catchy?). 

We rolled over FDIC Chairman  Sheila Bair's "Bair Feet." And we slaughtered the accountants of "Notorious O.M.B" (Office of Management and Budget, duh). 

At the finish, we found Dow Joneses' Captain Mitchell, who sprinted a mile from his marooned cab to the starting line, and still posted our best individual time (20:51.) 

But the Dow Joneses were forced to forfeit, because team member  Neil King bailed in order to cover the evening's GOP debates in South Carolina. (Maybe a little talk about priorities is in order for Mr. King.) 

We bumped into Sen.  Jack Reed (D., R.I.), struggling back into his rain gear. The former Army 82nd Airborne Division captain, now captain of "Reed's Rangers," didn't get the time he wanted (he clocked 30:13). He fretted to members of our team that he "didn't provide much leadership." 

"Oh no, sir!" chimed the other Reed's Rangers, who work for him. 

Every finisher got a pewter medal. Being dorks, most of us put them on.

The fastest? Team Navy, who started the week by killing Osama bin Laden.

Also, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission team, "Runnin' Out of our FERC'n Minds." 

Slowest? Veteran competitor Sen.  Richard Lugar, 79, who clocked a 44:40, but still beat most of  Team Milliken, including their captain, D.C. Superior Court Senior Judge  Stephen Milliken (44:53), who came in 499th place. 

On the way to the parking area we passed South Dakota's senator Thune, packing gear into his chauffeured SUV. 

Mr. Thune wasn't wearing his pewter medal. The captain of Mount Runmore was wearing a high-performance singlet, shorts and shoes. Everything matched.

How'd you do, Sen. Thune? "Eh, okaaaay, under 20 minutes," he said, seeming disappointed with a time (18:54) that was better than any other senator, and better than ours. 

Show off. 

 Write to  Elizabeth Williamson at elizabeth.williamson@wsj.com 