A team of U.S. Navy SEALs shot and killed al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden, eliminating the world's most-wanted terrorist after years on the run but raising questions about whether the Pakistani government knew of his location and was complicit in protecting him. The 40-minute raid took place at a fortified complex in Abbottabad, Pakistan, a city thick with Pakistani military personnel about 40 miles north of Islamabad, the capital. U.S. intelligence officials said the CIA, which had been gathering leads on people in bin Laden's inner circle, came to focus on one courier who eventually led them to the three-story mansion. After the U.S. said DNA tests showed a "virtually 100%" match of the body against genetic material from several bin Laden family members, bin Laden's remains were buried at sea. Grave terror threats, including the risk of reprisals, remain.

The PlayStation Network has been shut down for more than two weeks now as Sony scrambles to rectify an 'illegal and unauthorized intrusion' that has resulted in a significant theft of personal information.

Suspicions about Pakistan prompted calls for Washington to re-examine its relationship with, and aid to, Islamabad. The Obama administration will leverage the event to push Pakistan to go after other top targets, including Mullah Omar, the one-eyed Taliban leader. A senior Pakistani official dismissed suggestions of complicity and said the U.S. would face "disastrous consequences" if it carried out any more unilateral raids. Afghan President Karzai said the circumstances vindicated his government's growing opposition to U.S.-led combat operations in the Afghan countryside. Bin Laden's death could hasten the shift toward a less troop-intensive U.S. mission in Afghanistan. 

Al Qaeda No. 2 Zawahiri is widely considered even more radical than the slain leader but is struggling to keep al Qaeda relevant. It isn't easy, amid the tumult of largely peaceful popular uprisings inspired by others throughout the Arab world. At the same time, the political upheaval is disrupting counterterrorism cooperation by onetime key U.S. allies such as Egypt and Yemen and may be giving terrorists more breathing space. Long before bin Laden's death, his group had splintered and popped up in new places with new leaders.

The Navy SEALs carried off five computers, 10 hard drives and more than 100 storage devices, such as DVDs and removable flash drives, U.S. officials said, an intelligence trove that could force al Qaeda's terror operatives to move into areas or initiate communications that make them more easily detectable. The raid also probably represents the biggest success so far of a revolution in military technology: the ability to relay vast amounts of digital imagery through the unblinking eye of robotic aircraft and other spy gear to the SEALs and to Obama and senior officials watching in the White House Situation Room.

How much of the 48 contiguous U.S. states' water drains into the Mississippi River basin, the third-largest drainage basin in the world, after those of the Amazon and Congo rivers. The Army Corps of Engineers this week blew a giant hole in a Missouri levee to relieve pressure on floodwalls facing record water levels at the confluence of the Ohio and the Mississippi rivers.

Men and women Pope John Paul II beatified, or placed at the threshold of sainthood. That's more than all the other popes combined since the Vatican instituted formal processes for beatification and canonization. Now it's John Paul's turn, with Pope Benedict XVI's beatification of his predecessor.

Budget of the 1958 cult classic "Attack of the 50-Foot Woman," with Yvette Vickers. The picture went on to gross $480,000 in the U.S. (The action film "Fast Five," which just grossed $86.2 million in North America in its opening weekend, cost about $125 million.) Reports this week suggest a mummified body in the B-movie star's L.A. home was her own. 

Average student debt of newly minted college grads.

Even as U.S. households pare debt, the new grads are piling it on. With tuition rising at an annual rate of about 5% and parents on tight budgets less able to help, it's estimated the mean student-debt burden at graduation will reach nearly $18,000 this year—$22,900 counting the college loans parents take on, which students often pay. That's 8% more than last year and, in inflation-adjusted terms, 47% more than a decade ago. Debt can be a career motivator. But unemployment is at 9%, andaverage starting salaries for four-year college graduates are less than $37,000.

 --Mark Whitehouse 

 Sources: Army Corps of Engineers; Vatican; imdb.com, Motion Picture Association of America. 

Obama decided not to release any photos or videos showing bin Laden after the raid, saying the images could incite violence or be used as a propaganda tool against the U.S. The decision, which came after an internal debate about proving bin Laden's death, fanned conspiracy theories across the Arab world. 

Bin Laden's death sparked celebrations in the U.S., where people massed at Ground Zero in lower Manhattan and outside the White House. Obama told the American people of the successful mission in a nationally televised address Sunday night, and on Thursday visited the World Trade Center site, meeting with first responders and families of victims of the September 11, 2001 attacks. "When we say we will never forget," the president told them, "we mean what we say."

Leaders of the feuding Palestinian factions ironed out final details of an Egyptian-brokered agreement to form a unified government, though the deal faces significant hurdles. When done, it looks set to sharpen conflict with Israel, which froze $88 million of Palestinian funds. Still, the pact may signal less a triumph than both groups' vulnerability to the "Arab spring." 

The U.S. is trying to free up more than $30 billion of frozen Libyan assets to help rebels opposing Gadhafi. The move would bolster a world-wide effort to finance the struggling movement. It followed a NATO airstrike that killed members of the dictator's family. 

Japan made progress in fighting the nuclear crisis at the crippled Fukushima Daiichi complex as ventilators were switched on inside the No. 1 reactor building for the first time since the March 11 disasters. Plant operator Tepco, at the center of a debate over who should pay the utility's growing liabilities, hopes the move will allow it to install cooling equipment for a safe shutdown. 

Portugal agreed to a $116 billion financial bailout with the EU and IMF over three years. The deal will let the country exit debt markets for a few years, while forcing it to make economic overhauls that will boost long-term growth, officials involved in the arrangement said. 

General Motors said its first-quarter profit tripled, helped by stronger demand for its vehicles but mostly because the auto maker made money from the sale of interests in two former subsidiaries. Without those asset sales, GM's earnings disappointed investors and highlighted difficulties in North American operations and in other units around the world. 

BP can go ahead with its troubled $16 billion Arctic exploration and share-swap deal with Russia's state oil company, but only if it pursues it through its existing Russian joint venture TNK-BP, a panel of arbitrators ruled.

Access Industries, a conglomerate controlled by Russian-born billionaire Len Blavatnik, reached an agreement to buy Warner Music Group in an all-cash deal that values the company at $3.3 billion. 

Gap parted ways with top designer Patrick Robinson.

Facebook's business is growing faster than it forecast several months ago, raising the likelihood of an initial public offering as early as spring of next year, said people who have seen Facebook's recent financial information. 

Teva Pharmaceutical Industries agreed to buy Cephalon for $6.8 billion in an all-cash deal, aiming to push the Israeli company, the world's largest generic-drug maker by sales, further into selling the brand-name drugs it normally copies. 

The biggest U.S. wireless carriers are scaling back a joint venture for mobile payments that they originally hoped would compete with Visa and MasterCard, reaffirming the traditional credit-card companies' clout in the nascent market for mobile transactions. 

Mexico's Supreme Court dealt  Carlos Slim, the world's richest man, a major setback, ruling that his cellphone company can't block competitors by using court injunctions to ignore the rulings of the nation's telephone regulator. 

Silver tumbled 27% this week, its largest weekly percentage drop since March 1980, and gold fell 4.2%. The declines came as some big investors have been selling holdings of precious metals, suggesting the nine-month run-up could be near an end. The Dow ended the week down 1.3%, at 12638.74, with the drop coinciding with a plunge in commodities, sparked by worries about overheated markets. Crude oil slid 15% on the week.

Nasdaq OMX Group and IntercontinentalExchange went hostile with an $11 billion takeover offer for  NYSE Euronext, as expected. Meanwhile, Nasdaq and ICE are lobbying merger arbitragers and hedge funds to acquire more NYSE shares to put pressure on the board.

High-frequency traders have curtailed the use of fast-trading strategies in stocks amid a drop in volume and volatility after last year's "flash crash." A boom in high-speed trading in commodities and currencies has coincided with a series of sudden plunges in those markets. A year after the May 6 event, some Wall Street traders are suffering from a type of post-traumatic stress that one psychologist calls the "flash-crash flashback."

A wave of high-priced IPOs and mergers is driving a surge in wealth andcreating a new generation of millionaires and billionaires, at least on paper. The initial public offering of Glencore International alone likely will christen six new billionaires.

The U.K.'s financial regulator is pressuring some European institutions to restructure their London operations in ways that would subject them to greater oversight, including tougher capital and liquidity requirements. Some observers said the move conflicts with European rules that give primary responsibility of oversight to regulators in home countries.

The Madoff trustee is seeking to distribute an initial $272 million to compensate victims of the multibillion-dollarPonzi scheme. The amount represents a fraction of about $10 billion collected for victims so far. 