For more than two years, the Mets have been adamant that losses suffered by owner Fred Wilpon stemming from Bernard Madoff's Ponzi scheme would have no impact on the ballclub's operation. But by announcing Friday that they have retained an investment banker to sell up to 25% of the team, the Mets indicated that they are on shakier financial ground than they had previously acknowledged.

At the very least, it highlights the threat posed by the lawsuit brought by Irving Picard, the trustee seeking to recover funds on behalf of Madoff victims. Mr. Picard sued Mr. Wilpon and his real-estate investment firm, Sterling Equities, in December; they have yet to reach a settlement. At worst, experts say, Friday's announcement could mark the beginning of the end of the Wilpon family's controlling interest in the team.

The move the Mets are trying to pull off has become difficult in recent years in the sports business. The market for sports franchises essentially dried up in 2008, and while values have rebounded the past 18 months, the limited-partnership market has been more challenged, said Rob Tillis, principal at sports-investment advisory firm InnerCircle Sports.

"This is going to be all about the size of the check, valuation and control," Mr. Tillis said. "Also, does the limited partner get a piece of SNY?" he added, referring to the Mets' lucrative regional sports network.

In a conference call with reporters, the Mets' chief operating officer, Jeff Wilpon, said SNY is "totally separate" and "not part of the consideration."

Principal owner Fred Wilpon, who has owned at least a share of the team since 1980, insisted that his family would not relinquish majority ownership of the Mets. And Steven Greenberg, a managing director at Allen & Company whom the Mets retained for the sale, was optimistic that they could find a minority investor. "I'm very confident that when qualified buyers explore and get access to the information they're going to get, we'll have a robust level of interest in a minority stake in the club," Mr. Greenberg said.

Other sports owners have had difficulty raising funds without ceding control.

In the past two years, Texas leveraged-buyout king Tom Hicks tried to bring in limited partners to finance his ownership of the Texas Rangers baseball team, the English soccer club Liverpool and the Dallas Stars hockey team.

But when no buyers appeared who were willing to hand their money over to Mr. Hicks and cede all control to him, Mr. Hicks, who needed to raise money to meet his debt obligations, was forced to sell all three entities, though the Stars remain on the market.

The New York Times Co. has been trying to sell its 17.75% stake in New England Sports Ventures, owners of the Boston Red Sox, for more than a year, but so far has sold just 6.6% of its investment. 

On the other hand, Dan Rooney, the longtime owner of the Pittsburgh Steelers, successfully raised enough money from outside investors who bought stakes in the team but left Mr. Rooney and his son, Art Rooney II, in charge.

But as Marc Ganis, principal of the Chicago sports consulting firm, SportsCorp, Ltd., said, the NFL assisted the Rooneys' efforts by adjusting its rules on how much equity a principal owner needed to hold. Also, the Steelers, unlike the Mets, have proved to be one of their sport's strongest franchises in the last 40 years. "The Steelers run a good operation," Mr. Ganis said. "They don't operate on a shoestring, but they aren't known for spending a lot of money and yet they've had a lot of success." 

The Mets had the fifth-highest payroll in the majors last season, at $136 million, but finished just 79-83, in fourth place in the National League East. Jeff Wilpon said recently the team's payroll would approach $145 million in 2011. But the Mets were already on the hook for most of that money because of previous contract commitments.

They have signed only low-budget players this winter. And while they have a new general manager in Sandy Alderson and up to $60 million coming off the books after this season, it's not clear how much of that money the Mets will be able to spend.

To a significant degree, Mr. Alderson's ability to revitalize the struggling ballclub will be determined by what extent the Mets can shore up their finances. And that starts with finding an infusion of cash from one or more investors.

 Write to  Brian Costaat brian.costa@wsj.com and Matthew Futterman at matthew.futterman@wsj.com 