A series of safety and equipment failures in a  Massey Energy Co. mine likely allowed a small methane explosion to trigger a second, massive blast that killed 29 men in April, federal safety officials said Wednesday.

The Mine Safety and Health Administration offered its most detailed description to date of the possible causes of the accident at Massey's Upper Big Branch mine in Montcoal, W.Va. Among its findings: A water-spray system that helps suppress explosive coal dust wasn't functioning properly, and sparks from worn carbide bits on a piece of equipment known as a longwall shearer likely ignited gases that had reached explosive levels.

  Shane Harvey, general counsel for Massey, disputed the MSHA's scenario. "We do not currently believe that there were issues with the bits or the sprays on the shearer that contributed to the explosion," he said.

Massey and government safety officials have been at odds since the explosion, the worst U.S. coal-mining disaster in 40 years. Government officials have blamed Massey for safety lapses but also have been under criticism by members of Congress for not using their full authority to shut down unsafe mines.

Federal officials said the first explosion most likely occurred at the shearer, which grinds into coal and rock as it moves laterally back and forth across a coal seam. 

Officials said they believed a spark from the worn bits ignited a pocket of methane, which burned for 60 to 90 seconds, giving two miners enough time to turn off the shearer and begin running away before an larger blast swept through two miles of the mine. 

Kevin Stricklin, the MSHA's coal administrator, said the agency believed the larger explosion was the result of high levels of combustible coal dust that were set off when the methane continued to burn. The MSHA said Massey failed to spread enough nonflammable crushed limestone on surfaces to neutralize the coal dust. 

Massey's Mr. Harvey said eight of 153 sprays on the shearer were discovered missing after the explosion and could have been damaged in the blast. The primary purpose of the sprays, he added, isn't to prevent ignitions but to keep miners from breathing coal dust. 

He also said the company didn't believe coal dust was a major factor in the explosion. Massey has said it believed that natural gas erupted into the mine and overwhelmed normal safety procedures. The company is expected to update family members of the victims, as soon as Friday, on its own probe. 

The MSHA's Mr. Stricklin said its probe was continuing and that the agency planned to complete a more detailed outline of the accident within 60 to 90 days. 

Joe Main, head of the mine-safety agency, fended off criticism that the agency has been slow to investigate the accident and report its findings. He also said the problems outlined by officials should have been caught by the mine operator. 

The Massey accident is the subject of continuing civil and criminal investigations. Massey's board is weighing takeover bids from other coal companies. 

 Write to  Kris Maher at kris.maher@wsj.com 