 General Motors said its U.S. light-vehicle sales climbed 8% in December thanks to continued strong demand for crossovers and pickups. For all of 2010, GM said its U.S. sales rose 6.3% from 2009. 

The auto maker also said its sales in China grew 28.8% in 2010 to a record 2.35 million units, making the U.S. firm the first foreign company to surpass the two-million mark for annual vehicle sales in China. 

GM also said its sales in India jumped 59% to 110,804 vehicles. 

Ford posted a 6.8% increase in December sales of cars and light trucks, a result that doesn't include the Volvo brand it sold last year. For the full year, Ford's U.S. sales rose 19.5% light vehicles, when adjusted for the sale of Volvo. Without the Volvo adjustment, Ford's sales rose 15%.

Chrysler Group reported U.S. sales of 100,702 in December, up 16% from a year earlier. For all of 2010, Chrysler said sales rose 17% to 1,085,211 vehicles from 2009.

 Seven insurance companies have filed lawsuits against Toyota in a California state court seeking a minimum of $230,000 to cover the cost of claims paid for accidents related to the unintended acceleration problems identified in Toyota vehicles in the past several years.  

Budget airline easyJet has exercised options to place firm orders for 15 A320 aircraft from Airbus, to be delivered between 2012 and 2014. The British-based regional carrier said it also has upgraded contracted deliveries for 20 A319 planes to the larger A320 and has taken options for 33 more A320 planes.

Indonesian state-owned flag carrier PT Garuda Indonesia began pre-marketing for an initial public offering of around US$500 million, according to a term sheet.

 Greece's Piraeus Bank defended its decision to offer new shares at a deep discount in its €807 million ($1.08 billion) rights issue, saying such a move was "customary" in volatile times and that the terms were backed by a significant percentage of shareholders. 

A South Korean court rejected Hyundai Group's attempt to salvage its bid for a controlling stake in Hyundai Engineering & Construction, paving the way for rival bidder Hyundai Motor Group to acquire the builder's shares. 

 Spanish construction company Actividades de Construcción y Servicios said it has secured just over 30% of the voting rights in Hochtief, making headway in its effort to reach a majority stake in the German builder. Under German law, passing the 30% threshold allows ACS to continue to buy additional shares of the German builder on the market at its discretion without any time limit, without having to launch a new offer. 

 Royal Dutch Shell suffered a new setback to its plans to drill offshore in Alaska, after environmentalists successfully challenged a decision to grant the company air-quality permits.  

Oil giant BP's shares rose following reports that compensation payouts for the Gulf of Mexico oil spill may be much lower than expected.

 Brazilian state-run oil company Petroleo Brasileiro, or Petrobras, confirmed it's evaluating buying all of Italian oil major Eni's 33.34% stake in Portuguese energy company Galp Energia. Petrobras reportedly offered €3.5 billion ($4.67 billion) to buy all of Eni's stake in Galp Energia. 

 Cairn Energy said it has contracted two vessels to drill up to four oil and gas exploration wells this year off the shore of Greenland, following the drilling of three wells in summer 2010 which provided mixed results. 

India is working on a policy that will allow state-run companies to acquire coal assets abroad faster, Coal Minister Sriprakash Jaiswal said, as the country prepares to tackle competition to secure energy resources globally. Energy-deficient India is trying to buy coal mines abroad as local supplies aren't enough to feed the power plants it is building. 

Bidders for the U.K.'s state-owned bookmaker, the Tote, expect a shortlist to be drawn up by the end of January, people familiar with the situation said. Lazard, which is running the sale, received a number of indicative bids before Christmas. 

 The French antitrust watchdog's advisory council is to meet Thursday to study a plan by the majority-shareholding family of Hermès International that would prevent a hostile takeover of the luxury group, according to a person familiar with the matter. 

 Morgan Stanley named strategy head Jim Rosenthal to become its chief operating officer. He will continue to oversee strategy at the firm and serve as the chief operating officer of Morgan Stanley's brokerage joint venture with Citigroup's Smith Barney.  

Credit Suisse squeezed past Goldman Sachs Group in the rankings of top bankers to private-equity firms last year, logging in a 9.3% market share of fees, according to Dealogic. The Swiss banking company had $944 million in fee revenue last year from arranging mergers and underwriting loans and stock and bond offerings for financial sponsors. 

Euromedic International sold its dialysis service operations to Germany's Fresenius Medical Care AG & Co. for €485 million ($647.5 million). The acquisition will give Fresenius Medical Care a chain of dialysis clinics in the fast-growing health-care markets of Eastern Europe and Russia. 

 Oberthur, a maker of banknotes and smart-card technologies, sought reassurances from acquisition target De La Rue about the impact on its business and reputation of embarrassing paper-production irregularities that hurt its operations last year.  

Sinovel Wind Group, China's largest wind-turbine maker by market share, said it plans to raise up to 9.46 billion yuan ($1.44 billion) in an initial public offering ahead of a Shanghai listing, bucking the trend of Hong Kong listings by China's wind power firms. 

Pfizer has expanded its collaboration with drug maker Santaris Pharma, agreeing to a development and commercialization pact that could see it paying as much as $600 million. Privately held Santaris is focused on the development of therapies that target ribonucleic acid, such as the so-called messenger RNA that carry genetic information to direct the creation of proteins. 

 Andy Bond has stepped down as chairman of Wal-Mart Stores' U.K. supermarket chain Asda Group effective the beginning of the year. Bond will focus on finalizing Wal-Mart's acquisition of South African retailer Massmart Holdings, which is expected to be concluded by the end of March, when he will leave Wal-Mart.  

A U.S. appeals court restored a jury verdict that Microsoft infringed a patent related to combating software piracy, but ruled that the software giant was entitled to a new trial on damages. 

German prosecutors dropped an investigation against Deutsche Telekom chief René Obermann for alleged bribery and coercion of government officials in Macedonia and Montenegro. The investigation found no evidence against Obermann and two other suspects, a spokesman for prosecutors in Bonn said in a statement. The investigation of five other company employees will continue, prosecutors added.

Swiss telecom provider Swisscom said its joint venture agreements to extend the fiber-optic network in two areas of Switzerland are being examined by the country's competition authority amid concerns they could reduce competition for broadband internet access. 

Telekom Malaysia and Axiata Group have formed separate sub-committees to conduct internal investigations into alleged improper payments by Alcatel-Lucent. The move comes after U.S. law-enforcement and regulatory authorities made documents public alleging the French telecom equipment supplier paid bribes to Telekom Malaysia employees in exchange for non-public information. 