Aegis Group , the U.K.-based advertising and marketing firm, said net profit for 2010 fell 34% to £41.2 million ($66 million), due to an exceptional provision related to one of its clients, Spain's Nueva Rumasa, filing for pre-insolvency protection. 

The French government said it will be watching car maker Renault to ensure it takes corrective action after the company became the victim of a scam that resulted in the wrongful dismissal of three senior executives. 

 General Motors installed a new chief executive, Karl-Friedrich Stracke, for its struggling Opel European unit, replacing Nick Reilly, in the auto maker's latest move to accelerate the company's challenging turnaround in the region. 

Porsche Automobil Holding said it is sticking to its plan to raise €5 billion ($7 billion) by May 31 through a capital increase to cut its net debt, which stood at €6.34 billion at the end of last year, despite increased volatility on financial markets following the nuclear crisis in Japan. 

Auto parts vendors to India's Tata Motors have been told that the company may start exporting its Nano minicar to Indonesia, Thailand, Sri Lanka and Africa by December, executives at two component suppliers said. 

 A French judge filed preliminary manslaughter charges Thursday against Airbus over the 2009 crash of an Air France jet—opening a rare criminal investigation against a corporate powerhouse.  

German airline Deutsche Lufthansa said it returned to profit in 2010, and foresees profits rising this year despite higher oil prices. Net profit in 2010 was €1.1 billion ($1.53 billion), compared with a €34 million net loss the previous year. The result was boosted by a tax gain of about €400 million related to the financial restructuring of its catering business. 

French military and business jet manufacturer Dassault Aviation reported a 3.9% jump in net profit in 2010 to €267 million ($371 million), but painted a gloomy picture of its prospects for 2011. 

Lloyds Banking Group, which became 41% owned by the U.K. government after a series of bailouts, said it will cut 570 jobs as part of an ongoing integration program with HBOS, the lender it bought at the height of the financial crisis. 

 A U.S. investigation of banks' possible manipulation of the London Interbank Offered Rate is focused in part on three institutions: Bank of America, Citigroup, and UBS, according to people familiar with the matter.  

Crédit Agricole reported net profit of €1.26 billion ($1.75 billion) in 2010 after taking a hit from a large write-down on its 4.79% stake in Italy's Intesa Sanpaolo.

France's third-largest bank by market capitalization also said it aims to grow net profit fivefold to between €6 billion and €7 billion by 2014 as it refocuses on retail banking. 

South Korea's financial authorities announced a plan to strengthen the supervision of the distressed savings-banks sector and to require the small lenders to meet higher fiscal standards. 

 Coca-Cola's share of the U.S. carbonated soft-drink market edged up in 2010 as chief rival PepsiCo saw its share drop, according to industry data published. Sales of Diet Coke also leapfrogged Pepsi-Cola in the U.S. for the first time last year as the diet soda became the No. 2 soda behind regular Coke. 

China Petrochemical Corp. struck a deal to invest in a Saudi Arabian refinery, in a move likely to strengthen China's overseas energy ties but that also carries risks amid rising volatility in the Middle East. 

ING Groep said Chief Executive Jan Hommen earned a total of €2.6 million ($3.61 million) for 2010, more than twice the pay he received a year earlier, after he steered the bailed-out Dutch firm back to profit. 

U.K. insurer Legal & General Group said full-year net profit attributable to shareholders fell 5% to £820 million ($1.3 billion) and raised its full-year dividend by 24% as its business continued to generate more cash on the back of a recovery in sales, and said it was "confident" about its growth prospects. 

 General Mills is set to buy a 51% stake in Yoplait that values the French yogurt company at €1.6 billion ($2.22 billion), said a person familiar with the situation. Yoplait is owned jointly by PAI and French cooperative dairy group Sodiaal following PAI's acquisition of a stake in 2002. 

Danisco, the Danish food-ingredients and enzymes firm, said its revenue increased by 18% to 3.9 billion kroner ($726.2 million) in the third quarter compared with a year ago, of which 8% was a positive currency impact. 

Elliott Advisors accelerated efforts for a major board shakeup at Actelion by naming six new board members who should redefine the Swiss firm's strategy, and called for a probe to find whether Europe's largest biotechnology company has received a takeover bid. 

The cost regulator for the U.K.'s publicly funded National Health Service recommended the use of Merck & Co.'s injectable anti-inflammatory drug Simponi, after the U.S.-based manufacturer provided more information about the product. 

U.K. retailer HMV Group's chief executive said talks with its lending banks about renegotiating debt terms have been positive and he is confident the company will survive its current troubles. 

 FedEx's profit in the quarter ending Feb. 28 slid 3.3% to $231 million as revenue topped Wall Street's views but unusually severe winter storms pressured shipping volume and boosted costs.  

ZTE, the Chinese telecommunications-equipment maker, said full-year net profit rose 32% to 3.25 billion yuan ($494.7 million) on strong orders from overseas markets. The Hong Kong- and Shenzhen-listed company said revenue rose 17% to 70.26 billion yuan in 2010.

China's Alibaba.com said its fourth-quarter net profit rose 46% to 410.4 million yuan ($62.5 million) from a year earlier because of robust growth in its online-business platform. Alibaba.com is the listed unit of Alibaba Group, in which Yahoo owns a roughly 39% stake.

 VimpelCom, the Russian mobile-telephone operator, said its shareholders voted in support of a $6 billion deal to acquire the telecom assets of Egyptian billionaire Naguib Sawiris and create the world's fifth-largest mobile company by subscribers. 