 Las Vegas 

It was almost two in the morning when Manny Pacquiao arrived on stage to sing at his customary post-boxing concert, dressed in a navy suit with a yellow pocket square that peeked from his left breast like a parakeet. Earlier in the evening, Pacquiao had devastated his latest challenger, Shane Mosley, in a one-sided match that dragged 12 rounds and ended in a shower of boos. But here, before a few hundred fans in a drab arena about a mile away, there was only love. Philippine flags waved, smartphone cameras flashed. The welterweight champion of the world paced the stage with a microphone in his famous left hand, bending down to touch his admirers with his underappreciated, dangerous right. 

As a boxer, Pacquiao is a relentless punisher, considered one of the greatest ever, with a record eight titles in eight separate weight classes. But onstage, he is a sensitive crooner, fond of heart-twisting ballads that would make Air Supply blush. As the clock crept toward 3 a.m., he removed his suit jacket and handed it to a minder, who folded it over his arm and walked to a corner of the stage. Pacquiao waved out into the crowd at his wife, Jinkee, and launched into "Nothing's Gonna Change My Love for You"—a tender anthem made famous by George Benson and later the Hawaiian singer Glenn Medeiros.



 If I had to live my life without you near me...the days would all be empty...the nights would seem so long... 



It was surreal—imagine Tom Brady departing a Super Bowl to read at a poetry slam—but surreal is part of Manny Pacquiao's irresistible formula. At 32, he is one of the world's most enthralling sporting personalities, with a zealous following that devours every detail of his eccentric, multitasking life and flocks to his fights like pilgrims. In his home country of the Philippines, he is a humanitarian, a movie star and a congressman, and considered a potential president.

And Pacquiao is the only man on earth who can restore the "Rocky III" anthem "Eye of the Tiger" to its pre-ironic, 1982 glory, as he did on Saturday night, entering the ring at the MGM Grand accompanied not just by the bombastic song, but also by its original singer—Survivor's Jimi Jamison, who wore leather pants and appeared unthawed from Reagan's first term.

But a melancholy is starting to descend on Pacquiao's joyous career. Saturday night's fight against Mosley was the latest in a listless series of contests against opponents who have offered him little challenge other than staying awake. Unable to reach a deal to fight the one man who can rival him as the planet's best pound-for-pound boxer—the undefeated Floyd Mayweather Jr.—Pacquiao is forced to occupy himself with a second string of contenders grateful to bask in his reflected shine.

Those in the Pacquiao business try to make their best of the situation. "People want to see greatness, and Manny Pacquiao represents greatness," the promoter Bob Arum said after Saturday's fight. Arum compared Pacquiao with Tiger Woods in his prescandal prime, but it's a strained analogy: Without a rival, Woods was still fascinating because he could compete against the golf course, making an exasperating sport look simple. Pacquiao doesn't have that luxury. As gifted as he is, he can't box himself.

Now the search presses on for another foil: Juan Manuel Marquez, or Zab Judah, or Timothy Bradley. Whoever comes next will be pumped up as a formidable threat, just as the 39-year-old Mosley was. But those boos on Saturday—from an audience of 16,412 that was overwhelmingly pro-Manny—signal that boxing audiences are fatigued of watching a champion reheat leftovers. Pacquiao seems flustered, too. "He didn't want to fight toe to toe with me," Pacquiao said of Mosley afterward. 

The definitive 21st Century fighter is here and can't get his defining 21st Century fight. Pacquiao has a global reach, a shiny media patron in CBS/Showtime and a swaggering Nike campaign, but that maddening boxing-world inertia is creeping in, and an opportunity is slipping away. Pacquiao is the Yankees without the Red Sox, Federer minus Nadal. At the post-match news conference, groans could be heard as noted boxing historian Paris Hilton was ushered to a seat next to Pacquiao. Once more, boxing's biggest star was sharing a stage with a contender who peaked years ago. "It was an incredible fight," Hilton said, in the evening's most merciful review. 

Throughout the weekend, Mayweather loomed like a cloud. The day of the fight, the 34-year-old Vegas resident sent out a churlish tweet urging everyone to watch the Lady Gaga concert on HBO—and presumably skip Pacquiao on pay-per-view. A superb fighter, Mayweather has proved far more adept at being a provocateur and getting himself into legal trouble than in getting serious about a Pacquiao showdown, which has been delayed so long by sniping and drug-testing demands that it almost feels unreachable, boxing's version of a Slash and Axl reunion. 

Pacquiao maintains he wouldn't be crushed if a Mayweather fight didn't happen. If it did, Arum said he had no doubt Pacquiao would win. "I guarantee it," he said. "And the person who knows that best is a student of boxing, Floyd Mayweather Jr." 

But no one really knows who would win, which is exactly why it should happen, if a fading sport wishes to capitalize on its two most magnetic stars. This song is starting to sound the same. It is time for Floyd Mayweather Jr. to get in the gym, and for Manny Pacquiao to find out how great he really is.