A 12-acre Silicon Valley property that belonged to a great-grandniece of Levi Strauss is asking $59.5 million.

A 12-acre Silicon Valley property that belonged to a great-grandniece of Levi Strauss is asking $59.5 million. Plus, Blixseth home in Montana heads to auction and Glenn Beck sells in New Canaan, Conn.

The sellers of the Atherton, Calif., property, called Pine Brook, are the children of San Francisco philanthropist Madeleine Haas Russell, who died in 1999. The family has owned it for a century and used it as a summer retreat. There's a main, English Tudor-style house of more than 11,000 square feet. There's also a 6,500-square-foot guest house, a swimming pool, pool house, tennis court and gardens. 

The family members say in a statement that they always intended to eventually sell the land. Listing agent  Mary Gullixson of Alain Pinel Realtors says the estate is an unusually large offering. 

A 160-acre property that belonged to Edra and Tim Blixseth, the founders of Yellowstone Club in Big Sky, Mont., is being sold in a bankruptcy auction with an effective minimum reserve of $11.1 million. The property is located in the club, which counts  Bill Gates and cyclist Greg LeMond among its members.

The timbered property has two three-bedroom homes built in 2007 as guest homes for a main house that was never built. Ms. Blixseth acquired the property, along with the Yellowstone Club and a 249-acre estate near Palm Springs, Calif., in a divorce settlement in 2008; she later filed for bankruptcy. Boston-based private-equity firm CrossHarbor Capital Partners acquired the Yellowstone Club in 2009 and  Larry Ellison bought the estate near Palm Springs this year. 

The deadline to submit bids in the court-ordered sale is May 16, with the auction scheduled for May 20 in Missoula, Mont., if qualified bids are received. In their absence, the property is expected to go to CrossHarbor, the first lienholder on the property; it has submitted a bid of $10.9 million. Buyers would need to obtain membership to access the club's facilities.  Bill McDavid of Hall & Hall represents the property.

Talk-show host Glenn Beck and his wife, Tania, have sold their New Canaan, Conn., home for $3.6 million, 27% less than its $4.9 million asking price in late 2009. 

Mr. Beck, who earlier this month announced plans to leave his popular and controversial Fox News show, bought the home with his wife in 2005 for $4.3 million. The six-bedroom colonial farmhouse-style home is 11,320 square feet and sits on 2.8 flat acres overlooking a reservoir. The house was built in 2004 and has a covered porch and a pool. 

Mr. Beck recently announced during a live stage show that he had sold the home and planned to move out of the New York City area. Fox News, like The Wall Street Journal, is owned by News Corp.  Lynne Leonard of Lynne Leonard Realty represented the Becks. 

—Juliet Chung

—Email: privateproperties@wsj.com 