 Renault filed a "complaint against persons unknown" with French prosecutors for industrial espionage and other acts, but declined to give further details on the high-profile spying case at its electric vehicle program.  

The U.S. government is unlikely to recover its entire $50 billion investment in General Motors, in part because the Obama administration unloaded a big block of shares in the company's initial public offering at $33 a share rather than wait for a higher price, a federal panel said. 

 PSA Peugeot-Citroën said its 13% year-to-year rise in sales of new vehicles in 2010 was boosted by a surge in demand from markets outside Europe, a trend that appears to be growing.  

Tesla Motors, the electric sports car maker, expects to get about $60 million in revenue from building the electric components of an upcoming Toyota Motor RAV4 sport-utility vehicle. Tesla is building the batteries, motor, gearbox and electric control system for the RAV4, which is set to come out in 2012. 

Tesla also said it has finished the acquisition of the former Toyota and General Motors plant in Fremont, Calif. that will serve as its manufacturing hub.

 Germany's Commerzbank said it will raise up to €650 million ($853.6 million) in new capital by exchanging hybrid bonds for new shares, resulting in a capital gain and a core Tier 1 ratio increase. 

Spanish lender Banco Español de Crédito reported a weak fourth-quarter net profit of €9.5 million ($12.5 million), as it took further steps to clean up its loan book in the wake of a massive housing bust.

General Electric agreed to acquire Lineage Power Holdings from private-equity firm Gores Group for $520 million, giving GE's energy-technology business entry to the power-conversion market, where the growth of cloud computing and mobile smartphone applications is driving demand. 

Sun Holdings Greater China is planning to raise at least US$1 billion in an initial public offering ahead of a listing in Hong Kong this year, people familiar with the situation said. 

Marathon Oil's board said it has revived plans to spin off the company's refining and sales operations. The approval comes two years after the company decided against breaking up. The split will see the creation of Marathon Petroleum Corp., expected to be the fifth largest U.S. refiner. 

French oil major Total is currently in discussions with a preferred bidder to sell its U.K.-based refinery in Lindsey, North Lincolnshire, a person familiar with the matter said. The person didn't give details of the potential buyer. 

Cnooc, China's largest offshore oil and gas producer by capacity, plans to issue 10- and 30-year international bonds to institutional investors, becoming the latest Chinese company to tap the offshore bond market amid tightening liquidity at home. It didn't say how much it plans to raise. 

Moody's latest downgrade of AIG's credit rating could force the insurer to cough up millions of dollars to firms holding financial derivatives and other contracts from its units, according to the company's financial statements. The development is unlikely to affect AIG's plans to close a recapitalization agreement with the U.S. government Friday. 

 Lehman Brothers Holdings increased its estimate of how much its creditors will recover to $60.1 billion and said it expects to file a new plan to disperse its assets within seven to 10 days, nearly 2½ years after the investment bank filed for U.S. Chapter 11 protection in the largest bankruptcy ever.  

Fosun International announced a $600 million joint investment fund with Prudential Financial of the U.S., the latest move by one of China's biggest privately owned conglomerates to establish itself as an international investor. The fund will invest in both Chinese companies and foreign firms that have significant business opportunities in China. 

MSCI's fiscal fourth-quarter profit grew 23% to of $30.3 million as costs from the market indexing firm's past acquisitions cut into its margin. 

French insurer Groupama said it's interested in buying a stake of up to 20% stake in Fondiaria-SAI, Italy's second-largest insurer. It added, however, that it isn't seeking control of the company. 

Anglo Platinum, the world's largest producer of the metal, said it expects its 2010 earnings to have roughly tripled due largely to a jump in the price received for platinum-group metals. 

Inmet Mining's planned merger with Lundin Mining will put the combined 9 billion Canadian dollar (US$9.1 billion) miner among the world's biggest copper producers as demand for the widely used industrial metal shows no signs of easing. 

India's Tata Steel plans to launch its proposed 36.8 billion rupee ($817 million) follow-on public share offering on Jan. 19, three people involved in the transaction said, as it seeks to raise funds to lower its debt burden. 

Posco, the world's third-biggest steelmaker by output, posted a 59% decline in fourth-quarter net profit to 525.4 billion won ($471.7 million), weighed down by high raw-material costs, but forecast a rebound in profitability in the current quarter. 

 Merck & Co. said researchers have halted one of two major studies of its experimental heart drug vorapaxar and made significant changes to the other, throwing into doubt the future of one of the most important medicines in its product pipeline.  

Dutch biotechnology company Crucell, a takeover target of U.S. giant Johnson & Johnson, said it resumed operations at its South Korean vaccines plant after it had shut it down last year due to sterility issues at the plant. 

 France's Carrefour is taking a €550 million ($722 million) charge and restating its 2009 financial results after an audit of its Brazilian businesses uncovered losses far higher than previously disclosed. 

 Tesco, the world's third-largest retailer by sales, reported weaker-than-expected U.K. Christmas sales, falling behind rivals J Sainsbury and William Morrison in the race for festive spending, although its international business continued to grow strongly.  

Japan's Fast Retailing, the operator of the Uniqlo casual clothing store chain, reported a 35% fall in fiscal first-quarter profit to 22.71 billion yen ($273.7 million), citing weak sales of autumn and winter clothing in the latest setback for the once-surging retailer. 

 Starbucks unveiled an alliance with Tata Group, India's flagship conglomerate, for sourcing and roasting coffee beans, a move designed to pave the way for the U.S. chain to open stores in the country and to sell more Indian coffee world-wide.  

Target said it hired an advisor to pursue the sale of its $6.7 billion credit-card receivables portfolio, as the mass merchandiser also disclosed plans to acquire up to 220 sites for 1.83 billion Canadian dollars (US$1.85 billion) from a unit of Canadian department-store operator Hudson's Bay. 

 Intel's fourth-quarter earnings jumped 48% to $3.39 billion, as the chip-making giant's sales rose sharply and margins gained in part on a year-earlier $1.25 billion settlement charge.  

 The U.S. Justice Department is preparing a potential court challenge to Google's acquisition of travel-software company ITA Software that powers some of the most popular Internet airline-ticket search and booking sites, people familiar with the matter said. 

 SAP released preliminary fourth quarter revenues well above expectations, but said the $1.3 billion jury verdict awarded to rival Oracle would weigh heavily on its profits. The company said it had not yet re-measured its provisions set aside for the lawsuit filed by Oracle, so it could not yet disclose its profits and operating margin for the fourth quarter and full year.  

Online retailer Amazon.com will add 950 jobs in Scotland as the online retailer opens a new 1 million square-foot distribution center, as it continues to expand its worldwide shipping capacity.

Myspace's CEO told employees that parent News Corp. is exploring a sale, merger or spinoff of the social-media website, one day after laying off half of Myspace's work force.

 Research In Motion said it has provided solutions to let Indian security agencies access the smartphone maker's messenger and public email services, though the tools can't be used to monitor its corporate email services.  

Infosys Technologies posted a weaker-than-expected 14% rise in third-quarter net profit to 17.8 billion rupees ($395.3 million) under the weight of the strong rupee.