LONDON—The U.K. government has delayed implementation of a new antibribery law after businesses voiced concerns over the rules' clarity, specifically which companies would be affected and which actions could be interpreted as bribery. 

The Bribery Act was expected to come into effect in April, with guidance from the government about how businesses could comply with it due out around now. 

A spokesman for the Ministry of Justice said in a statement the government will release new details on the legislation in "due course."

"We are working on the guidance to make it practical and comprehensive for business," the statement said. 

A person familiar with the matter said the delay came after businesses complained about how the new law would work. 

"We are seeing a lot of uncertainty from clients around what internal controls they actually need to comply with the act, so it's important that the government takes its time and gets this guidance right," said  Andrew Maclay, director in the Forensics Services team at accountants BDO.

The new law is similar to the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, which bars companies that trade on U.S. exchanges from bribing foreign government officials to gain a business advantage. The U.K. law, though, went beyond the FCPA by not just prohibiting illicit payments to foreign officials, but also bribes between private businessmen. The law, which covers any company that conducts business in Britain, applied even if the individual who makes the payment doesn't realize the transaction was a bribe.

"Crucially, under the act, the greatest risk for organizations is if they are unknowingly involved in bribery somewhere in the world and do not have adequate procedures in place," Mr. Maclay said. 

Lawyers said some clients feared that treating business contacts to an expensive dinner or sporting event could be considered bribery under the new law, which also boosts the maximum penalty for bribery to 10 years in prison from seven, and sets no limits on fines.

Some companies were also unclear about whether they would fall under the act's jurisdiction merely by selling products in Britain. Also, the law stipulated that a company could be liable if anyone associated with it pays a bribe. Lawyers, though, were unclear whether that applied to agents, consultants, vendors, joint ventures and the like. 

The law was brought into effect by the last U.K. government at a time when countries around the world were taking a tougher stance against corruption. Tony Blair's Labour administration was also heavily criticized by anticorruption campaigners after putting pressure on the Serious Fraud Office to drop an investigation into allegations about bribes paid to foreign officials by British defense contractor BAE Systems PLC.