ABOARD A U.S. MILITARY AIRCRAFT—Secretary of Defense Robert Gates said "baby steps" toward internal reform weren't enough to stave off a deeper crisis in Bahrain, one day after violent clashes erupted between demonstrators and pro-government loyalists in the Gulf kingdom. 

Mr. Gates met King Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa and Crown Prince Sheik Salman bin Hamad al-Khalifa of Bahrain Saturday in a bid to persuade the ruling family to speed internal reform. 

"I told both the king and the crown prince that across the region I did not believe there could be a return to the status quo and—that there was change, and it could be led, or it could be imposed," he said. "Obviously, leading reform—and being responsive—is the way we would like to see this move forward."

Bahrain, a strategic ally of Washington and home to the U.S. Navy's Fifth Fleet, has been rocked by violent demonstrations in recent weeks. Shortly ahead of Mr. Gates's arrival Friday, antiregime protesters clashed with loyalists, the first major disturbances since the crown prince ordered the military off the streets three weeks ago and called for dialogue with the opposition. 

Mr. Gates's visit was meant as a show of support for the ruling family, but it also marked the start of a new outreach to U.S. allies in the region. The Obama administration wants to encourage rulers to avoid further instability by embracing internal reform, and Mr. Gates is planning similar discussions with regional leaders in the coming weeks. 

"I told the king that I felt that, given their readiness to move, that they in some respect had showed the whole region how you could move forward a process of reform while sustaining stability and continuity," Mr. Gates said. 

The influence of Iran, which is a focus of anxiety for Bahrain and other Gulf states, was a subject of discussion between the defense secretary and the ruling family. While U.S. officials have been skeptical of Bahraini claims that Iran stoked the uprising, Mr. Gates said he was concerned that Tehran might turn unrest to its advantage, especially in Shiite-majority Bahrain. 

"There is clear evidence that as the process is protracted, particularly in Bahrain, that the Iranians are looking for ways to exploit it and create problems," he said. 

Mr. Gates said he warned the ruling family in the meetings Saturday that "time is not our friend," because of the potential for Iran to exploit internal discord. Mr. Gates added: "Under the circumstances, and with the impulse behind the political and economic grievances across the region…baby steps probably would not be sufficient to meet the need, that real reform would be necessary."

While Bahrain's rulers have offered a national dialogue, opposition groups have yet to enter into the process.

"At the end of the day we are all going to have to live in the same country together and talk to one another," the crown prince said ahead of his meeting with Mr. Gates.