It may be time to take some junk out of your trunk.

Until recently, high-yield or "junk" bonds have been on a tear, posting double-digit returns in 2009 and 2010 and sending prices higher and yields close to all-time lows. 

But investors are starting to pare back their appetite for risky assets. For the first time since early December, there were net outflows from high-yield bond funds last week—some $801.9 million—according to EPFR Global, a Boston research firm that tracks fund flows.

On Tuesday, ProShares will launch the first inverse high-yield exchange-traded fund,  ProShares Short High Yield,
SJB


-0.07
%




 which seeks to bet against the daily performance of the iBoxx $ Liquid High Yield Index. If high-yield bonds are ripe for a pullback, then the ETF, which has expenses of 0.95%, should do well.

While some investment experts are warning investors to pare back their expectations, others say there's still opportunity—if investors are willing to do their homework.

"If you ever had it in your DNA to take on risk, the beginning of 2009 was really the time to do that," says  Michael Buchanan, portfolio manager of the  Western Asset High Yield Fund, which dropped its allocation to bonds rated below B to about 27% of its portfolio from 38% in December 2009. Both 2009 and, to a lesser extent, 2010 were years when taking risk was rewarded and security selection didn't matter as much. This year, says Mr. Buchanan, individual security selection and fundamental credit analysis will be more important. 

For example, while many of the opportunities have already been squeezed out of the large-cap high-yield issuers, such as  Ford Motor Co.
F


-0.54
%




,  American International Group Inc.
AIG


1.03
%




 and  CIT Group Inc.,
CIT


-0.21
%




 Mr. Buchanan has been finding better, if more hidden, opportunities in smaller names. For example, he has recently built up a "sizeable" position in the bonds of Florida East Coast Railway LLC of Jacksonville, Fla. The closely held company, whose bonds pay slightly higher yields of 7.25%, should benefit as rising oil prices make rail transportation a lower-cost alternative to trucking. That could help generate strong free-cash flow to pay down debt. 

And while investors shouldn't be looking for "heroic" capital gains, there is still room for the spread between junk-bond and Treasury yields to tighten, which could result in a bit more price upside, especially if default rates continue to decline, says  Martin Fridson, global credit strategist at BNP Paribas Investment Partners. He expects spreads could narrow another 0.5 percentage point—provided that the crises in Libya, Bahrain and Japan don't worsen.

 Write to  Jane J. Kim at jane.kim@wsj.com 