Libyan rebels regained control of the eastern gateway city of Ajdabiya on Saturday after international airstrikes on Col. Moammar Gadhafi's forces, the Associated Press reported, in the first major turnaround that comes as the North Atlantic Treaty Organization was expected to take control of all military operations in the country.

Drivers honked in celebration and flew the tricolor rebel flag, according to the AP. Others in the city fired their guns into the air and danced on burned-out tanks that littered the road. 

Ajdabiya's return to rebel hands Saturday came after a week of airstrikes and missiles against the Libyan leader's military.

Meanwhile, NATO, which on Thursday agreed to assume responsibility for operating a no-fly zone over Libya, is expected to agree to expand that role soon to incorporate all military operations there. "We expect a decision to take over all operations in the next few days," said Oana Lungescu, a NATO spokeswoman. 

Track the latest events in Libya.

Once a decision is made, the transfer of power will take some time. Even after NATO takes over, the U.S. military would still carry out operations.

This would allow the command and control of operations, including attacks on government forces on the ground, to be brought under one umbrella, thereby reducing the risks to those carrying out the mission, diplomats said.

See some key dates in Col. Gadhafi's nearly 42-year reign.

Track daily events in Middle Eastern countries.

"The full gamut of potential assistance that we might offer, both on the nonlethal and the lethal side, is a subject of discussion within the U.S. government," Gene Cretz, the U.S. ambassador to Tripoli, told reporters in Washington.

Mr. Cretz said, however, that the administration has made "no final decisions…on any aspect of that."

On Saturday, Libyan rebels regained control of the eastern gateway city of Ajdabiya after international airstrikes on Col. Gadhafi's forces. 

Saif Sadawi, a 20-year-old rebel fighter, said the city's eastern gate fell late Friday and the western gate fell at dawn Saturday after airstrikes on both those locations, according to the AP.

In the capital, Tripoli, which remains firmly under Col. Gadhafi's control under tight security, opposition groups had planned anti-regime demonstrations in at least two neighborhoods, Fashloum and Tajura, for Friday. But there were no signs of protestes, even within the confines of mosques where such actions have occurred over the past few weeks.

On the main street in Fashloum, men quietly filed out of several mosques in the area after the end of the traditional weekly prayers amid heavy presence by undercover security officers. Several police cars were parked off a roundabout at the top-end of the street.

In the capital's Souq al-Juma'a neighborhood, three residents said gun-totting pro-Gadhafi forces were present inside every alley, especially at night. "To go out means you want to die," said one, adding that arrests continue of anyone suspected of opposition to the regime continue. "This is Tripoli."

In Tripoli, the government used the coalition's bombing of several military installations over the past week, including the naval academy early on Friday, to portray the coalition as Western aggressors, or "crusaders" out to destroy the Muslim nation.

During a news conference in Tripoli, Libyan government spokesman Moussa Ibrahim described the crisis in Libya as a "civil war." Although the government previously warned about the prospect of a civil war, it never characterized the situation as such, insisting it was fighting alleged al Qaeda militants who were manipulating naive youth and opposition figures.

Separately, an official with the health ministry said a total of 114 people have been killed and 445 wounded in coalition bombardment through Wednesday. The official, Khalid Omar, declined to provide the civilian-military breakdown. 

Libyan authorities have continuously insisted that civilians have been targeted in the bombardment but have offered no credible proof so far.

Misrata, Libya's third-largest city, has been besieged by Col. Gadhafi's forces for nearly a month. On Friday, Misrata residents continued to flee to the northern tip of the city, near the coastline with some moving into empty schools and other public buildings, as Col. Gadhafi's forces clashed with rebels in the city's northwestern outskirts in a bid to gain more ground.

A doctor in the city said six people were killed on Friday when two mortar or artillery shells hit a house in the area. On Thursday, a teenage boy was killed by sniper fire and a mall in the city center went up in flames, he said.

The doctor said government forces were still hunkered down on a main thoroughfare, Tripoli Street, and at the central hospital, which has been shut down for refurbishment since 2007. Medical personnel with the rebels were forced to relocate from a makeshift field hospital that had become unsafe because of shelling by government forces.

Misrata residents established an independent council last month, including rebel military officers and the local lawyers association, to manage defense and municipal services

Foreign journalists have been prevented from going to Misrata. The Libyan government says it controls much of the city and that it is fighting a band of extremists who have wedged themselves among civilians.

Since allied airstrikes began one week ago, hitting several loyalist targets, they have failed to loosen Col. Gadhafi's forces' grip on part of the city. NATO officials said military planners were drawing up operational plans for incorporating the extra responsibilities into the alliance mission, which would be commanded out of Naples, Italy. 

NATO ambassadors could meet as early as Sunday to give the green light, they said.

No-fly zone operations are expected to be handed over from the coalition to NATO in a few days. After a period in which NATO polices the no-fly zone while the coalition, led by the U.S., France and Britain, organizes the attacks on ground forces, the two operations are expected to be joined, assuming diplomats sign off on the deal.

The first instalment of operational command moved from the U.S. to NATO at noon, Libya time, on Friday, with the enforcement of a Naval blockade aimed at keeping arms and mercenaries out of Libya. British Maj. Gen. John Lorimer said Libyan air-defense systems had been all but put out of action. Still, Gen. Lorimer added a note of realism about the effects of allied operations.

The operation will be run out of NATO headquarters in Brussels and the organization's main naval base in Naples Italy, with Italian commanders taking senior roles.

The battle against Col. Gadhafi's ground forces has emerged as the primary challenge to the international coalition's mandate to protect Libyan civilians. 

 Corrections & Amplifications 

An earlier version of this story incorrectly stated that Tripoli residents were fleeing to the coastline.

—Alistair MacDonald contributed to this article.

 Write to  Sam Dagher at sam.dagher@wsj.com and Stephen Fidler at stephen.fidler@wsj.com 