HONG KONG— J.P. Morgan Chase
JPM


1.40
%




 & Co. executives say the firm's newly approved securities venture in mainland China is the latest piece in its growing Asian-Pacific platform and a critical part of a push to globalize the U.S. bank.

The joint venture, approved by China's securities regulator last week, will allow the Wall Street bank to underwrite stocks and bonds in mainland China.

"Our access in China will help cement our franchise in Hong Kong and globally,"  Zili Shao, chief executive in China for J.P. Morgan, said in an interview.

Mr. Shao has been overseeing the securities partnership with Shenzhen-based First Capital Securities Co.  Bei Duoguang, who joined J.P. Morgan from China International Capital Corp., is set to head the daily operations of the joint venture and report to Mr. Shao, according to a person familiar with the matter.

Like other international investment banks, J.P. Morgan is able to underwrite deals for Chinese companies in Hong Kong, New York and other markets. But prior to last week, it was at a disadvantage compared with  UBS AG,  Goldman Sachs Group Inc.
GS


0.97
%




 and other banks that could already offer clients the option of raising capital in mainland China as well, where entrepreneurs can often raise more money for their companies.

J.P. Morgan gained market share in investment-banking revenues across the Asian-Pacific region last year, ranking No. 2 according to data provider Dealogic. It remained behind UBS, which can underwrite deals in China's so-called A-share market, has control of its joint venture and owns a rare stockbroking license for China.

Should the regulations in China allow it, J.P. Morgan would most likely increase its 33% stake in the joint venture.

The Asian-Pacific region represented 14% of J.P. Morgan's global institutional business as of the fourth quarter. The bank hopes to increase this to a stable 20% across bull and bear markets, said  Gaby Abdelnour, chief executive of J.P. Morgan's Asian-Pacific operations, in an interview.

Another big push in the region has been in corporate banking, a sector in which J.P. Morgan doubled its headcount last year. However, J.P. Morgan's corporate-banking operations in Asia are still dwarfed by those of  Citigroup Inc.
C


0.67
%




 and  HSBC Holdings PLC. 

The U.S. bank has also been hiring heavily for its commodities operations in the Asian-Pacific region, increasing its staff to about 75.

J.P. Morgan Chief Executive Officer  James Dimon has made it a priority to increase the bank's global reach. Pushing deeper into fast-growing emerging markets such as Asia is an important way to offset some of the rising costs of mounting regulation.

Combined, China's exchanges in Shanghai and Shenzhen have a market capitalization of $3.572 trillion, second only to the New York Stock Exchange. Goldman economists estimate that by 2030, China's combined equity markets, including Hong Kong, will become the largest in the world, overshadowing the U.S.

Only about a fifth of J.P. Morgan's revenue comes from outside the U.S., compared with more than half at Citigroup. J.P. Morgan's cash cow, its U.S. consumer-banking business, is pushing up against a 10% regulatory limit on the share of U.S. national deposits it is permitted to hold. 

In addition to a venture-capital unit it is developing, J.P. Morgan runs several other joint ventures in China. The bank owns a 49% stake in a fund-management joint venture with Shanghai International Group called China International Fund Management Co. In July 2007, the bank won approval to become the first locally incorporated foreign bank in Beijing, with JPMorgan Chase Bank (China).

It also has private equity and commodities operations in China and branches in Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin, Guangzhou and Chengdu. "These are building blocks for us," Mr. Abdelnour said.

So far though, China's domestic markets have been a source more of promise than profit for foreign investment banks. Chinese state-owned securities firms dominate the market for A shares bought and sold in mainland China.

Market leader  Citic Securities Co.
6030


-4.89
%




 earned 6.19 billion yuan ($933.9 million) in net profit in 2009, according data published by the Securities Association of China. By contrast, Goldman's joint venture made a net profit of 44.9 million yuan.

China's government restricts the ability of foreign firms to operate in its capital markets. Current Rules allow them only to do business through joint ventures in which they can hold a maximum stake of 33%. Despite gaining the ability to underwrite securities, J.P. Morgan won't be able to conduct sales and trading on the mainland.

Given's China's importance, J.P. Morgan has come under criticism for taking longer than peers such as UBS and Goldman to build a China presence, but the bank's executives say finding the right partner was more important than getting into the market early.

"In China, it is all about having the right relationship. You can negotiate three feet of documents but if you don't have the right relationship with your partner, it doesn't matter," Mr. Abdelnour said.

 Write to  Alison Tudor at alison.tudor@wsj.com 