How should the slaying of Osama bin Laden a stone's throw from Pakistan's premier military academy, in a garrison town barely 40 miles from the nation's capital, shape our understanding of that Islamic republic?

At first glance, nothing has changed. That Pakistan has been Janus-faced in its approach to fighting terrorism is hardly news. Nor can longstanding mutual suspicion between Washington and Islamabad, which in recent months has curdled into public recrimination by top military officials from both sides, be expected to disappear. According to U.S. Deputy National Security Adviser John Brennan, Pakistani officials were not informed of the mission to kill bin Laden until American aircraft had exited Pakistan's airspace. Meanwhile, as the fighting season kicks off in Afghanistan, NATO forces again face the familiar prospect of the Afghan Taliban using Pakistan as a sanctuary from which to launch attacks.

Look closely, however, and Sunday's drama reveals a rare opportunity to press Pakistan's army toward sorely needed reform. The ultimate goal should be a country that gives up its love affair with pan-Islamic adventurism and reorients itself toward its people's well-being.

Nobody expects a task of this magnitude to be easy, but the circumstances surrounding bin Laden's death open a crack in the door. The generals like the world to view Pakistan's radical Islam problem through the prism of geography and history—mostly confined to the lawless badlands near the Afghanistan border that even the British Raj in its heyday was unable to tame. That the U.S. located the al Qaeda chief neither in Afghanistan nor in Pakistan's unruly tribal areas seriously undermines that story line. If the world's most wanted man met his end beside Pakistan's equivalent of West Point or Britain's Sandhurst, it seems obvious Pakistan continues to aid and abet terrorists. 

The deeper problems are, of course, ideological and structural. The army and its notorious intelligence wing, Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), appear not to have shed their appetite for supporting global jihadism, in keeping with their Islamist sympathies. And unlike most armies in purportedly democratic lands, Pakistan's answers to nobody but itself.

The army has dominated Pakistan's national life almost since the nation was carved out as a separate homeland for the Muslims of British India in 1947. Though it employs barely 600,000 of Pakistan's 170 million citizens, it uses ginned-up fears about India to consume around one-fourth of the national budget each year—more than twice as much as education and health care combined. Generals have ruled Pakistan directly for 34 of its 64 years. For most of the rest, they have exercised more power—especially over foreign and strategic policy—than their ostensible civilian masters.

What does Pakistan have to show for this? Its wars with India have ended either in stalemates or defeats. Meanwhile, militant Islamist groups spawned by the ISI from the 1980s onward, albeit initially with U.S. blessing in Afghanistan, have spun out of control. Since 2009, Islamists have killed more than 3,000 Pakistanis. Over the past two decades, they've caused even more mayhem in India.

Perhaps most important, the army's longstanding love affair with jihadist groups ranging from al Qaeda to the India-centric Lashkar-e-Taiba have tarred Pakistan's reputation. According to Gallup, more than three-quarters of Americans hold a negative view of Pakistan; for neighboring India it's one in five. That bin Laden was found in a $1 million mansion in an army garrison town will only increase global suspicion.



The spotlight on Pakistan gives the international community a rare opportunity to publicly pressure the army to reform in the interest of the country it purports to defend. Pakistan is an honor-conscious society, and what gives the military its popular legitimacy is its appearance as a strong and incorruptible institution amid weak and rotten politicians. Sunday's operation, along with the poor record of the army, can be used to shame Pakistan.

To begin, the army must prove that it has given up its quest to treat Afghanistan like a puppet rather than a neighbor. The surest way to do this is to turn against its jihadist proxies in the Haqqani network, responsible for the deaths of hundreds of American soldiers in eastern Afghanistan. Unrealistic budgets flow from an expansionist world view: Curtailing the army's ambitions this way will free up much-needed resources for Islamabad.

As a good-faith gesture to make up for the bin Laden debacle, arresting his longtime deputy and al Qaeda's likely new leader, Ayman al-Zawahiri, and the Taliban's Mullah Omar would also be more than welcome. Both are thought to live somewhere in Pakistan under official or semi-official protection. Finally, the army needs to stop resisting a key administrative measure it beat back three years ago—bringing the ISI under civilian rather than military control. Pakistan's civilian rulers may be incompetents, but they lack the ISI's signature traits of over-ambitiousness and willful disregard for civilian lives.

Should Pakistan's generals proceed with these small reforms, the U.S. can keep up aid flows and establish closer military-to-military ties, with an emphasis on training for younger officers. The idea here would be to return the army to its British Indian roots—as a professional force that stayed out of politics and governance.

If not, the option of stepped-up drone strikes and public chastisement that erodes the army's image remains within easy reach. Either way, the world should not squander this opportunity to turn a symbolic victory over al Qaeda into a substantive one for ordinary Pakistanis as well.

 Mr. Dhume is a resident fellow at the American Enterprise Institute and a columnist for WSJ.com. 