How far must we go for the sake of the environment? It used to be so simple: Just trade in the gas-guzzling land yacht for an econo-box and you could puff yourself up with righteous self-regard. A few solar panels on the roof and a willingness to sort the recyclables also helped you to keep up with the eco-Joneses. No more. Rare is the domestic decision—from what light bulb to buy to how best to dispose of food scraps—that isn't fraught with moral peril. It is becoming ever more difficult to meet the demands of environmental purity, even for the most earnest.

Among the most earnest are those in the urban-homesteading movement, a grow-your-own lifestyle born of clashing imperatives. On the one hand, environmentalists champion the city: The more densely people are packed into urban areas, the less land will be gobbled up by the dreaded suburbs and the fewer fossil fuels will be used to commute from burb to urb. On the other hand, the core of the eco-sensibility is a yearning to be close to the land, to embrace Mother Gaia, to be more intimately connected to one's food than merely knowing in which aisle to find the frozen peas. Thus a conundrum: How can you be Mr. Green Jeans when you live in a canyon of steel? 

The answer: bring the farm to the city. Grow tomatoes on the balcony and runner beans up the fire escape. Raise chickens in your little backyard if you have one or up on the apartment roof if your neighbors (and neighborhood zoning) allow. The gag in the old TV show "Green Acres" was that Eva Gabor kept trying to live her Park Avenue lifestyle out amid the barns and silos of rural America. Now it's the other way around, as people eager to promote "sustainability" try to live like farmers in the shadow of skyscrapers.

Urban homesteading, as it is called, is a sort of survivalism for hipsters. And as with any self-respecting grass-roots movement, it has already devolved into squabbles over intellectual property. An eco-enthusiast in Pasadena, Calif., recently trademarked the phrase "urban homestead" and is now warning the authors and publishers cranking out urban-homesteading how-to books not to tread on the turf he has tried to fence in.

Scott Meyer, formerly the editor of Organic Gardening magazine calls his book "The City Homesteader: Self-Sufficiency on Any Square Footage," a title that avoids the word "urban" and thus any pesky trademark disputes. It's a cheerfully designed guide. The drawing of a bunny that accompanies the rabbit-breeding section may not quite be the stuff of Flopsy and Mopsy, but it's cute enough to make the nearby recipe for rabbit stew unappealing. The technologies that the book touts are delightfully retro (nothing says low-tech like cheesecloth) and are rendered in appropriate folk-art scribbles. In its mix of breezy, cartoon-illustrated directions for activities that we, as a society, have generally forgotten how to do, it is a sort of "Dangerous Book for Boys" for grown-ups.

There are instructions for drying herbs and keeping bees, for constructing a rain barrel and pickling cucumbers, for canning fruit and making cheese. The premise of the book is that these pursuits are manageable in a city setting, and some of the projects—such as "window-farming" curtains of leafy greens—seem downright practicable even in a Manhattan high-rise. But many, if not most, of the activities require a patch of ground, perhaps even a sizable one. Where's the compost pile supposed to go? And just try to keep goats in your high-rise efficiency without getting evicted (or committed). Mr. Meyer recommends 3,000 square feet of penned-in yard for a couple of billies, an acreage decidedly suburban rather than urban.

 By Scott Meyer  Running Press, 272 pages, $20

One of the pleasant surprises of Mr. Meyer's book is its lack of puritanical excess. Yes, he preaches the benefits of a "pet poo composter," but he doesn't go quite so far as, say, Kelly Coyne and Erik Knutzen, who, in "The Urban Homestead: Your Guide to Self-Sufficient Living in the City" (2008), tell how to rig up a five-gallon bucket with a toilet seat so that you can become a "humanure revolutionary."

Which brings us to the rather dramatic risks that attend the homesteading hobby. Though chicken droppings might be great for the old compost heap, don't even think about having Fido help you fertilize your tomato plants—carnivore manure (as page 192 helpfully points out) "may contain parasites and disease-carrying microbes that can survive the decomposition process and infest your garden." Nor is fertilizer the only matter for concern. We are urged to forage for wild food—dandelion salad, anyone? But we're also warned that "many common edible wild foods have poisonous (or at least unpalatable) look-alikes." Never mind the unpalatability, Mr. Meyer lost me at "poisonous."

And even if you have some baskets of lovely edible fruit, the danger isn't done. It is clear from Mr. Meyer's explanations that even the simplest food-preservation strategies can go wrong. Fail to properly sterilize your containers or thoroughly pasteurize your produce and you may be rewarded with a pantry full of bottled botulism: "When you make a mistake with canning," Mr. Meyer warns, "you can get you and your family very sick." 

I remember as a kid my own family's small experiment with regaining the lost knowledge of the frontier. We tried, once, to make old-fashioned sourdough bread from scratch, a process that entailed jarring the dough and leaving it in a cool, dark place. Alas, we missed the instruction warning not to turn the lids too tight, what with all the gasses produced as the yeasts do their stuff. We were startled awake one night by blasts worthy of a shotgun. We found the closet splattered with dough and with shards of glass from the exploded jars. 

The urban and suburban frontiers, it would seem, are not for the faint of heart—or at least not for those who can't follow directions.

—Mr. Felten, a Journal columnist, is the author of "Loyalty: The Vexing Virtue."