Libyan security agents are confiscating money and belongings from African migrants to allow them on vessels sailing toward Italy, sometimes escorted by the Libyan navy, according to an international aid official and a social worker familiar with the situation. 

The government security forces' alleged role in directing the refugee traffic from Tripoli came to light this week in accounts by migrants who survived the capsizing of an overloaded boat near Tripoli's harbor. 

Libyan officials didn't respond to allegations that state agents are abetting the wave of illegal migration during the country's armed conflict and profiting from it.

The people-smuggling business typically involves trawlers arranged by traffickers with ties to the migrants' African nations. More than 800 people have died fleeing Libya by sea during a 12-week-old insurgency against Col. Moammar Gadhafi's rule, according to the United Nations refugee agency. That number doesn't count the uncertain toll from the capsizing Friday, which hurled as many as 600 people into the Mediterranean about 100 yards offshore. 

According to one account of the capsizing, relayed by Nigerian compatriots of a fearful passenger who abandoned the voyage minutes before departure, the vessel had already begun tossing perilously in the waves before it was unmoored. "Blood of Jesus!" screamed the passengers, many of them Christians from sub-Saharan Africa, before they went down.

 March 22: A boat carrying 330 people departs from Libyan coast and never arrives in Italy. All aboard presumed dead.

 March 25: A boat carrying 72 migrants departs from Tripoli. On April 10, it washes up in Zlitan, Libya, with only 11 survivors aboard. Two later die. 

 Late March: A boat with 160 migrants never arrives in Italy.

 April 6: A boat of up to 300 people capsizes off Lampedusa. About 250 people die.

 May 6: A boat with more than 600 people founders off Tripoli. Many presumed drowned.

 May 8: A boat carrying 528 migrants crashes into the rocky shoreline of Lampedusa. Three people drown.

Source: UNHCR

The U.N. agency and a Somali diplomat in Tripoli said 16 bodies were recovered in the harbor. The Geneva-based International Organization for Migration, or IOM, said it had accounted for a half-dozen survivors who boarded another vessel and reached the Italian island of Lampedusa. The fate of the others remained unclear Tuesday, as Libya's government kept silent on the tragedy.

At least 12,360 people from Libya have crossed the sea to Italy and Malta during the fighting and a North Atlantic Treaty Organization bombing campaign aimed at halting Col. Gadhafi's assaults on civilians, according to the U.N. refugee agency. 

In fighting Tuesday, NATO launched a series of airstrikes that were coordinated with rebel units west of the town of Ajdabiya. Rebel commanders said they drew Col. Gadhafi's forces into an area where they were vulnerable to air attack. 

Italian authorities say the migration is being pushed by the Libyan leader, who in a speech two months ago had warned Europe of a human deluge.

A Nigerian migrant in Tripoli said security officers in the port area have stopped trying to halt illegal departures and moved in on the business of profiting from them. A Tripoli-based social worker who assists migrants confirmed her account, saying security officials at the port have since mid-March been confiscating cash from people before allowing them to board vessels. "This happens almost every day," she said. 

Track the latest events in Libya.

Track events day by day in the region.

See the level of unrest, plus the economic and politic status of some countries across North Africa and the Middle East.

Popular demonstrations in Tunisia toppled a president and spread to countries across the region. See photos from protests from Algeria to Yemen.

In some cases, she added, the vessels leave under government escort. "The naval officers who have boats…even accompany them to international waters and teach the captain how to guide the boat," said the social worker.

Those accounts are difficult to corroborate because the port and other parts of Tripoli are off limits to journalists unaccompanied by government minders. 

But Jean-Philippe Chauzy, a spokesman for the IOM, said interviews with 14 Libyan migrants reaching Lampedusa on three vessels over the weekend confirmed a pattern of payments to officials, which he characterized as extortion. "They're robbed of whatever savings they carry, mobile phones, watches," he said. 

Survivors of the capsizing also told aid officials that men who they believed to be police officers or soldiers had directed them to board another Italy-bound vessel. Mr. Chauzy said the IOM was "deeply concerned" over testimonies that those survivors were coerced to sail "in very risky conditions."

Without commenting on the allegations, Libyan Prime Minister Baghdadi Mahmoudi said Saturday that the government's capacity to patrol its shore had been crippled by NATO air strikes that began in March. 

"The seaport [in Tripoli] was bombed and security guards were killed," he told reporters. "Now the gate is wide open to illegal immigration. Now we don't have any means to stop this."

Under a 2008 treaty between Tripoli and Rome, Col. Gadhafi had previously deployed Libyan security forces to plug migration routes, keeping African would-be migrants bottled up in Libya. That treaty became defunct when Italy joined the NATO bombing assault.

Italy's foreign ministry said Tuesday the resulting wave of migration wouldn't affect its commitment to the campaign."We are confident that once security is fully restored and Libya is politically stabilized, without Qadhafi, the problem of migrants will also be resolved," said ministry spokesman Maurizio Massari.

On Tuesday, the U.N. refugee agency urged crews of ships in the Mediterranean to keep watch for unseaworthy vessels carrying migrants from Libya.

The appeal came after NATO denied a report in the British newspaper The Guardian that in late March NATO vessels in the Mediterranean ignored a sinking vessel carrying 72 African migrants, 61 of whom died.

A NATO official noted that most warships aren't well-equipped for hosting hundreds of refugees. "We'll do what we can," the official said, "but this problem needs a different solution and it's not necessarily a military one."

Sub-Saharan Africans made up most of the estimated 1.5 million illegal immigrants among Libya's population of 6.5 million people, according to IOM estimates. Nearly 750,000 are believed to have left during the conflict, fearful of violence and suddenly unemployed in a war-battered economy. Most have returned to their home countries.

A 31-year-old Nigerian who lost his construction job in Libya when his German employer pulled out, said he had planned to go to Italy to work and continue saving to start a business back home.

But over the weekend he learned that a Nigerian friend had disappeared in the capsized vessel, and that gave him pause. "It's risky," he said. "Too many people dying at sea."

—Stephen Fidler in Brussels and Muneef Halawa in Benghazi contributed to this article.

 Write to  Richard Boudreaux at richard.boudreaux@wsj.com and Stacy Meichtry at stacy.meichtry@wsj.com 