Until recently, Seattleites had plenty of reasons to feel superior: A diet that includes mushrooms and berries foraged from pristine local forests, a commitment to fixed-gear bicycles, fair-trade coffee, facial hair and the best attendance of any city with a Major League Soccer team in the country by a landslide. 

This season, Seattle Sounders fans aren't feeling quite so special anymore, thanks to a new MLS club with an eerily similar, comparably rabid and equally rain-impervious fan base that also hails from a progressive city in the Pacific Northwest. 

A look at some of the more colorful characters spotted at and around Seattle and Portland MLS games this year.

The Portland Timbers are 4-3-1 in their inaugural MLS season, tied with the Sounders in the Western Conference standings. And though their newly renovated stadium can't quite hold 20,000 fans (the Sounders drew a league-record average of 36,173 fans to Qwest Field last year) all four of the Timbers' home games so far have sold out.

Now, as Portland gears up to play Seattle Saturday for their first-ever MLS match, both camps are kicking around a new dilemma: How to work up a healthy hatred for fans who, in so many ways, look and think exactly alike. 

"You can't really say our beer's better than their beer. I mean, Mac & Jack's is way better than say, Deschutes, but still," said 23-year-old Sounders fan Josh Nelson during a home game on a drizzly afternoon last month, referring to popular microbreweries in Washington and Oregon, respectively. 

Sounders fans can no longer claim to be the league's most rugged supporters, as 18,627 Portlanders turned out in a torrential, freezing rainstorm last month for the Timbers' opening home game against the Chicago Fire. In Portland, stadium vendors hawk barbecued-tofu sandwiches, spinach salads and chocolate-covered bacon, putting Seattle's relatively mundane offerings, like veggie dogs, gourmet donuts and cappuccinos, to shame. Sure, the Sounders boast a "democracy" that gives fans voting rights on decisions like the team name, but the Timbers management consults regularly with its supporters group, the Timbers Army, and trumpets the team's commitment to community service. (The team plants a tree, for example, for every goal scored.) "The Timbers are all about helping out their fellow man," said Kaegan Dews, a 22-year-old dishwasher, pausing briefly between songs at the home opener. 

While Seattle's scarf-wielding supporters may look edgy compared to the baseball fans across the street at Safeco Field, Portland fans boast at least as many piercings, tattoos and mohawks. In the merchandise line at a Timbers game, Bryan Dean, a 40-year-old industrial designer with a tall blond mohawk was sporting a kilt. He said kilts are "considered quite masculine" in Scotland and Ireland and evoke Portland's identity: "underdogs and kinda blue collar, but also fringe, artistic."

"They're hippies," said Seattle fan Nic Greer, a 32-year-old garbage man with a lip ring who wears a chicken mask on his head to every game and a jersey that reads "Chicken Man" across the back. 

This Seattle-Portland animus isn't new: these fans have been at odds since the 1970s when both cities' teams played in the now-defunct North American Soccer League. But many current supporters of these franchises are newcomers who only got hooked when their cities' MLS teams were born. "We didn't really have rivals until this year," says Sounders fan Knox Burnett, 26, a guest-relations associate who moved to Seattle from South Carolina.

Only diehards like 15-year-old Steven Agen remember the last Seattle-Portland match in the second-tier United Soccer League the summer before Seattle got its MLS club in 2009. Half an hour before kickoff, Timbers fans held a funeral procession to mark the end of the rivalry by stuffing a toy whale in a coffin that was painted, oddly, in Timbers yellow and green. 

At a recent Sounders game, Agen said Timbers fans "are not the brightest bunch," thanks, he said, to their being "meth-headed" and "jobless." He said he has big plans for Saturday's match, though he wouldn't give details. "I'm one of the people they'll have to remove," he says.

For the most part, Seattle fans say any similarities they share with Portlanders are due to the fact that Portlanders are simply "wannabes" who have imitated them for years. "They are very envious of us—they have a little-sister complex," said Sean Geiger, a 26-year-old army reserve from Olympia, Wash., waving a Sounders flag and explaining that most of the Timbers' following are "wine-drinking, cheese-eating yuppies" masquerading as soccer fans.

Portland fans "think they're punk-rock, underground, hard-core superstars," said Jeff James, a 24-year-old software engineer singing heartily in the raucous Emerald City Supporters' section. "They think they're like, hipsters," said James, clad in skinny jeans, a plaid shirt, shades and K-Swiss sneakers. 'And they think Seattle's like a corporate town." 

Seattle fans like to poke fun at small differences, like Portland's higher unemployment rate and its relative lack of big companies. "Portland fans are icky, they're the trailer trash of the Pacific Northwest," said Kevin Scudder, a 48-year-old company owner relaxing in the stands. "We have a lot more money up here…though they do have a beautiful coastline."

Portland fans insult Seattle supporters by calling them "customers" instead of fans, and pick on everything from their love of boating to their diversity of political views. "In Seattle they have Republicans," said Heather Mathews, a graduate student at Lewis and Clark, who imagines Seattle fans spend most of their free time "sailing around in their sailboats." 

Portlanders also accuse Seattle residents of being soccer fans just for the scarves—thousands of which Sounders marketers distributed for free before their first game in 2009. "They're sellouts, man. They're like, 'Maybe I'll just wear this scarf and drink a lot of beer and go to this stupid soccer game," said Timbers fan Maggie McCombs, 24-year-old Portland waitress with a pierced lip who says she should know because her brother lives in Seattle. "That's what I hear his friends say."

With 500 seats reserved for Timbers fans Saturday, both camps are girding for tussles. Chants might include: "Suck my Xbox," a knock on the Sounders' main sponsor, Microsoft's Xbox 360, while Sounders fans will likely address Timbers fans by the nickname "Portscum."

"We just get drunk and have fun," said 22-year-old Sounders fan Brooke Dubay. "They're angry." The Portland supporters are so angry, she added, that they remind her of the kinds of fans that follow American football, a species she considers "more angry."

 Write to  Hannah Karp at hannah.karp@dowjones.com 