Manufacturing activity grew at a robust pace throughout much of the world last month, though high commodity prices, Japanese supply disruptions and monetary tightening in China began to take a toll.

Factory activity in the U.S. grew for the 21st consecutive month in April, though at a slower pace than in previous months. German and French manufacturers drove an acceleration in Europe even as Italy, Spain and Greece lagged behind. Meanwhile, China's activity remained flat, helping to ease concerns about overheating there. 

The slowdown in U.S. activity came as manufacturers reported strong demand from abroad but also noted the effect of rising raw-material costs and scattered supply disruptions related to Japan's March 11 earthquake. The Institute for Supply Management's index of manufacturing activity slipped to 60.4 in April from 61.2 the prior month as deliveries from suppliers slowed and order backlogs jumped. Levels above 50 indicate expansion. The prices portion of the index, at 85.5, stood at its highest level since July 2008.

"A lot of this growth in manufacturing that's taking place is driven by the export demand and the weaker dollar and that looks to continue," said Norbert Ore, chair of the ISM's survey committee. 

Construction-equipment maker Caterpillar Inc., which reported surging first-quarter earnings last week, said it was having trouble keeping up with export-driven demand for some products, such as excavators and underground mining trucks. 

An index of overall factory activity in Japan dropped to a two-year low of 45.7 in April from 46.4 a month earlier, Markit Economics and the Japan Materials Management Association reported last week.

 Caterpillar said it is benefiting from heavy spending on infrastructure in Latin America and Asia. About 90% of the large mining trucks Caterpillar makes in Decatur, Ill., are exported, many to Asia, Latin America or Africa. 

Crown Equipment Corp., a $1.8 billion family-owned maker of forklifts with manufacturing plants in the U.S., Germany, Australia, China and Mexico, says orders are "very elevated" across the world and attributed the strong growth in part to pent-up demand as companies catch up with equipment updates they hadlet slide during the recession. 

"They're getting back in the business of freshening their fleets," said Jim Dicke III, president of the New Bremen, Ohio, company.

Outside the U.S., a purchasing managers' index in the euro zone ticked up to 58.0 from 57.5 in March, Markit Economics said Monday. The details underscored a widening divergence among core European economies such as Germany and France and heavily indebted countries such as Greece, Italy and Spain. Spanish and Greek manufacturers both reported job losses, while activity in Greece declined for the 19th straight month.

In China, meanwhile, the government's efforts to cool the economy with various measures such as higher interest rates and reserve requirements appeared to be having the desired effect. Growth among China's factories was flat at 51.8 in April, according to HSBC Holdings PLC—a result that may help allay worries that inflationary pressures will require Chinese policymakers to engage in further tightening. 

In a separate report Monday, the U.S. Commerce Department reported that construction spending climbed 1.4% in March to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of $768.9 billion. The increase was largely in private-sector construction, which rose 2.2%. Public construction spending increased 0.1%. 

—Clare Ansberry and Paul Hannon contributed to this article.

 Write to  Sara Murray at sara.murray@wsj.com and James R. Hagerty at bob.hagerty@wsj.com 