'I am aware that I have not convinced everybody here to be a member of the Affordable Care Act fan club," President Obama told a group of Governors over the weekend, and he could have mentioned a majority of the public too. But he did promise to give states "the power to determine their own health-care solutions." If only this were more than political maneuvering.

Mr. Obama endorsed a bill sponsored by Oregon Democrat Ron Wyden and Massachusetts Republican Scott Brown that would putatively give states more flexibility and allow them to opt out of certain mandates. In theory, it sounds great: States could experiment with their own reforms, or as the President put it, "I don't believe that any single party has a monopoly on good ideas. And I will go to bat for whatever works, no matter who or where it comes from."

Mr. Obama's new faith in federalism is trailed by his customary rhetorical asterisk. Any state that the Administration decided deserved a waiver would still need to cover the same number of uninsured, and its coverage would still need to include the same comprehensive benefits and be as "affordable" as the Administration says it should be. That is, it must be as heavily subsidized.

So perhaps states could opt out of some consumer or employer mandates, which is a minor release valve. But they would still need to find other mechanisms to achieve the same liberal priorities, which in practice leaves little room to innovate—especially for a straight tax deduction or credit to purchase individual coverage or alternative insurance designs like high-deductible or value-based plans. That's why Democrats had nothing to fear from adding such a provision originally. The Wyden-Brown bill merely moves it forward by three years, to 2014.

The reality is that the liberals who wrote this bill really do think they have a monopoly on good ideas, and they do not include markets. Democrats are more than happy to give the states more freedom, as long as the states use it to impose comparable government control. That may be why we hear that White House health staffers Stephanie Cutter and Nancy-Ann DeParle have been privately telling liberal interest groups that this is a way to increase centralization—for instance with a state-based "public option" or even single payer.

The law required the Administration to promulgate the waiver standards "not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act," a deadline long past. Perhaps the delay is a measure of how important state flexibility was to the White House until it needed tactical political cover. But it's also an opportunity for a lions-and-lambs moment, if the President is sincere.

Indiana's Mitch Daniels and 20 other Governors recently wrote to the Administration requesting a genuine relaxation of the waiver standards, and expanding them to Medicaid. This is a particular concern for Hoosiers, because Heath and Human Services is trying to kill Mr. Daniels's "Healthy Indiana" Medicaid reform, which is run under a special federal dispensation. The program has been a huge success, but HHS doesn't like it because it features a health savings-like account.

On that score, the Heritage Foundation's Stuart Butler, who has been pulling for health-care federalism for years, suggests that the waivers be granted by an evenly divided bipartisan commission. Also notable is that large businesses can sponsor insurance largely free of regulatory interference under the 1974 law known by the acronym Erisa, which governs 59% of workers insured through their jobs. Why not states too?

The ObamaCare debate—now into its third year—has proved that there is nothing close to a national consensus and that some very large portion of the country opposes the President's command-and-control entitlement model. Mr. Obama is trying to finesse that political reality, even as he still won't yield on the substance.