"I'm really much more comfortable with the idea of documenting armed conflict than emotional conflict," filmmaker C. Scott Willis said recently. 

After nearly three decades as a producer for ABC News, 11 Emmy Awards and 10 years creating nonfiction television for PBS and others via his own production company, Mr. Willis chose for his feature documentary debut to abandon a firmly established journalistic comfort zone. His film, "The Woodmans," which earned the Best New York Documentary prize at the 2010 Tribeca Film Festival and begins a two-week run Wednesday at Film Forum, is, he said, "the kind of film that I don't normally do. It's not issue-driven; it's really character driven."

The four personalties at the center of "The Woodmans" are ceramic sculptor Betty Woodman, her painter and photographer husband George, their video- and performance-artist son Charles, and the most renowned member of the creative clan, photographer Francesca Woodman. It is Francesca's brief and ultimately tragic life—which ended in 1981 when she leapt from the window of her New York apartment at age 22—that offers the darkest part of the films trenchant, emotionally detailed family tapestry.

But "The Woodmans" is considerably more than an exhumation of a lost creative soul. "There's a temptation to make a film just about Francesca," Mr. Willis said. "But if you really think about it, that would be a short, sad film. I wanted to tell a family story and not sort of let it drift into the Gothic tale, which Francesca's life sometimes is seen as. I consider myself a journalist. For me, it's an investigative story not in the sense of uncovering scandal or corruption or something, but in the sense of being rigidly focused on finding a truth that I was comfortable with." 

The truth Mr. Willis offers is a scrupulously even-handed and open-hearted examination of the familial roots of self-expression, self-destruction and self-preservation. Built around Betty Woodman's creation of an ambitious sculpture installation commissioned for the U.S. Embassy in Beijing, the film offers disarmingly candid interviews with family members and friends, as well as evocative uses of Francesca Woodman's diaries and self-portrait-dominated photography and video work. The result is a personal history without reaching back into the past for indictment nor into the present for confession and catharsis. 

"If you don't steer an audience to a certain conclusion and you leave the 'what does it mean?' ambiguous," Mr. Willis said, "the story tends to stay with people a little bit longer. I love the idea that it's a movie that you sort of wake up with the next day. The more subtle approach was a departure for the filmmaker. "You don't get brownie points for nuance in any television news piece," he said. 

Mr. Willis explained that the genesis for what is an extremely graceful and respectful examination of a parent's worst nightmare lay in a faux pas. A chance social encounter between Mr. Willis and his wife and Betty and George Woodman prompted parent-to-parent small talk. 

"They asked if we had children," Mr. Willis said. "We said we did and that she went to college at [the Rhode Island School of Design]. They said they had a daughter who had studied at RISD, too. They asked us, 'What did she study?' We said photography. 'Oh isn't that interesting, our daughter also studied photography.'" 

Not knowing of Francesca Woodman's work or the circumstances of her short life, Mr. Willis and his wife made what they thought was a benign request. "'Oh, can our daughter call your daughter... ?' It was that kind of stupid social gaffe," Mr. Willis said. "I hate to inadvertently upset people and it was clear that Betty and George don't trot out Francesca in polite conversation. I think I was so flummoxed by this—that Betty and George were very generous and we started talking about it. As soon as I left the conversation that day I immediately looked up Francesca's work." 

Upon examining Francesca Woodman's photographs, a large exhibition of which will go on display at the Guggenheim next year, Mr. Willis's embarrassment transformed into resolve.

"I thought, there's such an extraordinary story here," he said. "And I really wanted to make a film about it." 