  Lothar Mentel, chief investment officer at multi-manager investment firm Octopus Investments Ltd., shares his views on oil with The Wall Street Journal.

 WSJ: How is oil uncertainty impacting global markets? 

 Mr. Mentel: Markets are responding with shock to the speed of change in the oil price. Emerging markets are inherently more vulnerable to the effects of a rising oil price, although within this bracket there would be winners and losers. One would expect resource-rich countries such as Russia to benefit greatly should oil move upward of $120 a barrel. The losers would be countries such as India and Brazil, where high energy and food costs have a significant impact on consumption. 

 WSJ: How will this affect interest rates and inflation?

 Mr. Mentel: A sustained higher oil price would also create problems in the developed world, putting consumers under pressure. With growth still hard to come by these are difficult times for the policy makers whose job it is to determine interest rates. However, in the U.K., if higher oil prices are shown to be stifling growth, it should lend further support to the Bank of England's current preference for keeping interest rates on hold, for a few months at least, by which time the Bank will hope that inflation fears have naturally subsided. 

 WSJ: How can investors navigate volatility caused by oil?

 Mr. Mentel: Volatile markets need to be managed accordingly. For example, in our portfolios we have recently added to a fund from Amundi Asset Management that captures the price of volatility. This is essentially the cost of insurance in financial equity markets. When concerns are raised, the price of insurance rises. This benefits the fund and so is a natural safe haven in markets where concerns are rising. Therefore the fund has a solid economic rationale to work when we need it most. 

 WSJ: Do you have any other tips to limit losses?

 Mr. Mentel: We recommend a multi-manager approach to ensure portfolio volatility is kept to a minimum through diversification. The funds of funds structure allows investors to hold a broad portfolio of differently performing assets.