NEW DELHI –Indian state-run companies Monday provisionally bagged more than a third of the 34 exploration blocks offered in India's ninth auction round, as global oil and gas majors continued to shun India as an investment destination. 

Consortia led by state-run Oil & Natural Gas Corp. won 10 blocks and by Oil India Ltd. was awarded three blocks. Reliance Industries Ltd., India's largest-listed company by value, bid for six blocks and was awarded two. Essar Oil Ltd. also won a block. 

A joint bid from  BG Group PLC and BHP Billiton Petroleum, a unit of resources giant  BHP Billiton Ltd., was successful in winning one block. 

Other global explorers, such as  BP PLC,  Royal Dutch Shell PLC,  ExxonMobil Corp.,  Chevron Corp. and  ConocoPhillips avoided the auction. This was despite a surge in global crude oil prices, which could make developing marginal oil and gas prospects more economically viable, and robust domestic demand in India, which has to import about 75% of the crude oil it uses. 

India produced an average 782,000 barrels a day of oil and 3.91 billion cubic meters of natural gas in February. 

Analysts say overseas companies are put off by India's tightly regulated oil and gas prices and uncertainty in the country's energy policies. 

One factor that might have further damped the enthusiasm of overseas companies is the Indian government's delays over  Cairn Energy PLC's proposed majority stake sale in its India unit, Cairn India Ltd., to  Vedanta Resources PLC.

Although that deal was announced in August last year, it is yet to receive approval from the Indian government. Cairn didn't receive any blocks in this auction. 

"Global players feel insecure due to instability in India's exploration and production policies as seen in gas pricing and tax holiday concessions," said Alok Deshpande, analyst with Elara Securities Ltd. 

The auctions covered eight deep-water blocks, seven shallow-water blocks off both the eastern and western coasts, and 19 land blocks in the states of Gujarat, Rajasthan, Tripura and Assam. 

India received 74 bids for 33 oil and gas exploration blocks. One block didn't have any bidders and 14 received just one bid each. 

The latest auction was launched on Oct. 15 and promoted in roadshows and investor meetings in Perth, Calgary, Houston, Moscow and Singapore. Physical data viewing rooms were opened at London, Perth, Houston and Calgary. 

This was the last auction round held under the New Exploration and Licensing Policy regime. The government has said it will introduce a new policy called the Open Acreage Licensing Policy soon, under which companies will be allowed to select blocks they want to explore. 

The government said it will evaluate the bids in the current auction and the blocks will be awarded within three months. The entire process, including the signing of contracts, is expected to be completed in four months. 

"We're very happy at the response to the bids," Oil Minister S.  Jaipal Reddy told reporters. "The response has been more than satisfactory. It's been very encouraging. All this is intended to enhance our energy security." 

When asked about the lack of interest from global oil majors, Reddy said: "All companies make their own commercial calculations. It's not for want of an inviting atmosphere in India. 

"The government has been fair to all the multi-national corporations which have participated in the oil sector," Mr. Reddy added. 

 Write to  Rakesh Sharma at rakesh.sharma@dowjones.com 