SAN DIEGO—Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke said Wednesday the central bank would exercise "all the power we can" to ensure community banks wouldn't be subject to new debit-card fee limits dictated by last year's Dodd-Frank financial-overhaul law.

The law includes an exemption from the debit-fee rule for small banks and credit unions, defined as institutions with less than $10 billion in assets. But these small institutions argue that the exemption won't work in practice and market forces will push them to accept the lower fee the rule sets for large banks.

Mr. Bernanke has previously raised concerns that the small-bank exemption may not work as intended. Mr. Bernanke, speaking at an Independent Community Bankers of America conference here, sought to assure the gathering that the Fed is doing what it can to make sure the carve-out works as lawmakers intended.

"At the Federal Reserve we are quite aware that the Congress in writing this law intended for small issuers to be exempted," Mr. Bernanke said.

The Fed has been working "really hard" on the rule over the past six months, with about 50 full-time staff devoted to trying to understand the interchange market as best they can, Mr. Bernanke said. The Fed put out a draft proposal in December, which would cap so-called swipe fees to 12 cents. Since then, the central bank has gotten more than 11,000 comments on the rule and the central bank must analyze each one, he said. "So we have our work cut out for us," Mr. Bernanke said.

Mr. Bernanke said several large card networks have agreed to operate a two-tiered fee system, and this could help ensure small banks could charge higher swipe fees. But small banks don't enjoy an exemption from the second part of the debit-fee rule, which allows merchants to choose the networks they want to route their debit transactions over. 

Mr. Bernanke said this aspect of the rule, and the increased competition it would bring, would likely bring downward pressure on debit fees across the board.