One day last month, when "Terra Nova" planned to shoot an emotional, sunlit scene between a little girl and a giant computer-generated brachiosaurus, it poured rain for 12 hours straight. A few days earlier, in a climactic moment that involved prehistoric animals chasing large vehicles, the camera truck sank into six feet of mud. In another scene, director Alex Graves had to stop a rehearsal so a leech could be detached from an actress. 

"Terra Nova," an adventure series about a family from the year 2149 which travels back 85 million years in an attempt to "restart" humanity, may be the most expensive broadcast television series ever made, and it is shaping up to be one of the most challenging. 

 The first two hours of the show cost about $16 million (producers say some of these costs will be amortized over the length of the show). Production in Australia required 300 crew members. A single scene that shows the family, the Shannons, arriving at their prehistoric home required 410 extras. The towering sets took nearly 15 weeks to build and include a Terra Nova "colony" the size of a football field inside 18-foot walls, complete with a market, hospital and residences. An 8-foot animatronic velociraptor makes a cameo in the second hour.

"Terra Nova" will be a huge test for the idea that TV networks need to ratchet up their spending after a period when cheap reality shows were the norm. Network television has long been the realm of the comfortable and familiar. CBS's ratings success with traditional shows in recent years is testimony to this axiom. But with HD screens bigger and competition from other media fiercer, networks are feeling pressure to mount expensive, epic projects that try to cut through the clutter. 

Other ambitious network productions in the works include an Incredible Hulk pilot at ABC. The network has commissioned movie director Guillermo del Toro ("Pan's Labyrinth," "Hellboy") to work on developing the show from the Marvel comic. 

Cable channels have long been ambitious in this realm with shows such as "Deadwood" and "Boardwalk Empire." ABC's "Lost" was a success. But the risks are enormous. ABC's "FlashForward" and NBC's "The Event" failed to attract viewers despite multimillion-dollar marketing campaigns and pricey visual effects. 

Producers are discovering that these endeavors are like feature motion pictures—in all sorts of ways. "Terra Nova" is getting a reputation in some quarters as a runaway production, a real-life version of "Tropic Thunder," the 2008 Ben Stiller satire about actors shooting a Vietnam War movie. 

The studio says "Terra Nova" is on budget and that any early mishaps are normal on a production of this size. "I'd be lying if I didn't say we teetered a bit a few months ago, but we all made a real commitment to move forward," says Gary Newman, chairman of 20th Century Fox Television. The per-episode cost is expected to be more than $4 million. A typical hospital or lawyer drama is more on the order of $2.5 million per episode, according to industry estimates.

 "Terra Nova" has two of Hollywood's wealthiest and most powerful figures behind it: Steven Spielberg and Peter Chernin. This is Mr. Chernin's first broadcast show since he left News Corp., where he ran its TV and film units, then rose to No. 2 at the parent company before departing in 2009. (News Corp. owns The Wall Street Journal.) 

The show's producers say that for every "Ishtar" and "Heaven's Gate" there is an "Avatar" and "Titanic," gigantic productions by James Cameron that were dogged by reports of cost overruns and logistical problems. Mr. Chernin shepherded both, and they wound up grossing $2.8 billion and $1.8 billion at the box office, respectively. 

 "Terra Nova" grew out of a lunch in June 2009, when Fox executives told Mr. Spielberg's top TV lieutenants that the network was in the market for a family adventure story with the same "Spielberg brand" as movies such as "E.T.: The Extra-Terrestrial" and "Jurassic Park." Fox needed a new broad-based hit that would attract all segments of the audience. "American Idol" was aging, its ratings softening. Acerbic host Simon Cowell was signaling that he would leave—which he made official seven months later. Peter Rice, Fox's chairman of entertainment, was looking for splashy "event" programming.

"Terra Nova" began as a 15-page treatment by little-known British writer Kelly Marcel, who typed the pages in London as an ode to her "Star Trek"-loving Dad. She called it "Gondwana Highway," named after a prehistoric supercontinent. It tells the story of the Shannon family in the year 2149, when the Earth is overcrowded and the majority of plant and animal life is extinct. A portal into primeval history gives the Shannons and thousands of other families a chance to travel back to pristine, prehistoric times. At first the Terra Nova settlement seems idyllic, but the Shannons quickly encounter man-eating dinosaurs; the colonists become disenchanted and restive. 

 Ms. Marcel was deemed too inexperienced to write the script herself. "The networks didn't know who the hell I was, and they definitely weren't going to let me in the room to pitch a giant dinosaur show," she says. Aaron Kaplan, a former Hollywood agent and executive producer on the series paired Ms. Marcel with "Nikita" creator Craig Silverstein.

 Mr. Silverstein says he approached the show as "'Little House on the Prairie' with dinosaurs." He adds: "Have you seen those sets? The lumber alone probably cost more than the first season of 'Nikita.' " Mr. Spielberg and other producers felt the duo's script had potential but was too dark and needed a more satisfying ending. Mr. Silverstein went to fulfill his "Nikita" obligations. Ms. Marcel went to London.

 The producers then brought on "24" writers Brannon Braga and David Fury to rework it. Mr. Fury soon left. "I had issues with the DNA of the project and because there were so many chefs in the kitchen," he says. Yet another writer was brought in, René Echevarria of "Star Trek: The Next Generation." 

While all this was going on, the studio had to let go of the show's seven staff writers, since they could not craft future stories or brainstorm plots without knowing where the show would take place and which actors would play what roles, according to a Fox executive.

It's still early in this year's development cycle, but the networks clearly are moving toward more ambitious productions. Aside from "Hulk," which ABC sees as a potential theme park and merchandising franchise, the network is developing "AKA Jessica Jones," another Marvel property about a female superhero from Melissa Rosenberg, who adapted the "Twilight" movies for the big screen. CBS has a Wild West drama in the works from the executive producers of "Battlestar Galactica" and "CSI." ABC is also developing an historical adaptation of "Romeo and Juliet." NBC's first drama-pilot pickup for the fall is about Playboy bunnies in 1960s Chicago. The "Mad Men"-like period drama won't require many visual effects, but as the producers of "Boardwalk Empire" can attest, creating detailed period costumes and sets is a pricey undertaking.

With the planned midseason shooting schedule approaching, "Terra Nova" still didn't have a location. Costa Rica and Hawaii had the right verdant jungles, but neither offered the tax incentives that the studio needed in order to offset production costs. Besides, Hawaii looked too much like "Lost." Florida and Louisiana offer incentives, but Fox didn't think the swamp-and-bayou look was quite right. The team considered shooting in Los Angeles against a green screen, with visual effects digitally added later, but that was deemed too costly.

In September, the group agreed on Queensland, where Mr. Spielberg's "The Pacific" filmed. But many actors were unwilling to commit to spending months half way around the world. "Once we decided to shoot there, we eradicated half the casting pool," says Mr. Braga, the writer. 

Irish actor Jason O'Mara says he signed on to play father Jim Shannon last May, but it wasn't until six months later, nine days before shooting, that British actress Christine Adams was cast in a key role. 

Then came the weather. A flash flood in December almost killed one of the production's security guards while he was trying to save a generator. When the rains formed a river around the Terra Nova colony, producers and actors had to trudge through knee-deep mud to get to the set. A bridge had to be built. The crew set up generators in the jungle, wove miles of cables through gullies and built cement islands in rivers to install lights—which attracted bugs. 

"We selected these locations for how they would look on film without a lot of attention to what it would take to move very large equipment," says Mr. Graves, the director. 

"Schoolies Week," Australia's version of spring break, was another unexpected trial. Swarms of drunken teenagers descended on the beach town near the set, and actors returning from work at 4 a.m. were greeted by yelling, retching revelers. The production is fortunate to be on a break now: It's not far from the horrendous flooding of recent days.

Mr. Spielberg and Mr. Chernin weigh in on all major decisions. Mr. Spielberg pushed to get Stephen Lang, the bad guy from "Avatar," to play the colony's leader. But he asked that his villainy be more ambiguous than in the initial script. He told set designers exactly what he thought the time portal should look like and added a scene in which the Shannon family goes outside and looks up at an enormous glowing moon, which had been concealed in their former polluted world.

Shooting took even longer because the cast and crew had to constantly check for ticks and leeches. Mr. Graves stopped one scene when he saw a nearby poisonous snake eating a frog. Actress Allison Miller discovered a leech between her toes. 

Fox says Mr. Graves shot the two-episode preview on schedule in 28 days, not including visual effects and construction, despite all the disruptions.

Paleontologist Jack Horner, who consulted on the "Jurassic Park" movies, helped the "Terra Nova" team authenticate the dinosaurs. In recent years scientists have discovered that dinosaurs were more birdlike than previously believed. The creatures in "Terra Nova" will have feathers and move gracefully. The first episodes will feature three breeds, including the ominous "slasher." Each subsequent episode aims to introduce a new creature. 

Normally a network would commission a pilot episode, then decide whether to go forward, but given the cost, Fox decided to go straight to a series. "Terra Nova" was originally intended to launch as a midseason replacement, starting in early 2011. But now Fox, whose corporate partner 20th Century Fox makes the show, will air the first two hours over two nights on May 23 and 24, perhaps after "American Idol." The series will premiere this fall, a strategy that worked for Fox with "Glee" in 2009. The first promotions will air during the Super Bowl. 

At a presentation last May, media buyers got a preview of colorful renderings of the series with clips of Mr. Chernin and Mr. Spielberg. Without actual footage, some media buyers said they were dubious the series would even be made. "Once in a while a network just bites off more than it can chew," says Brad Adgate, senior vice president of research at media-planning and ad-placement firm Horizon Media. 

Fox quieted some naysayers last week when it aired a three-minute preview for industry reporters. The brief glimpse of lavish landscapes, quirky futuristic vehicles, as well as its movie-like feel prompted the typically cynical TV critics to applaud.

The executive producers profess to embrace the high stakes. Says Katherine Pope, president of TV for Chernin Entertainment: "If you're not wondering if it's going to work, then it's not worth making."

 Write to  Amy Chozick at amy.chozick@wsj.com 

—Follow Amy on Twitter at @amychozick.