  Jo Nesbø doesn't seem like the kind of person who spends his days dreaming up gruesome, inventive ways to murder people.

The 51-year-old former stockbroker sings in one of Norway's most popular folk-rock bands. He tells his 11-year-old daughter funny bedtime stories. He writes wacky children's books with titles such as "Doktor Proktors prompepulver" ("Doctor Proctor's Fart Powder"). 

Lately, he's been gaining a growing international following with his chilling crime novels. His thrillers often feature serial killers with creative streaks (one of his villains' weapons is a spiked metal ball that expands in victims' mouths). His books have sold nine million copies world-wide, up from five million two years ago. He's now published in more than 40 languages, and two of his novels have been optioned for film. "The Snowman," due in the U.S. May 10, was a best-seller in England. 

In it, Mr. Nesbø's glum, alcoholic detective Harry Hole tracks a serial killer who's murdering married women who are having affairs. The murderer dismembers victims with an electric loop designed to decapitate livestock, and leaves a snowman as a calling card.

"The Snowman" is Mr. Nesbø's seventh Harry Hole novel, and his fourth to come out in the U.S. His books have landed somewhat haphazardly in the English-speaking world: the first two published in the U.K. were out of sequence; 'The Snowman" was written after "The Redeemer," which isn't available in the U.S. yet. His first two novels haven't been translated into English. HarperCollins published the third in 2007, and two more in 2009 and 2010. Though his books have been well-received critically, none have been best-sellers here.

Last year, Mr. Nesbø's agent, Niclas Salomonsson, approached Knopf Editor in Chief  Sonny Mehta about taking on his client. Mr. Mehta—who has a sizable stable of Scandinavian crime writers, including Stieg Larsson and Henning Mankell—bought four of Mr. Nesbø's books, including "The Snowman." Knopf is now seeking rights to those first two novels, "The Bat Man" and "The Cockroaches." 

Mr. Mehta says he's baffled that Mr. Nesbø hasn't sold more here, particularly since his novels share traits with popular American crime fiction. Mr. Nesbø, who says he's read Dashiell Hammett and Raymond Chandler, tends to feature a solitary detective and writes fast-paced, tightly plotted books.

"He fit into an idiom that was more recognizable to an American audience than Stieg Larsson was," he said. "I can't understand why he hasn't found a bigger readership."

Mr. Nesbø's agent and publisher say his fan base has grown steadily in other countries, and they expect the pattern will repeat here. Paperback sales of his books have soared. Year -over-year sales for "The Devil's Star," which came out in the U.K. in 2005, grew 5,500% in 2011, according to industry publication the Bookseller. 

All of the hype has prompted inevitable comparisons to another Scandinavian crime writer whose series features a depressive sleuth with self-destructive tendencies. Mr. Nesbø's British paperback publisher, Vintage, reissued his books to prominently feature a quotation from The Independent crowning him as "The Next Stieg Larsson." 

Mr. Nesbø is lukewarm about the comparison, noting that he's read only the first novel in Mr. Larsson's "Millennium Trilogy."

"It didn't strike me that we were exactly twin souls," he said. "I feel more related to some American crime writers than I do to Stieg Larsson." 

Mr. Salomonsson, his agent, concurs: "They're very, very different," he said. "They're Scandinavian and both write crime novels, and that's about it."

 Write to  Alexandra Alter at alexandra.alter@wsj.com 