WASHINGTON—Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner said China's rapid economic ascent is a "growing source of concern" and warned Beijing it risks not getting expanded access to the rich U.S. market unless it revamped its policies.

"We are willing to make progress" on issues of interest to China, Mr. Geithner said at Johns Hopkins University's School for Advanced International Studies, "but our ability to move on these issues will depend on how much progress we see from China," including a faster appreciation of the Chinese currency.

The tough words come a week before President Barack Obama meets with his Chinese counterpart, Hu Jintao, in Washington, and aim to set the tone and agenda for the meeting. Top Chinese officials are doing the same, as the two sides jockey to frame the meeting.

In London, China's deputy central bank governor, Yi Gang, reiterated that China intended to buy European bonds to stabilize the euro, which analysts see partly as an effort by China to line up European allies. In Beijing, Vice Foreign Minister Cui Tiankai said China was nervous about the security of its huge holdings of U.S. Treasury bonds—looking to shift the focus of the Hu-Obama meeting to U.S. economic policies, not Chinese.

Mr. Geithner batted away Mr. Cui's comments as "the kind of thing that you typically see foreign-ministry people say in the run-up to these meetings. There's nothing exceptional or interesting in this."

The U.S. wants visible progress on a range of issues, including currency appreciation, intellectual-property protection and reduction of domestic subsidies. China's goals are more symbolic, say analysts. It is looking to affirm its status as a powerful contributor to growth, while Mr. Hu wants to be recognized as a global statesman a year before he is scheduled to step down.

China's currency policy will be front and center. The U.S. has long argued that the yuan is undervalued and acts as a subsidy for Chinese exporters at the expense of U.S. competitors. In June, Beijing said it would let its currency float somewhat. It has appreciated 3.4% since, including a bit of an upward bounce in the past few days.

Mr. Geithner made clear the U.S. wanted the appreciation to move "more rapidly," and tried a new argument. He discussed the larger change in the "real exchange rate"—that is, the exchange rate adjusted to account for the difference between China's burgeoning inflation, which now tops 5%, and the U.S. inflation rate of about 1%. By that lens, China's real exchange rate is moving at an annual clip approaching 10%. 

"If that appreciation was sustained over time, it would make a very substantial difference in correcting what is a major distortion of the Chinese economy and the global economy," Mr. Geithner said. He urged the Chinese to let the currency rise faster as a way to fight inflation, because that would reduce the cost of imports to China in yuan terms; otherwise, inflation would boost the value of its currency.

Canadian Finance Minister James Flaherty, who was visiting Washington, backed Mr. Geithner's remarks, saying that unless Beijing fulfilled pledges to reform its yuan at a faster clip, China risked facing retaliation by affected countries. "I hope China keeps its promise to permit more flexibility in its currency," he said, adding that the rise of the yuan in the last year was largely due to inflationary pressures. 

Justin Yifu Lin, a noted Chinese economist who is the World Bank's chief economist, said that 10% inflation-adjusted appreciation would make the Chinese export sector less competitive and the import sector more so, adding somewhat fewer jobs overall. Mr. Lin and other economists have argued that China needs to shift from export-led growth, although there is sharp disagreement over the pace of change.

Bidding for some leverage over the Chinese, Mr. Geithner noted that China's growth owed a lot to its ability to obtain U.S. technology and export to U.S. markets. China wants greater access to U.S. high-tech products, more opportunities to invest in the U.S., and greater access to U.S. markets, he said. Those goals are threatened by a political backlash, unless China changes course.

Anti-Chinese sentiment in Congress is "something China is very attentive to and they need to be," Mr. Geithner noted.

It is far from clear how much the U.S. can pressure China. The U.S. made similar veiled threats against Japan in the 1980s and early 1990s, when Japan was seen as the rising power. The pressure did little to change Tokyo's policies on trade, but did help persuade Japanese firms to build factories in the U.S. to avoid protectionist measures.

"It's very hard to punish China," said  Pieter Bottelier, a China studies professor at Johns Hopkins University's SAIS. "You can't punish China without punishing U.S. companies looking to export to China or U.S. companies with operations in China."

—Ian Talley contributed to this article.

 Write to  Bob Davis at bob.davis@wsj.com 