Not many people these days have their own swordsmith.  Tom Tuke-Hastings, founder of luxury goods brand Henry Tuke, is a man who does. And, according to Mr. Tuke-Hastings: "He is the best swordsmith in Europe." He is speaking from the company headquarters at Royal Mint Court, opposite The Tower of London, in the heart of London's old medieval core. It feels an appropriate location for a man who sells swords for a living and has his own precious metal hallmark.

Read the complete  Watches and Jewelry report.  

Mr. Tuke Hastings founded Henry Tuke - an amalgam of his middle name, Henry, and one barrel of his surname, Tuke – two years ago. It is a luxury goods firm that, in his own words, caters for "the very wealthy". Not the 'bling' wealthy, he is eager to point out, but those with "good taste". 

It was with this market in mind, that he elicited the services of a swordsmith to create a sabre built for the sole purpose of removing the heads of champagne bottles. 

Few people outside the officers' messes of the British army or the most exclusive of Parisian night spots would even know this practise existed, let alone want to purchase a sabre with which to do it themselves. 

However, Mr. Tuke-Hastings is confident of finding a buyer. "It's all word of mouth," he says. 

The sabre itself has a handle made of ash, covered with the skin of a stingray. The hand guard is made of solid sterling silver and the blade of elegant but tough Damascus steel. Buyers of the sabre will also

get a stand made from 2,000 year old oak sourced from the Roman docks in London and carbon dated to 70 A.D. In all, sabre and stand will set you back a cool £27,000 (€32,000). Mr. Tuke-Hastings' champagne sabre is not the only high-end toy on offer from Henry Tuke. Discerning buyers can also purchase a macassar ebony and black walnut backgammon board with solid silver counters, priced at £35,000. 

"My aim is to create beautiful things out of the finest materials," Mr. Tuke-Hasting says, adding that his customers can also order their backgammon counters in gold, platinum or "bejeweled" should they so desire. The counters themselves look like small silver blood cells. "I designed them loosely on a haemoglobin cell," he says, without explaining why. 

Price is not considered an issue for the clients of Henry Tuke. "Everything I produce is top notch, made by hand, and in Britain," Mr. Tuke-Hastings says. His business model is hard to fathom, but boys' toys for the super wealthy would about sum up the ethos of the company.

The firm makes a point of using artisans that are based in the U.K. and its founder is almost evangelical in his desire to give work to local, skilled craftsmen. "With all my products I like to use just one craftsman from start to finish," he says. In the case of the backgammon board, Mr. Tuke-Hastings visited cabinet makers across the country before he picked one to manufacture it. "I found a craftsman that was able to inject a tiny sliver of metal, microns thick, under the surface of the backgammon board, which creates the smoothest possible playing surface." 

It is hard to imagine there is huge demand for a backgammon board of such high quality, and expense. However, the entrepreneurial Mr. Tuke-Hastings has already found a buyer for his first board, and has a second one in production. "I was considering making a gold board but with today's prices, even at nine carats, it's looking at costing £150,000," he says.

As to the future: Henry Tuke is working on producing an Elephant Polo statue, complete with mahout (the traditional term for the person who 'drives' an elephant). 

When asked who on earth would buy such a thing, Mr. Tuke-Hastings responds that the idea came to him while he was in Nepal taking part in last year's Elephant Polo World Championships. "I play for the UAE Sepoys," he says. "The statue is all linked in with the elephant polo crowd. I'm also working on a vastly complicated cigar cutter, with all sorts of unnecessary gadgetry, as well as a Damascus steel diving knife."

For those wealthy, and perhaps eccentric enough to be in need of all of the above, more information can be found at Mr. Tuke-Hastings' website: www.henrytuke.com.

