 Libyan rebels coming down from the eastern gateway city Ajdabiya, which they recaptured on Saturday, took control of the strategic oil-facilities towns of Brega and Ras Lanuf on Sunday.  

 Syria's government warned the public against more demonstrations while making a major concession by promising to lift the emergency law in place since 1963, according to media reports. 

 Yemeni President Ali Abdullah Saleh has backed away from a deal that would have him step down from power immediately but keep his relatives in charge of the country's elite counter-terrorism forces, according to Yemeni negotiators and people familiar with the situation. 

 Radioactive water in and around the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear complex has emerged as the central challenge for repair crews, slowing efforts to bring the troubled facility under control and raising concerns about new dangers to workers and the environment coming from the plant. 

 A Japanese lawmaker last year raised in Parliament the possibility that a natural disaster could wipe out a nuclear reactor's backup systems, leading to melting in the core, but the country's top nuclear regulator responded that such a scenario was "practically impossible." 

 Two weeks after tsunami waves swept across northern Japan, food and water are getting through to most survivors. But the next important phase of the relief effort—finding a more permanent home for the 200,000 or so evacuees huddled in schools and other public buildings—is proving more difficult. 

 A debate is emerging in business and political circles about how to do more with less electricity—or just do less. After years of debate, Japanese policy makers have finally begun seriously to consider for the first time in six decades instituting daylight-saving time this summer. 

 European Union leaders agreed to carry out continent-wide stress-tests for nuclear plants until the end of the year, German Chancellor Angela Merkel said. 

 The European Central Bank is working on a plan to keep struggling Irish banks afloat in the medium term, a euro-zone central-banking official said. The new facility would aim to replace the use of so-called Emergency Liquidity Assistance, the official said.  

 French voters delivered a blow to President Nicolas Sarkozy ahead of next year's presidential election, choosing Socialist and National Front candidates in regional elections.  

 The French economy grew more than initially estimated in the last three months of 2010, the national statistics bureau said, as it revised up gross domestic product data for the euro zone's second-largest economy. 

 German Chancellor Angela Merkel's center-right coalition appears to have lost a key regional election in the country's southwest, in a result that could weaken the chancellor's authority and highlights the rise of the Green party as a major opposition force.  

German business confidence slipped only slightly in March, despite rising energy prices and the devastating earthquake and nuclear crisis in Japan, the Ifo measure of sentiment showed. It was the first decrease after nine months of successive increases.

 Portugal's prime minister, José Sócrates, was re-elected leader of the ruling Socialist Party with an overwhelming majority.  

Portugal's main opposition leader, Pedro Passos Coelho, said in an interview that if he is elected prime minister, he plans to meet budget targets in coming years, and that he won't hesitate in requesting a bailout if the need arises. 

Russia's central bank left interest rates unchanged but raised reserve requirements, amid signs of slowing inflation and weaker-than-expected economic growth. Consumer prices continued to slow in March, although inflationary pressures remain significant, the central bank said.

 Ukraine is hovering between oppressive authoritarianism and European integration, and a failure to address corruption and safeguard democratic institutions could lead to the country reversing the advances it has made since the end of Soviet rule, opposition leader Yulia Tymoshenko said. 

 With housing and construction in the dumps and consumer spending pinched by thrift and tight credit, exports have powered more than half of U.S. economic expansion since the recession ended in mid-2009. Now that important engine for U.S. growth—the rest of the world—is damping the improving outlook. 

 Geraldine Ferraro, the former New York congresswoman who made history as the first woman to run for vice president on a major U.S. party ticket, died Saturday from blood cancer, her family said. She was 75. 

 Rajat Gupta stayed on as a director of three public companies after securities regulators warned him that they intended to accuse him of leaking inside information, prompting regulators to file an enforcement action against him on the eve of a related criminal trial.  

 North Korea's government food distribution system will run dry in May and put one-quarter of the country's 24 million residents at risk of starvation, the U.N. World Food Program said in an assessment that may influence whether the U.S. and other countries provide assistance to the country.  

The Taliban claimed it kidnapped 50 Afghan policemen in northeastern Afghanistan—part of the insurgents' murder and intimidation campaign against anyone affiliated with the U.S.-backed government.