WASHINGTON—U.S. regulators said Friday they would need until October to finalize an environmental review needed to clear the way for oil drilling in Alaska's Chukchi Sea. 

The review will affect leases for  Royal Dutch Shell PLC and others. It will now include analysis of a "Very Large Oil Spill" scenario, which the U.S. Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation and Enforcement hadn't included in a previous study. 

Shell and its allies in Congress have been frustrated by what they say are permitting delays by the Obama administration in Alaska. 

"Shell would be very disappointed with further delays in the regulatory process," company spokeswoman Kelly op de Weegh said Friday. "Shell's plans for exploring offshore Alaska incorporate unprecedented oil spill response capabilities, including dedicated at-site vessels, a containment system, and relief well rigs." 

Shell's permit application for the Chukchi Sea has earned some praise. William Reilly, chairman of a presidential commission appointed to investigate last year's oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico, said in January that the proposal was "as good as I have ever seen" when it comes to planning for spill response.

Last month, Shell postponed its Alaska offshore drilling plans to 2012, from 2011, citing a lengthy U.S. regulatory process. The company also needs an air permit for the Chukchi site and the litigation surrounding the environmental review is ongoing. 

The new environmental review timetable comes after a federal judge had ordered regulators to redo an environmental review for the 2008 sale of Chukchi Sea drilling rights, called "lease sale 193." 

Alaska environmental groups and native villagers have asked the U.S. District Court to reverse the sale, arguing that the government didn't have enough information about the local environment and wildlife. 

The court had asked regulators to "make reasonable efforts" to complete the environmental review by January, but the government has said it needed more time and on Friday outlined a plan to finish the study. 

Ms. Op de Weegh also said Shell is "investigating" how Friday's announcement will affect the company's 2012 exploration plans. 

"It's clear that continued regulatory delay and uncertainty places ever increasing risk on offshore Alaska development," she said. 

 Write to  Ryan Tracy at ryan.tracy@dowjones.com 

