Here's my idea of a fantasy newspaper or magazine assignment: I get on a flight from New York to Los Angeles—preferably business class, but economy will do—and when I spot the most remote, uninhabited park of the country (I've got a place in mind; from the air it appears miles and miles of charcoal hills, possibly in the Dakotas) the pilot courteously drops me off to go camping. Obviously, I'd have all the amenities of modern civilization: cellphone service, a cutting-edge tent, reading material, good food, and transportation to get me the hell out as soon as I get bored or lonely.

But when I go on vacation these days—not that there's one on the horizon—I've discovered that the farther I get from civilization the happier I am. It's obviously getting harder and harder to do, and not just because our species has infiltrated every corner of the planet. Children have something to do with it. No matter how many wooden toys and great books you're raised them with they'll always vote for the resort that serves frozen strawberry daiquiris at the floating pool bar over the edge of the world. 

And frankly I haven't had much experience with the remote. But on the rare occasions when I have—hiking a mountain pass, hitchhiking to the North Cape (called the northernmost point in Europe), rolling around in the mud of some stream bed in the Canadian Rockies (that was the summer after college,) snorkeling off a hidden beach in the Caribbean, or trekking among the sheep on the Isle of Skye—I couldn't feel happier or more alive.

However, my experiences don't hold a candle to  Eugene Linden's, whose book "The Ragged Edge of the World" was just published. Over the course of his career Mr. Linden, the author of nine books and countless magazine pieces, has actually spent time in some of the most out-of-the-way places on Earth: northern Siberia, an untouched Congo rain forest that even his pygmy guides had to be bribed to enter, Borneo, the antarctic. 

The book is something of a lamentation for the ways those places and the people who live there are happily succumbing to modernity, and in the process losing their indigenous knowledge. One example he gives is of an elusive butterfly in the highlands of Borneo, and the significance of its appearance to the Penan, a nomadic tribe of hunters and gatherers. Apparently, the Penan timed their hunting of wild boar to the sighting of the butterfly, and there's a relationship between the two connected to the fruiting pattern of a particular tree. However, Penan children, these days miles away at school, have lost much of their elders' culture and information—which is just as significant for us as for them because, as Mr. Linden writes, "such ecological connections could be invaluable to scientists trying to understand the dynamics and vulnerabilities of the local ecosystem."

But I didn't get together with him on a recent afternoon in one of the world's least remote or natural settings—a café in a sunken plaza on Avenue of the Americas—to hear about how our species is screwing up. I wanted to live vicariously through him; I wanted to breath in the fresh Siberian air (he informed me that through some meteorological quirk heavy-metal pollution from 2,000 miles away gets carried there and dumped in the Arctic Ocean); I wanted to hear the mating call of gibbons as they swung through the trees (I'm assuming gibbons swing through trees); I wanted to stare across the antarctic ice shelf with nothing between me and the horizon except the breeze and an occasional penguin.

"Most of the time I was traveling for a reason," Mr. Linden explained, referring to assignments for publications such as National Geographic, Time, and the Atlantic. "Yet the places I was going to were fascinating." He described them as filled with, "third-world variety Runyonesque people, tin-pot dictators. These were the stories I never got to tell." 

He has now. "It was fun but elegiac," he went on. "It never occurred to me this would be a farewell tour. A lot of the places I write about were utterly transformed."

I thought I knew what he was talking about. It's the siren song of middle age. You return someplace you remember fondly from your childhood, adolescence, or even early adulthood and it's unrecognizable. That happened to me in Tramore, an Irish seaside resort where I used to spend summers as a child (why there and not Nantucket or even the Jersey Shore I've never been able to get a straight answer). In any case, when I returned—and this wasn't yesterday; this was the '80s—the wild spit of land jutting into the sea where we used to take long walks (and it doesn't, or at least didn't, get much more untamed than where Ireland meets the sea) had been paved over with roads and condos. We were so disappointed we didn't even stop; we just kept going.

But about those pygmies. "It's a pure joy to travel with pygmies," Mr. Linden remembered (the occasion they had to be bribed and threatened notwithstanding) of his trip to the Ndoki rain forest in the Congo, and his excursions with the Ba'Aka. "These were the taller guys—4'8"-4'10". They're supremely confident in the forest."

The author told the story of their guide—a Bantu married to a pygmy—who promptly got them lost. Fortunately, a pygmy retrieved them. "We said, 'How did you find us?'" Mr. Linden remembered. "He pointed to one leaf in a forest of leaves. He said, 'It was quite clear you came down this way.'"

Among his other favorite places are Cuba's Zapata Swamp, which he described as a "conservation triumph. It has that feeling that you're totally alone." He said it was similar to the Everglades, "But totally healthy."

And then there are parts of Yellowstone Park which Mr. Linden described as the most remote spot in the lower 48 states. "In some of the caves in the remote drainages in a part of the park called the Thorofare (so named because it was an ancient migratory route for Native Americans) rangers gave found ancient chip piles." 

Mr. Linden has also had extensive experience researching primates, and claims to be something of a connoisseur of their humor. He reported that gorillas have the broadest senses of humor, orangutans the most sophisticated. "The worst kind of pratfall jokes make them laugh," he said of gorillas he encountered in the Congo. "Gorillas would like fart jokes."

 Write to  Ralph Gardner at ralph.gardner@wsj.com 