For casual sports fans, there is nothing harder than following college basketball.

Roughly 25% of the players turn over every year. Some 350 teams compete in more than two dozen conferences, and an absurd 68 schools make the playoffs -- compared with 16 for pro basketball and a mere eight in baseball.

And yet, come Monday, millions of Americans will be asked to pony up $10 to enter the office pool. They'll be faced with the daunting task of not only predicting which team will win the NCAA Men's Basketball Tournament, but which will win each of the 67 games of the three weeks of "March Madness."

If you're like most sports fans, you don't know a "Saluki" (Southern Illinois) from a "Racer" (Murray State). And dropping Gonzaga's Zags into cocktail-party conversation won't cut it this year. The Zags barely made the field.

This is the problem  Andrew Clark faced as a teenager in Massachusetts. He played basketball, followed the college game, but every March he'd pick the Zags to go far and his bracket would blow up.

But Mr. Clark, now a 23-year-old law student at Suffolk Law School, read "Moneyball,"  Michael Lewis's bestseller about applying statistical analysis to Major League Baseball, and decided to see if he might do better in his March Madness pool. His results? "Bracketeering: The Layman's Guide to Picking the Madness in March."

Mr. Clark isn't the first person to take a statistical approach to basketball, but he's certainly one of the first to lay out the simple approach in language that would likely make  Warren Buffett smile. The highlights:

Look, everyone loves an upset, and at some point a 16th seed will probably beat a No. 1 seed. But since it has never happened, the chances you will be able to pick the first time it does are exceedingly small. So put all No. 1s and No. 2s in the second round and move on.

"Moneyball" disciples know there are few statistics more telling in baseball than the difference between the number of runs a team scores and the amount it gives up. In basketball, the statistic is referred to as scoring margin. It's a pretty good clue to whether a team is a powerhouse or a pretender.

No one is going to mistake the basketball program at Belmont University, champs of the Atlantic Sun conference, with UCLA, but Belmont's 18.4 point scoring margin, tops in the nation during the regular season, is nothing to sneeze at.

Any basketball novice can find this important stat, along with other telling numbers, at: ncaa.com/stats/basketball-men/d1.

Free throws are like walks in baseball. They're essentially free points, or chances at free points. In close games, a few free throws may be the difference.

Wisconsin made 82.7% of its free throws this season. St. John's made 71.2%. But Wisconsin only committed 15.2 fouls per game vs. 18.8 by St. John's. Let's pretend Wisconsin and St. John's match up in the second or third round of the tournament.

Logic should tell you that a good free-throw shooting team going up against a team that fouls a lot should have an advantage.

Final baseball analogy. Teams that put more runners on base usually score more runs, and basketball teams that create more scoring opportunities usually score more points.

Mr. Clark calls this concept the created possession margin, which is a team's rebound margin plus its turnover margin. If you are looking for a reason to fall in love with Ohio Valley conference champ Morehead State or Colonial Athletic Association champion Old Dominion, then created possesssion margin is it.

Kansas is top-ranked because it has the country's highest shooting percentage from the field, at 51.8%, and it held opponents to 39.3% shooting.

However, only one other team ranked in the top 20 nationwide is also in the top 20 in these two other categories -- the Syracuse University Orangemen. No. 2 ranked Ohio State shot 50% from the field this season, just behind Kansas, but ranked 161st in its opponents' shooting percentage.

No one expects the Buckeyes to disappear early. But in a matchup with another top team with balance, such as, say, Kansas or Syracuse, that's an awfully good reason to pencil the Jayhawks or the Orangemen into the next round.

—Matthew Futterman covers sports for The Journal at: wsj.com/sports. Write: matthew.futterman@wsj.com 

 Write to  Matthew Futterman at matthew.futterman@wsj.com 