 Melbourne, Australia 

Later this week, one boy and one girl will win junior singles titles here at the Australian Open. There will be trophies, lots of smiles and some breathless talk about the future. 

If history is any guide, however, it's probably the last we'll hear from them. 

Since 1973, the first year that all four of tennis's Grand Slam tournaments held junior events, only a handful of junior champions in Australia have gone on to lift the adult trophy. 

Of the 35 boys who've won the Australian Open juniors during that span, just two, Andy Roddick and Stefan Edberg, have won a regular Slam, and only 10 have managed to advance as far as the quarterfinals. 

As the top players become more athletic, tennis analysts say it's actually becoming harder to tell whether youngsters will turn into great pros before their bodies have matured to the ripe old age of 21 or 22. There are currently no teenagers in the men's top 100 and just one among the women's top 20. 

"You can't read anything into who's the best junior," said Mats Wilander, the last male singles player to win the junior and senior editions of the French Open.

As the gap between the kids and the grown-ups seems to be widening, there's never been a better time to ask a broader question: Have the junior tournaments outlived their usefulness? And can anything be done to make them more relevant?

Junior Slams are reserved for players 18 and under. They run simultaneously with the later stages of the men's and women's events. Among the Grand Slam juniors, Australia's is the oldest—the boys' tournament dates back to 1922. The French Open and Wimbledon started theirs in the 1940s and the U.S. Open welcomed juniors in 1973.

Junior events were conceived as a way to allow kids to compete against the world's other top players and to help get them ready to turn pro. They later became hunting grounds for agents and equipment manufacturers looking to sign promising talents. In a sport where teens like Tracy Austin, Boris Becker, Michael Chang, Martina Hingis and Venus and Serena Williams have been fixtures for years, nobody ever thought the exercise might be a waste of time. 

While the stars of tomorrow accumulated experience (and occasionally rubbed shoulders with the sport's stars on the practice courts), their junior matches gave organizers an excuse to continue selling grounds passes at a point where a majority of players in the senior draws had already been sent home. 

In recent years, however, prospects for the top juniors seem to have dimmed a bit. Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova, who won the Australian Open junior event in 2006 and 2007, said she was questioning her readiness after losing in the third round of this year's main event. She chalked it up to a deficit of experience, but others have said it's probably a matter of getting stronger—and older. Even Bernard Tomic, the promising young player who won the 2008 junior Australian Open and reached the third round of the senior event this year, said he'd added 11 pounds of muscle over the past 12 months.

Tom Ross, a former senior vice president of Octagon and now head of TPR Advisers, an independent sports marketing firm that represents tennis players, said endorsers who once flocked to juniors are getting more cautious. "Sponsors aren't seeing the commercial benefits as rapidly as in years past," he said. 

Junior Slams don't offer monetary prizes. They provide food and lodging but airfare is often the player's responsibility. Vladimir Novikov, who coaches his son Dennis, an American junior, said his wife's salary as a tax adviser provides the bulk of the $60,000 to $70,000 needed to fund a full season. 

"A lot of players choose not to go through the traditional junior route and they're kind of skipping that and starting to play the lower level professional tournaments at a really early age," said John Tobias, the president of the tennis division of Lagardère Unlimited, a talent management company. 

High-achieving juniors can achieve great things. In total, 44 males since 1973 who've won a junior Slam, or 37% of the total, have gone on to reach at least the quarters of a senior Slam. A study conducted on behalf of the International Tennis Federation found that all 37 girls who placed among the top five juniors between 1995-2002 were eventually ranked pros. Men's No. 1 Rafael Nadal turned pro at age 15, but the best player of his era, Roger Federer, won Wimbledon's junior event in 1998.

But Roger Rasheed, the current coach of Gaël Monfils, said there is often no better test than putting a junior in the main event. "It's good to throw them in the deep end for sure to see what fight they've got," he said. 

Francis Soyer, director of the Australian Open's junior tournament, acknowledged that it's often hard to get the best juniors to come to Melbourne, but that things seem to be improving. "We've done very well this year to get seven of the top 10 for the boys and same with the girls," Mr. Soyer said.

Perhaps the strongest argument to preserve the junior Slams may be this: It gives the growing crowds more tennis to watch. At Melbourne Park Saturday, the crowd of 51,276 set an all-time daytime record. 

 Write to  Nicolas Brulliard at nicolas.brulliard@dowjones.com 