BANGALORE -- Earlier this year, Reliance Venture Asset Management Pvt. Ltd. co-invested $12 million in biomass power-focused All Green Energy India Pvt. Ltd., ending the investment firm's three-and-a-half-year search for an "investable" clean-tech firm.

Reliance Venture and other investors in India find backing of clean-technology or renewable-energy companies a dogged quest as the dearth of sound opportunities makes good deals few and far between. Companies in this cluster are not scaling up or maturing fast enough to absorb large amounts of capital and offer returns, venture capital and private equity investors say. 

The clean technology umbrella extends to any energy, water, transportation, manufacturing or agricultural technology that minimizes pollution by making emissions less toxic or cuts down on waste. Factors such as increasing population, rising oil prices and growing concern over carbon emissions have led to increased interest in investment opportunities in clean-tech companies, particularly in Silicon Valley, which often sets the cues that Indian investors follow,

But challenges such as complex land availability and allocation procedures, expensive local debt financing all limit investment opportunities in this sector. Of late, transfer of technology has also become a key issue with foreign investors questioning the ability of the Indian intellectual property regime to protect the interests of overseas partners.

But one issue that investors keep coming back to is the fact that there are only a few quality firms in this space, said Harshal J. Shah, chief executive of the venture capital arm of the Anil Ambani-led Reliance Group, adding he wouldn't be surprised if it takes Reliance Venture at least another year to find a similar deal. 

"Two-three years back, the clean-tech sector saw a mad rush of investments and a lot of money went into what really were not good deals," Mr. Shah said. "These deals were also priced exorbitantly. Today, many such companies are losing capital, leading to a glut in the market."

Venture capital and private equity funds invested $816 million in 32 green firms in fiscal 2011, which ended March 31, compared with $828 million and 32 firms to the previous year, according to data from the research firm Cleantech Group.

Things could change for the better with some recent regulatory changes that may trigger small- to medium-sized deals. However, larger deals may remain sporadic as there are few large projects, said Gokul Chaudhri, partner, BMR Advisors. 

"Favourable regulatory regime (similar to Europe and the U.S.) in terms of feed in tariffs, direct and indirect tax incentives/holidays coupled with naturally available resources have led interest in the sector," he said.

Furthermore, last year, the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission introduced a renewable energy certificate to promote green energy. The certificate is issued to renewable power generators for each megawatt of electricity generated that can be sold in the market. Power distribution companies that can't meet their renewable energy targets can buy these certificates. 

Clean-tech deals will increase this year and in future, said Satish Mandhana, managing partner, IDFC Private Equity, which has backed at least half a dozen green firms in the nation.

"As awareness for energy efficiency grows, there will be growth of investments in this area," he said. "India is the right place to give a push to this sector (compared with) other developed nations as our whole value system is of conserving any material for a longer period."

In renewable energy and water treatment, there are only four to five companies that can be considered for investment, said Karthik Ranganathan, partner, Baring Private Equity Partners India. "The number of companies is limited." 

That's why even though the total deal worth looks high, in 2010-11 the three largest investments alone accounted for over 90% of total deal value. Given this dearth of deals, investors have found other ways to participate. Typically, the "sweet spot" for a deal is $30 million to $50 million, for clean tech this can drop to $25 million.

"We also offer debt support for various green projects and will do so more aggressively going forward," Mr. Mandhana said.

However, exit options are unclear and untested as the sector is relatively new. For instance, an initial public offering is not an option for a small renewable energy company that produces 50 MW to 100 MW of electricity.

"It's a high-risk area and it has not been a raving success," said Ravi Adusumalli, head of private equity firm SAIF Partners India. "A tremendous amount of capital has been invested in such firms in the U.S., but returns have not been stellar." 

Sreenivasulu Srini Vudayagiri, investment director at Peepul Capital, said clean tech has been a hit-and-miss game so far. 

"It can be a chart buster with returns of [30 times the investment] or [an investor] can't even get back the capital," he said.

In India, there are two kinds of clean-tech deals -- those that adopt technologies or models and implement locally like hydro-power generation, and smaller tech innovation deals.

Many private equity deals in clean tech in India are of the first kind. Private equity investors, also, prefer backing companies seeking growth capital. 

"Typically, as a private equity firm, we tend to back companies that have positive earnings, good earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization and need growth capital," said Harish Gandhi, director at AIF Capital. "New companies that have only an idea in place won't work for us."

Some overseas investors want to start with small investments in India. 

"Quite a lot of investment in this sector is green field, where overseas companies want to use their development experience to build projects in India," said Mr. Chaudhri of BMR Advisors.