KABUL—Afghanistan's Supreme Court said Monday it will investigate more than 400 cases of alleged fraud in the country's September parliamentary elections, a move that likely will affect the poll's results and could complicate the appointment of a new parliament. 

The announcement comes just two weeks before the deadline to inaugurate the new parliament. If the court's investigation leaves the overall results uncertain, Afghanistan could find itself in a constitutional crisis. 

The Sept. 18 polls were marred by fraud, and a quarter of all 5.6 million ballots thrown out due to ballot stuffing or voter intimidation. 

The Supreme Court's decision to probe could stir ethnic tensions. Pashtuns, the country's largest ethnic group, are demanding a new election after they fared poorly, losing out to Afghanistan's smaller ethnic groups.

Winning candidates and some Western observers say that President Hamid Karzai, a Pashtun, is using the Supreme Court to put Pashtun allies in power. The president appoints the members of the Supreme Court with parliament's approval. 

Mr. Karzai's spokesman, Waheed Omer, denied those allegations Monday.

Haji Sediqullah Haqiq, chief of the Supreme Court's special tribunal on elections, said Monday that the court is "independent and is not under any pressure."

Mr. Haqiq didn't speculate how many of the alleged fraud cases will affect the preliminary winners for parliament's 246 seats, but he said changes would be made. 

"According to the constitution, the Supreme Court is the final arbiter on elections" and can annul them, Mr. Haqiq said. "If they inaugurate the new parliament before we can make a ruling, it will create chaos."

The international community has rallied behind the final results certified last month by the country's election authorities, the Independent Election Commission and the Electoral Complaints Commission. The United Nations has appealed publicly for Afghanistan's courts to stay out of election matters.

"Lately we've seen foreign embassies support the results of the fraudulent elections without allowing the courts to decide. It's unseemly that our allies, who are trying to win the hearts and the minds of Afghans, are ignoring the millions that want the results contested in court," said Daud Sultanzoy, a Pashtun member of Parliament from Ghazni province who lost his seat in the election.

—Arif Afzalzada contributed to this article. 