MUMBAI -- The Bombay Bullion Association is planning to launch an exchange-traded fund in gold, as India's main bullion trade body seeks to diversify from its role of a data disseminator.

"We will have to register as a company to meet the requirements of the SEBI [Securities and Exchange Board of India] and we expect to do that in six months time," BBA President  Prithviraj Kothari told Dow Jones Newswires recently.

According to rules of the SEBI, India's capital market regulator, the trade body will have to register as a mutual fund before it can launch ETFs.

The BBA has 450 members in the world's largest bullion spot market of Mumbai.

Mr. Kothari said the outlook for gold ETFs in India, the world's largest consumer of the precious metal, is strong.

India is the world's largest importer of gold, buying an average 700-800 metric tons annually.

Investor interest in gold ETFs, which were first launched in India in early 2007, was initially low. But according to latest data from the Association of Mutual Funds in India, the assets of gold ETFs in India has more than doubled in January from a year earlier to 35.81 billion rupees.

Benchmark Asset Management, Kotak Mahindra Mutual Fund, UTI Asset Management Co., Reliance Capital Asset Management Ltd., Quantum Mutual Fund, Religare Mutual Fund and SBI Mutual Fund are some of the fund houses that offer gold ETFs in India.

The trade body will look at also launching a silver ETF once it is allowed in India, Mr. Kothari said, adding that silver ETFs will witness more participation compared with gold.

India hasn't yet launched silver ETFs due to a tussle between the Forward Markets Commission and the SEBI on regulating the investment product. The SEBI regulates gold ETFs, while the  FMC
FMC


-0.81
%




 regulates the commodity futures market.

Mr. Kothari said that the outlook for bullion prices remains strong due to geopolitical tensions in the Middle East and North Africa.

He said silver may rise to 53,000 rupees/kg and gold to 23,000 rupees/10grams in the coming weeks from current levels of 52,115 rupees and 20,895 rupees, respectively.

"Silver has more room to move higher because it is still cheaper compared with other commodity prices globally," Mr. Kothari said.

The bullion trade body will also start minting of gold coins of 1 gram to 50 grams denominations.

"We will be minting gold coins in the next 15-20 days and these will be deliverable on all futures exchange platforms," said Mr. Kothari.

The BBA is planning to fix a morning and an afternoon price for gold in India on similar lines as that of the London Metal Exchange, Mr. Kothari said. Currently, it fixes an afternoon and a closing price.

In addition, the BBA is exploring over-the-counter options trading in gold, and developing a gold loan program for bullion traders.

 Write to  Swansy Afonso at swansy.afonso@dowjones.com 