SHANGHAI—The chief executive of property developer CapitaLand Ltd.'s China unit said Tuesday that the country's latest measures to cool the property sector, including restrictions on home purchases and reduced land supply for private development, will most likely result in pent-up demand rather than lowering prices.

Beijing is concerned about overheating in the real-estate market after months of rising home prices prompted widespread resentment over unaffordable housing. In addition to raising interest rates three times since October, China ordered local governments to introduce restrictions such as banning residents from buying third or subsequent homes, after earlier measures such as higher down-payment requirements and mortgage rates had a limited effect. 

In an interview, CapitaLand China CEO  Jason Leow said longer-term measures that make owning multiple units more expensive—such as higher interest rates, a real-estate tax, and possibly a higher stamp duty—would be more effective in managing the market. 

"We prefer market mechanisms where they address the real issues. By artificially curbing [home purchases] you're just deferring the problem," Mr. Leow said.

He added that some of the Singapore-listed company's customers have canceled purchases because of the new ownership limits, but not because the units were too expensive.

CapitaLand China generally sells about 3,000 residential units a year, and plans to put 4,000 units up for sale in the country this year. The company's revenue from sales of residential units totaled 5.4 billion yuan (US$821.9 million) in 2010.

Residential property accounts for 33% of CapitaLand's 10 billion Singapore dollar (US$7.85 billion) portfolio in China. The company also has offices, malls and serviced residences in more than 40 Chinese cities.

"The good thing is that we're in different sectors, which are affected by policy changes to a different degree," Mr. Leow said, adding that the company's retail and office operations are benefiting from the government's efforts to boost domestic consumption.

He said the government's restrictions on the number of units people can buy will limit demand in the short term, "but in the long term we still think demand is very strong."

He added that factors such as urbanization, higher disposable incomes and a limited number of investment options that can serve as a hedge against inflation will continue to make China's property market attractive.

Analysts say property developers in China need to have strong balance sheets, given the government's efforts to cool the sector and rein in bank lending. However, the impact of such measures on companies that had strong sales last year, such as  China Vanke Co., which posted a record 108 billion yuan in sales for 2010, will likely be small.

"Bigger players in the market won't have cash-flow problems," said Mr. Leow. "We actually monitor their gearing ratios and they are still in very healthy positions. Smaller players may face some problems, but maybe not immediately. 

"There are lots of individual companies who own pieces of land here and there, and we can see some opportunities moving forward to take over some of these projects."

CapitaLand China has more cash on hand than borrowed funds, Mr. Leow said, adding that despite lower interest rates on U.S. dollar loans, CapitaLand China borrows in yuan because the currency serves as a natural hedge. The unit's revenue is denominated in yuan.

CapitaLand China may also consider issuing yuan-denominated bonds if there is enough demand for such instruments, but not as a way of speculating that the currency will rise.

"Obviously in Hong Kong, there's demand for yuan-denominated financial instruments. So that's something that we'll look at if there's demand, but not so much because we like the currency," he said.