Yesterday we noted that Paul Krugman, the New York Times's star columnist, had offered only one example to bolster his claim that "eliminationist rhetoric" is "coming, overwhelmingly, from the right." To quote Krugman's Monday column:

As we noted in yesterday's column, in October then-Rep. Paul Kanjorski, a Pennsylvania Democrat, mused about assassinating a fellow politician. Not only was he not ostracized; he was rewarded with a spot yesterday on the op-ed page of Krugman's newspaper.

But what about the Bachmann quote? We doubted whether these three words, presented without context, constituted "eliminationist rhetoric" as Krugman claimed they did. Our skepticism turned out to have been well founded. 

In March 2009, the left-wing site ThinkProgress attempted to present Bachmann in an unfavorable light by using a longer version of this comment. Blogger Dave Evers nonetheless found the site guilty of "selective quoting" and made his case by presenting the quote in its full context. It's not terribly interesting but is important to commit to the record. Here is what Bachmann said (Evers tells us that the ellipses reflect pauses, not omitted text):

Now, if Krugman had said the words "armed and dangerous" were ill-chosen, we would have agreed. If he had said they were irresponsible, that would be a legitimate opinion, albeit one we would be inclined to discount as partisan.

But that is not what he said. Krugman, who recreationally burns politicians in effigy, described Bachmann's comment as "eliminationist rhetoric." That is flatly fraudulent.

If the broader claim--that the "rhetoric" of Republican politicians and the nonliberal media was to blame for last Saturday's act of mass murder--is true, why can't it be presented without false factual assertions? Krugman's little lie undermines the big lie he and his newspaper are attempting to purvey.

Krugman and his colleagues on the Times editorial board are not skilled enough to be effective liars. That is far from the worst thing you can say about newspapermen. But when did the people who run the New York Times forget that their job--their duty--is to tell the truth?

  Newsweek's Political Obscenity   In the wake of the Tucson massacre, the indecent behavior of the formerly mainstream media has not been limited to the New York Times-led witch hunt against Republicans, conservatives and independent media voices. Equally appalling in its own way has been the rush by pundits to advise President Obama on how to make political hay out of the atrocity.

The worst example is a Monday article by Newsweek's Jonathan Alter titled "Can Obama Turn Tragedy Into Triumph?" This passage will live in infamy:

To say that this is deeply cynical falls short of capturing what makes it so shocking. Dick Morris published a column Monday titled "There Are No Politics in Murder." Morris is right, of course, but his sanctimony grates on anyone who remembers that he did not practice what he now preaches. As we noted Monday, Morris was the mastermind of Bill Clinton's effort to capitalize politically on the Oklahoma City bombing.

But Morris is savvy enough to have some sense of decorum. He is trying to look like a decent man. Alter seems to be lacking in any sense of decency. What's more, that isn't even the creepiest passage from the Alter piece. Here is his conclusion:

A woman is in the hospital, gravely wounded in a brutal attack, and Alter is happy she is alive because he has an idea of how to put her to use furthering a political agenda. "Thank God" she lived, he says, because he has the rest of her life planned out for her. This is such an obscenity that Newsweek should be delivered in a plain brown wrapper.

Rahm Emanuel, a man known for petty indecencies, was asked yesterday about Alter's gross one. FoxNews.com has the video of a stricken-looking Emanuel, now running for mayor of Chicago, delivering a well-earned refudiation of Alter: "First of all, what I said was: Never allow a good crisis to go to waste when it's an opportunity to do things that you had never considered or that you didn't think were possible. That's not intended for this moment, or [sic] does it apply to this moment."

For Rahm Emanuel, there are limits. Not so for Jonathan Alter--or, for that matter, for the editors at Newsweek who allowed these ghoulish sentiments to be published. This follows a pattern. Politicians of both parties and all ideological stripes have behaved far better than the liberal media in the aftermath of Saturday's horror. (There are a few exceptions, Pima County Sheriff Clarence Dupnik being the most glaring.) Liberal journalism is being consumed by a moral rot. We cannot say the same about liberalism itself.

President Obama is expected to make his first extended remarks on the subject as part of a memorial service tonight at the University of Arizona. This will probably be the most carefully scrutinized speech he has ever delivered. If he is seen to be trying to use this atrocity for political purposes, it will damage the country and his presidency.

It may be that the monstrous behavior of Obama's supposed supporters in the media has put him in a position where he has no choice but to behave decently, scrupulously avoiding the merest hint of political opportunism. Here's hoping.

  Follow us on Twitter.  

  Join Fans of Best of the Web Today on Facebook.  

  Click here to view or search the Best of the Web Today archives.  

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web Today. Thanks to Paul Rotili, John Steele Gordon, Chet Hosch, Darin Zimmerman, Ethel Fenig and Steve Prestegard. If you have a tip, write us at opinionjournal@wsj.com, and please include the URL.)