The Department of Homeland Security Friday pulled the plug on a troubled billion-dollar program to build a high-tech fence along the Arizona border to help fight illegal immigration, a definitive end to a long-moribund project.

By scrapping the controversial SBInet program, DHS will now turn to a mix of proven, existing technology it says will help agents patrol a much bigger chunk of the Southwest border at a lower cost.

"SBInet cannot meet its original objective of providing a single, integrated border-security technology solution," Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano said in a written statement. She said the new solution, which will include mobile surveillance systems, unmanned aircraft and thermal-imaging devices, was "tailored to the unique needs of each border region" and would provide a "more effective balance between cost and capability."

DHS has spent the past year reviewing the program, initially conceived in 2005, which has been plagued by technology problems, cost overruns and delays. Only 53 miles of the Arizona border have been protected with SBInet technology at a cost of nearly $1 billion. In contrast, the new plan envisions covering the rest of the Arizona border—some 323 miles—for roughly $750 million.

Ms. Napolitano froze funding for the program—and its primary contractor,  Boeing Corp.
BA


0.77
%




—in March while the assessment was being carried out.

DHS said it would continue to use some elements of the old SBInet system "that have proven successful, such as stationary radar and infrared and optical sensor towers."

Boeing said that "we appreciate that they recognize the value of the integrated fixed towers Boeing has built, tested and delivered so far," adding that "Boeing remains committed to providing valuable solutions and supporting DHS."

DHS will carry out further assessments on the rest of the southern border to determine which technologies will best help border-patrol agents detect illegal crossings.

SBInet's demise was applauded by some key members of Congress, and even critics of the administration's approach to the border didn't challenge the move.

Sen.  Joe Lieberman, an independent from Connecticut who chairs the Senate Committee on Homeland Security, said in a statement that the "long-troubled" program was "unrealistic," and called the department's new plan a "far wiser approach."

New York Republican  Peter King, chairman of the House Committee on Homeland Security, said in a statement: "While I understand the Department of Homeland Security decision to end the SBInet program, I continue to have very serious concerns about the Obama administration's lack of urgency to secure the border." 

The administration deported a record number of illegal immigrants—more than 390,000—in the year ended Sept. 30. About half had a criminal record, in line with the administration's decision to target illegal immigrants with criminal convictions.          

 Write to  Keith Johnson at keith.johnson@wsj.com 