I knew it was time to update my running look when, on St. Patrick's Day, a neighbor complimented me on dressing for the holiday. Only problem was, this is how I dress to go running every day. At least it's better than my wife, who tells me I look like a sanitation worker.

I know I have problems with my jogging wardrobe. Six months ago, the drawstring on my black sweatpants broke and the only replacements I could find in my drawer were bright green from L.L. Bean. It's just coincidental that they perfectly matched the fleece I wear to go running in winter, hence my neighbor's reference to the luck of the Irish and my wife's trash-collecting talk. 

But my problem actually dates back to when I started running, reluctantly, about a decade ago. I hate doing what everybody else is doing—so what if it's good for your health. I suppose I found it easier to live with myself by throwing on whatever was in my drawer rather than officially admitting that I was a runner by going out and buying a tracksuit, or even running shorts. Which explains why I can often be spotted jogging around the Central Park reservoir in a cashmere sweater over the T-shirt I wore to bed the night before. 

I also went hunting for a new pair of black sweats at the Ocean State Job Lot outlet upstate. I was open to just about any color other than green. The problem was that, in apparent deference to the girth of the local community, the pants started at XX-large and worked their way up from there to XXXX-large. I also visited Modell's and spent a good half hour trying on various running outfits. But when I looked in the store mirror, Ali G. was staring back at me.

But after my neighbor complimented me on my St. Patrick's Day attire I shared my predicament and she recommended I visit a nearby athletic-wear store called JackRabbit Sports. She said that the staff seemed hyperactively helpful, as if they were on permanent running highs, or triple espressos. This didn't sound like my crowd, but I was desperate. And as soon as she described them, and in the wake of my unsuccessful visit to Modell's, I realized that what I needed was somebody to hold my hand, to reassure me that I wouldn't lose my soul if I spent a hundred bucks on, say, wind pants or a running jacket. I also needed an individual versed in the latest fabrics and fibers to educate and, finally, to assist me in my quest for clothing that would update my look without causing friends and family to collapse in guffaws. 

I was greeted at JackRabbit by  Kristine Taylor, a staff member who did indeed exude health and fitness but, at the same time, didn't seem overadrenalized. As it turned out Ms. Taylor, a Williams College graduate, isn't only a national diving champion and volleyball player but also an artist. Indeed, she confided that among the quasi-nonnegotiable virtues required for employment at JackRabbit are A) a sense of humor, B) that the candidate "has never worked seriously in retail," and C) that their passions extend beyond shaving a few seconds off their time at their next marathon. 

Even so, I realized that assisting me was akin to explaining telemarketing or Twitter to someone from the Middle Ages. We reached our first impasse when I explained that the absence of pockets would be a deal breaker. The garments she showed me had none, or the pockets were so small they couldn't handle anything bigger than a MetroCard or a $5 bill. 

I need cargo space in my sportswear. I need places for house keys, change, health-insurance card (lest my heart stop pumping midcourse) and, of course, my iPod. "You might want to carry your key in a shoe pocket," she stated gingerly. "For an iPod, I might get an additional carrying unit."

As if I'd be caught dead wearing one of those iPod attached armbands around my bicep. Who did she think I was?  Mariah Carey?  Scarlett Johansson? One of the Real Housewives?

I also wasn't sure what to make of her question about whether I ran hot or cold. We hardly knew each other. "Somebody who runs hot is going to feel hotter than their control counterpart," she explained.

"What's a control counterpart?" I asked.

"I'm not sure how scientific it is," Ms. Taylor said under her breath. "But it's something we discuss freely here."

I had no idea what the correct answer was. On my way to the park, before I start running, especially when I hit Fifth Avenue and the wind almost knocks me over, I'm freezing to death. On the other hand, by the time I finish my run I'm sweating so profusely, even in the dead of winter, that I can detect the alarm on people's faces as they pass me.

Whatever the vicissitudes of my metabolism it didn't matter because  JackRabbit was transitioning to spring wear and was almost sold out of anything cold-weather-related. A stylish, yet snuggly, substitute for my emerald green sweats didn't seem in the cards. Nonetheless, Ms. Taylor was heroic in her efforts to accommodate me, sending me into the dressing room with pants, shorts, and something she referred to as a "base layer." I think that's what used to be called an undershirt, but it apparently possesses marvelous "wicking" properties, whatever that means. 

"It also happens to be UPF 50," she said, referring to the garment's ultraviolet protection factor. 

Wouldn't anything that covers your body be UPF 50? Isn't that the point of clothing—apologies to Coco Chanel—in the first place? 

To make a long story short, I left JackRabbit with some sort of slinky Nike Dri-Fit running shirt "which pulls away sweat" according to the label. And also a pair of Brooks "Rogue Runner III" shorts that are multiples more expensive than I've ever paid for shorts, but at least had pockets. 

As soon as I pulled them out of the shopping bag, even before I could put them on, my wife said, "That's so not you."

I couldn't tell whether she meant it as a compliment or not. 

—ralph.gardner@wsj.com