At the end of 2010, the New York City Police Department had the most diverse force in its history, with a majority of rank-and-file police officers coming from minority communities, officials said.

Of the 22,199 officers on patrol, nearly 53% were black, Latino or Asian, marking the first time minorities outnumbered whites by any significant measure, according to police department statistics reviewed by The Wall Street Journal. Minorities had been in a dead-heat with white patrol officers since late 2006, and began inching toward a majority in 2008.

The trend has brought the department's racial breakdown closer to the overall ethnic makeup of the city.

To be sure, the department's white members are still the majority, comprising 53% of the 34,526-member police force and holding an overwhelming majority when it comes to the higher ranks, especially in executive positions. Numbers from 2010 show only fractional increases in minority officers joining the ranks of detectives, sergeants, lieutenants and captains, bolstering critics' claims that the force is not making enough of an effort to diversify its command structure.

The NYPD's main spokesman, Paul Browne, said the increase in minority patrol officers will naturally lead to a similar shift in leadership over time. While many of the higher ranks are determined by the results of exams officers take when they achieve a certain number of years on the job, the highest posts in the command structure are discretionary jobs appointed by Commissioner  Raymond Kelly. Detectives are also promoted based on merit.

"As with sergeants and lieutenants, the proportion of minorities occupying the rank of captain is expected to increase as the force matures," Mr. Browne said. He said the captain's rank is attained through competitive civil-service exams that are the bridge to the discretionary ranks: deputy chief, assistant chief, chief, deputy inspector and inspector.

Currently, 18% of the 432 captains in the department are minorities; of the 10 chiefs, three are minorities.

  Christopher Dunn, associate legal director of the New York Civil Liberties Union, said diversity in the patrol-officer ranks is "certainly important, but that is not the end of the matter. Diversity in the command structure is just as important because commanders set department policy, supervise the work of the department, and in many ways are the face of the department."

  Anthony Miranda, the executive chairman of the National Latino Officers Association and a retired NYPD sergeant, said that while progress has been made in the patrol rank, the number of minorities in the command structure shows that a "glass ceiling exists."

"Our struggle is to ensure that we're reflected in all the different levels of the agency," he said.

Latinos comprise 29% of the minorities in the rank of patrol officer; the second-highest-ranking official in the department,  Rafael Pineiro, is Hispanic.

"Unfortunately, during the last eight years under Commissioner Kelly, the NYPD command structure has remained almost entirely white, and we are concerned that too little has been done to make it more diverse," Mr. Dunn said.

Mr. Browne said that since Mr. Kelly began his second tenure as commissioner in 2002, he "saw increased diversity as a way of helping to succeed" in three categories of law enforcement: crime suppression, counterterrorism and community affairs.

Whites accounted for 60% of members in the rank of police officer in 2002, and through recruitment drives the department was able to shift the racial landscape while filling thousands of jobs left open by retirements. 

Last week, a class of 1,148 recruits, which included cadets who were born in 53 foreign countries, graduated from the Police Academy, officials said. Currently, NYPD officers across all ranks speak 64 languages in addition to English, officials said.

Since 2002, the number of minorities occupying the top-tier positions increased by about 4.5%, records show.

  Tom Reppetto, a police historian, former president of the Citizen's Crime Commission of New York City and a retired commander in the Chicago Police Department, said the NYPD has shown a "rapid" shift in diversity.

"The bosses of the future are going to come from the patrol officers ranks," he said. "The final analysis of any city is that the police force comes to resemble the population of that city. Sometimes it's a little slow getting there, but they eventually do."