 (Please see Corrections and Amplifications below.) 

FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla.— When people complain that life passes too quickly and the clock ticks away with nary a second's pause, send them here, to Fort Lauderdale Stadium.

Here, to where time stands still. 

Within the confines of this rickety ballpark, it is always April 1, 2009. That's the date when momentum stopped; when, after 47 years of hosting spring training, a Twilight Zone episode came to life and the hours, minutes and seconds were cryogenically frozen.

As baseball fans flock to Arizona and Florida to engulf the last crumbs of innocence from an increasingly corporate spring-training landscape ("T-shirts! Get yer $30 T-shirts here!"), Fort Lauderdale Stadium remains empty and alone. Though the Orioles spent 14 years here, bringing Cal Ripken Jr. and Eddie Murray and some excruciatingly bad ballclubs to South Florida, the Stadium will always best be remembered as the spot where, from 1962 to 1995, the New York Yankees spent their Februarys and Marches.

Back in those days, it was a romantic place; a splendid oasis known not by its proper name, but as, poetically, Little Yankee Stadium. The facility was built specifically for the team, which departed its longtime St. Petersburg home because, in part, its headquarters, the Soreno Hotel, refused to offer lodging to black players such as Elston Howard and Al Downing. 

"At the time Fort Lauderdale was this up-and-coming hot place to be," says Marty Appel, the Yankees' former media-relations director and an author of several books on the franchise. "It's where spring break was taking place, where the weather was beautiful and a lot of great restaurants and hotels were popping up."

The Yankees arrived in the spring of 1962, the greatest franchise in baseball coming off, arguably, the greatest season in baseball. When they marched into their new team hotel, the beachfront Yankee Clipper, royalty had descended upon Fort Lauderdale. There was Mickey Mantle and Roger Maris, the men who had battled to eclipse Babe Ruth's single-season home-run record. There was Howard and Whitey Ford and Yogi Berra. Joe DiMaggio, the stately legend, arrived as a spring instructor, Marilyn Monroe wrapped on his arm as they strolled through the lobby. (The two stayed in separate rooms.)

 "Oh, man, it was amazing," says Jake Gibbs, a rookie catcher with the team. "There was so much class. You looked around and thought, 'How do I belong here with all of these stars?' "

Fort Lauderdale Stadium was a jewel among sludge. Other ballclubs also used South Florida for spring training, but their facilities better resembled Little League fields than beatific paradises.

"There was a great big locker room where we could change and talk," says Gibbs, "and the field was spectacular. Beautiful, green, perfectly maintained. There was another field in the back where we worked out. It was, for the era, the perfect facility."

At the time, the stadium was in the middle of nowhere. "Not even a McDonald's," says Dooley Womack, a Yankee pitcher from 1966 to '68. "Nothing at all."

 Long before the Wendy's and the Burger King and the CVS sprouted up on adjacent streets, it was all alone, located across acres of empty fields and adjacent to the little-used Executive Airport. Because Fort Lauderdale was fighting to establish itself as a more than just another Florida beach town, the city embraced the Yankee players with open arms. 

Slaton Chevrolet, a dealer on Federal Highway, provided each member of the ballclub with a free car to use, no questions asked. The myriad pubs and nightclubs—the Greenbrier, Nick's Bar, the Mai-Kai, Stan's Lounge, the Bahia Cabana—let it be known that the Yanks drank for free.

 Before groupies were tagged groupies, young, bikini-clad women combed the city, hoping to meet a Mantle or Joe Pepitone or Bobby Murcer. "It was heaven," says Steve Whitaker, a Yankee outfielder from 1966 to '68 who still lives in Fort Lauderdale. "Here I was, a kid from the hicks of Washington State, nightclubbing in this warm paradise, then playing baseball on this amazing field. You had to pinch me."

As the decades progressed, Fort Lauderdale Stadium refused to change. Oh, there were minor upgrades—improvements to the press box, all-weather blue plastic seats replacing rotting wood ones. But even through the '80s, when other franchises were beginning to view spring training as yet another opportunity to price-gouge fans, the Yankees kept things simple.

 Programs—printed on white paper, with names listed in blue—sold for 25 cents until the cost eventually went up by (gasp!) a quarter. Sodas and hot dogs could be had for reasonable prices, and the corridors were filled with the unmistakable scent (and smoke) from hamburgers on the grill.

 Along the first-base line, about 30 feet back, was a railing where kids stood, knowing—knowing!—that inevitably Ron Guidry or Steve Kemp or Andre Robertson would stop by and scribble their names onto balls. This was before professional collectors poisoned things by lugging along 20 plastic-encased bats; before ballplayers skeptically wondered what a kid was about to do with that signed helmet. 

"You know what was great about Fort Lauderdale Stadium?" asks Rick Cerone, the Yankees' starting catcher for much of the early '80s. "It was that we were genuinely beloved. You had all these New York transplants coming to Florida, and they were truly excited to see us work out and play. The Yankees brought spark to Fort Lauderdale."

By the early 1990s, however, the spark was beginning to fade. Though George Steinbrenner, the team's owner, long professed his love for Fort Lauderdale, he desired an all-encompassing facility; one where the major- and minor-league operations could work side by side (when the Yankees were at Fort Lauderdale Stadium, their minor leaguers' base was 17 miles away in Hollywood). When the team wrapped up its final Fort Lauderdale stay in 1995, Marsh Samuel, the club's spring-training coordinator, told the Miami Herald, "This has been tragic."

Indeed.

The Orioles arrived the following spring, but things were never the same. Fort Lauderdale was the place where, in a 1977 interview at a bar named The Banana Boat, Reggie Jackson told a Sport magazine reporter that he was "the straw that stirs the drink." Fort Lauderdale was the place where Mantle and Ford opened a fantasy camp; where Cerone, Graig Nettles and Lou Piniella got into a drunken brawl at Bootleggers (thus resulting in Steinbrenner's decreeing the bar off-limits for Yankee players—for a week); where catcher Thurman Munson, watching the planes come and go from Executive Airport, first had the itch to fly.

Nowadays, with the Yankees in Tampa and the Orioles in Sarasota, the stadium's lone occupants are the Fort Lauderdale Strikers, a pro-soccer team that holds its practices at the facility. In their rental agreement with the city, the Strikers are required to keep the baseball field intact; to mow the grass and line the base paths and smooth over the mound. If you maintain it, they will come…

Don't laugh. From the look of things, the ghosts of DiMaggio and Mantle, Maris and Munson could emerge from the outfield wall at any moment, gloves in hand, bats aplenty, kicking off a game of legends to last through March's waning days.

"I wish it would happen," says Doug Pett, the stadium's former public-address announcer. "But spring training is never coming back to Fort Lauderdale Stadium. Baseball left and never looked back."

 Corrections and Amplifications 

 The Baltimore Orioles' spring-training home is Sarasota, Fla. An earlier version of this article incorrectly said the Orioles train in Clearwater, Fla.