 The Pace Gallery  545 W. 22nd St., (212) 989-4258  Through July 1

 Gagosian Gallery  555 W. 24th St., (212) 741-1111  Through July 8

The Pace Gallery's announcement card for its densely packed exhibition of 15 John Chamberlain sculptures from 1982 to 2008 (Pace represented the artist from 1963 to 2010, when he transferred to Gagosian Gallery) features a wide-angled aerial photograph of the 84-year-old artist's massive, cluttered studio on New York's Shelter Island. Imposing yet carnivalesque, the studio merges the industrial with the organic, the junkyard with the hothouse. Mr. Chamberlain is seen perched among his big metal sculptures and gargantuan piles of his signature material—crushed, cut and twisted automotive parts, particularly chrome bumpers.

A single Chamberlain sculpture can enliven a gallery like a Baroque fountain in a town square, or brighten a room like the unanticipated delivery of a large mixed bouquet. At its best, his work is transformative, expressing a range of different emotions and suggesting everything from whirling dervishes and sea creatures to Indian headdresses. The airier, multiroom installation at Gagosian comprises 13 huge works from 2009-2011, one of which, nearly 20 feet tall, shoots upward like a geyser.

But Mr. Chamberlain's sculptures, which can also be hulking, repetitive and bottom-heavy, work best in small doses or mixed company. Seen in the context of other 1960s art at Dia: Beacon, his work throws a boisterous, Abstract Expressionist wrench into Minimalism's orderly machine. And recent exhibitions pairing his sculptures with the paintings of Willem de Kooning and Joan Mitchell, respectively, felt ambitious and revelatory. 

His sculptures can also, however, simultaneously heighten and stub one's senses—just like the unexpected appearance of a crashed automobile. Seen en masse, as they are at Pace and Gagosian, his work begins to lose its novelty and nerve. A more selective and judicious display of his sculptures could serve to transform Mr. Chamberlain's junkyard jungle into a garden of delights.



 Lori Bookstein Fine Art  138 10th Ave., (212) 750-0949  Through May 21

The painter and educator Leland Bell (1922-91) was a pioneering individualist. Outspoken against the antiaesthetic trends of Pop Art and Conceptualism—and as elegant and engaging a lecturer on painting as any around—Mr. Bell was among the vanguard of postwar New York artists furthering the tradition of the School of Paris. A rigorous classicist and narrative painter, he fused elements of Balthus, Giotto, Jean Hélion and Ingres with those of Mondrian and Arp to create a truly original series of nearly abstract figurative paintings.

An astounding exhibition comprising seven large late interiors and 20 smaller paintings and works on paper spanning the 1950s to the '80s inaugurates Lori Bookstein's representation of Mr. Bell's estate.

The studies' elisions reveal an intimate, personal side of the artist's studio process. The grand theatrical interiors—bedroom mornings in which a reclining nude man and standing nude woman respond to a cat and dead bird; and dining rooms in which families chase a bird or butterfly—combine flat color, ebullient volumes and undulating arabesques. Mr. Bell's interiors explore themes of transformation, death and resurrection. His friezelike figures, moving laterally within flat fields of color, gesture mysteriously, stirring, puncturing and opening up the plane. These remarkable pictures, merging Modernism with ancient Egyptian wall painting, distill past and present into an art magical and timeless—solidly realized, yet as indefinable as dreams.



 Mitchell-Innes & Nash  534 W. 26th St., (212) 744-7400  Through June 18

Most striking about this grouping of twenty recent oil paintings by the British artist Leon Kossoff (b. 1926) is its creamy, polychrome light—luminous, pale spring greens, terracotta reds, salmon pinks, yellows, grays and baby blues. The show's alabaster palette, suggesting ancient ruins and the flesh-side of seashells, gives the gallery a warm, alternately arid and moist, melancholy air.

Subjects include Christchurch, Spitalfields in London; the human figure; slightly outsize portrait heads; and an old falling-down cherry tree, propped up with crutches in the artist's garden. 

An unlikely marriage of the styles of Soutine and Monet, the paintings convey a twinkling expressionism. Combining blunt trauma with tender devotion, Mr. Kossoff wields bravado brushwork through viscous paint to weave, or bind, subject and environment. 

Contemporary yet excavated in feel, "Head of Peggy IV" (2006) is as elegiac as a Fayum mummy portrait. The three large haunting paintings of Christchurch, with their almost anthropomorphic facades, achieve nearly iconic stature, recalling Monet's series of Rouen Cathedral. And his paintings of the cherry tree—like those of Christchurch, portraits, really—express an affecting futility.

—Mr. Esplund writes about art for the Journal.