A complicated relationship between Galleon Group founder  Raj Rajaratnam and an alleged source of inside information featured a two-way stream of business favors, social invitations and jokes. 

As former  Intel Corp.
INTC


-0.25
%




 executive  Rajiv Goel testified Thursday at Mr. Rajaratnam's insider-trading trial in Manhattan federal court, prosecutors played a flurry of covertly taped phone calls between the men who had been, until their 2009 arrests, friends for two decades. 

Mr. Rajaratnam, 53 years old, whose trial is in its third week, faces 14 counts of securities fraud and conspiracy. His lawyers say he traded based only on legitimate information. 

Mr. Goel pleaded guilty last year to securities fraud and conspiracy and has said he gave secret details of Intel's earnings and a business deal to Mr. Rajaratnam. He now is a government witness. Intel hasn't been accused of wrongdoing.

The phone calls played for jurors featured requests for jobs and stock-trading help (by Mr. Goel), a desire for corporate information and investment business (by Mr. Rajaratnam) and discussions of dinner dates and European vacations.

"Hey, get me a job with one of your powerful friends, man," Mr. Goel says in one taped call, on March 20, 2008. "I'm tired of this company." On the witness stand, Mr. Goel, 52, said he had wanted "greener pastures" after nearly a decade at Intel, where he worked in the finance group. 

Mr. Goel also testified that, at his request, Mr. Rajaratnam made trades in his Charles Schwab brokerage account. "So when are you making me some money, man?" Mr. Goel asked in a different taped conversation. 

As prosecutors put his brokerage statements on a courtroom screen, Mr. Goel testified that Mr. Rajaratnam had engineered purchases and sales of 60,000 shares of PeopleSupport Inc., allegedly based on inside information, that earned him more than $150,000 in profits in 2008. 

The company, now known as Aegis PeopleSupport Inc., hasn't been accused of wrongdoing.

For his part, Mr. Goel recommended Mr. Rajaratnam for a potential $10 million investment of Intel employee pension funds in Galleon. "Your deal has been approved, at least by the consultant internally," Mr. Goel told his friend in 2008, according to a tape played for jurors. (The investment ultimately didn't get made.) The two men also chatted in the calls about international driver's licenses for a joint family trip to Italy, hotel reservations for a business-school reunion in Philadelphia and an award Mr. Goel won at work.

In cross-examining Mr. Goel,  Terence Lynam, a lawyer for Mr. Rajaratnam, grilled Mr. Goel about whether he was testifying in the hope of obtaining a lenient sentence and about his failure to declare foreign bank accounts and interest income on his tax returns. 

The lawyer tried to play down the importance of Intel information Mr. Goel provided his client, asking whether Mr. Rajaratnam knew more about the company from other contacts than the witness did. "Sometimes he did, sometimes he didn't," Mr. Goel answered.

Mr. Lynam also sought to emphasize the men's long friendship. Mr. Lynam asked Mr. Goel whether he thought Mr. Rajaratnam was serious when he said on a wiretapped phone call that he would kiss Mr. Goel the next time they met in person.

"I don't like to be kissed by a man," Mr. Goel testified, adding, "or, for that matter, by women either—I'm a single-wife person." The courtroom, including Mr. Rajaratnam, erupted in laughter. Mr. Lynam quickly followed up, pressing Mr. Goel on whether he thought Mr. Rajaratnam had been kidding about the kiss. "I hope he was. Otherwise, I had him figured out all wrong," Mr. Goel said. 

Jurors Thursday also heard Mr. Rajaratnam's younger brother,  Rengan, calling him in a panic on March 25, 2008, after The Wall Street Journal made public details of a wireless venture about which Mr. Goel had allegedly given the Galleon founder inside information. The younger Mr. Rajaratnam seemed frustrated that their ability to make trades ahead of the deal would be hampered.

"Oh dude, we're f—" Rengan Rajaratnam said, according to a tape played for jurors. "It just hit The Wall Street Journal." 

Rengan Rajaratnam couldn't be reached to comment.