At the center of the feud between  Yahoo Inc.
YHOO


-0.65
%




 and Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. is  Jerry Yang. So far, he has been unable to make the marriage of the companies work.

Mr. Yang, Yahoo's co-founder, was the architect of the 2005 deal that gave Yahoo a nearly 40% stake in Alibaba Group, a move he made after Yahoo's Chinese operations foundered and the company wanted to unload it. The deal cost Yahoo $1 billion, but its stake in Alibaba is now potentially worth more than $10 billion, analysts said.

Yet over the past few years, Mr. Yang, who is one of four Alibaba Group board members, hasn't been able to smooth out tensions between Alibaba and Yahoo. While Mr. Yang and Alibaba founder  Jack Ma have been friends since the late 1990s and the tie-up was hailed by both companies as a way to enable to Yahoo to grow more quickly in China, Yahoo's Chinese website performed poorly under Alibaba's management. That angered Yahoo, as Alibaba's own payment and auction sites surged.

Those frictions have spilled into public view since Carol Bartz replaced Mr. Yang as Yahoo's chief executive in 2009. In recent months Mr. Yang has been more active on the board of Alibaba in attempting to mend fences after he previously gave Ms. Bartz more control over the relationship, said a person familiar with the matter. A Yahoo spokeswoman would say only that the 42-year-old Mr. Yang is "an active board member," without elaborating, and declined to make him available for comment. 

The relationship between Yahoo and Alibaba took a turn for the worse after Yahoo said this week that it was blindsided by Alibaba, which had transferred ownership of one of its most important Internet properties, Alipay, away from Alibaba. That has raised the possibility Alibaba could make similar moves with other properties it controls, potentially diluting the value of Yahoo's investment. 

For Mr. Yang, the dispute between Yahoo and Alibaba is another stumble. As Yahoo's CEO in 2007 and 2008, he has been criticized for not accepting  Microsoft Corp.'s
MSFT


0.31
%




 more than $30-a-share acquisition offer during that time. Yahoo's share price is nearly half that figure today.

"You have a company in China who's been incredibly successful, and now the company is worth tens of billions of dollars and possibly feels they sold too high a stake to foreign investors for too low a price," said Jim Friedland, an Internet analyst at Cowen and Company. He added that "part of Yahoo's investment is trust" in Alibaba's management, and that while it may take months or years, "it's likely Yahoo will be able to successfully settle the issues around Alipay with Alibaba." 