To paraphrase Maximus in "Gladiator"—Were you not entertained?

Sure, the line isn't being shouted by a perspiring Russell Crowe in a sand pit. It's being howled by an oversized man in billowy khakis.

But the question still applies. You may not be satisfied with the end result. But were you not thrilled, provoked, engrossed, grossed out, and spellbound by the 2010 season of the New York football Jets?

Could you possibly want a refund?

We all know what the safe conventional wisdom is here. Good, but not good enough. A Super Bowl was predicted; anything less is a disappointment. A loss is a loss. Another AFC Championship opportunity squandered. Same Old...

These Jets did not make themselves easy to love. Head coach Rex Ryan wore obnoxiousness like a cologne. He talked big, steered his team like a pirate ship, won a playoff shocker over the Patriots, but in the biggest game—the true test as to whether he would vanquish those sad Jets ghosts with a Super Bowl berth—he did not tiptoe the tormented franchise over the hot coals.



Magic Khakis got his comeuppance, and the grave dancing has begun. Famed Jets skeptic Mike Francesa closed his WNBC Sunday night TV show with a Schadenfreude video medley of Jets AFC Championship Game losses.

It's easy to treat a football season as a pass/fail. One team survives, the other 31 don't. Moral victories—storming back from 24-0—are for suckers. Especially if you kick off a season on HBO asking your players to lead the league in wins and to win the Super Bowl.

"The best place to be is when expectations are high," Mr. Ryan told his team at camp.

The Jets did not lead the league in wins. After a 9-2, division-leading start, they lost three of four and slipped into a wild-card slot, deprived of a home playoff game for the second consecutive year. As good as the Jets have played on the road, a little playoff home cooking in the Meadowlands may have helped.

Now, Woody Johnson's club must bang its noggin on the door again. After stacking up for 2010, will the Jets bring back the Renovation Foursome of Santonio Holmes, Braylon Edwards, Antonio Cromartie and LaDainian Tomlinson? More broadly, the NFL's labor situation is unresolved.

It's brutally hard to rally a team back to championship contention. For all the planning, a certain amount of luck is needed—injury avoidance; those fortunate bounces that invariably decide an important game or three. And does anyone think that the Patriots—the Jets' stern-faced photographic negative—won't be playing with a green chip on their shoulder next season?

Mr. Ryan is undaunted. "We're gonna chase that Super Bowl," he said after Sunday's 24-19 loss. "We're going to chase it 'til we get it. And then we'll chase it again after that."

Wait: Is Rex hinting about winning back-to-back Super Bowls? Now that's chutzpah.

For Jets fans, it will be a long, cold week. Nobody who owns an oversized Nick Mangold jersey will want to watch an avalanche of Steelers and Packers hype.

But only a true Jets hater—or a Pittsburgh fan—could deny a little curiosity of what it would have been like to see the unrestrained Jets in a Super Bowl environment.

It's not happening. The Jets are done. They were gripping and maddening and ultimately unsuccessful.

But were you not entertained? 