PORT ST. LUCIE, Fla.— In the dead of winter, the Mets could allow themselves to imagine the return of a healthy Carlos Beltran. They could hope that the knee injuries that had dogged him for almost two years would no longer be an issue. But with spring has come a harsher reality.

The star right fielder remains limited in his physical activity because of what the team is calling tendinitis in his left knee. And it is clear now that, whether because of his arthritic right knee or his suddenly balky left one, Beltran will remain in a fragile state for the foreseeable future.

For the moment, the Mets still expect him to be ready for Opening Day. But would anyone be stunned if he weren't? He has played in only one spring training game, as a designated hitter, and figures to have no more than a couple of weeks to make the transition from center to right field.

Even if Beltran's left knee responds well to anti-inflammatory medication and several days of light activity, his latest setback underscores the challenge the Mets will face in keeping him on the field.

"I think right now we have to recognize that his knees need to be managed to maximize his performance and availability," Mets general manager Sandy Alderson said. "This is obviously some indication of that need, and we'll deal with it."

Unfortunately for the Mets, managing Beltran's knees essentially means playing him less often. Manager Terry Collins said he has already looked at the schedule and mapped out a plan to give Beltran regular days off.

Those days off will likely include day games after night games, at the very least. And given the way Beltran's spring training has gone, there will likely be days off that Collins didn't plan for.

"I've already anticipated trying to make sure he has enough time, so when we get to midsummer, he's still out there," Collins said. "I've also thought that on a daily basis, to have a conversation and have him make sure that sometime early enough in the day, he's telling me he's ready to go or, 'Hey, look, I could use a day.'"

At best, that approach will preserve Beltran's knees for the long haul, but it will also leave the Mets without their cleanup hitter on a regular basis. That will create somewhat of a dilemma for Collins when he fills out his lineup card.

If he moves Jason Bay from the No. 5 spot into the cleanup spot and moves other hitters up accordingly, he'll lose the consistency in the batting order, which he values. But if he pencils in Beltran's backup in right field in the cleanup spot, it would be laughable.

The two outfielders below Beltran on the Mets' depth chart are Scott Hairston, who hit just .210 last season, and Willie Harris, who hit just .183.

And that's the best-case scenario. Given how Beltran injured his left knee by simply running at the start of spring training, it's reasonable to wonder whether both knees will hold up enough for him to play even on the reduced schedule Collins had in mind.

"When I started running here in the first couple days of spring training," Beltran said, "I felt like I was compensating, and it got worse and worse and worse, to the point where now I have to make sure it doesn't get worse than that."

When asked if this is simply how it's going to be for him from now on, Beltran said, "Maybe, but what can I do about it? There's nothing I can do about it. I have to deal with the situation."