 An independent study of Air France-KLM's operations, which the company has declined to release, found a lack of "strong safety leadership at all levels of management" that has resulted in lax cockpit discipline, ineffective pilot training and "an unhealthy relationship" with unions.  

Virgin Blue Holdings, Australia's second-biggest carrier by traffic, forecast a sharp fall in fiscal first-half profit, partly owing to severe floods in Queensland state and a booking system outage that disrupted flights in September.

 Siemens said its net profit in the first quarter rose 16% from a year earlier to €1.72 billion ($2.35 billion), as it benefited from a recovering global economy and increased spending on big-ticket items. 

Greece's State Minister for Investment, Haris Pamboukis, said the government would seek damages from Siemens after the company was implicated in a bribes-for-contracts scandal. 

DuPont's fourth-quarter profit dropped 15% to $376 million amid charges, but revenue rose across nearly all its business segments. The diversified manufacturing and science group boosted its per-share earnings forecast for the year to $3.45 to $3.75 from its earlier view of $3.30 to $3.60. 

Kimberly-Clark's fourth-quarter earnings were flat at $492 million as stronger sales and prior cost cutting for the consumer-products company were balanced by rising commodities prices, lower production levels, currency impacts and other items. 

Hindustan Unilever, India's largest consumer goods maker by sales, missed market expectations as its net profit for the October-December period slipped 1.7% to 6.38 billion rupees ($140.3 million) because of high raw material costs. 

 European ethanol producers say the extension of a U.S. ethanol tax credit for 2011, approved by Congress last month as part of the $858 billion tax-reduction bill, could prompt them to file a trade complaint with the European Union. 

 Succession plans for Macau gambling tycoon Stanley Ho were thrown into question when lawyers claiming to represent the ailing billionaire said Ho's main assets had been distributed among some his family members without his consent.  

Leather-goods maker Coach reported that second-quarter profit rose a better-than-expected 26% to $303.4 million on a 19% increase in sales to $1.26 billion.

The company said it plans to gradually move some production out of China, where labor costs are rising, and into lower-cost countries, such as India. 

 AIG Chief Executive Robert Benmosche expects to remain in his role for the next 12 to 18 months following an "encouraging prognosis" from his doctors, the company said. The 66-year-old Benmosche, who was diagnosed with cancer in October, has been receiving treatment for his condition over the past few months and has so far responded "very well" to the chemotherapy.  

Travelers, one of the largest property-casualty insurers in the U.S., said fourth-quarter profit fell 30% to $894 million as several factors that helped it to a record result a year ago weren't repeated in the last three months of 2010. 

 BlackRock's fourth-quarter profit more than doubled to $657 million, up from $256 million a year earlier, as revenue surged, helping results beat estimates for the world's biggest money manager.  

Premafin Finanziaria shareholders approved a capital increase for up to €250 million ($341 million), which will allow French insurer Groupama to take a minority stake in the Italian holding company, as well as its insurance unit Fondiaria-SAI, Italy's No. 2 insurer. 

 Johnson & Johnson's fourth-quarter profit fell 12% to $1.94 billion as the health-care products giant recorded a $922 million charge related to the DePuy ASR hip recall, and sales slid more than analysts expected. 

 3M's fourth-quarter profit fell 0.7% to $928 million as margins declined, although results topped Wall Street's expectations as all six of the consumer and industrial manufacturer's business units reported revenue growth.  

Corning's fourth-quarter profit rose 41% to $1.04 billion as demand improved and the glass maker recouped $324 million related to claims from a 2009 earthquake that disrupted some operations in Asia. 

 The U.K. government said it will give News Corp. a chance to avoid a more prolonged probe of its £7.8 billion ($12.5 billion) effort to buy the rest of British Sky Broadcasting Group amid a continued drumbeat of controversy surrounding the deal. 

 Lagardère raised its full-year forecast for 2010 for the second time as advertising markets recovered more quickly than expected, and outlined a strategy to put its sports and entertainment unit at the heart of its business.  

 Yahoo's quarterly profit more than doubled to $312 million, up from $153 million a year earlier, on payments from its search pact with Microsoft, but revenue declined as it struggles to keep pace with online rivals Google and Facebook. 

The Internet giant also said it was cutting another 1% of its global work force, its second round of layoffs since December. 

 Google plans to hire more than 6,000 employees this year as the Web-search giant continues to diversify its business by expanding into areas such as online enterprise software, mobile-device software and local-advertising initiatives. 

 LinkedIn, the business-oriented social network which has more than 90 million members, plans to roll out updates for its marketing tools that let advertisers zero in on people based upon job titles, seniority, age and location, people familiar with the matter said. 

 Network equipment vendor Ericsson posted a fourth-quarter net profit of 4.32 billion Swedish kronor ($656.2 million), up from 314 million kronor a year earlier, as its business was boosted by strong mobile broadband sales.  

Facebook, seeking to develop revenue streams beyond advertising, plans to begin requiring all developers of games on the popular social-networking service to use its in-house Credits payment system.

Tencent Holdings, whose market capitalization of about $45 billion is the largest of any Chinese Internet company, said it plans to launch a 5 billion yuan ($759.5 million) investment fund to invest in online games companies and other firms. 

A U.S. judge has limited for now Motorola Solutions' ability to close the $1.2 billion sale of its telecommunication network equipment business to Nokia Siemens Networks following an intellectual property suit brought by Huawei Technologies. 

Verizon Communications said its wireless arm added 872,000 contract customers in the fourth quarter. Verizon's wireless business, which it jointly owns with Vodafone Group, generated revenue of $16.1 billion, up 5.7% from a year ago. 

Overall, Verizon's fourth-quarter revenue fell 2.6% because of its declining wireline business. Verizon posted a fourth-quarter profit of $4.65 billion, up from a year-earlier profit of $2.37 billion, thanks largely to its previously disclosed change in the way it accounts for its pension costs. 

France Telecom's Orange said it entered exclusive talks to acquire a 49% stake in French video-sharing website Dailymotion for €58.8 million ($80.2 million). 

DP World—majority owned by Dubai World, the Dubai government conglomerate—is on track to list some of its shares on the London Stock Exchange in the second quarter after postponing its plans last year, Chief Executive Officer Mohammed Sharaf said. 

DP World also said throughput at its ports worldwide increased 10% year on year in 2010 on a like-for-like basis—excluding contribution from Callao, Peru, which became operational in 2010 and Saigon, which became operational in the third quarter of 2009.

Dynegy said it didn't receive any rival offers that challenged Icahn Enterprises' bid to acquire the power producer for about $665 million. 