WASHINGTON—The Treasury Department Friday touted the start of a temporary payroll-tax holiday that will cut taxes for workers by $110 billion this year. 

The payroll-tax cut, part of bipartisan tax legislation signed last year, will lower Social Security taxes by $700 on average for U.S. workers, Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner said during a press briefing at the White House. 

But many low to moderate-income households have seen paychecks shrink in the first weeks of 2011, despite the new payroll-tax cut.

That's because a separate tax credit, the so-called Making Work Pay credit, expired at the end of 2010. That credit, which was President Barack Obama's signature tax and stimulus policy, gave a larger share of benefits to low and middle-income households.

By contrast, under the new law, a married couple with combined income of $250,000 could see their taxes cut by $4,200 this year. 

The measure temporarily lowers Social Security payroll taxes paid by employees to 4.2% of earnings, from 6.2%.

The White House released a fact sheet with scenarios of hypothetical taxpayers. An Ohio truck driver and nursing aide with combined income of $52,500 will get a tax cut of $1,050.

"This is a very substantial increase in the...amount of cash people see in their pockets. And it makes a big difference for struggling families," Mr. Geithner told reporters.

Married couples that earn less than $40,000 are more likely to have a higher tax bill than they had last year.

Many of those are in jobs that pay hourly wages, such as supermarket clerks or teachers' aides, said Roberton Williams, a senior fellow at the Tax Policy Center, a left-of-center think tank. 

The group estimated that nearly a third of taxpayers—51 million—will pay more in federal taxes in 2011 than they did last year, because of the expiration of the Making Work Pay tax credit. 

"It's a very regressive change. The losers from December to January, the people whose taxes are going up, are predominantly at the lower end of the income scale," said Mr. Williams. 

 Write to  Martin Vaughan at martin.vaughan@dowjones.com and Jared Favole at jared.favole@dowjones.com 