GREENBURGH, N.Y.—The biggest reason to believe the Rangers can beat the Washington Capitals in the first round of the NHL playoffs peeled off his pads after practice Tuesday and declared that a day off was the last thing he wanted.

Goaltender Henrik Lundqvist has started each of the Rangers' last 26 games, a streak made necessary by the club's desperate push to reach the playoffs. Now that the Rangers are in the postseason as the Eastern Conference's eighth-place team, they will lean on Lundqvist even more as they open their series against superstar Alexander Ovechkin and the top-seeded Capitals on Wednesday night.

"If I would sit down, maybe I would feel tired," said Lundqvist, who led the National Hockey League with 11 shutouts, finished among the league's leaders in save percentage and goals-against average, and won at least 30 games for the sixth consecutive season. "But I don't go there. It's so exciting to be in the playoffs. It's not going to be hard to be ready to play."

A terrific goaltending performance can help a lesser team steal a best-of-seven playoff series, and Lundqvist's presence seems an obvious edge for the Rangers. In Game 1, the Capitals will start rookie Michal Neuvirth, one of three young goaltenders Washington used for lengthy stretches this season. "We're confident in our kids," Capitals general manager George McPhee said in January, when asked whether he would try to acquire a veteran goalie. "It's their time now."

To compensate for their goalies' inexperience, the Capitals changed their style of play in 2010-11. After forging a reputation over the last several years as a free-wheeling, offense-first team, they showed an increased commitment to team defense during the regular season, allowing just 197 goals, the second-fewest in the conference.

Sacrificing some of his ability to freelance in the offensive zone for the sake of playing better defense, Ovechkin scored just 32 goals, the lowest single-season total of his career. He remains an incandescent talent, however, and it will be interesting to see whether Washington coach Bruce Boudreau relieves Ovechkin of some of his back-checking duties in an attempt to ignite the Capitals' offense.

"We understand how they play," New York coach John Tortorella said.

In what could be a low-scoring series—the Rangers allowed only 198 goals themselves—Lundqvist may be the greatest advantage the Rangers have, but he isn't the only one. They won three of their four meetings with Washington this season, and a healthy bit of history is on their side, too.

For one thing, playoff collapses have long been something of a tradition for the Capitals. They have finished with at least 100 points seven times in their 36 years of existence—they had 107 this year, 14 more than the Rangers—and in none of those seasons did they advance beyond the playoffs' second round.

 In fact, even with Ovechkin around for the last six years, Washington hasn't won more than one series in any postseason tournament since 1998, when it made a surprising run to the Stanley Cup Finals only to be swept in four games by the Detroit Red Wings.

For another, in spite of the teams' separation in the standings, the Rangers finished the regular season with a better goal differential. That is, they scored 36 more goals than they allowed; the Capitals scored only 27 more than they allowed. And lately, goal differential has been as good an indicator of playoff success as seeding has been.

Over the NHL's last 10 postseasons, there were 150 series, and the team with the better goal differential won 96 of them, or 65.3%, according to Stats Inc., a firm that tracks statistical trends in sports. During the same period, the team that finished ahead of its opponent in the standings won only 63.8% of the time.

For the Rangers, an upset of Washington would go a long way to easing the still-lingering sting of last year, when a shootout loss in Philadelphia in the regular season's final game cost them a playoff spot.

 Lundqvist said Tuesday that that failure has stayed with him since.

"That's what I've always loved about him, is how hard he competes," Tortorella said. 

 Write to  Mike Sielski at mike.sielski@wsj.com 