As Communist Party General Secretary Hu Jintao visited Washington last week pledging friendship and cooperation, back in China the generals were having a field day bashing America. Popular media commentator Major General Peng Guangqian, for example, called the U.S. a "trouble maker in the Asia-Pacific." He alleged that "the U.S., fearing the loss of its hegemonic status, is speeding up its activities in Asia to impede China's development."

This split in attitudes toward the U.S. is especially significant because Mr. Hu is retiring next year. The future of China-U.S. relations will be determined by Xi Jinping, the man destined, barring a major upset, to become general secretary at the 18th Party Congress in October 2012. Mr. Xi will also likely take over as chairman of the Central Military Commission, putting him directly in charge of military policy.

And unlike his predecessor, Mr. Xi's primary power base is the defense establishment. He will likely give senior military officers an even bigger say in diplomatic and security policies. Mr. Xi, who has assertive views on the subject, is losing no time in bolstering his authority among the generals.

On the same day that the Hu-Obama summit was held, the PLA announced the appointment of General Liu Yuan as political commissar of the General Logistics Department. As the son of late President Liu Shaoqi, Gen. Liu is a member of the "princeling" faction, which Mr. Xi—as the son of Xi Zhongxun, a former vice-premier—leads. Mr. Liu previously held the much less sensitive post of political commissar of the Academy of Military Sciences. 

It is understood that Mr. Xi is maneuvering to have Gen. Liu appointed director of the PLA General Political Department, which controls all military appointments, before the Party Congress. Gen. Liu is only one of the dozens of princeling generals who have gained promotions in the PLA in the past decade. 

Unlike former General Secretary Jiang Zemin or Mr. Hu, who had no military experience prior to their induction to the CMC, Mr. Xi spent three years in the army's highest echelon. Immediately upon his graduation from Tsinghua University in 1979, he served in the CMC General Office as the personal secretary of then Defense Minister Geng Biao. The princeling got this job through his father, who was close to Minister Geng and other senior generals.

Another factor in Mr. Xi's favor is that while serving in mid- to high-ranking civilian administrative posts in Hebei, Fujian and Zhejiang Provinces from 1982 to 2007, he kept up his PLA connections by volunteering in military-related jobs. For example, when he was vice party secretary of Fujian from 1996 to 2000, he served concurrently as vice director of the Committee on National Defense Mobilization within the Nanjing Military Region, director of the National Defense Mobilization of Fujian Province, and the first military commissar of the Fujian Artillery Reserves Corp. 

Partly owing to his decades-old involvement in military affairs, Mr. Xi is on comradely terms with several of the current CMC members who spent a sizeable portion of their careers in Fujian and Zhejiang. They include Defense Minister Liang Guanglie, Chief of the General Staff Chen Bingde, Naval Commander Wu Shengli and Air Force Commander Xu Qiliang.

And finally, Mr. Xi's wife, Peng Liyuan, a glamorous singer with the PLA Song and Dance Troupe, has the rank of major general. This connection is more important than it might first appear, as she has tens of thousands of fans among the younger generation of PLA officers.

Given that his portfolio since elevation to the Politburo Standing Committee in 2007 has been party affairs, Mr. Xi has not had many opportunities to express his opinions on military or foreign policies. However, he is a keen supporter of funneling more national resources toward military modernization. He is an advocate of Chairman Mao's theory of "the synthesis between [the requirements of] peacetime and war." This means that civilian sectors should also play a major role in military construction. 

While party secretary of Zhejiang from 2002-07, Mr. Xi doubled as the party secretary of the Zhejiang provincial military district. In a remarkable speech to Zhejiang-based officers in 2007, Mr. Xi pointed out that "we must implement [Mao's] strategic concept of the 'unity between soldiers and civilians,' and both the army and regional [civilian authorities] should assiduously pool our resources in the preparation for military struggle [against China's enemies]."

Mr. Xi is also a nationalist who might champion tougher tactics to expedite China's rise as a superpower. While touring Mexico in 2009, the vice-president raised eyebrows when he made a thinly veiled attack on the U.S.: "Some foreigners with full bellies have nothing better to do than pointing their fingers at us," he said. 

Senior officers in the Chinese military are lobbying for even greater funding for advanced weaponry to blunt American forces' "hegemonic expansion" into Asia. Military strategist Major General Yang Yi has noted that "China must construct aircraft carriers to safeguard regional peace." To firm up his status as paramount leader and flesh out his vision of a China that can stand up to American bullying, Mr. Xi will likely heed the hawkish voices of his generals. That could mean all the pledges made in Washington last week amount to nothing.

 Mr. Lam is a professor of China studies at Akita International University, Japan, and an adjunct professor of history at the Chinese University of Hong Kong. 