WASHINGTON—President Barack Obama on Thursday ordered a "comprehensive" review of U.S. nuclear facilities and said he doesn't "expect harmful levels of radiation" from damaged nuclear reactors in Japan to reach U.S. soil. 

Mr. Obama, speaking in the White House Rose Garden, said he wants the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission to learn as many lessons as it can from the problems at the Japanese reactors and make any necessary changes to U.S. reactors. Still, he said, nuclear power is an important source of energy in the U.S. 

The president, who earlier Thursday made a trip to the Japanese Embassy to express his condolences, also said the U.S. is bringing all available resources to bear to assist the Japanese. 

Mr. Obama's remarks come as the international community is expressing increased skepticism about Japan's efforts to cool the reactors and calling into question the safety of nuclear-power plants around the world. 

The chairman of the NRC, Greg Jaczko, said earlier Thursday it could take weeks to solve problems at the troubled reactors, which were severely damaged by a 9.0-magnitude earthquake and resulting tsunami. 

The U.S. has been providing technical expertise, aid and equipment to the Japanese government to deal with what the administration has called a complex, confusing and serious crisis. The Obama administration has recommended that U.S. citizens evacuate beyond a 50-mile radius of the reactors, which stands in contrast to the 12-mile radius suggested by the Japanese government. 

"I want to stress that this is, we think, a prudent and a precautionary measure to take," Mr. Jaczko said. 

Obama administration officials Thursday sought to stress that despite the different recommendations, the U.S. is working closely with the Japanese government and has faith in its ability to tackle the problem.

"We have no reason to question the assessment that had been made or the recommendations that had been made by the Japanese authorities," said Daniel B. Poneman, deputy U.S. energy secretary. 

He added, "The Japanese government has tremendous, longstanding" nuclear capabilities. 

One of the main problems plaguing the nuclear reactors remains keeping spent nuclear fuel cool. Japanese authorities said Thursday they made modest headway in their efforts by dousing the reactors with water, The Wall Street Journal reported. 

Obama administration officials have said the U.S. has 11 technical experts working with the Japanese government and has sent 17,000 tons of equipment to help. 

The administration has also insisted that the threat of dangerous radiation levels reaching U.S. shores is minimal. 

"The basic physics and basic science tells us that there really can't be any risk or harm to anyone here in the United States or Hawaii or any of the other territories," Mr. Jaczko said. 

The administration has also said that U.S. nuclear facilities are safe and under constant review. 





