DENVER—St. John's players milled around the lobby of Denver's Grand Hyatt Hotel with tired eyes. A line of suitcases leaned against the wall, stuffed with clothes intended to last for many more days. 

"You travel so far to come out here just to go right back home —it's hard to get over," said Dwight Hardy, his voice quiet. "I just wish the outcome could have been different."

The team was about to board a bus to the airport, their travel plans abruptly changed after a dispiriting 86-71 loss to No. 11 Gonzaga in their opening game of the NCAA Tournament. The loss ended dazzling thoughts of a deep tournament run for the sixth-seeded Red Storm, the ultimate Cinderella story about a group of last-chance seniors who finally connected before it was too late.

Still, "we achieved our goals," Hardy said. He got a chance to step onto a court with NCAA emblazoned in the center. "That's a once-in-a-lifetime thing for me," he said.

 For nearly the entire team, it was the final game of their college career. In a few days, the 10 seniors will be gone, dispersed over campus.

For the St. John's program, the slate is wiped clean. The team that restored New York's faith in the Red Storm will be completely eviscerated. From the most experienced team in college basketball, they will become the least.

A slew of freshmen, rated one of the top recruiting classes in the country, will file in with little to no idea how a group of all-but-written-off seniors rose to heights no one else thought possible in their final season.

The new class will be young, and good, and used to winning. The rigors of college basketball, with virtually no senior leadership, may require its own epic adjustment. 

"Next year will be the most challenging year of my career," coach Steve Lavin said. "It's the youngest team in school history, the youngest team in the country and competing in the Big East. So we know that we're two years, three years out from really becoming the basketball program that we hope to be."

Freshman Dwayne Polee II will become the team's experienced leader. Already, said the slender 6-foot-7 forward, he has been in touch with several of the new players, including two from his home state of California, forwards Amir Garrett and Norvel Pelle. Six of the committed players are ranked as top 100 prospects, including forward Maurice Harkless from Queens, guard D'Angelo Harrison (Sugar Land, Texas, fprward Sir'Dominic Pointer (Detroit, Mich.) and forward Jakarr Sampson (Akron, Ohio).

"I talk to them pretty often," he said. "With all the buzz around the program, they just want to be a part of it."

It is odd to consider that a freshman nicknamed "Bambi" by his teammates will become one of the team's most venerable veterans. But he said he is ready. 

"I feel like I have experience that will carry over to next year and I'll be able to help the freshmen a lot," said Polee II, noting that he had already bulked up from 183 pounds to 195 by the end of the season and hopes to arrive weighing 205 pounds next year.

Polee II recorded one of his strongest games of the season against Gonzaga, with 12 points, three steals, three rebounds, and three assists in 21 minutes. But he said the most important lesson he will impart when the new class arrives is how little those statistics matter.

"You can't worry about who has what or how many points you have," he said. "You just got to give yourself to the team.''

It is a lesson that sounds right to everyone—until each high-powered recruit realizes it applies to him, too.

"That's definitely going to be a hard part," Polee II said with a half-smile. "But that's what we have the summer for."