TOKYO—In a back street in the Akihabara district, across from the flashing lights of an electronics discount store, next to the vending machine that dispenses spaghetti in a can, and one floor below the massage parlor that promises "total relaxation," lies a true pioneer in the Japanese culinary world: the country's first sushi restaurant featuring a cast of beautiful, young female chefs.

Despite the neighborhood, the only thing slimy about Nadeshico Sushi is the fish. "I love fish," proclaims 24-year-old sushi chef Yuki Chizui, placing a slab of marbled fatty tuna on top of a carefully crafted nugget of rice. "I worked at a sushi restaurant for six years and only the men were allowed to make the sushi." she says. "Even on a busy day, I couldn't even offer them my help—that's the kind of world it is."

Like sumo and Kabuki, the traditional art of making sushi has long been monopolized by men. Until now. At Nadeshico (translation: ideal woman) Sushi, which opened its doors late last year, young women line up behind a 17-seat counter, meticulously crafting individual pieces of nigiri (or regular) sushi while bantering with the clientele, 90% of which is male. The restaurant's specialty: sushi rolls shaped like cartoon panda and frog heads, adorned with heart-shaped eggs.

For the Japanese men who dominate the sushi-making industry—where the craft is traditionally passed down from generation to generation—the move is blasphemous.



"I imagine what they're doing isn't proper sushi-making," sniffs Masanori Nakamura, the 41-year-old owner of Sushi Nakamura in Tokyo, which has been awarded one Michelin star. "They're just trying to imitate the art of making sushi," he says. Mr. Nakamura explains that it takes 10 years to properly learn the art, from choosing the freshest fish at the market; learning how to gut and slice it; forming a perfect mound of rice upon which to place it; and learning the rhythm and cadence of crafting sushi while chatting with customers. 

At Nadeshico Sushi, women learn how to make sushi in two months. That is akin, in sushi years, to completing medical school in a few weeks. Of course, the job in this case doesn't involve any of the dirty work involving fish, like gutting and slicing. There are two men in the back of the restaurant who bone fish and discard intestines. Masayuki Yoshino, one of the men behind the screen, has been in the sushi business for 30 years. "My ex-colleagues say I'm a real fool for doing this," he says. "But I thought it would be fun. Sushi is an industry that has a long tradition of discriminating against women." Though there are a few women sprinkled throughout Japan who are sushi chefs, Nadeshico is the only sushi restaurant whose sushi chefs are exclusively female.

Kazuya Nishikiori, the middle-aged owner of Nadeshico, says he wanted to create a new model for working women in Japan. But he later explains he'll only hire women who are between the ages of 18 and 25 to work behind the counter. "After all, our slogan is 'fresh and kawaii,"' he explains, invoking the ubiquitous word for "cute." "If someone wanted to work here and was 30, I'd put her in the back." 

The No. 1 reason most chefs cite as to why girls can't make sushi: they're too hot. "The temperature of a woman's hands is higher, and when you're handling fresh fish, this isn't good," says Keiji Mori, the owner of Maru, a modern kaiseki (multi-course haute cuisine) restaurant in Tokyo that employs two female chefs in its kitchen.

"This is ridiculous!" cries Mr. Nishikiori. "People use this excuse that women have warmer hands, but women are usually colder than men. And then they say, if you're wearing makeup, it will defile the purity of the sushi, but what if you're a man and you have a cold? What's the difference?"

Hiroyuki Musashi, the 44-year-old owner of the one-Michelin-star restaurant Sushi Musashi in the tony Aoyama neighborhood, started making sushi when he was 18 years old. "The temperature of your hands doesn't matter at all," he says. "Sushi is a tough job, to be frank: You work late and long hours, you have to go home late on the train."

Mr. Nishikiori, who runs a staffing company and has had no experience owning a restaurant, admits that his place isn't Michelin-star quality. "It's best to come in with low expectations," he says. He wants to attract young people and foreigners as customers.

Indeed, one review site gave the restaurant just 2.5 stars out of 5. A male patron wrote: "The sushi is pretty awful." But he also said: "I felt like it was the first blush of love when I was talking with the chef at the counter—my heart was pounding." 

Kii Otsuki, a 21-year-old college student who works at Nadeshico part time, says: "Sometimes customers get the wrong idea, since it's all girls. Since this is Akihabara and there are certain associations with this place, I just laugh it off. Many customers are surprised how serious we are." Over the past few years, Akihabara has become a mecca for "maid cafes," where patrons can mingle with young women dressed as French maids. 

While Nadeshico isn't haute cuisine, even the industry's seasoned and grizzled male chefs admit that things have to change. "I think it is strange that there aren't any female sushi chefs," says Mr. Nakamura, who teaches at a culinary school in Shinjuku commercial center in Tokyo and says that the number of female students has swelled fivefold over the past 20 years. Some have ambitions to become sushi chefs. Mr. Musashi takes it one step further: "Young females have more determination and ambition than young men in Japan these days." 

 Write to  Mariko Sanchanta at mariko.sanchanta@wsj.com 